
Sir Terry Wogan, who has died at the age of 77 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/31/terry-wogan-dies-aged-77>, 
owed much of his success to one stereotypical attribute of the Irish: a fluent 
and mellifluous delivery. But his enduring popularity was also underwritten by 
another quality found more often in his home country than most others: a love 
of language and literature.

Sir Terry Wogan: tributes to BBC broadcaster dead aged 77 - latest updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/live/2016/jan/31/sir-terry-wogan-tributes-after-legendary-broadcaster-dies-live>
He was a keen reader of Irish authors from James Joyce to William Trevor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/20/brief-survey-short-story-william-trevor>
 and, above all,Brian O’Nolan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/08/100-best-novels-at-swim-two-birds-flann-o-brien-obrien-dermot-trellis>
, the satirist and surrealist whose wild but jaunty tone Wogan knowingly 
adapted to the airwaves. Possessing a natural high intelligence – honed by 
education in Limerick and Dublin from Jesuit priests, the intellectual SAS of 
the Roman Catholic church – Wogan became one of the few presenters on radio 
music stations whose audiences routinely wanted the singers to shut up so that 
they could hear more of the host talking.

His career-defining work came in two long stints on the Radio 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2> breakfast show, from 1972-84 and 
then 1993-2009, the first after a rather ill-fitting spell at the newly formed 
Radio 1 in the late 60s. He had been recruited to the pop station following a 
short but high-profile Irish radio career that began after Wogan, having 
fulfilled his family’s wishes by becoming a bank clerk, answered a newspaper 
advert for an announcer.

 In his two occupations of the Radio 2 morning slot, Wogan memorably applied a 
vital lesson – the benefit of building up a stock of catchphrases and 
characters – learned from O’Nolan, who wrote novels, including At 
Swim-Two-Birds, under the nameFlann O’Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1989/nov/16/biography.flannobrien>, and 
whose newspaper columns, under the byline Myles na gCopaleen, Wogan had read 
when growing up.

So, for example, on air, Wogan’s wife, Helen, was always the “present Mrs 
Wogan” or, after he became Sir Terry in 2005, “the present Lady Wogan”, wryly 
implying an impermanence that was actually the opposite of their devoted 
51-year marriage. Older listeners were “coffin dodgers”, while radio colleagues 
received nicknames; the announcer Alan Dedicoat becoming “Deadly Alancoat.” Sir 
Jimmy Young, for a long time a seniorRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 2 colleague, would feature, 
reportedly to his disgruntlement, in word-sketches featuring “the ancient 
broadcaster, trundling into the studio on his portable commode”. The final 
flourish in that riff was very O’Nolan.

Sir Terry Wogan: king of inoffensive mockery and self-deprecation — obituary
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/31/terry-wogan> 
 If a supply of recyclable references had been a godsend for a newspaper 
columnist, it was perhaps even more so to a broadcaster with up to two and a 
half hours to fill five times a week. Wogan also understood, long before modern 
communications made this a standard part of broadcasting, what a valuable 
resource the audience could be. Drawing heavily from that old fashioned social 
media device, the postbag, he read out letters, stories and limericks – a 
deliberate nod to his belovedIrish birthplace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/31/terry-wogan-son-of-an-irish-grocer-legendary-broadcaster>
 – that not only provided a free script but created a sense of community with 
listeners who, in their latter years together, styled themselves “Terry’s Old 
Geezers and Gals” or Togs.

 Although sometimes considered cosy – and, in latter years, often admitted by 
commentators to that body of harmless charmers known asnational treasures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/nov/14/national-treasures-observer-list>
 – Wogan had, in his personality and patter, an intriguingly subversive, even 
dirty streak. Among the ranks of the supposed treasures of the nation, he was 
perhaps closer in sensibility toAlan Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/19/alan-bennett-promises-more-of-the-same-in-new-anthology>
, who hates the tag, than to Dame Vera Lynn.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffrom-blankety-blank-to-wake-up-with-wogan-terry-wogans-career-in-the-spotlight-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Blankety%20Blank%20to%20Wake%20Up%20With%20Wogan%3A%20Terry%20Wogan%E2%80%99s%20career%20in%20the%20spotlight%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffrom-blankety-blank-to-wake-up-with-wogan-terry-wogans-career-in-the-spotlight-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Blankety%20Blank%20to%20Wake%20Up%20With%20Wogan%3A%20Terry%20Wogan%E2%80%99s%20career%20in%20the%20spotlight%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Ffrom-blankety-blank-to-wake-up-with-wogan-terry-wogans-career-in-the-spotlight-video&media=>
From Blankety Blank to Wake Up With Wogan: Terry Wogan’s career in the spotlight
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2016/jan/31/from-blankety-blank-to-wake-up-with-wogan-terry-wogans-career-in-the-spotlight-video>
 A regular feature of his Radio 2 breakfast show in its second incarnation 
were the “Janet and John” stories, sent in by listeners, in which the children 
from the Ladybird books, now in adulthood, became involved in adventures that 
culminated in punchlines of eye-popping innuendo. If the same material had been 
read on air byJonathan Ross or Russell Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/feb/01/brand-ross-discuss-sachsgate-tv>
, investigations and suspensions might have followed, but Wogan, in another 
lesson from O’Brien, understood how gentle tone and persona can distract from 
bolder content.

 Another of his tricks in this direction was to leave the audience to supply 
the joke. During a brief fashion for celebrated women to wear the name of their 
husband on their T-shirts – so that Madonna might be seen sporting the word 
“Ritchie”, in honour of her spouse at the time – Wogan murmured between records 
one morning: “I’d fancy the wife of the present director general will not be 
doing that.” The BBC’s DG at the time wasGreg Dyke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greg-dyke>.

Sir Terry Wogan was a bridge between Ireland and Britain, taoiseach says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/31/sir-terry-wogan-bridge-ireland-and-britain-taoiseach-says>
In common with some of Wogan’s other on-air fantasies – including the “dance 
of theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> virgins” that supposedly took 
place on the roof of Broadcasting House each morning – these gags may have 
benefited from occurring before the time when social groups could take instant 
collective offence at things said by presenters.

 His wit could be more openly wicked away from the microphone. Wogan once 
remarked in a BBC hospitality box at the Proms that he no longer played much 
golf because the rest of his foursome had all been arrested by Operation 
Yewtree. This was comic exaggeration, but he was deeply relieved by the 
complete exoneration of his friend Jimmy Tarbuck, and viscerally horrified by 
the revelations about Rolf Harris, another member of the Thameside showbiz set.

 Such sharp humour was most apparent on air in Wogan’s laconic television 
commentaries on the Eurovision Song Contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/31/from-eurovision-to-radio-2-terry-wogans-best-quotes>
, which were reputed to have brought protests to the BBC from the broadcasters 
and even ambassadors of some of the countries whose competitors he skewered. He 
escaped discipline, though, because these voiceovers were another example of 
his clever use of found material. Most often, he was merely reciting, with a 
slight inflection of scepticism, the descriptions of the host nations or songs 
distributed by publicists.

 This critic’s gift, rare in a form of broadcasting where presenters tend more 
naturally to be optimists or publicists, was also on display, during his first 
run of Radio 2 mornings, in the acerbic demolitions of the American soap opera 
Dallas. They could be as sharp-eyed as the critiques of the same series that 
were making the name ofClive James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/05/clive-james-dante-translation>, 
the Observer TV critic, at the same time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fterry-wogan-intriguingly-subversive-national-treasure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F672a995fec93276ba990f49f52556d4221ee8a54%2F0_167_2800_1679%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Terry%20Wogan%3A%20the%20intriguingly%20subversive%20national%20treasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fterry-wogan-intriguingly-subversive-national-treasure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Terry%20Wogan%3A%20the%20intriguingly%20subversive%20national%20treasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fterry-wogan-intriguingly-subversive-national-treasure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F672a995fec93276ba990f49f52556d4221ee8a54%2F0_167_2800_1679%2F2800.jpg>
 Wogan was furious when one high-up suggested he might be ‘overdoing the 
sentimentality’ during his final breakfast show. Photograph: Leon 
Neal/AFP/Getty Images 
 What radio crucially gave Wogan was time to digress and invent. One reason 
that his thrice-weekly BBC chatshow, screened from 1985-92, was regarded as a 
relative blot on his biography is that the short 35-minute format, generally 
with three guests, inevitably cramped his verbal imagination and flow. Also, by 
instinct an improviser, he struggled to adapt to scripts on Autocue and briefs 
written by producers, who would sometimes complain that he was busking his way 
through interviews. Revealingly, his best moments on that show depended on 
reaction rather than preparation, as when he warnedDavid Icke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/mar/17/features.weekend>, the former 
Coventry City goalkeeper who had unexpectedly declared himself to be the son of 
God, that the chortling audience was “laughing at you, not with you”.

 And, despite the tendency of the TV series to be regarded, to his annoyance, 
as a failure, no show in the BBC1 7pm slot has achieved equivalent ratings in 
the two decades since Wogan was axed. Having guessed the way the commission was 
going, he had asked to leave a year before it ended, but was begged to stay on. 
He subsequently learned that the extension was to allow the set ofEldorado 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/oct/23/tony-jordan-interview-bbc-eldorado>
, the soap opera planned as a replacement, to be completed in Spain.

Sir Terry Wogan - a life in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/gallery/2016/jan/31/sir-terry-wogan-a-life-in-pictures>
 Although at heart a kind man, Wogan declared himself unable ever to forgive 
the BBC television executive, still a very prominent presence at the 
organisation, who truncated his career at the broadcaster and, Wogan believed, 
had been less than straight with him during the process of demotion.

 He always refused to name his nemesis publicly, less from kindness than from 
the survival instincts of a freelance. It has recently been reported that he 
was “too busy” to give evidence to Dame Janet Smith’s inquiry into his former 
Radio 1 colleague Jimmy Savile. And, while Wogan’s diary was often scarily 
packed, his elusiveness may also have owed something to his belief, genially 
passed on to younger broadcasters, that it was safer to keep well away from any 
matters involving BBC managers.

 True to this creed, on 18 December 2009, during his final Radio 2 breakfast 
show, Wogan intervened during a record to thin out the ranks of corporation 
bosses who had gathered behind the studio window to witness his last moments on 
air. He was also furious when one high-up suggested that he might be “overdoing 
the sentimentality” during that programme.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fchris-evans-pays-tribute-to-terry-wogan-he-was-my-radio-dad-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F1%2F1454317613497%2FKP_1620371_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Evans%20pays%20tribute%20to%20Terry%20Wogan%3A%20'He%20was%20my%20radio%20dad'%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fchris-evans-pays-tribute-to-terry-wogan-he-was-my-radio-dad-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Evans%20pays%20tribute%20to%20Terry%20Wogan%3A%20%27He%20was%20my%20radio%20dad%27%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F01%2Fchris-evans-pays-tribute-to-terry-wogan-he-was-my-radio-dad-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F1%2F1454317613497%2FKP_1620371_crop_640x360.jpg>
Chris Evans pays tribute to Terry Wogan: ‘He was my radio dad’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2016/feb/01/chris-evans-pays-tribute-to-terry-wogan-he-was-my-radio-dad-video>
 However, though distrustful of BBC bosses, Wogan was notably supportive, both 
on and off the record, ofChris Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/chris-evans>, who replaced him on the radio, 
andGraham Norton <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/graham-norton>, who 
took over the Eurovision commentary on TV. It is often tough to be appreciative 
of a successor, but Wogan recognised worthy and appropriate replacements in 
Evans’s rapport with the audience and Norton’s facility with language. It 
helped that, with the single exception of his sacking from the chatshow, Wogan 
had the unusual luxury of always having chosen his own moment of departure from 
major shows.

 A benevolent mentor to many other broadcasters, Wogan would pass on pieces of 
wisdom including: “Television is about innovation, but radio is about 
repetition.” He meant this to explain why sound careers tended to be longer 
than screen ones, and it proved so in his case, with his post-chatshow return 
to Radio 2 leading to his finest work as a broadcaster.

 Despite this, his strong sense of professional pride led him – after BBC TV 
ended an exclusive television contract, restricting him to the charity telethon
Children in Need <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/children-in-need> 
and occasional documentaries about Ireland – to turn up on Channel 4 and 
Channel 5 in order to signal that the reduction in demand had been internal 
rather than external. But, though he expected Television Centre executives to 
get the point, he was careful not to be bitter in public about career reverses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fterry-wogan-intriguingly-subversive-national-treasure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0659db4f2d676594569bb1b5174cfab31aa7f051%2F0_11_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Terry%20Wogan%3A%20the%20intriguingly%20subversive%20national%20treasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fterry-wogan-intriguingly-subversive-national-treasure%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Terry%20Wogan%3A%20the%20intriguingly%20subversive%20national%20treasure&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjan%2F31%2Fterry-wogan-intriguingly-subversive-national-treasure%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0659db4f2d676594569bb1b5174cfab31aa7f051%2F0_11_2700_1620%2F2700.jpg>
 Wogan in 2013 with a collection of Pudsey Bears to be auctioned for Children 
in Need. Photograph: Sean Dempsey/PA 
 Where he could become tetchy, both publicly and privately, was at any 
discussion of his hair. From relatively early on, fellow DJs would refer to him 
behind his back as “Terry Wig-On”, a tag that became public in the reviews of 
the TV criticVictor Lewis-Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jan/08/atheist-comedy-michael-macintyre-records>
. Wogan had a prepared monologue for interviewers, along the lines of “If a man 
were to take steps in that direction, would he [gesture at the dark curve 
across his scalp] take these particular strides?”, which can be seen as a 
non-denial denial. However, in contrast to otherodd coiffures such as Donald 
Trump’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/02/donald-trump-my-hair-amazing>, 
Wogan’s arrangements, whatever they were, did change shape and shade as he aged.

 He had a canny understanding of the mechanics of fame. When he was on BBC1 
three times a week, and it was difficult for him to walk down a street or visit 
a restaurant without harassment, he became worried that his children were 
taking flak at school due to his fame. The advice he gave them – “Whatever they 
say about me, just agree with them” – was both practical and anti-egomaniacal 
in a way that was very him.

 Strikingly, the other broadcasters he most admired – including Alistair Cooke,
John Arlott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/feb/28/my-hero-john-arlott-david-rayvern-allen>
 and John Cole – were often those who had a way with words on the page, and he 
always planned, with the time freed by giving up the daily Radio 2 show in 
exchange for a Sunday slot, to do more writing. Last October, a book of short 
stories,Those Were The Days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/20/those-were-the-days-by-terry-wogan-digested-read>
, bitter-wistful for a lost Ireland, was added to his already heavy shelf of 
memoirs and anecdote collections that famous entertainers routinely produce.

Terry Wogan: from son of an Irish grocer to legendary broadcaster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/31/terry-wogan-son-of-an-irish-grocer-legendary-broadcaster>
 In November last year, Wogan withdrew at the last moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/nov/13/children-in-need-well-miss-terry-wogan-but-were-in-safe-hands-with-dermot-oleary>
 from hosting Children in Need, citing what was described as a “procedure on 
his back”. When he subsequently took leave from his Radio 2 Sunday show as 
well, there were ominous rumours in broadcasting of serious illness, but Wogan, 
always determined to protect his loved ones from the consequences of his 
recognition, chose to complete his life in total privacy. And so, for the Togs, 
this will be theirBowie moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/obituary-david-bowie>.

 Wary of public shows of emotion, especially in broadcasting studios, Wogan 
had been determined to deliver the closing link ofhis final Radio 2 breakfast 
show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2009/dec/17/terry-wogan-radio-final-show>
 in a manner that he characteristically described as “manful”. However, he had 
tellingly taken the precaution of making written notes for possibly the only 
time in his radio career and, reading from them, audibly broke down. The next 
broadcaster on air, Ken Bruce, left an appropriate pause before thanking Wogan 
and saying: “We will never see his like again.”

 Well, an equivalent may, perhaps, be seen, as he was a very good, rather than 
great, television presenter. Radio listeners, though, are unlikely ever to hear 
his like again. Although a lapsed Catholic, Wogan once expressed the hope that, 
when the time came, people might light a candle for him, a traditional way in 
the religion of remembering the dead.

Millions will want to do so now, either literally or metaphorically, because 
Terry Wogan <https://www.theguardian.com/media/terry-wogan> channelled his love 
of literature and Ireland and his innate good nature to become one of the most 
original and enjoyable talkers in the history of British broadcasting.


 * This article was amended on 1 February 2016. It originally said Togs is the 
acronym for the community of listeners known as “Terry’s Old Geezers”. The 
community includes female listeners but the reference to this – “and Gals” – 
was omitted from the name.
 