
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> hopes to steal a march on 
one of its supermarket rivals, announcing that it will accept Sainsbury’s Brand 
Match money-off vouchers until 30 June - two months after the promotion is due 
to end.

Sainsbury’s announced earlier last week that it was ditching its Brand Match 
promotion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/07/sainsburys-drops-price-match-promotion-to-focus-on-cheaper-basics>
, under which gives vouchers to shoppers if they could have bought branded 
goods cheaper at Asda.

The scheme, which was introduced in 2011, will end soon, with the last 
vouchers given out on 26 April.


Customers already holding vouchers and those who receive them over the next 
fortnight will have two weeks to redeem them at the company’s stores.

Sainsbury’s said it was bringing the promotion to an end 
<http://help.sainsburys.co.uk/help/brand-match/sainsburys-brand-match> because 
its customers had said that “having lower regular prices across the store is 
more important than Brand Match”.


 Now Tesco has announceed that from 11 April 
<http://www.tescoplc.com/index.asp?pageid=17&newsid=1342>, its customers will 
be able to use Brand Match coupons to get money off their Tesco shopping.


Matt Davies, Tesco’s UK chief executive, said: “This is a little help for 
Sainsbury’s customers from us at Tesco … It also provides the opportunity for 
Sainsbury’s customers to experience Tesco’s Brand Guarantee, which we launched 
in October and has been universally welcomed by our customers.”


Brand Match vouchers will be accepted in-store at Tesco Extra, Superstore and 
Metro outlets, subject to a limit of one per customer per transaction. Some 
exclusions apply, including fuel, tobacco or tobacco-related products.


The move by Sainsbury’s reflects the fact that many shoppers have switched to 
buying little and often, rather than doing one big weekly shop, so fewer 
baskets contain the 10 items, including at least one branded product, needed to 
qualify for Brand Match.


Sainsbury’s was criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/25/sainsburys-asda-brand-match-tesco-price-war>
 in September 2014, when it stopped handing out Brand Match vouchers if 
customers could buy branded goods cheaper at Tesco.


For its part, Tesco said its Brand Guarantee offered an immediate price match 
at the tills, without the need for paper coupons. It “ensures customers will 
never pay more for their branded shop when they buy 10 or more different 
products, compared with Asda, Morrisons or Sainsbury’s”, the company said.

 