
Another accident involving Tesla’s autopilot system has been reported, this 
time in Montana when a Model X veered off the road and hit a post.

Early on Sunday morning on a highway near Whitehall, a Tesla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tesla> veered off to the right into a 
wooden guardrail, according to the Detroit Free Press, stopping the car before 
it left the road. The driver told a highway patrol officer that the car’s 
driver assist feature had been engaged.

Both the driver and passenger were unharmed.

Tesla on Tuesday said data suggested that the driver’s hands were not on the 
wheel when the accident occurred.

The company confirmed that the driver had enabled autosteer on an undivided 
mountain road, a Tesla spokesperson said in a short statement, adding that it 
is looking into the crash.

 “No force was detected on the steering wheel for over two minutes after 
autosteer was engaged,” Tesla said, adding that it was contrary to the system’s 
terms of use.

Another accident happened on 1 July when a Model X driven by art dealer Albert 
Scaglione – who wasalso using autopilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/06/tesla-autopilot-fatal-crash-public-beta-testing>
 – hit a guardrail on a highway in Pennsylvania, crossed several lanes and 
flipped on to its roof. Scaglione and his son were both injured, and police 
later charged Scaglione with careless driving.

Meanwhile, Tesla’s CEO, Elon Musk, has said the electric car maker has no 
plans to disable its autopilot feature in thewake of a fatal accident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/01/tesla-driver-killed-autopilot-self-driving-car-harry-potter>
 in which the driver of a Model S car was using the technology, theWall Street 
Journal reported <http://on.wsj.com/29BMpde>. 

Tesla under investigation by SEC after fatal crash involving autopilot, report 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/11/sec-tesla-self-driving-car-crash-death-investigation>
The company is planning an explanatory blogpost to educate customers on how 
the feature works, the newspaper reported on Tuesday. “A lot of people don’t 
understand what it is and how you turn it on,” Musk told the Journal in an 
interview.

The company came under regulators’ scrutiny after a fatal car crash on 7 May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/30/tesla-autopilot-death-self-driving-car-elon-musk>
 that killed a Model S car owner who was operating it in autopilot mode. In a 
recent move, the US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration sent the 
company a letter, seeking details of all design changes and updates to 
autopilot since it went into use last year.
 