
The US Securities and Exchange Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/securities-and-exchange-commission> is 
investigating whether Tesla failed to disclose to investors a lethal crash 
involving its autopilot technology.

According to the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/sec-investigating-tesla-for-possible-securities-law-breach-1468268385>
, the SEC is scrutinizing whether the incident was “material” information that 
Tesla should have disclosed in a formal regulatory filing, though one source 
reportedly said the investigation may not lead to any kind of enforcement by 
the agency.

Tesla driver dies in first fatal crash while using autopilot mode
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/30/tesla-autopilot-death-self-driving-car-elon-musk>
Joshua Brown died on 7 May when his Tesla Model S collided with a large truck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/30/tesla-autopilot-death-self-driving-car-elon-musk>
 crossing the highway in front of him in Williston, Florida. Brown, who died at 
the scene, was an avid fan of Tesla who had posted dozens of videos of himself 
using the car in its autopilot mode.

The car’s software notified Tesla of the crash, and Tesla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tesla> reported it to the National 
Highway Traffic Safety Administration. The NHTSA has subsequently launched an 
investigation into self-driving technology and its role in the fatal crash, as 
well as broader issues related to the implementation of self-driving cars.

Elon Musk Twitter rant a 'case study' in how not to handle a crisis, experts 
say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/07/tesla-elon-musk-autopilot-death-crisis-management>
The SEC would not comment, and the NHTSA could not be reached for comment.

Tesla said in a statement: “Tesla has not received any communication from the 
SEC regarding this issue. Our blog post last week provided the relevant 
information about this issue.”

Last week, Tesla’s CEO Elon Musk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/elon-musk> contested an article in 
Fortune that pointed out that Tesla and Musk had sold more than $2bn in Tesla 
stock before the news of the accident had been announced. Fortune claimed Musk 
had said the accident was “not material to the value of Tesla” and went on to 
describe the 1m deaths from cars worldwide every year.

“Please, take 5 mins and do the bloody math before you write an article that 
misleads the public.”

Musk later tweeted Fortune editor Alan Murray:

Elon Musk (@elonmusk) 
@alansmurray <https://twitter.com/alansmurray> Yes, it was material to you -- 
BS article increased your advertising revenue. Just wasn't material to TSLA, as 
shown by market.
 <https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/750350191044259840> July 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/750350191044259840>  