
Never have the principles of self regulation practised by the Guardian 
readers' editor's office been tested so robustly as in this past year, both 
practically and theoretically.

There were 2,570 more emails call and letters than the year before – a total 
of 28,464 between April 2011 and March 2012. Following the Guardian's Milly 
Dowler story on 4 July relating to phone hacking, and the appointment of Lord 
Justice Leveson to conduct an inquiry into the culture, practices and ethics of 
the press, pressure intensified on our work. This also led to a new public 
prominence and focus on the role.

After the updating of the Guardian's editorial guidelines in August 2011, the 
new Accuracy and Standards page was launched in October – later than we had 
hoped at the beginning of the year.

In all, seven of the eight recommended changes endorsed by the Scott Trust 
<http://www.gmgplc.co.uk/the-scott-trust/> in early 2011 have been put in 
place, including an online rolling corrections column. This enables corrections 
and clarifications to be posted in the kind of time frame the web now demands – 
during the hours the office is open. It does not resolve the issue of 
increasing pressure to post corrections at any time, seven days a week.

The one initiative planned for 2011 that hasn't been fully implemented is a 
wider distribution of the deletions policy. There are a number of reasons. 
Among them was the broader pressure of work that slowed all the changes to the 
readers' editor's office.

In addition, the European Data Protection Framework was due to be published, 
and there was some concern in the draft regulations leaked in December that 
there would be no journalistic exemptions for "the right to be forgotten". In 
early 2012, journalists were assured that this is not the case, but the 
Guardian's deletions procedure will need to be reviewed against the broad 
principles of the new policy. The numbers of requests for deletion just keep 
growing.

Of the 31 complaints to the PCC about the Guardian in 2011, 10 were from those 
dissatisfied by the responses of the readers' editor's office; of these, nine 
were either rejected or resolved without adjudication.

One of the most serious was the case of Mark Duggan, the young man whose 
shooting triggered the English riots in August. The Independent Police 
Complaints Commission and the Metropolitan Police complained to the PCC about a 
headline and subheading on a Guardian front-page story on Friday 18 November 
2011. The headline and subheading were misleading and it took too long – 21 
hours – before these headings were amended on the website on the Saturday.

The IPCC agreed to suspend its PCC complaint to enable me to investigate. We 
apologised – both for the misleading headlines and the length of time it took 
to change the headline – in print, in the usual corrections and clarifications 
position on the leaders page, and online. In addition, I wrote an Open Door 
column explaining how the errors were made and apologised once more.

The IPCC, along with the Met, felt that didn't go far enough and pursued 
complaints to the PCC. The PCC found that the paper's headline and subheading 
were misleading, but its apology and corrections were sufficient.

In what was an important test of the work of the readers' editor's office in a 
year when I was called to give evidence before the Leveson Inquiry, the PCC 
said in it its adjudication:

"The Commission considered the adequacy of the remedy the newspaper had 
provided.

"The newspaper's initial delay in recognising the problem was a matter of 
regret: had it taken full account of the IPCC's concerns on the evening of 18 
November, it would evidently have been in a position to revise the main 
headline online and in at least some print editions of the newspaper.
Nonetheless, once the newspaper had recognised its error, it reacted quickly 
to put it right, in accordance with the terms of Clause 1 (ii) of the Code. 
Given the sensitivity of the issue, its apology was also appropriate.

"In dealing with the complaint, it was the role of the PCC to give external 
scrutiny to the newspaper's internal processes, including on this occasion the 
work of its Readers' Editor. It established that the newspaper had initially 
breached the Editors' Code but had properly fulfilled its obligations under 
Clause 1 (ii) of the Code to provide a remedy..."
 