
Health officials have announced the first case of Zika transmitted by local 
mosquitoes in Texas 
<https://www.dshs.texas.gov/news/releases/2016/20161128.aspx>, the second state 
in the country to find local mosquitoes apparently carrying the virus.

The tropical virus country-hopped through Latin America and the Caribbean in 
the last year, first arriving in the United States in the territory of Puerto 
Rico, beforearriving in Miami, Florida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/florida-zika-cases-transmission-neighborhood-miami-dade-county>
. Zika can cause severe birth defects in pregnant women infected with the 
disease.

“We knew it was only a matter of time before we saw a Zika case spread by a 
mosquito inTexas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>,” said Dr John 
Hellerstedt, the state health commissioner.

Genetically modified mosquitoes could be released in Florida Keys by spring
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/26/zika-virus-genetically-modified-mosquitoes-florida>
Until Monday, Texas had 257 confirmed cases of Zika, though all were 
associated with travel or sexual transmission. Zika is most commonly spread by 
infected mosquitoes.

“We still don’t believe the virus will become widespread in Texas, but there 
could be more cases, so people need to protect themselves from mosquito bites,” 
Hellerstedt said. “Especially in parts of the state that stay relatively warm 
in the fall and winter.”

The announcement comes one week after Florida governor Rick Scott sought to 
quell Zika anxiety in Miami.

The governor held a press conference to announce that three miles of Miami 
Beach, a popular winter tourist destination, was “cleared” of active Zika 
transmission. Pregnant women are still advised to postpone travel to about 1.5 
miles of Miami Beach, and a nearby area of Miami-Dade county called Little 
River.

The World Health Organization also dropped Zika from the category of “global 
health emergency”, instead settling in for along fight against the disease 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/19/health/who-ends-zika-global-health-emergency.html?_r=0>
.

However, tools to fight the mosquitoes that carry Zika remain scarce. 
Mosquitoes can grow resistant to pesticides, and the widespread application of 
common airborne sprays has prompted outcry in some places, such asPuerto Rico 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/08/10/489433636/puerto-ricos-efforts-to-stop-zika-are-hampered-by-mistrust-disease-overload>
.

Further, alarming discoveries about the virus have continued. 

For example, a study released in mid-November found some babies of 
Zika-infected mothers may develop microcephalyafter children appear normal at 
birth <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-zika-babies-idUSKBN13H1TT>. 
Children with microcephaly are born with abnormally small heads and suffer 
severe developmental disorders. Microcephaly is considered the most severe 
birth defect associated with Zika.

One Texas-based epidemiologist also criticized politicians’ focus on small 
geographic areas, such as Miami Beach, noting that public health officials are 
not surveilling for the disease, and that four out of five patients are 
asymptomatic.

'Nobody's looking': why US Zika outbreak could be bigger than we know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/17/zika-virus-outbreaks-us-testing-difficulties-mosquitoes>
“The idea that Zika is confined to a small, circumspect area of Miami is 
ridiculous,” said Dr Peter Hotez, dean of the National School of Tropical 
Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Texas. “There’s probably a 
lot of transmission going on in Texas, Louisiana, Alabama and Florida that 
we’re not aware of because we’re not really doing active surveillance, so this 
is not a surprise at all.”

Though Zika infection is believed to be widespread 
<http://www.cidrap.umn.edu/news-perspective/2016/11/puerto-rico-adds-more-evidence-zika-burden-tilts-toward-women>
 inPuerto Rico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/23/puerto-rico-zika-virus-fears-mosquitos-misinformation>
, officials said they did not expect the disease to spread as far in Texas. 
Many epidemiologists believe that widespread window screens and air 
conditioning in Texas is responsible for hindering the spread of mosquito-borne 
diseases.

The infected area, in Brownsville, tends to be a hotspot for mosquito-borne 
diseases, Hotez said, including a recentcase of Chikungunya 
<http://valleycentral.com/news/local/texas-department-of-state-health-services-confirms-chikungunya-case-in-brownsville>
.

The city is one of the poorest in Texas 
<https://www.texastribune.org/2016/01/19/poverty-prevalent-on-texas-border-low-in-suburbs/>
. Brownsville is the southernmost city in Texas, on the Gulf of Mexico 
bordering the Mexican state of Tamaulipas. In Cameron County, where Brownsville 
is located, almost half of children live in poverty, according to the Texas 
Tribune – the highest rate in the state.
 