
So which bubble are you in, then? Oh come on, of course you live in a bubble; 
we all do. Humans naturally gravitate towards befriending people who seem 
similar, and towards working with like-minded people. We cluster in the places 
other people who do that work can afford to live, choose newspapers that share 
our values, warm to other parents with kids the same age – or to people who 
thankfully don’t have kids either, and therefore don’t turn down Sunday lunch 
in the pub becauseGina Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2003/jan/29/familyandrelationships.healthandwellbeing>
 says that’s naptime.

We all create little self-reinforcing pockets of shared values and 
experiences. All that matters is whether you realise it’s a bubble, and make 
the effort to understand what life is like in other people’s worlds. This is a 
column about why a Conservative government increasingly anxious to reach beyond 
its comfortable core vote is struggling to do just that.

Four months after David Cameron unveiled his flagship election wheeze for 
winning over working-class voters, namely expanding right to buy bymaking 
housing associations flog off their stock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/20/lords-vote-tory-plans-extend-right-to-buy-housing-association-tenants-doubt>
 to tenants, the whiff of compromise is already in the air. Greg Clark, the new 
communities and local government secretary, faces stiff opposition not just 
from the Liberal Democrats – who this week threatened to torpedo any such 
measure in the Lords – and from Labour, but also from some Tory MPs.

Housing association chiefs and Tories propose right-to-buy deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/24/housing-associations-agree-right-to-buy-deal-with-government>
On Thursday Clark gave an emollient speech to the National Housing Federation, 
and it looks as if there might be room for tinkering at the edges of this 
faintly half-baked idea, which was rushed into the manifesto at the last minute 
in a pre-election panic about having nothing much to say toC2 voters 
<http://www.abc1demographic.co.uk/>. But the real question is why government so 
often seems to have a tin ear for them.

Blaming it simply on Cameron being posh is, frankly, the politics of stupid. 
If you believe an ex-public schoolboy and scion of a titled family couldn’t 
possibly serve working people – well, congratulations, you just ruled out Tony 
Benn. Reverse snobbery is just as bad as the straightforward kind, and 
sanctimonious too.

But the real test of whether a politician has listened, learned and understood 
people from beyond his or her particular bubble is whether the resulting ideas 
actually work in real life. Having spent a day this week in Birmingham talking 
tohousing associations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/sep/25/right-to-buy-views-social-housing-associations>
, I reckon that’s where the Conservatives are going wrong.

Right to buy: views from the social housing sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/sep/25/right-to-buy-views-social-housing-associations>
You can see the thinking a mile off. The right to buy your council house was a 
totem of the Thatcher years, symbolising everything about her connection with 
the aspirational working classes. To the chagrin of many Tories, and the 
genuine dismay of those anxious to represent people who share Conservative 
values but aren’t well off, this group don’t much vote Tory any more. The 
mistake was in assuming that the new right to buy would basically be more right 
to buy, when even Margaret Thatcher might be thinking twice about tackling 
housing associations were she in power today.

There’s nothing wrong, and not even anything uniquely rightwing, about wanting 
to help people own their homes. It was, after all, Labour in the late 1950s 
that first started talking about a right for tenants to own the homes they 
lived in.

But what made right to buy different and essentially Thatcherite was, as its 
original architect Michael Heseltine has said, that it was explicitly intended 
to reverse what he saw as the dominance of the state over individual lives. The 
whole point was that individual prosperity should not be held back by the 
boring old collective good, and what followed – a chronic shortage of social 
housing as homes were sold off and not replaced, buy-to-let landlords moving in 
for the kill once the first owners sold up, a decades-long supply crisis – was 
simply the logical consequence of that.

The lucky new owner-occupiers flourished. Their children and grandchildren are 
struggling. Nobody believes government assurances that homes sold off in future 
would be replaced (thecompromise deal now being discussed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/24/housing-associations-agree-right-to-buy-deal-with-government>
 would be for housing associations to go ahead voluntarily with introducing 
right to buy, on condition that they’re not legally compelled to do so and that 
replacements are built).

How does a tenant on £13,000 a year buy in London, even with a discount?

It’s not that this government is wholly blind to squeezed-middle voters’ 
concerns. Iain Duncan Smith, the original champion of this policy, is correct 
that home ownership matters. Having an asset is life-changing: it’s not just 
about making a buck in a rising market or having something to sell in 
retirement, but about a feeling of security – something tangible to call your 
own. Similarly George Osborne was right to grasp public anger at the way 
ordinary salaries aren’t keeping pace with boardroom pay and profits, and to 
demand apay rise for the workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/reality-check/2015/jul/08/george-osborne-budget-national-living-wage>
.

Where that all falls apart, however, is when you end up promising a “living 
wage” that is nothing of the sort, while simultaneously cutting in-work 
benefits, and thus leaving your target voters worse off. Talking up home 
ownership for tenants whilstcapping their in-work benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/08/george-osborne-social-security-cuts-tax-credits-housing-benefit>
 – making it harder for many families to save a deposit – was similarly clumsy.

The real madness of it, however, is that forcing housing associations to flog 
off their assets would have undermined the very people on whom the government 
is relying to build new homes. The trouble with right to buy is that it’s 
solving 1979’s problem at today’s expense.

Back then house prices were running at less than four times average incomes; 
it was still a big leap from social housing to your own place but, given a 
generous government discount, millions could bridge that gap.

But today, the gap is a yawning chasm. House prices are at six times median 
incomes and 12 times in London. However much they aspire, however hard they 
strive, how does a tenant on £13,000 a year buy in London, even with a 
discount? It’s not the dead hand of the state holding them back – if you can 
call housing associations, a charitable sector engaged in public-private 
partnership, the state – but an affordability crisis caused by a chronic 
housing shortage that’s been decades in the making. And you’d have to be living 
in quite the bubble not to see it.
 