
Late next June, when each party will almost certainly have its presidential 
nominee in place and voters other than party stalwarts start paying real 
attention to the 2016 race, the US supreme court will likely hand down a ruling 
that will change the course of the race and many American women’s lives. That 
is because, on 13 November, the courtannounced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/nov/13/us-supreme-court-challenge-texas-hb2-abortion-rights>
 that it would hear Whole Women’s Health v Cole, a challenge to HB2, Texas’s 
draconian anti-abortion statute.

And, if HB2 is upheld, Roe v Wade – which legalized abortion in the US – is 
essentially dead.

When the court does finally make its decision, the Democratic nominee will not 
only be a strong supporter of reproductive rights but is overwhelmingly likely 
to be the first woman to lead the presidential ticket of either party. The 
Republican candidate is much more up in the air, but will certainly oppose 
reproductive rights, and (if the candidate is anyone but Donald Trump) will
probably be committed to the idea that abortion should be illegal in all 
circumstances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/10/anti-abortion-hysteria-republican-candidates>
.

So no matter how it is decided, the case will send off a political firestorm – 
as did the US supreme court’s landmark 1992 abortion case, Planned Parenthood v 
Casey – and nobody can be sure how theUS supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> will resolve the issues it 
left unresolved 23 years ago.

Casey was also heard in a presidential election year, after supporters of 
abortion rights challenged a package of regulations in Pennsylvania under the 
assumption that the US supreme court would rule against them and throw out Roe. 
The pro-choice movement, concerned that the court would overturn abortion 
rights at some point, wanted the court to rule before the electorate decided 
between the incumbent George HW Bush and whomever the eventual Democratic 
nominee was, if such a ruling had to happen at all.

Somewhat surprisingly, the court reaffirmed Roe v Wade, and the presidential 
candidate who supported women’s abortion rights – Bill Clinton – was elected 
despite the backlash from the anti-abortion movement.

Because the Republican-dominated court had been widely expected to overturn 
Roe, most supporters of reproductive rights treated it as a relief and a 
victory. And compared to the most likely alternative outcome of giving the 
state unlimited control over women’s uteruses, it was.


But the pro-choice movement’s “victory” came at a steep cost: Roe’s “trimester 
framework” had originally forbidden almost all state regulation of 
pre-viability (or first and second trimester) abortions. The ruling in Casey 
replaced the viability framework with the determination that any regulation of 
abortion at any stage of a woman’s pregnancy would be constitutional as long as 
it did not constitute an “undue burden”.

In theory, the “undue burden” standard could have provided a fairly robust 
protection of a woman’s right to choose to have an abortion; in practice, it 
has not.

Among other things, the court held in Casey that a mandatory waiting period 
for a woman seeking an abortion was constitutional, although the restriction
placed a significant burden on some women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/10/texas-abortion-law-supreme-court>
 – particularly poor and/or rural women – while not advancing any legitimate 
state interest in the protection of its citizens. Mandatory waiting periods are 
simply designed to make abortion maximally inconvenient and provide no heath 
benefits to the women subjected to them. As then justice John Paul Stevens 
wrote in his opinion in Casey: “The mandatory delay ... appears to rest on 
outmoded and unacceptable assumptions about the decision-making capacity of 
women.”

The Texas statute is the obvious end point of a ruling like Casey; it’s the 
culmination of a process in which anti-abortion forces have piled regulation 
upon regulation until they have forced most of the state’s abortion clinics to 
close. In the case of Texas, HB2 was upheld by the fifth circuit court of 
appeals even though it would place a major burden on the reproductive rights of 
women outside of a handful of urban centers, and despite the fact that the law 
has no plausible connection to protecting a woman’s health. The clinics are not 
being closed because they don’t provide safe abortions, butbecause they do 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/supreme-court-hear-major-abortion-case>.

As with so many cases, it is nearly certain that the fate of a woman’s right 
to choose in the United States will come down to justice Anthony Kennedy, the 
only member of the five-justice Casey majority still on the court. Supporters 
of Roe have ample reason to be pessimistic. Kennedy – always the shakiest 
member of the Casey five – hasupheld 20 of the 21 abortion restrictions to come 
before him as a US supreme court justice 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/jurisprudence/2013/11/justice_anthony_kennedy_abortion_swing_vote.html>
 under the new “undue burden” standard. It’s possible that he could vote to 
uphold the Texas statute and continue the process of asserting that Roe remains 
in force while making it devoid of any meaningful content.

Conversely, it’s possible that the Texas law – which does far more to restrict 
access to abortion than any that the Court has considered since Casey – will 
finally be a bridge too far for Kennedy. As Ian Milhiser of ThinkProgress
observed 
<http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2015/11/13/3721902/scotus-roe-wade-case/>, 
Kennedy did vote to grant a stay preventing HB2 from immediately going into 
effect, suggesting that he is, at the very least, uncertain about whether to 
uphold the law. He may well be swayed by the evidence showing how much HB2 
would affect abortion access for women in Texas and any other state that 
followed its model.

It is unlikely that Kennedy will author an opinion announcing in so many words 
that Roe v Wade has been overruled. But whether the court’s ruling is 
eventually framed that way or not, the fate of abortion access in America may 
well be decided four months before Americans head to the polls.
 