
Here’s the first thing fashion fans need to know about Zoolander 2: while the 
original Zoolander film was uncannily prescient about the absurdities of the 
industry – foreseeing thepopularity of the onesie 
<http://i.imgur.com/jXAvKuB.gif> and practically inventing the selfie face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/nov/11/zoolander-2-derek-reminds-the-world-that-he-invented-the-selfie-face>
 – Zoolander 2 doesn’t quite feel like a fashion film at all.

Aside from a few jokes (the evil Mugatu is holed up in a “fashion prison for 
the criminally insane and really out there”) and a load of cameos (Marc Jacobs, 
Anna Wintour, Jourdan Dunn, Tommy Hilfiger, Alexander Wang, Kate Moss ...), 
this is mainly a jolly action adventure featuring two comically stupid 
protagonists. On close watching, however, a few choice nuggets of fashion truth 
do emerge ...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-myth-and-the-reality-the-fashion-verdict-on-zoolander-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e494335cde777986112cafd564c07f5dd36637b%2F0_192_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20myth%20and%20the%20reality%3A%20the%20fashion%20verdict%20on%20Zoolander%202&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-myth-and-the-reality-the-fashion-verdict-on-zoolander-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20myth%20and%20the%20reality%3A%20the%20fashion%20verdict%20on%20Zoolander%202&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-myth-and-the-reality-the-fashion-verdict-on-zoolander-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e494335cde777986112cafd564c07f5dd36637b%2F0_192_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Kristen Wiig as Alexanya Atoz in Zoolander 2, chasing everlasting youth. 
Photograph: Wilson Webb/AP 
1. The fashion industry can laugh at itself ... 

... but only about very specific, non-contentious things, presumably agreed 
upon in advance via contract.

Consider that the first Zoolander film opened with a man named Giorgio and a 
woman with a sharp bob and sunglasses plotting to kill the Malaysian prime 
minister in order to protect the industry’s ability to use cheap child labour. 
Ouch. This time around – with Anna Wintour, Kate Moss and a raft of other 
fashion people on board – the industry’s evil plan is much sillier: achieving 
everlasting youth. And as anyone who has witnessed the facelifts and botoxed 
brows gathered at fashion shows will attest, that’s not caustic satire, that’s 
standard industry behaviour.

2. True fashion jokes won’t make everyone laugh

The outrageous “fashion” clothes in both Zoolander films feel far more like 
fancy dress than thegrey marl and scruffy trainers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2014/sep/16/-sp-london-fashion-weeks-what-the-designers-wore>
 most designers actually wear. This makes Zoolander 2’s one authentic style 
moment all the more enjoyable: Mugatu wearsCraig Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jun/12/craig-greens-gender-toying-collection-london-menswear>
 – one of London’s most conceptual menswear designers, beloved of serious 
fashion critics andFKA twigs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2015/apr/13/fashion-lessons-from-coachella-2015-in-pictures>
 – in an amusing cult reference that made approximately five people in my 
screening room laugh (while no one else noticed). Perhaps that is what’s known 
as throwing fashion people a bone.

3. The beard is the window to the soul

In 2001, long before the phrase peak beard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2013/jul/24/have-we-reached-peak-beard> 
was conceived, Zoolander’s male models were universally clean shaven, all the 
better to show off their chiseled cheekbones. But this has been a busy decade 
for beards, as Zoolander 2 acknowledges. First, they were fashionable; thentoo 
fashionable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/apr/16/fashion-conscious-men-warned-we-may-have-reached-peak-beard>
. Now, from theachievement beard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/shortcuts/2015/oct/14/the-p46-the-loser-and-other-beard-types-2015-david-letterman>
 to the “sleeping in his car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/feb/05/stubble-trouble-simon-cowell-sepp-blatter-sebastian-coe>
” beard, facial hair is deemed to be laden with meaning; great significance is 
imparted by every variation of shape, whisker and heft. So when Derek goes off 
the rails he sports a faint, straggly five o’clock shadow born of anguish. When 
he moves to a hut in the wilderness (a self-imposed exile that only feels 
desperate if you are unaware – as presumably Zoolander 2’s scriptwriters are – 
ofhow hot log cabins are right now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/04/cabin-porn-hideaways-gucci-furry-loafers-prada-coat-fashion-log-cabin>
) he has a grey-streaked Ming the Merciless goatee that speaks, appropriately, 
of a complete lack of aesthetic vigilance.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-myth-and-the-reality-the-fashion-verdict-on-zoolander-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39f122d4bf49c7274bfb64f8ceb26e016b09d86a%2F0_137_3000_1804%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20myth%20and%20the%20reality%3A%20the%20fashion%20verdict%20on%20Zoolander%202&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-myth-and-the-reality-the-fashion-verdict-on-zoolander-2%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20myth%20and%20the%20reality%3A%20the%20fashion%20verdict%20on%20Zoolander%202&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fthe-myth-and-the-reality-the-fashion-verdict-on-zoolander-2%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39f122d4bf49c7274bfb64f8ceb26e016b09d86a%2F0_137_3000_1804%2F3000.jpg>
 Benedict Cumberbatch as All, left, and Kyle Mooney as Don Atari. Photograph: 
Wilson Webb/AP 
4. Fashion is in the midst of a generational culture clash


Zoolander 2’s most accurate industry commentary comes as Derek and Hansel are 
faced with the unbearably annoying young “designer-mogul-dude” Don Atari. Atari 
deals in so many layers of irony that it is never possible to know what he’s 
getting at, saying things like “I hate you, you make me sick, I love you”, much 
to the bafflement of our admittedly easily baffled middle-aged heroes. The
much-discussed scene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/23/trans-rights-activists-lpetition-zoolander-2-boycott>
 with Atari’s muse, Benedict Cumberbatch’s All, however, is less successful. 
Including a transgender model highlightsa genuine recent development in the 
industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/aug/19/transgender-models-on-a-high-street-near-you>
, but the delivery feels clumsy and rude. The intention may have been to 
demonstrate that Hansel and Zoolander are out of touch but the results 
highlight the same not-too-fabulous quality in the film’s creators.

5. Fashion people can’t act ...

... and the hierarchy of celebrity cameos is truly bizarre. Guest appearances 
veer from Kate Moss, flashed across the screen for a split second, to Susan 
Boyle, seven years after she could be considered part of the zeitgeist. But the 
seminal cameo moment is actually rather brilliant, involving a cabal of fashion 
people gathered, like Voldemort’s Death Eaters, for a mysterious ceremony. 
There’s an alarmingly bronzed Valentino Garavani, the winningly named “Marc by 
Marc Jacobs”, a hilariously stilted Anna Wintour and a hammy Tommy Hilfiger, 
the subject of a joke I won’t ruin for you that feels pretty close to the bone. 
It’s bizarre and wooden – a kind of Eyes Wide Shut worst actor competition for 
fashion people – and it works because you can’t quite tell whether this lot are 
entirely in on the joke or not.
 