
It can be hard work being a fan of the Clarkson-May-Hammond iteration of Top 
Gear <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> at the Guardian. You 
might as well admit you enjoy livening up a country walk by stamping on the 
heads of bunnies, or open a meeting by suggesting maybe Donald Trump’s got a 
point about that wall. One’s liberal credentials are ripped to shreds by 
confessing to loving it, but it’s a hard habit to break.

The Johannesburg-based second episode of their Amazon Prime show The Grand Tour
 <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-grand-tour>, though, was a mixed 
bag. After the first episode, the big bang of a launch with an opening sequence 
alone reputed to have cost £3m, this was the real test: the chance to see 
whether they could keep up their automotive priapism. And, let’s be frank, 
latter series of Top Gear tended to start well before fading away, as if the 
good ideas were burned off like the last fuel in a near-empty tank. So how did 
it fare?

The Grand Tour review – Clarkson and co leave the BBC in their dust
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/18/the-grand-tour-review-jeremy-clarkson-james-may-richard-hammond-leave-the-bbc-in-their-dust>
Too much filler

Top Gear was sometimes obviously filling time: short sequences that were 
neither informative nor funny would be dropped in, with the pretence that they 
were demonstrating something remarkable that would fascinate us all. They’re 
back in force on The Grand Tour – episode two offered a brief interview with a 
South African chap who had built his own replica of a Le Mans-winning Mercedes 
race car. It took him a year and a half and his wife didn’t mind. This, truly, 
was the stuff of a slow day in the local radio station newsroom. Equally 
needless wasJames May <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/james-may> 
being sent to watch spinning – people doing doughnuts in souped-up cars, while 
hanging out of the windows. It was, at heart, a glorified YouTube clip.

The local flavour was better judged
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-grand-tour-can-jeremy-clarkson-and-his-cronies-keep-up-the-pace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe46ec930f702f32fed77a3bf87a93f2f5fae8021%2F0_0_9000_5400%2F9000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Grand%20Tour%3A%20can%20Jeremy%20Clarkson%20and%20his%20cronies%20keep%20up%20the%20pace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-grand-tour-can-jeremy-clarkson-and-his-cronies-keep-up-the-pace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Grand%20Tour%3A%20can%20Jeremy%20Clarkson%20and%20his%20cronies%20keep%20up%20the%20pace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-grand-tour-can-jeremy-clarkson-and-his-cronies-keep-up-the-pace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe46ec930f702f32fed77a3bf87a93f2f5fae8021%2F0_0_9000_5400%2F9000.jpg>
 In Johannesburg, there were jokes about carjacking – and a running gag about 
President Jacob Zuma’s inability to read out long numbers. Photograph: Amazon 
Prime Video 
Last week, Clarkson baffled the US audience in the studio-tent with a joke 
about Carol Vorderman – it seems neither her Countdown fame nor her status as 
the only person to win Rear of the Year twice have permeated the American 
consciousness. This time he kept the references local, with a running gag about 
President Jacob Zuma’s inability to read out long numbers, his taste for 
state-funded luxury goods, and a segment where the trio dwelt on carjacking 
rates in South Africa. “How did you have time to come here?” Hammond asked the 
audience, on being told there were 35 carjackings a day. It wasn’t exactly 
funny, but at least it wasn’t met by silence like the Vorderman gag.

They’re too in thrall to the military
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-grand-tour-can-jeremy-clarkson-and-his-cronies-keep-up-the-pace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6322561cdbdc9fb5fc0a68a46afb5a762efecdef%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Grand%20Tour%3A%20can%20Jeremy%20Clarkson%20and%20his%20cronies%20keep%20up%20the%20pace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-grand-tour-can-jeremy-clarkson-and-his-cronies-keep-up-the-pace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Grand%20Tour%3A%20can%20Jeremy%20Clarkson%20and%20his%20cronies%20keep%20up%20the%20pace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-grand-tour-can-jeremy-clarkson-and-his-cronies-keep-up-the-pace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6322561cdbdc9fb5fc0a68a46afb5a762efecdef%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Like a show whose central purpose is to imagine what goes on inside the head 
of a 13-year-old boy. Photograph: Ellis O'Brien/Amazon 
The first episode showed a brief preview of the upcoming series, featuring a 
large amount of military hardware. The centrepiece of the second was a sequence 
in which the three presenters tried to replicate a training exercise used by 
Jordanian special forces. It’s easy enough to see why a show whose central 
purpose is to imagine what goes on inside the head of a 13-year-old boy 
(without the sex. Very much without the sex) then magnify it to the point of 
absurdity might keep returning to the armed forces. But for those who like to 
think they’ve moved beyond 13, the fetishisation of armed forces can get a bit 
wearing. In 2009, the UK Ministry of Defence admitted military personnel had 
spent the equivalent of 141 days working on Top Gear stunts. The only 
difference this time is that other countries’ forces are being co-opted. 
Clarkson being shot with blanks appears to have become producer Andy Wilman’s 
version of the custard pie in the face, and it’s just as tiresome.

Big budgets can mean bloat
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-grand-tour-can-jeremy-clarkson-and-his-cronies-keep-up-the-pace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0b603919d02a6165aa5dcbff101b1f100382767%2F0_43_885_531%2F885.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Grand%20Tour%3A%20can%20Jeremy%20Clarkson%20and%20his%20cronies%20keep%20up%20the%20pace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-grand-tour-can-jeremy-clarkson-and-his-cronies-keep-up-the-pace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Grand%20Tour%3A%20can%20Jeremy%20Clarkson%20and%20his%20cronies%20keep%20up%20the%20pace%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fthe-grand-tour-can-jeremy-clarkson-and-his-cronies-keep-up-the-pace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0b603919d02a6165aa5dcbff101b1f100382767%2F0_43_885_531%2F885.jpg>
 The special forces sequence dragged on and on and on. Photograph: Amazon Prime 
The special forces sequence was the centrepiece, and pretty much every other 
piece, too – it dragged on and on and on. The central conceit was lifted from 
the movie Edge of Tomorrow, though you wouldn’t necessarily know that – when 
Clarkson suggested they start again each time they got shot, like in that Tom 
Cruise film, the others responded by asking if he meant Cocktail or Rain Man. 
And seeing James May get shot as he ran to get in a Renault, set up the same 
way each time, became boring long before the producers thought it did. Worse, 
it was too heavily and obviously scripted. Top Gear’s best stunts worked 
because, although the viewer knew such absurdity must have been set up, the 
trio managed to be natural about it; the best bits were where their pleasure in 
each others’ misfortune – or irritation at that pleasure – was clearly genuine. 
May’s inhumanity to man, as it were. Take away the spontaneity, and you’re left 
with mannered TV presenters pretending to be actors. It feels as though there 
is too much at stake – in money and reputation – for the Pooterish 
ridiculousness of Top Gear’s old best bits. You suspect there will be nothing 
so cheap as trying to convert an old Triumph into a yacht this time around. 
More’s the pity: Clarkson, May and Hammond work best when they’re being Little 
England (emphasis very much on the little) rather than trying to be Great 
Britain.

But they’re still funny

Reader, I laughed. I didn’t weep with laughter, as I often did at Top Gear’s 
greatest flights of fancy, but I did laugh. I laughed as Clarkson’s trousers 
fell down under the weight of grenades as he tried to abseil out of a 
helicopter. I laughed when he had to put on his reading glasses to follow the 
instructions on a stun grenade. I laughed when, after they stormed a hijacked 
aeroplane, May responded to Clarkson’s inquiry as to whether all the terrorists 
were dead at the back of the plane by saying, “Everybody’s dead back there.” 
So, sluggish and scripted – but still with moments that sparkle.
 