
Antony Gormley has been struck down by modesty. The artist who casts his own 
body religiously, and whose monumental works include not only the Angel of the 
North buta hotel room 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/10/antony-gormley-room-sculpture-beaumont-hotel>
 whose exterior is shaped like a squatting Lego figure, has been musing about 
his own place in history.

“It’s quite possible that my whole project is very flawed,” he speculates 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/art/artists/antony-gormley-im-not-sure-anything-i-do-is-very-useful-to-the-h/>
. “That, in the great frame of things, when contributions are weighed in the 
balance of usefulness to the human race, I may be found very wanting, but it’s 
too late for doubt now. Neither is there time for it.”

The trouble with this introspection is that it sounds so phoney. Gormley 
clearly does not doubt his own significance. His self-criticism is laced with 
narcissism. And that’s fair enough, maybe. If you are going to be an artist you 
need a big ego. It’s injudicious of Gormley to wonder about something that only 
the future can decide – but all artists fret secretly about the same thing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fantony-gormley-legacy-painters-paintings-national-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd889523b3fad0dfc3ecbfbd60222f26a2f1ed221%2F168_92_1435_1919%2F1435.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20legacy%20game%3A%20Gormley%20isn't%20the%20first%20artist%20to%20worry%20about%20his%20place%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fantony-gormley-legacy-painters-paintings-national-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20legacy%20game%3A%20Gormley%20isn%27t%20the%20first%20artist%20to%20worry%20about%20his%20place%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fantony-gormley-legacy-painters-paintings-national-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd889523b3fad0dfc3ecbfbd60222f26a2f1ed221%2F168_92_1435_1919%2F1435.jpg>
 Paul Cézanne’s Bather with Outstretched Arm, owned by Jasper Johns. 
Photograph: © Photograph by Dorothy Zeidman 
One of the most fascinating things about art is its relationship with history. 
Most of the art we see is a relic – even to look at a work that won the Turner 
prize two years ago is to look at the past. Art is preserved by museums, 
private collections, or as a public monument, and all involve a sense of 
history – for the Tate to collect a work by a contemporary artist (as it 
collects Gormley) is, for example, to lay a bet on that artist’s historical 
importance. Many bets are bad, which why the Tate stores are so full of art 
that rarely sees the light. Some bets go truly sour, as when it found itself 
witha large collection of work 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-cornwall-22026730> by the disgraced artist
Graham Ovenden <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graham_Ovenden>. 

It’s not only museums that lay bets on an artist’s place in history. Artists 
consciously see themselves as historical figures. One reason the National 
Gallery’s current exhibitionPainters’ Paintings 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/painters-paintings-from-freud-to-van-dyck>
 is so interesting is that it shows how artists imagine themselves as “greats” 
by collecting the art of previous greats: when Lucian Freud looked at the 
Cézanne he owned, or Matisse purchased a Gauguin, they were comparing 
themselves with these masters and therefore seeing themselves in the same grand 
tradition. Picasso and Matisse gave each other paintings in recognition of 
their equal heroic standing in modern art history – a status they were totally 
aware of in themselves and each other.

Artists, in other words, imagine their future place in the museum even as they 
make new art. How can you not? Gormley is silly to pretend a humility he does 
not need to have. For as he surely knows, he is guaranteed some kind of place 
in history. In one way art history is cruel: it selects only a few artists as 
heroes, like Picasso and Matisse. Yet in another way it is generous. Lots of 
artists occupy a historical half-light where they are remembered dimly. PhD 
students seek them out in the Tate stores, and exhibitions rake them up from 
time to time. “Rediscoveries” are constantly dragging “neglected” names into 
the limelight. Let’s resurrectWinifred Knights 
<http://www.dulwichpicturegallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/2016/june/winifred-knights/>
. Let’s exhumeChristopher Wood 
<http://pallant.org.uk/exhibitions/forthcoming-exhibitions/main-galleries/christopher-wood1/christopher-wood>
.

British art is a particularly rich, if often very dusty, archive for this kind 
of rediscovery because it is full of these kinds of second-rank, “interesting” 
artists. There has never been a British Picasso, Matisse, Cézanne, Mondrian, 
Pollock, Magritte or Rothko. Quite frankly there has not been a British artist 
since the death of Turner in 1851 who even remotely resembled a genius.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fantony-gormley-legacy-painters-paintings-national-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F813fb059781161fb3973726d0321abb0cf50c35d%2F340_250_2025_1215%2F2025.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20legacy%20game%3A%20Gormley%20isn't%20the%20first%20artist%20to%20worry%20about%20his%20place%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fantony-gormley-legacy-painters-paintings-national-gallery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20legacy%20game%3A%20Gormley%20isn%27t%20the%20first%20artist%20to%20worry%20about%20his%20place%20in%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fantony-gormley-legacy-painters-paintings-national-gallery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F813fb059781161fb3973726d0321abb0cf50c35d%2F340_250_2025_1215%2F2025.jpg>
 Antony Gormley, Bridge, 2015. Photograph: Stephen White 
As an artist, Gormley is glibly effective but ultimately shallow and easy on 
the brain: just compare hisclumsy attempts 
<https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quantum_Cloud#/media/File%3AAntony_Gormley_Quantum_Cloud_2000.jpg>
 to represent quantum reality with the way cubism captured Einsteinian 
space-timea century ago <http://www.moma.org/collection/works/79051>. Gormley, 
I think, is just another of Britain’s long line of so-so artists who are good 
enough to impress their time but lack true greatness. And that means we will 
remember him piously, just as we kid ourselves that Henry Moore is in Picasso’s 
league.
 