
The Battle of the Bastards, the ninth episode of this year’s Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, has just won seven 
Emmys (including best writing and best directing), a record for a single 
episode of a television show. Fans know to expect a bloodbath in the 
penultimate episode of each season, but even by the show’s own gruesome 
standards, this one was something else. Focusing mainly on the long-promised 
showdown between the drama’s warring bastard sons, the perpetually brooding Jon 
Snow and the relentlessly evil Ramsay Bolton, a man who gets his kicks from 
rape, torture and feeding his enemies to his hunting dogs, this was a bleak, 
brutal and weirdly cathartic hour of television.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbattle-of-the-bastards-game-of-thrones-episode-record-seven-emmys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34dae79a2541f3b5a00b4ca10bc2b639c4215b2b%2F0_297_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Battle%20of%20The%20Bastards%3A%20Game%20of%20Thrones%20serves%20up%20TV's%20finest%20hour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbattle-of-the-bastards-game-of-thrones-episode-record-seven-emmys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Battle%20of%20The%20Bastards%3A%20Game%20of%20Thrones%20serves%20up%20TV%27s%20finest%20hour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fbattle-of-the-bastards-game-of-thrones-episode-record-seven-emmys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34dae79a2541f3b5a00b4ca10bc2b639c4215b2b%2F0_297_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Director Miguel Sapochnik accepts the Emmy award for Outstanding Directing For 
A Drama Series. Photograph: Mike Blake/Reuters 
Beautifully directed by Miguel Sapochnik, The Battle of the Bastards took the 
simple theme “war is hell” and paid homage to everything from the opening 
moments of Saving Private Ryan to Akira Kurosawa’s Ran, which features probably 
the greatest battle sequence ever filmed, a six-minute depiction of the horror 
and futility of combat in which the only sound comes from Tôru Takemitsu’s 
score. The Battle of the Bastards can’t quite match that, but there are 
moments, most notably the terrifying scene in which Jon is slowly crushed under 
the weight of dead men, his vision narrowing to pinpricks, when it comes close. 
Time magazine called Sapochnik’s work “among the most beautifully shot in the 
show’s history 
<http://time.com/4374330/game-of-thrones-battle-of-the-bastards-review/>”, 
while the New Yorker’sEmily Nussbaum 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/07/04/the-political-resonance-of-game-of-thrones>
 hailed it as “an action sequence with a flexible humanity, and a 
thoughtfulness about war, that the larger plotlines too often lack.”

She was right that what makes The Battle of the Bastards both so terrifying 
and so humane is its understanding that war is chaotic, that having right on 
your side doesn’t always mean you will win and that even if you do struggle to 
victory, thousands of other human beings will have died for your cause.

Emmys 2016: Game of Thrones breaks Frasier's record and wins best drama again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/18/game-of-thrones-emmy-awards-2016-breaks-record-best-drama>
The high price of war was never more obvious than in the show’s final moments, 
the overdue reckoning between Ramsay and his brutalised bride Sansa. Game of 
Thrones is often accused of being all spectacle and no subtlety but this 
confrontation, which both disturbed and satisfied, was a clever reminder that 
the most devastating moments are not always played out on the battlefield. 
“Your words will disappear. Your house will disappear. Your name will 
disappear. My memory of you will disappear,” Sansa told her blood-spattered and 
cowed husband, in a scene that would not have been out of place in a Jacobean 
tragedy.

It isn’t perfect – the arrival of the Knights of the Vale in time to save the 
day was too pat, although the scene, shot from above, when they circle Ramsay’s 
men remains eerily beautiful. Yet it has become the US’s most award-laden hour 
of television for a reason: it’s an ambitious, involving and dramatically 
satisfying hour of drama which thrusts the audience into the heart of the 
action and makes them, however briefly, taste the reality of war.
 