
The stock market is down again and officially entering bear market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/20/what-is-a-bear-market> 
territory, having fallen 20% since its April 2015 peak.

Your pension is in trouble (again)

The more than 5 million workers who every month pay into a stock market-based 
pension from their salary are worst hit. At retirement, they simply get back 
what they have paid in plus any investment returns. The FTSE 100 index has 
slumped by a fifth since hitting an all-time high of 7122 on 27 April 2015, 
which means pension pots have shrivelled.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fbear-market-pensions-shares-investments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcddd9144dce23e324c0ac9e2675635cb0e9f0ec5%2F0_0_966_523%2F966.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20bear%20market%3A%20what%20it%20means%20for%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fbear-market-pensions-shares-investments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20bear%20market%3A%20what%20it%20means%20for%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fbear-market-pensions-shares-investments%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcddd9144dce23e324c0ac9e2675635cb0e9f0ec5%2F0_0_966_523%2F966.jpg>
The only good news is that your pension is unlikely to be 100% invested in the 
FTSE 100. A typical workplace pension fund spreads investments across a range 
of assets, such as bonds and property, and they have not all fared as badly as 
stocks.

For example, the mainstream shares-based fund run by Legal & General for lots 
of employers has seen losses of around 12%-13% since April. But pension 
investors will also have some of their money in the bond portfolio, where 
losses are just 1%-2%, while the cash element will have gone up, albeit only 
slightly. This means that overall, workers will have lost around 7%-8% of their 
pension pot since April – bad news, but not as catastrophic as the headlines 
suggest.

The millions of workers still in final-salary pension schemes, mostly in the 
public sector, are not affected as they have guarantees based on their salary 
levels. But if the stock market remains weak, many of these promises become 
tougher to finance.

Your Isas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> are down dramatically


Some of the funds popular with small investors are down heavily. M&G’s £6bn 
Global Dividend fund has lost 20% since April, the worst performer among the 25 
biggest funds in the country, according to figures from Trustnet.com. 
Vanguard’s £4bn UK all share index fund, which simply tracks the stock market, 
is down more than 15%, while Halifax’s £5bn UK Growth fund is down 14.5%.

But some of the star fund managers have performed relatively well during the 
crisis. Neil Woodford’s £8bn Equity Income fund has lost just 2.9%, while the 
stand-out performer isTerry Smith’s £4.5bn Fundsmith Equity fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/nov/06/investment-funds-terry-smith-warren-buffet>
. It has delivered a profit of 2% since April despite markets falling virtually 
everywhere.

If you hold individual shares, you’ve been hammered 

The London stock market has been hit particularly hard because it is home to 
the world’s biggest mining groups. Anglo American, which just five years ago 
was the 15th biggest constituent of the FTSE 100 with a value of £31.5bn, has 
been worst hit. Its shares have collapsed from a peak of £34.21 in 2011 to just 
£2.24, with its Brazilian iron ore and Australian coal mines suffering as 
demand from China has dropped. So if you held £1,000-worth of Anglo American 
shares five years ago they are worth just £65 today.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fbear-market-pensions-shares-investments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1210cfc6d92c73626ea2425067d3e542e493139f%2F0_598_1989_1192%2F1989.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20bear%20market%3A%20what%20it%20means%20for%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fbear-market-pensions-shares-investments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20bear%20market%3A%20what%20it%20means%20for%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fbear-market-pensions-shares-investments%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1210cfc6d92c73626ea2425067d3e542e493139f%2F0_598_1989_1192%2F1989.jpg>
 The bear market will hit pensions and shares, though the price of flights may 
come down. Photograph: Tom Mason/Rex Shutterstock 
Share in other metals and minerals companies in the FTSE 100 have also 
tumbled: Glencore has collapsed from £5.24 to just 75p, while BHP Billiton is 
down from £26.10 to £6.08. The falling price of crude has also rocked the oil 
majors, with Shell down from £21 to £13.50 over the past year.

However, not every FTSE 100 stock is down. Share prices in housebuilders 
Taylor Wimpey and Barratts have continued to increase, while Direct Line, 
Hargreaves Lansdown and ITV are all ahead.

Interest rates will stay at rock bottom


Inflation is just 0.2% in the UK and the eurozone, so the prospects of an 
interest rate rise are virtually zero this year. The falling Shanghai stock 
market is also pushing the value of its currency down, making Chinese exports 
cheaper, and exporting deflation around the world. It’s good news if you have a 
tracker mortgage as monthly payments are unlikely to rise, but it’s further bad 
news for savers suffering near-invisible returns on their deposits.

Prices in shops may fall

The price of oil is down, as are metal and commodity costs, while Chinese 
imports are getting cheaper. The ONS said this week thatinput prices for 
manufacturers in the UK are 10% less 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/uk-inflation-rises-unexpectedfly-air-fares>
 than last year. Even some soft commodities have fallen hard – the wholesale 
price of coffee beans is down 25% on the year – although corn, wheat and sugar 
prices have been broadly stable.

Holidays will be more expensive – but flights cheaper 

The best place for your money over the past five years has actually been UK 
smaller companies funds

Over the past two years British holidaymakers have almost never had it so 
good, with sterling rising sharply, particularly against the euro, meaning 
cheap holidays in Spain. But in the past month sterling has weakened 
dramatically against the euro, with the pound now buying just €1.28 compared 
with €1.42 in late 2015. The US will also look expensive for British visitors, 
with sterling hitting a seven-year low against the dollar this week.

But there could be an airline price war. Aviation fuel is usually the single 
biggest cost for airlines. It has collapsed in price, but until now that hasn’t 
fed through to lower fares because airlines were locked into long-term 
contracts. They are now unwinding, allowing airlines to cut prices (or fatten 
their profits).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fbear-market-pensions-shares-investments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd101eb0b02f75c633cbbe07710466bb3ad768699%2F0_0_1194_983%2F1194.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202016%20bear%20market%3A%20what%20it%20means%20for%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fbear-market-pensions-shares-investments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202016%20bear%20market%3A%20what%20it%20means%20for%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fbear-market-pensions-shares-investments%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd101eb0b02f75c633cbbe07710466bb3ad768699%2F0_0_1194_983%2F1194.jpg>
What you can do

Most people are fatalistic about their pensions, crossing their fingers and 
hoping things will improve. Individuals can choose to pay more in, using their 
company’s “additional voluntary contributions”. At least the money will be used 
to buy shares and bonds that are cheaper today than a year ago. But others will 
argue that is just throwing good money after bad.

Anyone who decided to follow the Guardian’s Keep It in the Ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/keep-it-in-the-ground> campaign 
last year and divested from coal, oil and gas has done particularly well. 
Stocks such as those of Royal Dutch Shell have been among the worst performers 
on the stock market, so being out of them will have paid off.

The brave investor may want to buy the thing that has fallen most, in the hope 
that it will rebound. On that basis, you would want to sell the top-performing 
fund sector of the past year, European smaller companes, which are up 11%, and 
buy global emerging markets funds, which are down 18%. But there is no 
guarantee such a strategy will work; emerging markets funds have been the worst 
performers in the funds universe over six months, one year, three years and 
five years. When you were told to put your money into China for long-term 
growth, it was wrong. The best place for your money over the past five years 
has actually been UK smaller companies funds.
 