
Libya looks certain to be the next flashpoint in the “war on terror” – with a 
crucialpolitical deadline approaching today 
<http://saudigazette.com.sa/world/mena/deadline-for-new-libya-unity-govt-extended/>
. As RAF jets are already over desert skies and President Obama is telling the 
Pentagon to look at military options, it seems that the west isready to take on 
the 6,000 Islamic State fighters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/09/raf-in-libyan-missions-in-preparation-for-helping-unity-government>
 in the vast, oil-rich sands of north Africa.

Tunisia is so worried by the build-up of Islamists on its doorstep that it has 
begun to build ananti-terror barrier along its border with Libya 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-35515229> – a desperate attempt to 
protect itself from terrorism. In the ever spiralling war against terror, Libya 
now matters to everyone.

UN Libya envoy accepts £1,000-a-day job from backer of one side in civil war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/un-libya-envoy-accepts-1000-a-day-job-from-backer-of-one-side-in-civil-war>
But the effort to address the threat is being impeded by the body that should 
be leading the response: theUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>. Foreign forces would have to 
be invited in by a Libyan government. The problem is not that there isn’t such 
a government. The problem is that there are three.

To the administrations in Tripoli and Tobruk, the United Nations added a third 
– a “unity government” in Tunisia: one so fractured thatthree of its 
nine-member presidential council reportedly came to blows recently. 
<https://www.libyaherald.com/2016/02/10/presidency-council-stalemated-over-defence-ministry-appointment-granted-more-time-by-hor-to-name-government/>

Endorsed by the UN in December, the administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/23/un-security-council-backs-libya-unity-accord>
 has said it will come up with a list of ministers thateveryone can agree on by 
tonight. 
<http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/2/8/187497/World/Region/No-time-to-lose-to-install-Libya-unity-government-.aspx>
 To make matters worse, everything the UN does now is tainted by Libyan 
concerns about its credibility.

Much of that concern relates to the role of the former UN peace envoy, 
Bernardino Léon. Léon, a former Spanish foreign minister, spent weeks last 
summer completing the proposed agreement between the two sides to form a 
power-sharing unity government. Those talks were meant to put to rest the 
intense, butlargely hidden, competition between regional players such as the 
United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia and Qatar 
<http://nationalinterest.org/feature/how-the-gulf-arab-rivalry-tore-libya-apart-14580>
and their client states over influence in Libya, whose oil and gas reserves 
make the nation a valuable piece of global real estate.

RAF flying Libyan missions in preparation for helping unity government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/09/raf-in-libyan-missions-in-preparation-for-helping-unity-government>
But analysts say the UN’s credibility as an honest broker in those talks was 
dramatically undermined when the Guardianrevealed emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/un-libya-envoy-accepts-1000-a-day-job-from-backer-of-one-side-in-civil-war>
 showing that while Léon was drafting the accord, he was also negotiating to 
become the £35,000-a-month director general of UAE’s “Diplomatic Academy” – a 
potential conflict of interest.

The emails, hitherto undisclosed, appear to show that Léon asks permission to 
proceed with a plan to name the Libyan ambassador to the UAE as a possible 
prime minister of the unity government. In one set Leon draws up a plan with 
the UAE’s national security council on how the Libyan armed forces could be run.

For many Libyans these disclosures are profoundly shocking. Léon claimed there 
had been a “selective reading” of his emails and had similar communications 
with other regional players. But following publication of the emails, senior UN 
officials I spoke to confirmed that they were being subjected to “extraordinary 
pressure” from Gulf states.

The UN could have conducted a transparent investigation and restored its 
credibility. Instead it replaced Léon with a veteran German diplomat.Léon took 
up his role with the Emirates Diplomatic Academy 
<http://www.uaeinteract.com/docs/Emirates-Diplomatic-Academy-appoints-top-UN-diplomat-Bernardino-Leon-Gross-as-first-Director-General/72130.htm>
, and from this vantage point surfaced last month to pronounce Libya a “failed 
state”.

This has not been the only misstep. From the outset the UN has failed to work 
with political forces on the ground to design administrations best suited to 
local traditions. This would have meant international partners handing over 
responsibility for anti-terror operations to Libyan forces of varying political 
complexions and – something the west and its allies have so far not been 
willing to contemplate – tolerating their attempts to dislodge IS.

Instead militias, warlords and armed groups thrived as UN-backed processes 
failed to deliver governance or a politics that has popular support. The task in
Libya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> has always been a daunting one. 
It has not been helped by the UN playing a difficult hand badly.
 