
The crisis the NHS faces is so urgent that in last month’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/autumn-statement-2015> the chancellor was 
persuaded to bring forward some of the extra £8bn of cash he pledged during the 
election. But while he gave (a little) with one hand, he squeezed hard with the 
other. There will be no extra money in the immediate future for the single 
biggest cause of the pressure on the NHS: the holes in social care. George 
Osborne did indeed conjure up an extra £2bn of cash for social care from the 
country’s council tax payers. Now it is clear that it was not really magic at 
all, just smoke and mirrors. According to the independent King’s Fund 
thinktank, the 2% social care levy is unlikely to raise the £2bn claimed, even 
if all of the 152 councils that deliver social care risked their electoral 
chances and decided to raise it. And in the areas that need the most, it would 
raise the least.

Since 2010, local government has had to cut spending, in aggregate, by nearly 
30%. Poorer councils have had to cut the most: with relatively few larger homes 
in bands D and E, authorities depend on money from Whitehall to make up for the 
shortfall between their income and local needs. Now these councils will be 
penalised again. The laws of maths say 2% of not much brings in even less, and 
raising council tax will mean some of it goes straight out again on council tax 
benefit.

Social care left in crisis by spending review | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/06/social-care-left-in-crisis-by-spending-review>
At the same time, central government grants are to be cut, with councils 
allowed to keep their business rate receipts instead. This is likely to mean 
another poverty penalty. There is less than a fortnight until the details of a 
new financial settlement are announced, and councils still have no idea what, 
if any, method of redistributing income from rich to poor boroughs will be 
used. That is not the only fiddle Mr Osborne has deployed. The Better Care 
Fund, the pot of cash to smooth the way to providing integrated health and 
social care goes up – but it is paid for by cash from the new homes bonus, 
meant to incentivise councils to speed up planning.

Then last week, almost unnoticed, a pioneering experiment of the kind that 
must succeed if the NHS is to stay viablefell apart 
<http://www.cambridge-news.co.uk/Cambridgeshire-s-older-people-s-care-contract/story-28292894-detail/story.html>
. UnitingCare was a consortium of Cambridgeshire hospital trusts and community 
care providers that wona £1.2bn contract 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/4c008640-9a70-11e5-987b-d6cdef1b205c.html#axzz3tYlMth1l>
 to deliver NHS care to older people. It was the first contract with built-in 
rewards for cutting hospital admissions and accident and emergency visits, and 
its failure to deliver benefits from integrating care raises very serious 
questions about the capacity of the NHS to manage procurement. The people in 
charge of Manchester’s devolvedhealth and care integration scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/mar/24/devo-manc-five-early-lessons-for-the-nhs>
 should be worried.

It will take months if not years to identify the reasons for the failure of 
UnitingCare. Seasoned observers wonder if the savings had been clearly enough 
identified; they note that GPs were not apparently part of the project; they 
contemplate the absurdity and the inefficiencies of the rules governing 
administrative change inNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
foundation trusts; and they know that changing administrative structures is a 
poor way of changing behaviour.

Pushing for change at the same time as the harshest ever slowdown in spending 
on the NHS may be justifiable. But doing it while increasing demand for its 
services by failing to fundlocal government 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/local-government-funding-at-the-spending-review-2015>
 properly is like piling too many people into a life raft. It doesn’t need to 
happen, and it is not going to end well.
 