
Hector is a fine and noble name for a man. Hectors from history are led by the 
tragic hero of the Trojan wars, the ultimate in good blokes. But somehow men 
themselves think Hector suits women better.

And so it was that Peter Mandelson, the Labour Party's Communications 
Director, described Margaret Thatcher's first ever televised performance in the 
Commons as 'shrill and hectoring'. Shrill as in shrew and hectoring as in 
harridan, one suspects.

It was an interesting judgment, not least because most people found her 
'coquettish' in giving way to frequent interruptions from Labour. Clare Short, 
leading feminist in the Commons, observed, 'She was practically flirting with 
some of our younger chaps. I expect it's all part of the efforts to soften her 
image.' Whatever the verdict, it seems the political lexicon of sexism is being 
dusted off as the shock of Margaret Thatcher's current vulnerability leads to 
the writing of a new chapter in the fortunes of the first woman Prime Minister.

Certainly, Tory MP Emma Nicholson is convinced that a bitter, anti-woman 
undercurrent is flaring up in Parliament and not just on the Labour benches. 
'They will use anything to attack the Prime Minister and I think they are 
sacrificing their acceptance of women as equals to get at her.' Inside and 
outside Westminster, there's talk of political challengers being 'hand-bagged', 
of curtains being bought for the retirement home in Dulwich, of babyminding the 
new grandson, while Downing Street is countering with propaganda about a 
'caring' ethos and teamwork.

The Prime Minister is suddenly a woman again as the men in her party circle 
for the succession and the men on the opposite benches get their first whiff of 
power for over a decade. Her personality and leadership style are making a lot 
of the political running. It's almost inevitable that her gender will be 
implicated - it has always been a political challenge for both her allies and 
her opponents. One can't help thinking that Neil Kinnock would have made a 
better job of it if he'd been opposing another man. But Mrs Thatcher herself 
has done pretty well out of being a woman.

She got her first real break as the 'statutory woman' in Edward Heath's 
Cabinet, was underestimated as a candidate in the 1975 leadership contest 
because she was a woman, and has subsequently exploited her femininity as a 
weapon in the political process. If she uses the Royal 'we' a lot, it's because 
she is a Queen Bee, a woman who has fought her way to the top in a man's world, 
then pulled the ladder up after her.

One of the keys to her power has been the extent to which she has steered well 
clear of women's issues and other women politicians.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> MPs are treated like 'one of 
the boys' when they stick to issues like transport or energy, according to 
Clare Short. 'But the sexism comes out when you hit certain spots, like 
cervical cancer or rape or pornography,' she said. 'Men are uncomfortable with 
these issues and try to squeeze them out of the political agenda by making you 
feel more of a woman than a politician when you raise them.'

Mrs Thatcher has failed to champion her sex in other ways. Apart from a short 
appearance by Baroness Young in the early Eighties, she has always had all-male 
Cabinets. With a few exceptions the men are said to have been scared of her, if 
not wets then wimps. And she has thrown the misogynists on her own back benches 
other fish to fry, notably Edwina Currie. Lynda Chalker, who many regard as the 
most able woman minister, has been kept out of the limelight.

Cary Cooper, Professor of Organisational Psychology at the University of 
Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, has studied women executives in 
industry and says it is very common for women at the top to behave more like a 
man than men and to avoid association with other women. 'They don't want to be 
made out to be feminists in any form,' he said.

Whatever the qualities of the private woman, the public image of Margaret 
Thatcher is almost as much a construction as Dame Edna Everage's. From the 
ludicrous posed photos at the kitchen sink on the day she became Tory Leader, 
to the famous make-over of the voice, hair and clothes, to the double acts on 
the international stage with Hollywood-trained Ronald Reagan, Margaret 
Thatcher's femininity has been deliberately moulded and put to powerful use. 
She has tremendous appeal as a role model for modern women, while paradoxically 
emphasising their traditional roles as homemakers and mothers, and remaining 
indifferent, if not downright hostile, to the needs of working women.

It's no accident that the television satirists of Spitting Image have 
portrayed Thatcher as a man. Clare Short (who herself confesses to believing 
there's a colonel's uniform beneath the trim suits) is convinced she has got 
away with a lot more than any man would have, while Tory MP Theresa Gorman 
believes that qualities for which men in politics are complimented are used in 
evidence against her.

As more women have battled their way into politics during the Eighties, the 
more public and offensive forms of sexism have diminished. The 'Ditch The 
Bitch' campaigns of the early Thatcher years were stamped on by Labour women. 
And as the Thatcher years rolled by, it became reassuringly clear to the male 
establishment that the interests being served by the arrival of the first woman 
Prime Minister were not those of women but of a new class of meritocrats.

The next Prime Minister will be a man, but despite the hatred that 'That 
Woman' frequently inspires, the sentiment 'We've had one woman but never again' 
is rarely heard. It's almost as if, as a woman, Margaret Thatcher represents no 
one but herself, whoever that is. All the same, her femaleness is implicated in 
the current power struggles. 'If I were Margaret Thatcher right now, I'd be 
worried,' said Professor Cary Cooper. 'You just watch the men around her. As 
they see her power base crumbling, her opponents will look for elements in her 
femininity that indicate weakness and use them to put her down.'

Just as Margaret Thatcher used racism to get in (with her infamous remark 
about Britain being 'swamped by people of a different culture'), so may her 
opponents risk using sexism to chip away at her unassailability and help get 
her out.

GIRL TALK

'It's been a touching spectacle: the brave little woman getting on with the 
woman's work of trying to dominate the world'
Austin Mitchell MP on the Lawson resignation crisis, House of Commons, Oct 31.

'The British whinge, complain, stamp their feet and sometimes wave their 
handbags'
Ron Leighton MP on the Government's European policy, House of Commons, Nov 2.

'Will the Prime Minister confirm that a 63-year-old pensioner on an income of 
Pounds 70.01 per week, living in Southwark, will pay exactly the same poll tax 
as a 63-year-old professional lady, earning Pounds 1000 per week, who is 
married to a millionaire and living in Dulwich?'
Dr John Reid MP, Prime Minister's Questions, June 29.

Â· This article was republished as part of a special edition marking 50 Years 
of the Guardian women's page <https://www.theguardian.com/women/50years>.
 