
It may never happen. George Osborne's grand plan to shrink the state back to 
1948 levels may never get off the runway. As the miasma of hisautumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/05/autumn-statement-key-points-george-osborne-live>
 clears, it looks as if he could have committed a political error far greater 
than hisomnishambles budget 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/democracylive/hi/house_of_commons/newsid_9712000/9712855.stm>
. A financial plan supposed to last to 2019 and beyond is likely to unravel 
through a monumental misreading of the country's state of mind.

It took a few days for the full import of the verdict of the Institute for 
Fiscal Studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/06/ifs-living-standards-lower-osborne-autumn-statement>
 to permeate the political world. The IFS is the trusted arbiter whose 
sand-blasting analysis strips sugar coating from every chancellor's figures. 
All governments fear the institute – Gordon Brown used to spit teeth when it 
constantly punctured his boasts. Now Osborne is, apparently, apoplectic at the 
latest IFS analysis. In a few plain pages Paul Johnson, the IFS director,
delivered a devastating judgment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/nov/30/living-standards-institute-fiscal-studies>
 on the scale of cuts that Osborne had left opaque.

After the next election his cuts would be far deeper than anything seen yet, 
accelerating from their current 2.3% a year to 3.7% a year up to 2019, getting 
tougher annually as they get closer to the bone. The IFS leaves out the 
ring-fenced departments – though the claim that NHS spending is "protected" 
looks thinner by the month: we can see how much it needs it needs a 2% rise to 
keep pace with older, sicker patients. Meanwhile, Osborne's unfunded giveaways –
marriage tax allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/sep/27/tory-tax-break-marriage-glue>,
free school meals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/05/nick-clegg-free-school-meals-children-six-seven>
 and£6bn foregone on petrol tax <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-21858399> – 
will require another £12bn taken from welfare, above the £19bn in cuts by 2015.

To add to Osborne's anger, Johnson confirms Labour's warning that incomes have 
fallen by £1,600 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/06/ifs-living-standards-lower-osborne-autumn-statement>
 since 2010, warning that the average income "will surely still be below its 
2010 level by the election in 2015". His most shocking number – showing
government back to its 1948 size 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/10502351/Benefits-face-further-cuts-under-deficit-plan-claims-IFS.html>
 – was the ideological intention of Cameron's Conservative party.

Will it ever happen? Public exposure of so dire a future for Britain may well 
sink the Tories beneath the electoral waves. But that depends on Labour and Lib 
Dems refusing to accept the need for such harsh cuts just as growth returns, so 
casting the Tories as the wreckers, not the saviours. Osborne will set his plan 
into "law", a purely political gesture to smoke out the opposition, since one 
parliament can't bind the next. Why would Lib Dems or Labour let their 
manifestos be written by theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>?

Tim Farron, the MP and Lib Dem chair, tells me he'll have none of it. "This is 
the kind of thing we're in coalition to stop. Nothing we agree can go beyond 
2015. If we voted for Osborne's bill, that would write most of our manifesto, 
so I have no intention of signing up to those kinds of cuts. We should not need 
to take a scalpel to the rest of the state." This is about the Lib Dems' 
political future: "We are not planning for a Tory deal post 2015, we need a 
free hand." While there needs to be "stability in the recovery", he said they 
"will not sign up to an ideological downsizing of the state".

However, Nick Clegg, in an interview in the Sunday Telegraph, sounded a very 
different note. He told Matthew d'Ancona that the autumn statement was "one of 
the most fully co-authored fiscal moments of this coalition government 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/nick-clegg/10503227/Nick-Clegg-I-still-want-to-govern-with-either-party.html>
". His party was, like the Conservatives, campaigning on the theme that repair 
was advanced but not complete, and could not be trusted to Labour. His party 
was "not going to advocate restoring the upper tax rate of 50p". He supports 
this brutally fast deficit reduction: "We continue to commit ourselves to the 
fiscal plan … Conservatives and Liberal Democrats both agree that you have to 
clear the decks by 2018."

Which is it, the Clegg or Farron view? The Lib Dems need to call a special 
conference before they vote on an economic plan to bind them for years to 
harsher austerity than we've seen yet.

Ed Miliband has set off for South Africa to pay his respects. A long return 
journey and hours of ceremonial will give him rare time to think. His response 
to the Osborne plan will be pivotal - should Labourgenuflect again to an even 
tougher neoliberal project 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2013/06/21/labour-spending-cuts-hars_n_3480442.html>
, or this time break free? He should consider that the trap is really for 
Osborne: how can the chancellor claim the patient is in recovery while 
prescribing a near-killer dose of chemotherapy? Either there's been no cure, or 
no need for more savage austerity – not both. This contradictory message will 
be in the mortuary before they can begin to shape it into a slogan.

As economic news improves without people feeling better, voters will be in no 
mood for a belt tightening thatLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> must explain is excessive. Spell 
out what Osborne's cuts mean, in nurses, police and care homes, with creeping 
public squalor in streets and parks: sports centres, libraries and Sure Starts 
shut; schools bereft; everything saleable privatised, only to be snatched up by 
other countries' state-owned concerns. Food bank poverty will worsen as the 
"hardworking" are increasingly the benefit-dependent "scroungers", as the 
working poor need more credits and housing benefit to bridge the gap between 
rising rents and cost of living.

The Guardian's ICM poll shows 70% say they feel no recovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/09/no-gains-economic-recovery-tories-cut-labour-lead-icm-guardian-poll>
, women most of all. If the future is where elections are won, Osborne's future 
is nothing but grim. It's for Labour – and the Farron Lib Dems – to convince 
voters that it doesn't have to be this way, with a better economic plan of 
investment, not household debt and house price bubbles. If Labour can't 
convince on that, it can't win anyway. Any attempt to shadow the Osborne plan 
would be fatal. The IFS judgment should brace Miliband's backbone to resist the 
back-to-the-future tendencies of some in his party.
 