
This may be the era of the staycation, but how many of us can honestly say we 
have explored the UK? Generally, we prefer to neglect our own backyard in 
favour of the exotic. Tell people you are travelling to India to look at 
ancient temples and people reverently agree: “It’ll be amazing.” Visit 
Birmingham to explore the industrial heritage of its canal network and people 
ask, quietly: “Are you feeling alright?”

If we holiday in this country (and the tanking pound may soon mean it is our 
only option), we flock to the honeypots: the Lakes, Cornwall, Pembrokeshire, 
neglecting less trendy options. I, for instance, have barely explored my native 
Lancashire, much less the remote flatlands of rural Lincolnshire, a county 
which now has only its second five-star B&B, the Elm Tree.

It was opened last March by owners Chris and Jonathan Wilkinson-White, who are 
Lincolnshire lads (Jonathan is the chatty frontman) and can give you the full 
lowdown on the hidden delights of the nearby Lincolnshire Wolds, the coast 
around Skegness or the Lancaster bomber at theAviation Heritage Centre 
<http://www.lincsaviation.co.uk/>. A comprehensively refurbished 19th-century 
farmhouse, the four-bedroom property is furnished with antique pieces – chaise 
longue, ornate dressing tables, beautiful wardrobes – bought in renowned 
antiques hub Horncastle. Like Louth, Horncastle is one of several handsome 
market towns that dot the vast and, in its own way, majestic countryside around 
Lincoln.

Admittedly, Lincolnshire’s charm was less evident on a midweek night in 
Spilsby. After a dull pint of Bombardier and an even worse half of England v 
Slovenia in the Red Lion, a 1970s-style exposed-brick boozer, where everyone – 
older gents playing dominoes; lads bantering over the pool table – seemed to 
know each other, I was looking forward to heading back to the Elm Tree.
 Photograph: John Aron Photography 
One drawback at the Elm is that its de facto guest lounge – a granny-ish, 
somewhat gloomy parlour – hardly invites you to hang out. But retiring to your 
bedroom is no hardship. In all of them, period fireplaces and restored 
neo-Georgian ceiling mouldings are skilfully blended with modish, neutral 
colour schemes and antique and upcycled furniture (the reception desk is made 
from old packing crates) to create four supremely comfortable rooms. There are 
excellent buttery cookies (Chris used to be a chef), Neal’s Yard toiletries and 
(hallelujah!) duck-down pillows and heavy duvets.

It is also noticeable that this far out into the sticks you get plenty of 
space for your money. No boxy, city-centre rooms these. They start sizable 
(from £90) and top out in Percy Pheasant’s Suite (£150), a huge affair with 
handmade four-poster bed, rolltop bath, garden views and bling-y touches 
(chandelier, shimmering gold bathroom wallpaper) that, to me, seem a little 
OTT. I was billeted here to avoid some noisy calves in a neighbouring barn, but 
this room would make a superb romantic hideaway.
 The breakfast (and afternoon tea) area. Photograph: John Aron Photography 
The Elm Tree has been commended by VisitEngland for its breakfast (served in a 
smart, neo-chintzy room also used for afternoon teas), and after a false start 
– dry pastries, incongruous “posh” Aldi yoghurts – it settled into its 
confident stride: loose-leaf tea, homemade jams, seriously creamy scrambled 
eggs. The Elm sources fantastic rare-breed sausages from a specialist butcher 
and Chris produces a neat, greaseless trencherman’s full English – including 
agreeable sautéed potatoes. Lighter options are available, but you can work it 
off walking in the surprisingly hilly wolds or scouring the local antique 
yards. All safe in the knowledge that the tourist hordes have yet to make it 
this far east.
• Accommodation was provided by the Elm Tree (doubles from £90, 01790 753534, 
elmtree.co.uk <http://www.elmtree.co.uk/>). For more information, see 
visitlincolnshire.com <http://www.visitlincolnshire.com/>

Ask a local


Astrid Gatenby, visitor experience manager, Gunby Hall 
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/gunby-estate-hall-and-gardens>, Spilsby
 Birdwatching at Gibraltar Point nature reserve, Lincolnshire. Photograph: 
Alamy 
• Nature 
I love walking in the nature reserves managed by Lincolnshire Wildlife Trust: 
my favourites areSnipe Dales <http://www.lincstrust.org.uk/snipe-dales> and 
Gibraltar Point <http://www.lincstrust.org.uk/gibraltar-point>. In November and 
December hundreds of grey seals come to have their pups atDonna Nook 
<http://www.lincstrust.org.uk/node/3352>. It’s a wildlife spectacular.

• Eat 
In Spilsby, Deli-E11even <http://www.spilsby.info/shops/Deli-E11even.html> 
does delicious sandwiches and cakes. One of my favourite restaurants isThe Lakes
 <http://www.thelakesrestaurant.co.uk/> in Burgh le Marsh.

• Film 
The historic Kinema in the Woods <http://www.thekinemainthewoods.co.uk/> in 
Woodhall Spa is a unique setting in which to catch a film. An old cinema organ 
is played during the interval.
 