
‘The front-facing camera currently seems to stand rather low on the list of 
system-critical features consumers demand,” observed PocketNow in a
chin-stroking article 
<http://pocketnow.com/smartphone-news/front-facing-cameras-feature-or-fruitless>
in March 2012. “With the primary focus of this secondary camera aimed at video 
calling …one would think there would be a corresponding eruption in the usage 
of mobile video services. This explosion hasn’t happened.”

Such are the perils of jumping too far forward in trying to read social 
signals. It turned out that a front-facing camera was terrific for taking 
stills – and then meant stills featuring you, the phone owner. We all know what 
happened next. Taking a picture of yourself is hardly new; cameras have had 
timers for ages so you could set them on tripods and run around in front. 
What’s new is being able to see what you’re photographing, and do it at arm’s 
length.

The fascinating thing about selfies, now a culture-engulfing phenomenon, is 
how unintentional they were. The technology business (as opposed to the wilder 
internet) has only done this a few times; the only other example that comes 
easily to mind is the text message, aka SMS, which began as a means for control 
of mobile networks, then morphed into a messaging system for anyone. That was 
intentional, though, whereas the front-facing camera, theSony Ericsson Z1010 in 
2003 
<http://www.nerdeky.com/history/sony-ericsson-z1010-%E2%80%93-world%E2%80%99s-first-phone-front-facing-camera>
, seems to have been one of those features that uncovered a consumer desire 
pretty much by accident. It’s not the sort of thing that’s going to pop out of 
a focus group. And if you see a front-facing camera on a phone, and are told 
it’s for video calling, you’re probably going to judge it by those criteria.

Who discovered that actually you could get a pretty respectable picture using 
the front-facing camera of their phone (and which phone it was) sadly isn’t 
noted. But it’s possible that they posted the result to a social network; years 
ago, that would have been the photo-sharing site Flickr, where a search on 
hashtag “selfie” shows an explosion in the number taken, from 48 in 2001 to 
nearly half a million in 2014. (There are actually more with that tag 
apparently taken in 2000, but I’m dubious about some: I think they’re more 
likely modern smartphones with wrongly set dates.)

Of course, phone companies noticed the growth of the selfie, so have thrown 
themselves into offering front-facing cameras which they hope will have that 
elusive must-have quality. Microsoft emphasised the wide-angle lens on some of 
itsLumias <http://www.microsoft.com/en-gb/mobile/phones/lumia/?order_by=Latest> 
– though one suspects that would just make your nose look big. LG and Lenovo, 
meanwhile, are offering phones which have not one but two front-facing cameras. 
(There’s only one on the back.) What’s the second one for?Lenovo 
<http://news.lenovo.com/article_display.cfm?article_id=2066%E2%80%9D> says the 
subsidiary two-megapixel camera, yoked to the main 8MP selfie one, “analyses 
depth of field information to replicate human binocular vision” to “unleash a 
myriad of new possibilities that can give selfies a creative twist”. (Mainly 
changing the focus point or blurring out a photo-bomber.) LG, meanwhile, with 
itsV10 <http://www.engadget.com/2015/10/01/lg-v10-hands-on/>, uses one to take 
“normal” selfies and the other to take “wide angle” shots which it can stitch 
together into a coherent whole.

They are nice twists on the idea — the refocusing one was introduced for the 
back camera in 2013 by HTC with its One model; strangely it was ditched this 
year.

Lenovo’s idea seems the more promising, but it’s hard to shake the feeling 
that both are trying to mine an exhausted seam. The selfie has already moved 
off the camera to the selfie stick (another idea you’d struggle to extract from 
a focus group). There must be another phenomenon out there, some overlooked 
feature that an eager teen with a sense of exploration and a lot of friends is 
going to realise is really cool if you... What is it, though? Selfies fitted 
into a growing obsession with the self (measurable by fitness trackers and 
Facebook growth). What’s next in our cultural evolution? It’s probably lurking 
somewhere on your phone. You’ll know it when you see it.
 