
‘No one wants revenge’

Beguiling and baffling to the very end. Would we have it any other way? Quite 
frankly, if you came to this final episode ofThe Returned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-returned> expecting answers and 
resolutions, you were probably watching a different show from the rest of us. 
Instead, this was a finale that asked viewers to figure things out for 
themselves, fill in gaps and at times just accept the inexplicable. Ultimately 
it was all in keeping with a drama that was less about tangible details than 
something deeper and more sensory.

I’m talking in the past tense here, because I’m fairly certain that was the 
last we’ll see of this particular bunch of the undead. Yes, Returned showrunner
Fabrice Gobert has suggested that a third series is possible 
<http://www.digitalspy.com/tv/the-returned/news/a673549/there-could-be-a-third-series-of-the-returned-says-creator-fabrice-gobert/>
, but he also indicated that if it were to happen, it would be different from 
the first two. For all the ambiguities and mysteries this week’s finale left 
unresolved, it did offer a heavy sense of closure, of spirits being laid to 
rest. This was an episode all about the acceptance of death, from the Séguret 
family finally learning to let go of Camille, to the widespread understanding 
among the living that the dead - even Milan! - are not a threat. It also was an 
episode that offered some of the most affecting imagery in the show’s short 
history: Adele and Simon, dressed in their wedding attire, stepping out from 
the cave; the assembled returnees looking out onto the lake; and, of course, 
Victor and Julie (and Ophélie!) at the beach.

‘You can change things if you want to’

For all the unanswered questions left dangling by this finale, it did deliver 
on the biggest mystery of them all: we now know why the dead returned. It was, 
as Milan suggested last week, all down to Victor, whose prayer to revive his 
adoptive father, Mr Lewanski, summoned Camille, Simon et al back to life. Of 
course Lewanski himself didn’t return, because he wasn’t dead in the first 
place, the heart attack he suffered having not been fatal. That all makes some 
sort of sense, but it does raise a further question: what prompted the second 
batch of returnees - Audrey, Milan, Etienne et al - to return? Victor again was 
surely the cause, but who was he looking to bring back that time? His mother 
and brother? It seems unlikely - they didn’t exactly look like the happiest of 
families when they were reunited. Perhaps it was Laure, Julie’s partner, who 
died in the incident at the Helping Hand.

Whatever his intention was, it does seem fitting that Victor’s prayer would 
unintentionally summon a whole host of returnees; he’s never understood quite 
how powerful he is, while everyone around him has (including us viewers). It 
was always inevitable that Victor, having roused the dead from their graves, 
would also be responsible for sending them back to the afterlife. And so it 
proved, as the revenants assembled at one of the vast sinkholes near the dam, 
waiting for his instructions.

Of course, though, there was a complicating factor in all of this: Julie. 
Throughout the second half of this series Victor has been confronted by two 
visions: one of Julie plunging to her death, the other of her at the beach, 
drying the head of a little boy who isn’t Victor. Neither is terribly good news 
for Victor, who can either watch Julie die, or can let her get on with her life 
and be alone once again. Victor, quite nobly, opts for vision two. “I want you 
to live,” he tells Julie, before disappearing off with the other returnees.

Except, without Victor, life doesn’t have much meaning at all for Julie. So 
she opts for vision one, hurling herself into the sinkhole. Quite a few of you 
in the comments have compared Victor to Cassandra, the Greek mythological 
figure who was able to predict the future but unable to convince people of her 
prophecies. Victor’s problem has been that he can see the future but do nothing 
to alter it. “Even if I try to save her, I won’t be able to,” he says of Julie. 
Yet, in the episode’s climactic moment, he does just that, heeding the words of 
Etienne, who tells him that he “can change things if you want to”. Victor 
essentially manages to merge his visions: he sees Julie at the beach, but this 
time he is the little boy with her. When he opens his eyes, the revenants have 
gone, and the sinkhole has been filled with water. Julie is lying next to it, 
damp but alive. When we next see them they’re at the beach, Julie eating ice 
cream with Ophélie, Victor playing in the sea with his friends (Victor has 
friends!). It’s an idyllic image, but one that’s suddenly punctuated by the 
scream of a baby (more on that later).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-returned-recap-episode-eight-the-returned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cd7fdd93bc06d48613e4563c7077d4209e15107%2F0_89_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Returned%20recap%3A%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Returned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-returned-recap-episode-eight-the-returned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Returned%20recap%3A%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Returned&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Fdec%2F06%2Fthe-returned-recap-episode-eight-the-returned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cd7fdd93bc06d48613e4563c7077d4209e15107%2F0_89_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 Spirit levels rising: The Returned, series two. Photograph: Jean-Claude Lother 
‘We have to let her go’

While it’s impossible to give anyone other than Victor top billing this week, 
coming in at a close second was the long and deeply moving goodbye between 
Camille and the rest of the Ségurets. You got the sense last week that, even as 
she sided with the living over the dead, Camille knew that she didn’t really 
belong with her family. For one thing she has started to rot again, something 
that she says happens when she is away from the rest of the returnees. What 
really forces the issue though is the encounter with Frederic, who shoots 
Camille before being shot himself by Claire. Camille dies, but is revived by 
Virgil. Her revivification seems to finally make her family recognise what the 
rest of us have known for a while: that she belongs with the dead rather than 
the living. Only Lena struggles to let go. “I don’t want to live without you,” 
she says, echoing Julie’s words to Victor.

But, of course Camille isn’t really gone. The preternatural twin bond between 
her and Lena, means that Camille is always present in some spiritual form. As 
the Ségurets finally make their exit from the town, Lena glances over at the 
spot in the car where Camille would have been, and sees her sister, smiling 
contentedly.

‘Death has no meaning’

Not everyone enjoyed such a happy ending. Indeed there were some deeply dark 
moments in this finale, none more so than the sight of Audrey eating her own 
mother, Sandrine, while chained up in the Helping Hand. A truly gruesome sight, 
and sad too given that, not long before, Audrey had been mourning her mother’s 
death. Clearly she was consumed by the same feral hunger that we have witnessed 
in the other Returnees - Camille eating a rabbit in series one, for example. 
Her fate remains unclear: I didn’t spot her on the hillside with the rest of 
the Returnees. Did she stay chained up in the Helping Hand? If so she may have 
suffered the same horrible fate as Serge, who elected to lie down in the tunnel 
where he committed his many serial killings, and slowly decompose. It was an 
act of penitence from Serge; he knew he didn’t deserve to be with the rest of 
the returnees.

A similarly bleak fate awaited Pierre, who took his own life after 
encountering Milan. Though he was unable to see it through the first time, and 
despite his flock abandoning him after the death of Sandrine, Pierre never 
really lost the belief in the ideas of ‘the circle’. Even Milan couldn’t 
convince him otherwise. “Death has no meaning,” he told Pierre, who still 
embraced it anyway.

Meanwhile, Adele and Simon finally found something like the peace they craved 
- albeit without Chloe or baby Nathan. Instead, in one of the most 
head-scratching sequences of this finale, the pair entered the caves, where 
Adele encountered a strange wrinkled returnee, who led her into the darkness. 
When she emerged, both she and Simon had reverted to their wedding-day selves - 
the last time either of them felt truly happy, perhaps? Whatever the subtext, 
it seems awfully strange that the pair just abandoned their search for Nathan, 
given that they’ve spent half the season trying to keep him out of the clutches 
of Lucy.

Speaking of baby Nathan, we urgently need to talk about the episode’s final 
shot, which shows Lucy leaving him in a bassinet outside an unknown couple’s 
house. I’m sure I’m not alone in noticing a parallel with Victor, who also 
appeared on a doorstep 35 years before. But is that the only similarity between 
the two? My theory, and please feel free to debunk this in the comments, is 
that Victor, like Nathan, is a product of both the living and the dead, and 
that Nathan has the same powers as Victor. It’s telling that the returned 
considered Nathan so important, only coming together once Lucy had taken 
possession of him once again. So what, then, is the significance of Lucy 
leaving Nathan on that couple’s porch? And why did Victor look so frightened at 
the beach when he heard Nathan’s screams? He presumably was the one who 
instructed Lucy to leave the baby there, which makes his look of horror all the 
more confusing and ominous. Is the cycle about to begin again? Might more of 
the dead be about to return to the land of the living? And might a third season 
be on its way?

Notes and theories

 * What’s the deal with Lucy? The episode’s flashback showed her arriving in 
the town 36 years ago, asking Milan if he’d seen “a little boy”. Was she one of 
the undead, even then? Or is she something else entirely? It was interesting 
that she told Alcide the gendarme that she would be back, and the shot of her 
delivering the baby to that couple’s doorstep makes it clear that she didn’t 
disappear with the rest of the revenants at the sinkhole. 
 * Two major things we never found out: whether Simon killed himself or not, 
and who Victor’s parents were. Though perhaps Victor never had parents in the 
first place. 
 * Leadership, or a lack of it, was a recurring theme this week. Pierre, Lucy 
and Milan all failed as leaders in one way or another, and it was Victor, a 
reluctant leader if I’ve ever seen one, who succeeded. 
 * Did the revenants become the water we saw in the sinkhole? Or is that too 
literal an interpretation?You might recall water being found in Camille’s 
coffin way back in series one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/jul/14/the-returned-recap-season-one-episode-six>
. 
 * Victor’s vision of Milan shooting Julie turned out to be something of a red 
herring. By the end Milan had completely renounced his ways, and found some 
form of silent reconciliation with his wife and Toni at the sinkhole. 
 * Nice to see Mme Costa reunited with her husband, though that wasn’t my 
favourite Costa moment in this finale; that would have to be the shot of her 
nonchalantly smoking a cigarette in the fire station as a group of revenants 
suddenly appeared from behind the door. 
 * Thanks for all of your comments and theories over the course of the series. 
They’ve been excellent as ever.  