
It was a warm Saturday afternoon, Match of the Day, May 1973. A huge crowd had 
packed into the Sydney Cricket Ground to seeSouth Sydney Rabbitohs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/south-sydney-rabbitohs> against St George.

A titanic battle between two great rivals saw the scores locked at 11-11, and 
with just three minutes remaining South Sydney were granted a penalty on the 
halfway line. Eric Simms,arguably rugby league’s greatest goal-kicker 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/sport/nrl/the-legend-who-changed-the-game/story-e6frexqr-1111117619335>
, couldn’t make the distance. Rabbitohs captain Bob McCarthy took a gamble and 
threw the ball to the 21-year- old rookie Claude Williams.


 A strapping young Wiradjuri Aboriginal man with a smile as broad as his 
shoulders, a shock of wavy black hair and a Zapata moustache, Williams was a 
surprise inclusion in the starting line-up. According to the match report in 
the Sydney Morning Herald, he was “hardly sighted in general play”, but 
Williams nonchalantly caught McCarthy’s pass and slowly fashioned a kicking 
mound out of the turf.

“The crowd were getting impatient, but I needed to build it high to make the 
distance,” remembers Williams. “I wasn’t nervous, because it was so far out 
nobody expected me to make it.”
 How the sports pages reacted to that kick. Photograph: Claude Williams 
After a long run-up, Williams put his right boot firmly through the ball and 
sent it sailing majestically between the uprights to a rapturous roar from the 
Rabbitohs supporters. The first man to embrace him was Simms, and in the 
dressing room after the match, Channel Nine television personality and 
fanatical Rabbitohs fan Don Lane grabbed him by the collar, drew him close and 
planted a kiss firmly on his forehead. “Thank God Bobby gave Claude the kick,” 
said Simms, “I never would have made it that far.” Williams was asked to appear 
on rugby league’s weekly television show. A star, it seemed, was in the making.

“I never went on that program,” says Williams. For all the accolades he 
received in the press after the winning kick, his memory is of returning to 
work on the Monday. A storeman at a cosmetics company in Surry Hills, he was 
feted by his colleagues. “I walked in and all of them came round to our section 
and said ‘good onya Claude, fantastic kick’. You know for me, it was no big 
deal. I was never one to blow my own trumpet or act the poser. I had confidence 
in myself, but I didn’t talk myself up.”

It’s characteristic of Williams that he skipped the scheduled television 
appearance to spend the day with his mate and two girls on a harbour ferry. 
“You know, it was in the paper about me scoring that kick,” he says. “My mate 
was telling the girls that I was the bloke that scored the kick. I was just 21, 
a shy kind of kid, in those days I wasn’t a talker. I wasn’t confident speaking 
to the media – in those days there was no media training. I never had that 
experience and confidence to get in front of a TV camera and talk about it. 
There weren’t too many players who were media savvy in those days.”

 Self-promoter he was not, but from a young age Claude Williams was destined 
to be a sportsman. At 15 he was opening both the bowling and the batting for 
the Sydney Cricket Club in theAW Green Shield 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sydney_Grade_Cricket#A_W_Green_Shield> 
competition. Indeed several years before that kick for the Rabbitohs, he made 
his debut at the SCG in a City vs Country representative cricket match. “It was 
like hallowed turf,” he remembers fondly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f1a2616737787461292256fddf1a9632725eb7d%2F71_76_2305_3251%2F1418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f1a2616737787461292256fddf1a9632725eb7d%2F71_76_2305_3251%2F1418.jpg>
 The Sydney Cricket Ground - where it all started for Williams. Photograph: 
Claude Williams 
Rugby league <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rugbyleague>, however, became 
the focus after Williams helped Zetland win the 1969 C grade grand final 
against La Perouse at Redfern Oval. As Williams tells it, the legendary 
Rabbitohs captain John Sattler picked him out of the pack, silencing the rowdy 
dressing room as he entered to congratulate them on their victory.

“I was sitting in the corner of the change room, and he came over, put his 
hand over and said, ‘Hi, I’m John Sattler’. I was a really quiet kid in those 
days, you know I was very reserved and introverted. I said ‘Yes, how are you 
John, I’m Claude’. He said, ‘Yes, I know who you are Claude, I just watched you 
play and I was very impressed with your game. I’m here to ask you if you’d like 
to play senior grade next year.’.

Williams’s father encouraged his son to seize the opportunity. “I was in two 
minds,” he says. “I was only 16, and it wasn’t as if I lacked confidence, but I 
thought I wouldn’t mind playing another year or two and mature a bit. But Dad 
said, ‘No I think you should give it a go.’” His father, of course, was the 
iconic country and western singerClaude ‘Candy’ Williams 
<http://www.discogs.com/Various-Buried-Country-The-Story-Of-Aboriginal-Country-Music/release/6551735>
. Mates with the great Aboriginal leaders Chika Dixon and Charlie Perkins and a 
regular performer atthe Foundation for Aboriginal Affairs 
<http://aso.gov.au/titles/documentaries/foundation-1963-1977/clip1/>, Candy was 
a star in his own right, yet he could be found at all of his son’s matches, no 
matter the level.

It was the kind of support that Williams needed, but didn’t get from rugby 
league. In one Rabbitohs game, when he lined up against a childhood hero, 
Williams was shocked by what he heard. “I was on the wing, I got the ball and 
as I ran inside he yelled out ‘kill that black cunt!’ I thought, fuck! It sort 
of threw me. It stung me. It really hurt inside – it affected me that. When he 
got the ball I’d chase him to try and get a square-up, but he was quick and I 
never got the chance.”

Williams only played a handful of top-flight rugby league matches, but he 
refuses to dwell on the possibilities. He freely admits that Clive Churchill’s 
Rabbitohs – “that fantastic team” he calls them – was near impossible to break 
into as a young player.

“The career depends on what you produce on the field,” he says firmly when I 
ask him whether he lacked the requisite streak of self-interest. And the 
racism? “It was just as bad for the Chinese,” he says. “They were called 
chinks, the Europeans – the Italians and the Greeks – they were called wogs and 
dagoes, so they copped it just as much.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce0c55b4ce74dda8d0573ff966fdf029d59a46ac%2F448_107_4520_2761%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce0c55b4ce74dda8d0573ff966fdf029d59a46ac%2F448_107_4520_2761%2F2000.jpg>
 Williams leads celebrations on Souths’ bench, flanked by Clive Churchill and 
John Sattler. Photograph: Claude Williams 
Williams walked away from rugby league to pursue his great love – basketball. 
From a multitalented family (his first cousinHarry 
<http://www.deadlyvibe.com.au/2007/11/harry-williams/> was the first Indigenous 
man to represent the Socceroos at a World Cup in 1974), throughout his short 
career at the Rabbitohs he had moonlighted as a guard with Eastern Suburbs in 
Sydney’s premier basketball competition. Monday and Friday basketball training 
bookended Wednesday night games, while Tuesdays, Thursdays and weekends were 
dedicated to rugby league. “My whole week – basically six days – was taken up 
with basketball or rugby league,” he says. All, of course, while drawing his 
wage on the factory floor.

In 1974 and 1975 Williams was selected for the New South Wales basketball team 
in the Nationals, but his contract with South Sydney prevented him from 
participating. “I wasn’t getting paid much, but I was still contracted,” he 
explains. “For two years I said, ‘I can’t go, I’m sorry.’”

Walking away from rugby league to pursue a career in basketball might have 
seemed like a step backwards, but it connected him to something far bigger than 
sport.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc66705c158c83fd54708f003327c996c333af8e%2F0_0_2183_3264%2F1338.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc66705c158c83fd54708f003327c996c333af8e%2F0_0_2183_3264%2F1338.jpg>
 Williams felt more at home on the basketball court than on the football field. 
Photograph: Claude Williams 
 The 1970s was a time of enormous change in the consciousness of Indigenous 
people. A group of young black radicals including Gary Foley, Bruce McGuiness, 
Paul Coe, Bob Maza, Denis Walker and Bobbi Sykes were at the crest of a new 
Black Power movement in Brisbane, Redfern and Fitzroy. Black empowerment was 
the call, self-determination was the aim. Williams was never involved in the 
politics – “mate, I was too busy playing sport,” he grins – however just as the 
nascent Aboriginal Black Power movementlooked to the United States 
<http://www.kooriweb.org/foley/images/history/news/ni1.html> for inspiration 
and fraternal support, Williams was influenced by a trip to the west coast of 
America.

Basketball took him places where rugby league couldn’t. In 1977 Williams 
travelled to America, Canada and Hawaii with the NSWBasketball 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/basketball> team. The bumper crowds, 
marching bands, orchestras and cheerleaders of college basketball were a shock 
to the Australians, but for Williams the off-court action was just as 
enlightening.

 “They thought we were English,” he says. “I found the African Americans knew 
a little bit about Aboriginal Australia, and when I spoke to them it was like 
an instant bond. Like we’d come from the same footsteps – there was an instant 
respect. It was the same with the African American players in the NBL, I used 
to connect with them stronger than most. They had a higher respect for me as an 
Aboriginal man.”

Returning home, Williams landed a job as a clerk with the council and played 
with theCity of Sydney Astronauts 
<http://www.basketball.net.au/back-in-the-day-march-1979/> in the early seasons 
of the National Basketball League, which was launched in 1979. The bulging lump 
that protrudes from the knuckle on his right hand is a war scar testament to 
his rough and ready style of play. By 1983, the Astronauts became the Sydney 
SuperSonics, and the legendary American import Owen Wells signed on as 
player-coach. Wells fired a rocket up Australian basketball, and with Williams 
in the team, lead the SuperSonics to a record-breaking 16-game winning streak.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffc39e65626de51107d1cedbbe444101cfbb6f11%2F122_89_3037_1635%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffc39e65626de51107d1cedbbe444101cfbb6f11%2F122_89_3037_1635%2F2000.jpg>
 Williams, the centre of attention on the Sydney SuperSonics’ bench. 
Photograph: Claude Williams 
 “We connected over music,” says Williams. “He was into a lot of jazz – he was 
different, most of the African Americans who came out were all r&b. In the 
dressing rooms it was always ghetto blasters with the latest r&b and soul 
music, but not many were into jazz. Owen was highly intelligent, highly 
educated and knew his music. He was very stylish and classy – an inspiration to 
his team-mates.”

 As Williams recounts memories of his old friend, it’s hard to ignore the 
influence. The wild hair of Williams’s youth has given way to a slicker 
short-back-and-sides, and his handlebar moustache has been trimmed down to a 
thin pencil above his upper lip. A comb is always handy in his bag. Gold 
jewellery adorns his fingers and neck, several rubber bracelets with the words 
“Deadly Vibe” wrap around each wrist, and he’s wearing a Miles Davis t-shirt. 
He’s equally comfortable discussing the finer points of Betty Davis, The 
Undisputed Truth or The Isley Brothers at Lazy Bones Lounge in Marrickville as 
he is playing snooker in local competitions.

 In 1987, Williams became Wells’s assistant coach and as they travelled around 
the country they roomed together, sharing basketball tactics and listening to 
Blue Train by John Coltrane. Their friendship was an intellectual bond. After 
101 NBL games, Williams was ready for a new challenge.

 The composition of Sydney basketball was set to change for a third time 
within a decade. In October 1987, the owner of the SuperSonics, Mike 
Wrublewski, formed a new franchise called the Sydney Kings. A merger of the 
SuperSonics and the West Sydney Westars, the press reported the Kings would be 
“the saviour of basketball in this city”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F4%2F1425508571676%2F8367086f-30f9-44c8-97b0-cc9dc5550931-2060x1375.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F4%2F1425508571676%2F8367086f-30f9-44c8-97b0-cc9dc5550931-2060x1375.jpeg>
 A portrait of Claude Williams, taken at the National Centre of Indigenous 
Excellence in March, 2015. Photograph: Phat Ngo for Guardian Australia 
Williams was appointed as head coach, becoming one of just a few Australians 
to take the reigns of an NBL team and the first and only Aboriginal basketball 
coach.Rugby league commentator and historian Brad Cooke 
<http://www.smh.com.au/rugby-league/league-news/dream-time-for-brad-cooke-after-securing-nrl-radio-commentary-with-abc-20140301-33sqi.html>
 reckons Williams was the second Aboriginal coach in any elite sport (Arthur 
Beetson coached Easts in rugby league in the 1970s).

Williams played the role of front-man, commenting in 1987 that the creation of 
the Sydney Kings was “a positive step that we are united”. The reality, 
however, was rather different. The “one team, one city” concept had been 
advocated for years by Wrublewski, but it was only after mounting financial 
losses that West Sydney agreed to the idea. The rivalry inevitably seeped from 
board level into the dressing room. In one infamous incident, team-mates Damien 
Keogh and Marc Ridlen – formerly of the Westars and SuperSonics respectively – 
almost came to blows in a match against Illawarra Hawks.

 If coaching is all about managing delicate egos, Williams’s job to funnel the 
players of two teams into one entity was a crash course in diplomacy. “The 
better players would be used to playing lots of minutes,” he says. “I was a 
first year head coach, I had all the strategies in place and I knew exactly 
what I wanted. It wasn’t particularly the team I wanted – I didn’t have carte 
blanche. There was a compromise between the two clubs with the selection of 
players. I knew it would take time for the chemistry to develop.”

As the season wore on and results failed to go their way, the Sydney Morning 
Herald basketball journalist Ian Cockerill concluded: “Although the Kings have 
assembled a squad of brilliant individuals this year they have failed to 
congeal as a team and appear in danger of missing the play-offs.”

 Miss the finals they did, and by season’s end Williams had accepted an offer 
from Newcastle Falcons. Wrublewski was notorious for his hands-on, passionate 
approach, but Williams was continually frustrated by the intrusion of board 
members in the coaching of the team. His two seasons at Newcastle, however, 
weren’t much better. “Like a lot of coaches I personally found it difficult to 
communicate with board members who are businessmen, not basketballers,” he says.

 A little over two decades on since his last involvement in top-flight sport, 
it seems Claude Williams is remembered in flashes and snippets. Few of the 
basketball and rugby league scribes of the day recall the man, although they 
all remember the name. There’s bits and pieces on the Sydney Kings website, and 
of course a few mentions on basketball and rugby league websites.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b53d4e04b45239a64c16019f35404baf777ce01%2F51_0_2313_3028%2F1528.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Claude%20Williams%2C%20former%20Souths%20player%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fmar%2F05%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-claude-williams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b53d4e04b45239a64c16019f35404baf777ce01%2F51_0_2313_3028%2F1528.jpg>
 ‘South Sydney’s lively young utility back’, according to this newspaper 
report, with Rabbitohs coach Clive Churchill. Photograph: Claude Williams 
One of these sites, Rebel Rabbitohs 
<http://rebelrabbitohs.com/Articles/A%20few%20drinks%20with%20Andrew%20Denton.pdf>
, is particularly revealing. ABC journalist Andrew Denton – a man who led the 
charge for South Sydney to be returned to the NRL in 2001 – tells his favourite 
childhood memory of listening to the legendary rugby league radio commentator 
Frank Hyde calling Williams’s goal-kick in 1973. “A couple of years ago I saw 
Andrew on the corner of Oxford and Crown Street,” says Williams. “I was going 
to go up to him and introduce myself, but he approached me and mentioned the 
kick. We had a good chat.”

Like many Indigenous athletes of yore, Williams is best remembered among his 
own people – recognised as one of the “Black Diamonds” in the Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander Sports Hall of Fame. He comes from a long line of 
luminaries from the Wiradjuri nation, including Linda Burney, Paul Coe, Mum 
Shirl, Anita Heiss, Stan Grant, Wally Carr, Evonne Goolagong-Cawley and David 
Peachey.

 Yet Cooke, who used to run a boxing program with Williams on Koori Radio, 
reckons he’s been under-utilised by the community. “My best memory of Claude, 
apart from being the legend and a Black Diamond, was from a boxing trip to 
Vegas in 2009,” he says. “He went from being an “Uncle” and a godlike figure to 
getting excited for interviews with legends of boxing like [Muhammad Ali’s 
biographer] Thomas Hauser and Roberto Duran. He talked to Roberto abouthis fight
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oMYhM-pN1CE> against the Aboriginal boxer 
Hector Thompson.”

For the best part of a decade Williams travelled around Australia running 
basketball programs for Aboriginal kids withVibe Australia 
<http://www.deadlyvibe.com.au/>, and he helped Aboriginal people find work 
during the 2000 Sydney Olympics as an Indigenous liaison officer at Stadium 
Australia.

 When there’s an event in Sydney’s Aboriginal community, you’ll find Williams 
there. In 2006, while he was running the boxing radio program, a plaque was 
unveiled in Glebe to commemorate the great Aboriginal middleweight boxerDave 
Sands <http://adb.anu.edu.au/biography/sands-david-dave-11611>. The plaque, 
said Williams in his speech as MC, “is a symbol of our commitment to remember 
and celebrate the great heroes in our community”. In February, he addressed the 
crowd at Redfern’s National Centre of Indigenous Excellence to mark the 
anniversary of the Australian Government’s apology to the Stolen Generation.

The National Centre of Indigenous Excellence turned five this month, and 
“Uncle Claude” works in the after-school program and the Deadly Young leaders 
program. He was born just up the road in Camperdown, and you’ll find him every 
other week in his old stomping ground with his good mate Tony Mundine. Tony, of 
course, is the father of one of Australia’s greatest sportsmen, Anthony, a man 
who has also traversed two different sports with great success. There are links 
and deep roots in these friendships – shared memories, shared histories and 
shared goals. “I want to give back to these kids and this community,” says 
Williams. “It’s a challenge.”


Basketball remains a burning passion, and Williams hopes to return to coaching 
sooner rather than later. Like a tactics junkie needing his fix, to this day 
he’ll watch college basketball over NBA, where the coaching and strategy is 
more pronounced. “It’s the greatest game I’ve ever played,” he says. 
“Basketball is an intelligent game – there’s individual skill and the technical 
side.”

For a man that has been at the top of his game in rugby league, basketball and 
junior cricket, incredibly there remains one lingering regret. At 15, while he 
was at Cleveland Street High School, he was scouted by the NSW Lawn Tennis 
Association to join their elite program atWhite City 
<http://www.austadiums.com/stadiums/stadiums.php?id=147> in Paddington. “I was 
excited, and to be honest, in my heart, that’s what I wanted,” he says.

 Cost was the barrier to entry, and the exorbitant fee was out of the family 
budget. His dream was dashed. “I’d have to say if there’s any regrets, that 
would be the biggest ever in my life, that I wasn’t able to play tennis,” says 
Williams. “I honestly think I wouldn’t have played cricket, rugby league or 
basketball. I believed I was the best. I still know to this day that if I 
could’ve followed that path I could’ve gone all the way.”
 