
Most states, including some very conservative ones, prefer not to give their 
endorsement to white supremacist symbols – though there are notable exceptions, 
like South Carolina, that infamously preferto display the Confederate flag 
<http://jezebel.com/is-south-carolina-just-gonna-fly-that-confederate-flag-1712235994>
 on state property. On Thursday, appropriately enough, a slim majority of the 
US supreme court ruled that Texas was not required to give its imprimatur to 
the Confederate flag.

At issue in Walker v Sons of Confederate Veterans 
<http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/14pdf/14-144_758b.pdf> were the specialty 
license plates offered to drivers by the state of Texas. In addition to its 
standard plates, Texas offers a series of special designs people can choose for 
an additional fee. This program is distinct from the option of personalized 
plates, in which individuals choose an alphabetical and/or numerical pattern on 
their own. If approved, the specialty plates are made available to anyone in 
the state.


In this case, the Sons of Confederate Veterans proposed a specialty plate 
featuring the Confederate battle flag. The relevant panel rejected the design 
and refused to issue the plate, citing its authority to reject any design that 
“might be offensive to any member of the public.” The panel concluded that “a 
significant portion of the public associate the confederate flag with 
organizations advocating expressions of hate directed toward people or groups 
that is demeaning to those people or groups.”

In a 5-4 ruling – with the four Democratic nominees joined, interestingly, by 
Justice Clarence Thomas, the Court’s only African American member - the court 
held that Texas was not required to issue the pro-Confederate plate design. 
This is not an easy case, but the Court’s opinion is probably right.

Let’s not mince words: the Confederate battle flag originated as a symbol of 
treason in defense of slavery that was repurposed as a defense of apartheid 
during the massive resistance to Brown v Board of Education. It’s about hate, 
not heritage. Yet individuals have a First Amendment right to display one on a 
bumper sticker, outside their house or on a t-shirt, because racist speech is 
protected. The state can prevent threatening speech, but it cannot punish 
people merely for expressing ideas.

The dissenting justices see this case as being about this kind of individual 
right.

“Messages that are proposed by private parties and placed on Texas specialty 
plates are private speech,” asserted Justice Samuel Alito in his dissenting 
opinion. If this is true, the Sons of Confederate Veterans plate must be 
permitted despite its hateful symbolism.

The majority, however, makes a persuasive case that this is a case of 
government speech, not private speech. This is an important distinction, 
because while the state generally cannot suppress private speech or favor one 
private opinion over another, it is not required to endorse or express any 
particular view. “A person who displays a message on a Texas license plate” 
instead of a bumper or window sticker, argues Justice Stephen Breyer in his 
opinion for the Court, “likely intends to convey to the public that the State 
has endorsed that message.”

Nor has the pro-Confederate viewpoint been singled out. The state tightly 
controls the design of the specialty plates and has rejected at least a dozen 
plate designs, suggesting that the specialty plates are government speech. 
Texas is not required to give its tacit endorsement to the display of the 
Confederate flag any more than it is required to approve specialty plates with 
pornographic images. “Texas offers plates that pay tribute to the Texas citrus 
industry,” notes Breyer, “[b]ut it need not issue plates praising Florida’s 
oranges as far better.” Graduates of the University of Oklahoma whoproposed 
<http://www.dallasnews.com/sports/college-sports/texas-longhorns/20100818-Texas-proposal-to-sell-OU-3629.ece>
 a specialty Texas license plate depictingBoomer and Sooner 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boomer_and_Sooner> trampling a Texas Longhorn 
would also probably find themselves out of luck, and it’s hard to say that this 
violates the First Amendment.

The court’s decision, of course, will not only cut in one ideological 
direction. Based on the ruling, lower courts will almost certainly that rule 
North Carolina is permittedto offer a “choose life” license plate 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/nation/2014/12/05/supreme-court-license-plates-abortion-confederate/18977405/>
 without offering a pro-choice alternative. But I don’t see that as 
particularly problematic. Pro-choice advocates retain their ability to make 
their case in public, including on their cars. It’s not necessary to ask for 
the state’s approval or implicit endorsement, let alone to pay it for the 
privilege. I recommend that supporters of reproductive freedom in North 
Carolina take the money they might have used to get specialty license plates 
and send it to their local abortion provider instead.

Individuals have the right to express hateful ideas in public, but the state 
is not required to endorse them. Either way, state governments, like 
individuals, are allowed to determine the content of the messages they wish to 
send. If one wants the state to send better messages, the solution is to elect 
better public officials.
 