
This was supposed to be the year we declared the album dead. All the industry 
predictions were that we would now only listen to music in playlists, and the 
new tastemakers would be Spotify employees making mood-defined collections of 
songs called things like “Rainy Monday” or “Pre-Menstrual Synthpop”. In fact, 
2016 was notable for a string of spectacular, blockbuster full-length records 
from the biggest artists in the world: Beyoncé, Kanye, Rihanna and Drake. These 
artists found ways to make their records feel like more than just music, 
controlling hype and excitement with innovative release strategies, most of 
which took place offline.Beyoncé’s feature-length visual album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/24/beyonce-launches-new-visual-album-lemonade-hbo>
 was debuted on good ol’ fashioned HBO;Kanye West’s Madison Square Garden album 
playback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/11/kanye-west-new-album-the-life-of-pablo-launch>
 was streamed to cinemas worldwide; and fans hoping to peek atFrank Ocean’s 
high-concept album/coffee-table magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/aug/21/frank-ocean-blonde-first-listen-review-an-album-that-will-be-worth-living-with>
 had to queue up outside a newsagent at midnight. By shunning lazy social media 
promotion, artists found more meaningful connections with their fans; 2016 felt 
like a forgotten time where music was a shared experience, rather than a solo 
pursuit.

The supposed rules of the biz were also broken as artists who released music 
without record labels had genuine success. Skepta who self-released his 
Konichiwa – was rewarded withthe Mercury prize 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=If7Xa-OX7No> and a headline show at Alexandra 
Palace. But while it’s been a billboard year for established acts, breaking 
acts found it harder. Singers who were hotly tipped at the start of the year – 
Jack Garratt, Frances – had pitiful commercial performances; we are still 
waiting for a 2016 debut album by a British artist to go gold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-year-in-music-kanye-drake-rihanna-beyonce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4918ab0d824424e724a5261dbc117ede47de0ecf%2F0_278_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20year%20in%20music%3A%20how%20Beyonc%C3%A9%2C%20Kanye%20and%20Drake%20saved%20the%20album&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-year-in-music-kanye-drake-rihanna-beyonce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20year%20in%20music%3A%20how%20Beyonc%C3%A9%2C%20Kanye%20and%20Drake%20saved%20the%20album&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2F2016-year-in-music-kanye-drake-rihanna-beyonce%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4918ab0d824424e724a5261dbc117ede47de0ecf%2F0_278_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Political leader… Chance The Rapper. Photograph: Maury Phillips/WireImage 
The politicisation of music, meanwhile, continued apace. From moving scenes in 
Chicago, whereChance The Rapper led thousands of voters to the polls 
<http://hiphopdx.com/news/id.41180/title.chance-the-rapper-leads-thousands-of-voters-to-the-polls-in-chicago>
, toTa-Nehisi Coates talking race and judgment 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/12/ta-nehisi-coates-obama-transcript/510965/>
 on Blood Orange’s Freetown Sound, it’s no longer taboo for artists to wear 
their political stripes on their sleeves. Unless, of course, you are Taylor 
Swift, who refused to endorse a candidate in the US election or encourage her 
fans to vote (until polling day where she posted a single pic of her outside a 
polling station).

If anything, 2016 signalled a return to a 1970s attitude to music: big stars 
have taken the role of public intellectuals, we no longer malign middle-aged 
artists on their seventh or eighth albums, and new artists are treated with 
suspicion. Perhaps, also like the 70s, something new and nihilistic will shake 
that up in 2017.
 