
You can say, without fear of contradiction, that Andrew Howe is a nerd. A 
senior demographer at the Australian Bureau of Statistics, he has spent his 
adult life voluntarily collecting and organising Australia’s football 
statistics. “I grew up on stats,” he says. “I’m a population statistician by 
day and I’m the football statistician by night.”


Since 1999, Howe’s statistics have been treated as the official record by 
football’s governing body. Each year he completes a season guide, which is 
mailed out to the media. During Adelaide United games, he sits in the 
commentary box and collates the match events – goals, time in possession, shots 
on target, corners – for the Fox Sports stats department.

Over the past few seasons, on Twitter he’s provided a running statistical 
commentary during A-League matches as well as an array ofdata visualisations 
<https://www.facebook.com/media/set/?set=a.10151675572057934.1073741827.619232933&type=1&l=2abcf0229a>
, which have earned him a loyal following among football fans. Like when 
ex-Sydney FC striker Mark Janko scored six consecutive goals last season, Howe 
announced that he had equalled Besart Berisha’s A-League record from 2012, and 
was one game away from equalling the national league record, set by Damian Mori 
in 1994-95 for Adelaide City. Or during the 2015 Asian Cup, when the first 20 
games were won by the country with the highest population. “This is getting 
scary,” tweeted Howe, as he witnessed his two loves, football and population 
statistics, merge.

Fox Sports commentator Simon Hill, like many football journalists, consults 
Howe for fact-checks and statistical quirks. Last season, when Wellington 
Phoenix’s Fijian striker Roy Krishna went on a goal-scoring spree, Hill 
wondered if he was on track to become the highest scoring Pacific Islander in 
the national league. He sent Howe a message, and within the hour was emailed a 
complete breakdown of the 14 Pacific Islander players, from Esala Masi (202 
games, 43 goals, Fijian) to Benoit Michelena (one game, zero goals, Tahitian). 
There was also a note of qualification: “There were a couple of PNG [Papua New 
Guinea] players as well,” wrote Howe. “PNGers are sometimes regarded as Pacific 
Islanders – they are part of Melanesia.” Howe is nothing if not a perfectionist.

To truly understand Howe’s obsession, you need to visit his home in Adelaide. 
His collection of Australian football newspapers, magazines, photographs and 
other memorabilia is staggering. The entire back catalogue of the defunctSoccer 
Action newspaper is bound and organised into cardboard boxes, annual reports 
and yearbooks are arranged in plastic sleeves, while hundreds of match programs 
are kept in manila folders.

Then there is the more far-out stuff. Howe, a little embarrassed, shows me his 
The Many Faces of Frank Arok photo album, which consists entirely of 
photographs of the former Socceroos coach. He also treasures, for reasons that 
can only be understood by a few people, the entire collection of the anarchic 
and outlandishly offensiveInside Soccer fanzine from the mid-1990s (think Mad 
magazine meets South Park, but with Australian football as the focus – the 
authors of the fanzine were apparently under police surveillance for years).

There’s an impressive array of rare kits, from the 1989 St. George-Budapest to 
the 1993 Morwell Falcons, as well as his prized 21st birthday present: a Sydney 
Croatia championship ball signed by Vedran Rozic, Graham Arnold, Robbie Slater, 
Craig Foster and Ned Zelic. The NSL cassettes and records are a collectors 
dream, including Macedonian folk singer Goce Nikolovski’s ode toPreston 
Makedonia <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zr9E2YSQtaw>, and the LP of APIA 
Leichhardt’s stirring 1987 championship song (“The APIA team is but a big 
family/They’re the champions of Australia/with a touch of ethnic flavour/Yes 
they are, the greatest soccer team!”).

The most important part of the collection, however, is Howe’s folders of 
stats. The complete statistical history of the NSL/A-League – over 7,000 
matches, with around 40 match events documented for each one – is scrawled on 
hundreds of old pieces of paper and arranged lovingly in folders and filing 
cabinets. And that doesn’t include the Socceroos or Matildas stats, the women’s 
league, the youth leagues, the various Cup competitions since 1962, or the 
encyclopaedia of Australian players that he’s slowly building. All up, he 
reckons he’s statted over 10,000 Australian matches at all levels. It’s all 
been digitised now, of course, but to this day Howe maintains a hand-written 
record.

“It just gives me more feel,” he says. “It’s hard to explain. I’m always 
looking for ways to cross-check, and if I do a hard copy version I can always 
tally up. That’s a statistician’s life. If you do things the old-fashioned way 
it’s easier to retain stuff in the head.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Fthe-stats-guru-helping-keep-alive-football-history-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61a505074ca53892fcf660b282520c8b274514c5%2F0_0_4608_2767%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20stats%20guru%20helping%20keep%20alive%20football%20history%20in%20Australia%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Fthe-stats-guru-helping-keep-alive-football-history-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20stats%20guru%20helping%20keep%20alive%20football%20history%20in%20Australia%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Fthe-stats-guru-helping-keep-alive-football-history-in-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61a505074ca53892fcf660b282520c8b274514c5%2F0_0_4608_2767%2F4608.jpg>
 Andrew Howe’s filing cabinets contain the complete statistical history of 
Australian football. Photograph: Joe Gorman for Guardian Australia 
Ten years since the start of the A-League, Howe’s statistics have become more 
important than ever. In 2005 theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> replaced the National Soccer 
League, which ran from 1977 to 2004, making it the first national football 
competition of any code, and also the first to collapse.


The NSL was a very different competition to the A-League – the popularity, TV 
ratings and crowd figures of the latter have thoroughly eclipsed the former, 
and the game is now considered a mainstream Australian sport. The NSL clubs 
were far more diverse than the current crop – over the 28 seasons, there were 
at various times clubs representing Italian, Hungarian, Croatian, Yugoslav, 
Maltese, Greek, Macedonian, Dutch and Jewish communities. There were also 
non-ethnic clubs, like Newcastle KB United and Blacktown City, as well as 
privately owned franchises, like Perth Glory and the now defunct Parramatta 
Power.

2005 was Year Zero. Diversity gave way for homogeneity as clubs were mandated 
to represent an entire city. The “old soccer, new football” slogan was a 
deliberate ploy to differentiate one competition from the other, and all the 
ethnic-backed clubs were banished to their respective state leagues, with no 
possibility of promotion back to the top flight.

There remain heated debates about the ethics and merits of this decision, but 
there is no denying that it worked. Football seemed to completely re-orient 
itself in the mind of the Australian sports fan. The average crowd figure for 
the first season in 2005-06 was 11,627 – a record season attendance since the 
NSL began in 1977, and a whopping 161% increase on the average attendance in 
the final season of the NSL in 2004. One report suggested that 41% of first 
season A-League fans had never been to an NSL game, an incredible figure 
considering the growth in numbers. A new legion of fans appeared to materialise 
overnight.

Howe’s annual season guides were suddenly expunged of their history. The first 
A-League season guide is particularly unusual – Howe says he was instructed to 
treat the A-League as an entirely new entity, and so there is literally no 
history. It was as if Australia’s national football competition began in 2005.

Perhaps because of the rapid boom of the last 10 years, there are no good old 
days in Australian football. Australian rules or rugby league both trade on 
nostalgia – think ‘kick-to-kick’ and the Fitzroy Lions in the AFL, or ‘Bring 
Back the Biff’ and Newtown Jets in the NRL. But under this administration, for 
10 years football has wanted little to do with its past. Nobody, it seems, 
cares what happened to Brunswick Juventus or Sydney Olympic.

But this is changing. The FFA Cup, which kicks off for a second time this 
week, was a roaring success in 2014, allowing grassroots clubs and some of the 
former NSL clubs to come up against A-League clubs. When Adelaide City beat 
Western Sydney Wanderers in the round of 32, it was predictably cast as a David 
and Goliath scenario. Yet Western Sydney Wanderers have never won a national 
championship. Adelaide City have won three.

The opportunity for all clubs to again compete on a national level has been 
cathartic. For the first time in a decade, there has been a real and tangible 
connection between the grassroots and top level of the game inAustralia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/australia>, and while there have 
naturally been teething issues, the FFA Cup has provided the old clubs a 
necessary glimmer of hope and ambition.

There is also a push to treat the A-League and the NSL as one. Privately, 
there is support from journalists and commentators, as well as amongst many 
fans. Rather than perpetuate the notion that football has two separate 
competitions, there is a desire to merge the statistical history into one 
continuous entity. The resistance, where there is any, will be at FFA, but it 
feels as if it’s a matter of when, not if. Howe and his stats are at the centre 
of this movement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Fthe-stats-guru-helping-keep-alive-football-history-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F514ceb09b00d85b1df8aeefb78e3cbd0f2dc71c2%2F0_0_1085_651%2F1085.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20stats%20guru%20helping%20keep%20alive%20football%20history%20in%20Australia%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Fthe-stats-guru-helping-keep-alive-football-history-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20stats%20guru%20helping%20keep%20alive%20football%20history%20in%20Australia%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Fthe-stats-guru-helping-keep-alive-football-history-in-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F514ceb09b00d85b1df8aeefb78e3cbd0f2dc71c2%2F0_0_1085_651%2F1085.jpg>
 The mighty Miranda Croatia of the Southern Sydney Churches League. Their 
record loss was 19-0. Andrew Howe is fourth from the right, back row. 
Photograph: Picasa 
 Howe began collecting stats in 1989 as a university student and a football 
convert. Growing up in the Sutherland Shire, in May 1988, as a curious 19 
year-old, he decided to venture into the city with his brother to watch APIA 
Leichhardt play Marconi at Lambert Park. The “Italian derby”, featuring the 
famous Italian strikerFrancesco Graziani 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Francesco_Graziani>, who was playing the first 
of two games in his guest stint for APIA, was Howe’s introduction to the 
Australian game. He was hooked.

“It was different,” he says. “Basically every week for the previous five years 
I’d been to a rugby league game, and there was the occasional Sharks chant, but 
there wasn’t the buzz that I was getting from this packed inner city ground, in 
a completely different sport that was far more tense.”

Howe was an eager learner and a geography junkie. He loved studying atlases, 
maps and national flags, and the NSL scratched that itch. “It taught me so much 
about the world,” he says. After witnessing the diverse culture of Australian 
football, with teams like Sydney Croatia, Preston Makedonia and South Melbourne 
Hellas, Cronulla Sharks seemed anodyne. Howe started watching more SBS 
television, and he would buy the foreign language newspapers that covered the 
games – the ItalianLa Fiamma and the Yugoslav Novosti were his favourites. His 
parents thought he’d lost the plot as he’d sit up late at night, listening to 
foreign language SBS radio broadcasts from matches in Italy or Greece.

Although there was some brief NSL stats in the magazines and newspapers, Howe 
decided to start from scratch and build his own database. “It took years,” he 
admits. He would spent his weekdays cross-referencing every single fixture 
since 1977 from the match reports of at least three different publications, 
noting down scores, crowd figures, goal-scorers, substitutions: the works. It 
was a labour of love.

When he wasn’t collecting stats, Howe would venture out to Lambert Park to 
watch APIA, or to the Croatian Sports Centre in Sydney’s western suburbs to 
watch Sydney Croatia, or St George Stadium to watch St. George-Budapest and 
Sydney Olympic. He quickly developed a love of Balkan music, particularlyLepa 
Brena <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GYXB73Xigmo>, who he saw in concert at a 
Yugoslav club in Canberra in 1990. But he loved the Croats in particular. He 
joined the Macquarie University Croatian Society, and by 1989 he and a group of 
mates from the Shire – none of whom had any Croatian heritage – had established 
a team in the church leagues named ‘Miranda Croatia’. Howe would change the 
opposition team names in an attempt to ethnicise the Southern Sydney Churches 
competition – in Howe’s imagination, at least, St Phillips became ‘Filipino’, 
St. Giles became ‘Macedonia’, Fairfield LDS became ‘Latvia’ and Mortdale 
Baptist were re-named ‘Turkish’.

Howe’s first true love, however, is the Socceroos. Coincidentally, his first 
match in 1990 was afriendly <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TDIHWtJ7ZWY> 
against the Croatian club Hajduk Split. “It was just as independence was really 
hotting up over there,” he says. As the Hajduk players ran onto the field, he 
remembers them tearing the red star symbol, always associated with the Yugoslav 
government, off their shirts. “There was this symbolic thing – Socceroos versus 
Hajduk Split, 90% were Hajduk Split fans, and the team ripping off their emblem 
before the game. I loved it!”

He began to seek an audience for his stats in 1992. With a new, six-team 
finals series approaching, Howe sent theSoccer Australia magazine all the 
possible variations, noting: “it may be more probable for a first v fourth, 
rather than a first v second… come grand final next May.” Sensing a maths nerd, 
the editor Greg Blake asked Howe to do his niece’s homework. Howe agreed, and 
soon after a double page spread was published with his finals series 
variations. He still has the note that came with his pay packet from Blake: 
“Although you may be tempted to retire to Bermuda on the strength of your 
earnings, please resist the urge as we may call on your services again.”

He soon became a regular contributor to the football press. His feature on the 
coming of the internet, in theSoccer Australia magazine of March 1996, is a 
classic, with references to “cyberspace” and the “information superhighway” 
helping promote the game and connect fans around the country. “I was a soccer 
person, a stats person, an information person,” remembers Howe, “the internet 
started helping me do more things and connect more with people and so this 
network was forming through message boards.”

There is certainly a touch of the Nick Hornby about Andrew Howe. But while 
Hornby’s famed autobiographical novelFever Pitch is about a man singularly 
obsessed with Arsenal, a great club in one of the world’s biggest leagues, Howe 
has devoted his adult life to an entire competition which few people in 
Australia even bothered with.

Like in Fever Pitch, Howe’s life events are often remembered in reference to 
what was happening in football at the time. His engagement in April 1993, for 
example, is recalled in the context of the afternoon match between Melita 
Eagles and Heidelberg. He and Vaniece were engaged at sunrise on Cronulla 
Beach, and by afternoon they were at Melita Stadium in the industrial suburbs 
of Sydney’s south-west with 2,000 other hardy souls for a forgettable 1-1 draw. 
Melita and Heidelberg were both relegated from the NSL soon after, but the 
marriage survived, they settled in Adelaide with their two kids, Oliver and 
Reuben (Olyroo?). Howe remains an avid Adelaide United fan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Fthe-stats-guru-helping-keep-alive-football-history-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc90eecc0c7d9b525c55d9012aa735b8b803d1d19%2F0_0_1086_1451%2F1086.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20stats%20guru%20helping%20keep%20alive%20football%20history%20in%20Australia%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Fthe-stats-guru-helping-keep-alive-football-history-in-australia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20stats%20guru%20helping%20keep%20alive%20football%20history%20in%20Australia%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjul%2F27%2Fthe-stats-guru-helping-keep-alive-football-history-in-australia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc90eecc0c7d9b525c55d9012aa735b8b803d1d19%2F0_0_1086_1451%2F1086.jpg>
 Andrew Howe supporting Australia against Colombia at the World Youth Cup, 
1993. Photograph: Picasa 
 It was fitting that Melbourne Victory won the grand final in 2014-15. The 
best-run club in the competition with the biggest supporter base now have three 
titles to their name, and Kevin Muscat, Victory’s inaugural captain, became the 
first person to win an A-League title as a captain and a coach.

As Michael Lynch wrote 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/soccer/muscat-can-equal-postecoglou-record-with-victory-win-if-only-the-record-books-would-show-it-20150514-gh1whl.html>
 in theAge grand final preview: “It has been widely reported that Kevin Muscat… 
can set a record if he leads Melbourne Victory to grand final triumph by 
becoming the first man to captain and then coach a club to a championship. 
Well, he will be – but only in the A-League era… It’s an anomaly that should be 
corrected.”

Current Socceroos coach Ange Postecoglou did it as well in the NSL, back when 
people called him Angie and he had aDavid Brent goatee 
<http://www.smfc.com.au/images/team-of-the-century/grand-final-win-1998-l.jpg>. 
In 1991 
<http://neoskosmos.com/news/en/South-Melbourne-Football-club-1991-history>, 
under the guidance of Ferenc Puskas, Postecoglou captained South Melbourne to 
the championship, and then repeated the feat as coach in 1998 and 1999.

Some will say it doesn’t matter, or that it’s a minor issue in the great 
scheme of things. They are, of course, correct. But why count the current 
A-League statistics if it’s all so trivial? Why even play at all if these 
records will mean nothing to future generations? Sport, perhaps more than any 
other activity, requires history to make it whole and to give it meaning. 
Football, wrote British author David Winner, “is a living symbol of stability 
and heritage.” Yet no other sport treats its history so poorly as Australian 
football. That there are no official and readily available records, apart from 
Howe’s voluntary database, is illustrative.

Think of it this way. If Melbourne Victory win the grand final again next 
season, they’ll become the most successful club in A-League history. There’s no 
doubt that Victory, their fans and the media will latch on to such an important 
milestone. But in truth, they’ll only be equal to South Melbourne, Hakoah 
Sydney City and Marconi Stallions. These three clubs have each won four 
championships, and for now at least, are the benchmark in the Australian game. 
Just as Postecoglou’s achievements in the 1990s were as important as Kevin 
Muscat’s in the current era, the achievements of South Melbourne, Hakoah and 
Marconi hold no less importance than those of A-League clubs.

There is an argument that combining the statistics will further whitewash the 
achievements of the NSL clubs, most of whom no longer compete due to their 
expulsion in 2004. It is true that it’s not a fair competition if South 
Melbourne, for example, are not allowed to build upon their past success, but 
Melbourne Victory are. But the composition of the A-League is a question for 
another day – perhaps re-including them in the records is the first step to 
re-including them in the competition?

The statistics are not just the domain of clubs, they’re also a tribute to 
personal achievement. Think Damian Mori, who stands way out in front as 
Australia’s greatest ever goalscorer with 240 goals, most of which were scored 
for Adelaide City in the NSL. In the last season guide of the NSL in 2003-04, 
Mori is listed as having scored 209 national league goals. In 2006-07, the 
second season of the A-League, the slate is wiped clean and his tally is listed 
as just seven, all scored in the first season of the A-League. And what of his 
closest challenger, Rod Brown, who scored 137 goals between 1983 and 1997, but 
is no longer listed anywhere in national league records? Are some goals more 
important than others? An official record that recognises the contributions of 
these men is long overdue.

Then, of course, there’s Andrew Howe, the only person who has the requisite 
information for all this to be possible, and for whom the NSL isn’t just a 
distant memory but a life’s work. “I just tell the stats,” he says, “other 
people can tell the stories.”

 