
After the events of 2016, foreseeing the year ahead may be foolhardy. Best 
perhaps to abandon the task of objective prediction in favour of the search for 
hope. Is there any chance that those who accept complexity rather than demand 
false certainty, that those who search for solutions not for blame, could get 
their act together?

Could 2017 be the year of the moderate insurgency?

Such an insurgency needs help from its enemies. Expect “betrayal” to be on 
many lips as the year unfolds. As the complexity and cost of Brexit becomes 
clearer, and with the rest of Europe demanding a high price for access to the 
single market, many who voted out with high hopes will be dismayed. On the 
Leave side, an acrimonious split will grow between realists willing to 
negotiate the terms of a qualified departure, and fundamentalists who see a 
complete rupture from the European mainstream as the path to national 
resurgence.

In the US, Donald Trump’s more radical supporters are already protesting 
against the abandonment of some of his more wacky campaign promises. Trump’s 
presidency will vividly demonstrate the gap between populism’s strengths as a 
campaigning tool and its inadequacies as a method of democratic governance. As 
the new president’s erratic behaviour, incoherent policy programme and tendency 
to fall out with anyone who stands up to him moves from being a novelty to a 
national liability, the Republicans will be deeply split over how to respond to 
Democratic resurgence ahead of the 2018 midterms.

America’s travails will provide strategic opportunities for Russia and China, 
but while internal dissent in both countries will continue to be suppressed, 
Vladimir Putin and Xi Jinping may see an opportunity to take on the mantle of 
global leadership in areas ranging from confronting terrorism to climate change.

In France, Marine Le Pen will fight a determined and opportunistic campaign, 
but her defeat, combined with victory for Angela Merkel, could highlight the 
limits of populism’s appeal and provide the momentum for continental leaders at 
last to address the deeper faultlines of the European project.

The moderate insurgency could have many fronts. Back home, Theresa May’s 
government – its right wing distracted by Brexit – will continue slowly to 
develop an account of one-nation Conservatism including a critique of business 
practice in areas such as executive pay and poor working conditions (on which 
subject I am leading a review for the prime minister), and a commitment to a 
regionally focused industrial strategy. Austerity will be seen as a burden to 
be lessened, not a virtue to be extolled. Historians may come to see 2017 as 
the beginning of the end for the long, intellectually barren era of 
neoliberalism.

There could even be signs of life in the Labour party. A surprise victory in 
April forGerard Coyne’s members-first campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/len-mccluskey-too-busy-running-labour-says-unite-leadership-rival>
 to lead the trade union Unite could have a powerful impact. It will be 
moderate insurgency in action, showing pragmatism can be a successful electoral 
strategy. InLen McCluskey, it will remove Jeremy Corbyn’s most powerful 
supporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/len-mccluskey-disloyal-mps-asking-for-it-will-be-held-to-account>
, and it could contribute to the emergence of new models of trade unionism 
relevant to modern forms of employment and pursuing partnership rather than 
confrontation in the workplace. Another disappointing round of local elections 
in May (the success of mayoral candidates such asAndy Burnham in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/andy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor>
 in spite of, not because of, Labour in Westminster) will be the final straw 
for Labour MPs, and with his own activist base now hopelessly divided, Corbyn 
may not even put up a fight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmoderate-insurgency-2017-labour-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6085e335f014f4e7f898966aafc5c8a89676dd52%2F0_0_3715_2887%2F3715.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20moderate%20insurgency%3A%20A%20better%20world%20can%20emerge%20out%20of%20defeat%20and%20division&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmoderate-insurgency-2017-labour-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20moderate%20insurgency%3A%20A%20better%20world%20can%20emerge%20out%20of%20defeat%20and%20division&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fmoderate-insurgency-2017-labour-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6085e335f014f4e7f898966aafc5c8a89676dd52%2F0_0_3715_2887%2F3715.jpg>
 Vladimir Putin, with a Viking sword on Friday, could take advantage of 
America’s travails to take on the mantle of global leadership. Photograph: 
Mikhail Klimentyev/AP 
The victory of emerging frontrunner Keir Starmer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/keir-starmer>in the subsequent contest could 
provide Labour with credible leadership. An insurgency needs a programme, so 
just as important as the top job would be the stirrings of intellectual renewal 
as the party explores radical policy ideas such as universal basic income and 
the major reform of our creaking tax system.

Labour’s debate would hint at a deeper shift in the public mood. People will 
remember that, as well as political extremism, war, terror and a remarkable 
celebrity death toll, 2016 was a year in which absolute poverty levels 
continued to decline, and deaths from malaria halved; a year when international 
communities of city leaders, climate change activists and medical scientists 
focused not just on today’s challenges but tomorrow’s opportunities. As we 
become aware of the scope for technology to transform our lives, there will be 
a determination to create a world where science and innovation benefits us all, 
not just the billionaires of Silicon Valley.

Defying expectations, will 2017 be the year optimism comes back into fashion? 
Sick of complaining, resigned to the failures of their parents’ generation, 
young people will be inspired by the simple question “Why not?” Just like the 
shift in America from the gilded age of division and excess in the late 19th 
century to the progressive era of the early 20th century, there will be an 
explosion of social innovation.

Across the globe we will see new social movements focused less on protest and 
more on solutions, the growth of alternative business models, ambitious ideas 
to renew the public realm, growing confidence and bold experimentation among 
city leaders. Taking the energy of populism but combining it with optimism, the 
sapping narrative of the elite versus the masses will be replaced by a patient 
determination to make politics the engine of social engagement and progress. 
The moderate insurgency will smash apart the assumption that you have to be 
enraged and extreme to be determined and active.

By now you may be wondering whether I wrote this piece having started my new 
year celebrations early. I’m not putting money on any of the above. But if, 
after the many defeats and divisions of 2016, optimism appeals, remember a 
simple truth: when it comes to human progress it is not hope that leads to 
action but action that leads to hope.

Matthew Taylor is chief executive of the RSA <https://www.thersa.org/>. He is 
writing in a personal capacity
 