
An adorable six-year-old in a pink top reaches up to me, her bright green eyes 
pleading for a hug. Next to her a slightly older girl, with curly brown hair 
and laughing dark eyes also reaches up. I lift the first child on to my back 
and bounce her around for a few moments before gently setting her down again. 
The games are starting and it is time to get into a circle and pay attention.

I am dressed in a spotty shirt, outsize trousers, stripy socks and a glittery 
bowler hat. This isn’t my usual working gear, but I am visiting this Greek 
refugee camp as an undercover clown withThe Flying Seagull Project 
<http://www.theflyingseagullproject.com/>. Hoards of children, some barely 
older than toddlers, run free around the camp. Their parents have travelled 
with them from Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan in the hope of finding a life away 
from violence and poverty. Now they are stranded in camps in Greece while 
politicians deliberate on where they can go.

The Flying Seagulls visit this camp every day to provide games, organised play 
and shows for the children. Ash Perrin, the ringmaster, has seen an improvement 
in behaviour since they started: “It used to take 15 minutes before you saw 
their child faces. They came with hard adult faces. Now the minute they see us 
it’s the vulnerable open child we see. They’re responding well.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fclowns-flying-seagull-project-normal-children-refugees-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b3ea78b2be590c9e71385ebaf40558eaee8de5a%2F0_157_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20clowns%20bringing%20laughter%20to%20refugee%20camps%3A%20%E2%80%98Happiness%20matters%20like%20food%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fclowns-flying-seagull-project-normal-children-refugees-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20clowns%20bringing%20laughter%20to%20refugee%20camps%3A%20%E2%80%98Happiness%20matters%20like%20food%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fclowns-flying-seagull-project-normal-children-refugees-greece%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b3ea78b2be590c9e71385ebaf40558eaee8de5a%2F0_157_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Undercover clown Anna Leach (right) with professional clown Miriam Needham. 
Photograph: Anna Leach 
The games are simple and based on sound and movement that is easy to 
understand without language. “If you need to use words to describe it – give 
up, you won’t get through,” says Perrin. “We try not to speak too much anyway 
because there’s something very inclusive about not needing to understand 
anything to play the game. A circle is a very strong structure. In a circle 
there’s no start or finish so no one gets to be at the front. It’s a productive 
shape to use.”

Perrin has seen clear signs of trauma among the children. “We see kids that at 
one moment would be the sweetest most genuine little faces and the next moment 
be the most angry and violent.” I’ve seen this for myself. The older girl who 
wanted me to pick her up earlier on lashed out at the other child, biting her 
hand hard, her face instantly transformed from smiles to fury.

Perrin and his troupe of clowns want to bring the children moments of a happy 
childhood with laughter and games. “We can create something that feels light, 
and caring, and more than just eating a plate of food or having a bed,” he 
says. “Something that’s catering to their personality, to their sense of 
belonging, their sense of mattering.”

We can create something that feels light, and caring, and more than just 
eating a plate of food or having a bed
Ash Perrin 
Miriam Needham, a professional actor and one of the troupe, adds: “Happiness 
matters like food, like water, like warmth, like shelter. I’ve seen the change 
it can bring to people, how it can make people strong just to laugh. Happiness 
and joy are contagious – it goes from the children to the parents out to the 
whole community.”

Psychologist Jayne Crimes, who has been working in a refugee camp on the Greek 
island of Samos, says a project such as the Flying Seagulls would be beneficial 
for the children there: “One of the things that is really positive about a 
group like that coming into their environment is that it creates a momentary 
sense of safety. It creates a sense of being able to connect to the present and 
a chance to connect with other kids. It’s a structured experience but one that 
is fun and allows them to forget things.”

She says the children at the camps are bored and frustrated: “Many parents 
describe how it’s very, very difficult to keep the kids occupied during the 
day. The kids are really frustrated – there’s often fights … many are withdrawn 
socially. They’re aggressive with their siblings. There’s a lot of bed-wetting, 
which is often a sign of anxiety.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fclowns-flying-seagull-project-normal-children-refugees-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c7ac3332515fe715e231810e06cbf447e9f49bd%2F840_63_3404_2598%2F3404.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20clowns%20bringing%20laughter%20to%20refugee%20camps%3A%20%E2%80%98Happiness%20matters%20like%20food%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fclowns-flying-seagull-project-normal-children-refugees-greece%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20clowns%20bringing%20laughter%20to%20refugee%20camps%3A%20%E2%80%98Happiness%20matters%20like%20food%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fclowns-flying-seagull-project-normal-children-refugees-greece%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c7ac3332515fe715e231810e06cbf447e9f49bd%2F840_63_3404_2598%2F3404.jpg>
 The troupe of clowns working with children at the refugee camps when the 
writer visited earlier this year. Photograph: Anna Leach 
Increasingly academic research is recognising the importance of play in 
children’s development. David Whitebread, director of theCentre for Research on 
Play in Education, Development and Learning 
<https://www.educ.cam.ac.uk/centres/pedal/> at Cambridge University, says: 
“Play is something that children do all the time. It’s how we’re evolved to 
learn. It’s absolutely crucial.”

He refers to studies on the children who were severely neglected in orphanages 
in Romania in the 1990s: “It’s well documented that the one thing that made a 
difference helping those children to come back to being children and having 
some semblance of normality in their development was play therapy.”

A common misunderstanding around play and development, Whitebread adds, is 
that children are best off playing by themselves. “It is important that they 
have time to themselves making up their own games, but actually what evidence 
we have so far suggests we need a mix.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> love adults playing with them as 
well –providing the adults are genuinely playing, rather than trying to 
organise them. We talk about guided play, that’s quite a common concept now. 
And turns out to be very effective.”

Perrin plans to keep working in the camps in Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> through next year. “If they’re not 
going anywhere then we can’t either,” he says. “They need emergency emotional 
support and moral lifting. Otherwise we’re going to have kids growing up with 
deeply rooted psychological disorders.

“Ten years from now these children are not going to be children. They’re going 
to be able-bodied, angry confused, psychologically unwell people. And then the 
process for helping them heal is far more difficult and far more complex. 
That’s why we have to do something that immediately caters to some change of 
atmosphere, some injection of positivity. We’ve got to do something now.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 