
1) How to Talk to Girls at Parties
Neil Gaiman’s science fiction comedy short story has been adapted by 
screenwriter Philippa Goslett and directed by John Cameron Mitchell – making 
his first movie since 2010’s Rabbit Hole. Some nervy teenage boys show up at a 
party in, amazingly, Croydon, and are tongue-tied when it comes to chatting up 
the opposite sex. But then they discover that the “exchange student” girls at 
the party are from a different planet.Nicole Kidman stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/13/nicole-kidman-eyes-john-cameron-mitchells-how-to-talk-to-girls-at-parties>
.

2) Silence
 Andrew Garfield and Shin’ya Tsukamoto in Silence 
A new film by Martin Scorsese <https://www.theguardian.com/film/martinscorsese>
 is always an event, and this looks intriguing. It is based on the prizewinning 
1966 novel by Japanese author Shusaku Endo (filmed twice before, by Japanese 
director Masahiro Shinoda in 1971 and Portuguese director João Mário Grilo in 
1996 as The Eyes of Asia). It is the true story of a 17th-century Christian 
missionary in Japan, played here by Liam Neeson, who was forced to recant his 
faith. Two younger priests, played by Adam Driver and Andrew Garfield, come 
looking for him and themselves face the same ordeal.

3) Manchester-by-the-Sea
A man is forced to take care of his nephew after the boy’s father dies. This 
is the bare outline of Kenneth Lonergan’s new film, a drama that stars Casey 
Affleck as the uncle who shoulders the burden of childcare, while at the same 
returning to his Massachusetts hometown and attempting to make peace with his 
ex-wife, played by Michelle Williams. Lonergan is respected as an auteur after 
his critically adoredMargaret 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/dec/02/fox-bury-margaret-lonergan>
 struggled to get a proper release after a colossal row over editing and 
ownership.

The film predictions we got right – and wrong – in our 2015 preview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/24/the-film-predictions-we-got-right-and-wrong-in-our-2015-preview>
4) American Honey
Andrea Arnold <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrea-arnold> is another 
heavy-hitting British director heading to the US in 2016. Her new movie, 
American Honey, stars Sasha Lane as a teenager who travels across the US 
midwest with one of the now notorious magazine sales crews. These groups of 
young people peddle magazine subscriptions door to door, sleeping three or four 
to a room in cheap motels with the lowest seller getting the floor. Arnold was 
reportedly inspired by the scandalised press coverage of these groups and their 
drug abuse. The cast also includes Shia LaBeouf.

5) Nocturnal Animals
Fashion designer Tom Ford <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/tom-ford> was 
much admired for his movie-directing debut A Single Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-single-man> (2009), which starred Colin 
Firth. He follows this up with Nocturnal Animals, starring Jake Gyllenhaal, Amy 
Adams and Armie Hammer. It’s an intriguing story within a story based on the 
cult 1993 novelTony & Susan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jul/17/tony-and-susan-austin-wright> by 
Austin Wright. A divorced and remarried woman receives the manuscript of a 
novel entitled Nocturnal Animals, written by her first husband, who has become 
a writer since they split. It appears to be a strange melodramatic thriller, 
composed in a coded way to disturb and upset his ex-wife.

6) Hail, Caesar!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fhail-caesar-watch-the-trailer-for-the-new-coen-brothers-comedy-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444410062066%2FKP_525375_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hail%2C%20Caesar!%20Watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20new%20Coen%20brothers%20comedy%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fhail-caesar-watch-the-trailer-for-the-new-coen-brothers-comedy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hail%2C%20Caesar%21%20Watch%20the%20trailer%20for%20the%20new%20Coen%20brothers%20comedy%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F09%2Fhail-caesar-watch-the-trailer-for-the-new-coen-brothers-comedy-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F9%2F1444410062066%2FKP_525375_crop_640x480.jpg>
We might have been hoping for an actual Roman epic from the Coen brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/coenbrothers>, with George Clooney as Caesar. 
Actually it’s about 1950s Hollywood and the frantic behind-the-scenes 
quarrelling and ego-tripping during production of a sword-and-sandals 
extravaganza. Josh Brolin plays legendary spin doctor and fixer Eddie Mannix 
(Bob Hoskins played him the movieHollywoodland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/nov/24/benaffleck.drama>) who has to 
cover up various crises, including the kidnap of the pampered leading male – 
played by Clooney.

7) Everybody Wants Some
After his epic masterpiece Boyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/10/boyhood-review-richard-linklater-film>
,Richard Linklater <https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-linklater> now 
gives us a more conventional picture, though with a comparable preoccupation 
with masculinity. It’s a comedy-drama set in the early 80s about a group of 
first-year college students dealing with the dizzying prestige and freedom of 
being star baseball players. Everybody Wants Some (the title is taken from a 
Van Halen track) is a coming-of-age story and has been described as a followup 
to Linklater’s breakthrough movieDazed and Confused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/dazed-confused-comedy>.

8) Julieta
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F417ed8a02905ad47c959936d6f1f410290df68a9%2F459_109_1732_1039%2F1732.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2075%20films%20we're%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2075%20films%20we%27re%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F417ed8a02905ad47c959936d6f1f410290df68a9%2F459_109_1732_1039%2F1732.jpg>
 ‘It’s a hard-hitting drama’ … Pedro Almodovar. Photograph: Kena 
Betancur/Reuters 
This new film from Pedro Almodóvar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pedroalmodovar> is understood to portray, in 
David Lynch’s words, a “woman in trouble”. It was originally called Silence, 
which is what the director calls the main component of any woman’s emotional 
trauma, but Almodóvar changed the title to avoid confusion with Scorsese’s 
forthcoming work. Julieta is played at two different times of her life by 
Adriana Uguarte and Emma Suárez. “It’s a return to the cinema of women, of 
great female protagonists, and it’s a hard-hitting drama, which excites me,” 
says Almodóvar.

9) Weightless
Once a director of almost Salingeresque reclusiveness, Terrence Malick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/terrence-malick> is now very prolific. His 
new picture is understood to be about the intersection of two love triangles. 
Michael Fassbender, Cate Blanchett, Christian Bale, Rooney Mara and Ryan 
Gosling are all supposed to be in the cast, but Malick can be ruthless in 
cutting entire characters from his final edit. Weightless is set amid the music 
scene of Austin, Texas, where Malick filmed concert scenes in 2011 and 2012 
featuring Arcade Fire, Iron and Wine, Fleet Foxes and Black Lips.

Ben Wheatley swaps a field in England for a warehouse in Boston
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/27/ben-wheatley-swaps-a-field-in-england-for-a-warehouse-in-boston>
10) Free Fire
Ben Wheatley <https://www.theguardian.com/film/ben-wheatley>’s new film, 
co-written with Amy Jump, is a move to something like a straight-ahead 
Hollywood thriller. Could he be heading into the Christopher Nolan league? Free 
Fire is set in Boston in 1978. A big meet between criminals in a deserted 
warehouse turns sour: Cillian Murphy and Michael Smiley play Irishmen who have 
arranged to buy guns from mobsters played by Armie Hammer and Sharlto Copley. 
But things go badly wrong, and a shootout begins.

Matthew McConaughey to play dapper koala in animated musical Sing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/11/matthew-mcconaughey-sing-koala-garth-jennings-animated-musical>
11) Sing
One of the year’s oddest propositions sees the return of Son of Rambow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/apr/04/comedy.drama>’s Garth Jennings 
who directs this animated musical with Scarlett Johansson voicing a “punk-rock 
porcupine”, Matthew McConaughey as a “dapper koala” and Reese Witherspoon 
behind an “overtaxed pig mother”.

12) Certain Women 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F215ac2c4dbf67e314e744b472c1f24a45975e832%2F0_15_2048_1230%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2075%20films%20we're%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2075%20films%20we%27re%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F215ac2c4dbf67e314e744b472c1f24a45975e832%2F0_15_2048_1230%2F2048.jpg>
 Michelle Williams reunites with Kelly Reichardt for Certain Women. 
Yet to truly put a foot wrong, Meek’s Cutoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/apr/14/meeks-cutoff-review> director 
Kelly Reichardt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/21/-sp-kelly-reichardt-my-films-are-just-glimpses-of-people-passing-through>
 has assembled an impressive cast for her new ensemble drama about the lives 
and loves of people living in a small Montana town. The lineup includes Kristen 
Stewart, Michelle Williams and Laura Dern.

13) Wiener-Dog
Revisiting his greater work hasn’t always worked for Todd Solondz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/todd-solondz> (the loose Happiness sequel 
Life During Wartime was a letdown) but recruiting Greta Gerwig to play Welcome 
to the Dollhouse’s bullied outcast Dawn Weiner is reason to be excited. 
Especially with a cast that also includes Julie Delpy and Ellen Burstyn.

14) Salt and Fire
Werner Herzog <https://www.theguardian.com/film/wernerherzog> directing a 
romantic thriller about a supervolcano might sound strange but this is the man 
who re-imagined Bad Lieutanant with Nicolas Cage in the lead role. Set to 
premiere at Sundance, the South American-set film stars Michael Shannon and 
Gael García Bernal.

15) War Machine
Beasts of No Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/02/beasts-of-no-nation-review-brutal-epic-opens-awards-season-in-style>
 proved a confident start to Netflix’s move into original movies and their 
major film of 2016 sounds like an equally high profile success story in the 
making. Brad Pitt stars in this black comedy that takes a satirical look at 
America’s war with Afghanistan. Animal Kingdom’s David Michod directs.

16) Russ & Roger Go Beyond
After his Amanda Knox-inspired drama The Face of an Angel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/26/the-face-of-an-angel-review-amanda-knox-michael-winterbottom>
 underwhelmed,Michael Winterbottom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-winterbottom> is sticking to safer 
ground with the true story ofthe strange relationship between Roger Ebert and 
Russ Meyer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/02/roger-ebert-russ-meyer-josh-gad-beyond-the-valley-of-the-dolls>
, who worked together on Beyond the Valley of the Dolls. Will Ferrell stars as 
Russ and Josh Gad as Roger.

17) Neon Demon
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ebcf99d1a3d83f26a29875514f6d5b6d0518433%2F0_41_7012_4215%2F7012.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2075%20films%20we're%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2075%20films%20we%27re%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5ebcf99d1a3d83f26a29875514f6d5b6d0518433%2F0_41_7012_4215%2F7012.jpg>
 Elle Fanning in Nicolas Winding Refn’s horror movie Neon Demon. 
After Spike Lee’s impressively angry Chi-Raq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/25/chi-raq-review-spike-lees-urgent-angry-and-very-sexy-midlife-masterpiece>
, Amazon are set to continue their relationship with daring directors by 
releasing the latest from Drive’sNicolas Winding Refn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/nicolas-winding-refn>. He’s giving the horror 
genre a stab with this cautionary tale about beauty-obsessed women in LA. Keanu 
Reeves, Elle Fanning and Christina Hendricks star.

18) Story of Your Life
After Prisoners, Enemy and Sicario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/08/sicario-review-emily-blunt-at-the-sharp-end-in-war-on-drugs>
, Denis Villeneuve has avoided the often troublesome transition from acclaimed 
foreign-language director to successful Hollywood player. He’s moving from the 
thriller genre to sci-fi with this tantalising set-up: Amy Adams plays a 
linguist recruited to uncover whether aliens have come to earth in peace or for 
war.

19) Zama
Female directors will be continuing their ascent in 2016 after a year of calls 
for more visibility, and this ambitious Latin American film fromThe Headless 
Woman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/feb/18/the-headless-woman-review>
’s Lucrecia Martel is set to be one of the most high profile. Produced by Pedro 
Almodóvar, it’s a historical epic about an official of the Spanish crown on a 
dangerous mission.

20) Doctor Strange
For anyone tired of superhero movies, Marvel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel>’s latest addition to their 
expanded universe might tempt you back to the fold. Teased as a “mind trip 
action film” it boasts one of the year’s greatest casts: Benedict Cumberbatch, 
Chiwetel Ejiofor, Tilda Swinton, Rachel McAdams and Mads Mikkelsen.

21) Ghostbusters 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa083edbb30fb6989e93d2a24596f0e40297ed68%2F0_163_2399_1440%2F2399.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2075%20films%20we're%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2075%20films%20we%27re%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa083edbb30fb6989e93d2a24596f0e40297ed68%2F0_163_2399_1440%2F2399.jpg>
 The all-female cast of Ghostbusters. Photograph: Sony Pictures 
Paul Feig’s female-fronted reboot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ghostbusters> of the adventures of the 
ghoul-squishing quartet has met with some worrying blowback from fans of the 
original concerned that ladies wouldn’t be able to cut it. But the film itself 
looks like a cracker, with Melissa McCarthy and Kristen Wiig among those 
donning a jumpsuit, plus cameos from almost all the original crew.

22) Snowden
Oliver Stone’s biopic of the NSA whistleblower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/snowden> has moved to 2016, potentially 
eyeing a Cannes premiere. Joseph Gordon-Levitt takes the lead, with Shailene 
Woodley as his girlfriend, plus Tom Wilkinson, Zachary Quinto and Melissa Leo 
as the Guardian journalists and the documentary maker to whom he first told his 
story.

23) It’s Only the End of the World
Still just 26, Xavier Dolan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/11/xavier-dolan-canada-tom-at-the-farm>
 continues his remorseless rise to the top with a drama about a writer (Gaspard 
Ulliel) returning to his hometown after 12 years to announce that he is dying. 
This family – including Lea Seydoux, Marion Cotillard and Vincent Cassel – 
aren’t wholly sympathetic.

24) Love and Friendship
Eighteen years after Last Days of Disco, director Whit Stillman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/15/whit-stillman-the-cosmopolitans>
 reunites with Chloë Sevigny and Kate Beckinsale for a loose version of Jane 
Austen’s 1790s-set novella Lady Susan. Beckinsale is the lead, a beautiful 
widow intent on both securing her inheritance and snagging a new husband for 
herself and a fresh one for her deb daughter. Stephen Fry, James Fleet and 
Jemma Redgrave are on call.

25) The BFG 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-bfg-trailer-steven-spielberg-film-mark-rylance-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F9%2F1449675601101%2FKP_711169_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20BFG%3A%20the%20first%20trailer%20for%20Steven%20Spielberg's%20film%20starring%20Mark%20Rylance%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-bfg-trailer-steven-spielberg-film-mark-rylance-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20BFG%3A%20the%20first%20trailer%20for%20Steven%20Spielberg%27s%20film%20starring%20Mark%20Rylance%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Fthe-bfg-trailer-steven-spielberg-film-mark-rylance-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F9%2F1449675601101%2FKP_711169_crop_640x480.jpg>
Now Steven Spielberg <https://www.theguardian.com/film/stevenspielberg> has 
finally got his mitts on Mark Rylance (he first chased him in the 80s, only to 
be turned down in favour of the RSC), he’s not letting up. Eight months after 
the release of Bridge of Spies (in which Rylance starred as Soviet agent Rudolf 
Abel opposite Tom Hanks), we have this much-anticipated adaptation of the Roald 
Dahl book about a little girl befriended in her orphanage by a benign giant.

26) The Light Between Oceans
Michael Fassbender and Alicia Vikander play a lighthouse keeper and his wife 
living off the coast of Western Australia who raise a baby they find adrift in 
a rowboat. Rachel Weisz co-stars in the latest from Blue Valentine andThe Place 
Beyond the Pines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/apr/11/place-beyond-the-pines-review> 
director Derek Cianfrance.

27) Whiskey Tango Foxtrot 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdxAcIWDi8ps&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdxAcIWDi8ps>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DdxAcIWDi8ps&media=>
Formerly known as The Taliban Shuffle, this is a war reporter satire headed up 
by Tina Fey with cracking support from Margot Robbie, Alfred Molina, Martin 
Freeman and Billy Bob Thornton. It’s based on the book by Kim Barker, who 
arrived in Kabul as a clueless journalist in 2002 before finding her feet amid 
the crossfire. The directors, Glenn Ficarra and John Requa, previously took the 
reins on Robbie’s vehicle Focus, as well asCrazy Stupid Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/sep/22/crazy-stupid-love-film-review> and
I Love You Phillip Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2012/nov/15/i-love-you-phillip-morris-reel-history>
.

28) A United Kingdom
Amma Assante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/18/amma-asante-belle-bicultural-ghanaian-british-director-grange-hill>
 follows Belle with another true-life tale of racial difference bucking high 
society. In this 1940s-set drama, David Oyelowo plays Prince Seretse Khama of 
Botswana, who causes an international stir on marrying a white woman from 
London (Rosamund Pike). Jack Davenport, Tom Felton, Laura Carmichael – and 
Nicholas Lyndhurst! – co-star.

29) The Lost City of Z
Having been let go from the shackles of starring in Fifty Shades of Grey, 
Charlie Hunnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/09/charlie-hunnam-turning-down-fifty-shades-of-grey>
 has a pop at another strapping lad with whip – real-life jungle explorer 
Percival Fawcett, who never returned from a 1925 trip in search of a lost 
Amazon civilisation. Sienna Miller plays his missus, Robert Pattinson and Tom 
Holland also don the khaki.

30) La La Land
Damien Chazelle! JK Simmons! Jazz! The breakout Whiplash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/whiplash-review> director sticks 
with the familiar for his next project – but also chucks into the mix Ryan 
Gosling and Emma Stone. They’re replacing Miles Teller and Emma Watson as an 
ivory-tickler and the aspiring actress he falls for in LA.

31) Loving
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7ac577a624115087e09c016d23ac5062a5e5544%2F0_6_1880_1130%2F1880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2075%20films%20we're%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2075%20films%20we%27re%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7ac577a624115087e09c016d23ac5062a5e5544%2F0_6_1880_1130%2F1880.jpg>
 Joel Edgerton and Ruth Negga as Richard and Mildred Loving. Photograph: Ben 
Rothstein/AP 
Jeff Nichols 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/02/mud-director-jeff-nichols-twain> 
(Mud) has quietly become one of Hollywood’s more significant auteurs, and here 
he is taking on a big, real-life subject. In 1959, Mildred and Richard Loving 
were convicted of interracial marriage in a Virginia court and went all the way 
to the supreme court to get the ruling overturned. Ruth Negga plays Mildred, 
and Joel Edgerton is Richard, while Nichol’s ever-present collaborator Michael 
Shannon turns up as Grey Villet, the Life photographer who covered the story 
and helped turn it into a key test of civil rights.

32) LBJ
Every president must get their movie, and here is one of those previously 
overlooked, despite having a bit part in every account of the Kennedy 
assassination. Lyndon Baines Johnson may have a bellicose reputation, but his 
record on civil rights, ending poverty and gun control makes his presidency a 
high water mark in US liberalism. Interest in him cinematically seems to have 
been piqued by his portrayal inSelma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/12/reel-history-selma-film-historically-accurate-martin-luther-king-lyndon-johnson>
 as a tough-nosed, savvy political operator, and this biopic – directed by Rob 
Reiner with Woody Harrelson as the man himself, with a script plucked from the 
2014 Black List – looks as if it will cover familiar ground, starting with 
LBJ’s abrupt ascent to the presidency and battles over civil rights and Vietnam.

33) The Real Wound
Abdellatif Kechiche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/27/abdellatif-kechiche-interview-blue-warmest>
 won the Palme d’Or in 2013 withBlue Is the Warmest Colour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/21/blue-is-the-warmest-colour-review>
, an impassioned study of same-sex coming-of-age. This time, the subject is not 
dissimilar, but it’s about a teenage boy on the lookout for girls. It’s adapted 
from a novel by François Bégaudeau, who is perhaps best known for writing and 
starring in another Palme winner, The Class, in 2008; if nothing else, The Real 
Wound has pedigree. It’s also got Gérard Depardieu, on something of a roll 
after Welcome to New York and The Valley of Love, so definitely worth looking 
out for.

34) Zootopia
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbY73vFGhSVk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbY73vFGhSVk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbY73vFGhSVk&media=>
After Pixar released both Inside Out and The Good Dinosaur this year, sister 
studio Walt DisneyAnimation <https://www.theguardian.com/film/animation> has 
two films lined up for 2016. South Pacific yarn Moana is due in November, but 
earlier in the year will come this sprightly sounding animal-noir tale, 
inspired apparently by Disney’s now rather forgotten 1973 cartoon Robin Hood. 
Named after the town filled with animals where it all goes down, Zootopia 
revolves around a bunny rabbit cop Judy Hopps (Ginnifer Goodwin), who teams up 
with unreliable scam artist fox Nick Wilde (Jason Bateman) to track down a 
missing otter.

35) Assassin’s Creed
Macbeth director Justin Kurzel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/24/macbeth-director-justin-kurzel-australian-film-maker-snowtown>
 reunites with his stars Michael Fassbender and Marion Cotillard for this 
adaptation/extension ofthe blockbusting video game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/assassins-creed>, which concerns itself 
with the descendants of a secret society (The Assassins) who over the centuries 
must confront those of another (The Knights Templar). Fassbender plays Callum 
Lynch, a character created especially for the film, which, like the game, is 
part of a series of interlocking stories set in a larger game universe. There’s 
no word yet on whether he spends the entire time wandering around a faux 
medieval Scottish landscape with the scars of battle still visible on his 
flesh. Still, game producers Ubisoft deserve kudos for going down what looks 
like the arthouse route for their film.

36) Money Monster
Jodie Foster <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jodie-foster>’s last 
directorial effort, The Beaver, was a not-likely-to-be-popular oddity 
thoroughly swamped by the unpleasantness surrounding its leading man, Mel 
Gibson, in the run-up to its release in 2011. Now she’s back for more, however, 
and has cast another heavyweight lead actor – George Clooney – in the central 
role. Clooney plays one of those financial advice guys who dispenses stock tips 
on his TV show; a disgruntled viewer, played by 71’s Jack O’Connell, turns up 
and holds him hostage after losing money. Julia Roberts is in there, too, 
playing the show’s producer.

37) A Cure for Wellness
Gore Verbinski is best known as the purveyor of effervescent family 
entertainments, from Mouse Hunt to Pirates of the Caribbean, but he also has a 
nice line in horror: to wit, the US remake of the Japanese classicRing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2009/jun/26/the-ring-remake-beats-original-ringu>
. A Cure for Wellness sees him dive back into the horror pool, with Dane DeHaan 
playing a young employee attempting to extricate his boss from a sinister 
“wellness” spa run by Jason Isaacs, who has dastardly designs on his patients, 
who include Mia Goth. With Verbinski’s track record for handling a big canvas, 
this is sure to be worth a look.

38) Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fbatman-v-superman-watch-the-new-trailer-for-zack-snyders-superhero-smackdown-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F3%2F1449121923489%2FKP_646761_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Batman%20v%20Superman%3A%20watch%20the%20new%20trailer%20for%20Zack%20Snyder%E2%80%99s%20superhero%20smackdown%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fbatman-v-superman-watch-the-new-trailer-for-zack-snyders-superhero-smackdown-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Batman%20v%20Superman%3A%20watch%20the%20new%20trailer%20for%20Zack%20Snyder%E2%80%99s%20superhero%20smackdown%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fbatman-v-superman-watch-the-new-trailer-for-zack-snyders-superhero-smackdown-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F3%2F1449121923489%2FKP_646761_crop_640x480.jpg>
It’s taken them years, but finally DC Comics are catching up with the Marvel’s 
interlinked-stories concept as applied to cinema.This film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2>, originally conceived as the 
sequel to the forehead-kneading Man of Steel, sees the Caped Crusader (Ben 
Affleck) make his way to Superman’s Metropolis, there to confront the 
phone-box-bothering superhero (Henry Cavill) who he suspects may wreak chaos if 
left unchecked. The trailers make it look pretty fun (as they would) and it all 
sets up future movies, such as the long pined for Wonder Woman, whose lead 
actor Gal Gadot is getting a prominent cameo here.

39) Billy Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk
Ang Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anglee> has been quiet since winning 
the best director Oscar for Life of Pi in 2013, so it’s excellent news that the 
soft-spoken Taiwanese-American master is back. He’s gone for another literary 
adaptation, of Ben Fountain’s 2012 novel about an Iraq war veteran who is sent 
back to the US on a promotional “victory” tour, culminating in an appearance at 
the Dallas Cowboys’ Thanksgiving-day game. The script is by Slumdog’s Simon 
Beaufoy, and newcomer Joe Alwyn (a Bristol University graduate) is playing 
Billy. Possibly time to start practising those Oscar speeches.

40) The Unknown Girl
A new Dardenne brothers film is always an event on the Euro arthouse circuit, 
with a Cannes berth all but guaranteed for the two-time Palme d’Or winners and 
their brand of intense, low-key naturalism. Adèle Haenel plays a GP who takes 
it on herself to identify the eponymousfille inconnue, a girl who dies after 
being denied medical care. Having achieved their biggest hit to date with the 
Marion Cotillard-starringTwo Days One Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/07/-sp-dardenne-brothers-marion-cotillard-two-days-one-night>
, the brothers appear to be returning to the slightly less box-office-friendly 
fare of their earlier work.

41) Star Wars: Rogue One 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb18f2ce9643f092d885e363160a98ab82f05461%2F0_0_2560_1534%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2075%20films%20we're%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2075%20films%20we%27re%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb18f2ce9643f092d885e363160a98ab82f05461%2F0_0_2560_1534%2F2560.jpg>
 Star Wars: Rogue One features Riz Ahmed, Diego Luna, Felicity Jones, Jiang Wen 
and Donnie Yen. Photograph: Jonathan Olley, Leah Evans/AP 
You’re ready for another, right? Barely a year after the seismic upheaval of 
JJ Abrams’s franchise reboot, there are yet more wars on the way.Gareth 
Edwards’ spin-off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/24/star-wars-rogue-one-to-resurrect-peter-cushing-via-cgi-despite-slipper-issues>
 stars Felicity Jones, Diego Luna and Ben Mendelsohn. Set before the original 
trilogy, we’ll be following a bunch of resistance fighters plotting to steal 
plans to the Death Star. Let the hype be your guide.

42) The Free State of Jones
The title comes from a small outpost in Jones county, Mississippi, where – 
according to legend – a confederate soldier called Newton Knight set up a tiny 
mixed-race community in the middle of the civil war. Knight, a confederate army 
deserter, was in a common-law marriage with a former slave. He led a rebellion 
against the confederacy, though whether he did this for noble reasons is still 
debated. And who will play this morally patchwork man? The charismatic 
southerner with a gift for leadership and a tendency for roguishness?Matthew 
McConaughey <https://www.theguardian.com/film/matthew-mcconaughey>? Alright 
alright alright.

43) Florence Foster Jenkins

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F062d9824333c9be0708ed2f86cb6431d6631c5bf%2F62_0_938_563%2F938.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2075%20films%20we're%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2075%20films%20we%27re%20most%20excited%20about%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2015%2Fdec%2F29%2F75-must-see-films-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F062d9824333c9be0708ed2f86cb6431d6631c5bf%2F62_0_938_563%2F938.jpg>
 Meryl Streep and Hugh Grant in Florence Foster Jenkins. Photograph: Nick 
Wall/Nick Wall Photography 
New York socialite Florence Foster Jenkins made a living as an opera singer, 
despite not sounding like one. She had no pitch, rhythm nor tone yet became a 
popular curiosity for punters keen to see her foul up an aria. Jenkins, who 
remained convinced of her own talent, was the X-Factor first-rounder of her 
day, making sure that her performances were reviewed only by her friends or 
herself. She played one her final shows in 1944 in – due to public petition – 
Carnegie Hall. InStephen Frears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stephen-frears>’ biopic, she’ll be played by 
Meryl Streep, with Hugh Grant and Mission Impossible: Rogue Nation star Rebecca 
Ferguson in support.

44) Nine Lives
Don’t ask meow Kevin Spacey <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/kevinspacey> 
got involved with this one. Barry Sonnenfeld’s comedy will have him play a man 
trapped in the body of a cat. Plot details are scarce, but Jennifer Garner and 
Christopher Walken have taken roles, hopefully not as Scratching Post and Sand 
Pit. As to which breed of cat Kevin will inhabit? The film-makers haven’t made 
their felines known.

45) The Founder
Biopic of Roy Kroc, the businessman who wrested McDonalds away from its 
founders – brothers Mac and Dick McDonald – and set a meat and potatoes fast 
food joint on its way to ubiquitousness. Written in the style of The Social 
Network by The Wrestler scriptwriter Robert Siegel, it starsMichael Keaton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-keaton> as Kroc and is directed by 
John Lee Hancock (The Blind Side, Saving Mr Banks). If it can stay warm enough 
to seem appetising to Oscar voters come 2017, Keaton will have pulled off a 
remarkable remarkable run: he was a fixture of awards season with Birdman last 
year and is likely to be popping up again with Spotlight this time. The Founder 
would make for a tasty triple.

46) Warcraft 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2Rxoz13Bthc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2Rxoz13Bthc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2Rxoz13Bthc&media=>
Blizzard Entertainment’s video game phenomenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/world-of-warcraft> gets a film 
off-shoot courtesy of Moon and Source Code directorDuncan Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/06/world-of-warcraft-movie-duncan-jones-interview>
. Orcs and humans will clash, scores of grunts will fall in a mighty battle 
between the two races for control of the mystical world of Azeroth and gamers 
will experience dizzying ecstasy as their passion for the film’s click-crazy 
origin is channeled by someone who shares their love. Along with the Assassin’s 
Creed (see No 35), Warcraft could be the start of a movement previously 
unprecedented: game-based films that don’t embarrass fans of both. No 
Gamer-style meta narrative, Duncan. Please.


47) Brothers Grimsby 
A must-see ahead of the release of its worryingly cruddy trailer, Sacha Baron 
Cohen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sachabaroncohen>’s latest might be 
still worth a watch for all the wrong reasons. He plays Norman “Nobby” Grimsby, 
a pub schlub and football lout whose search for his long-lost brother ends 
disastrously after he fouls up his black ops-trained sibling’s assassination 
attempt and forces them to go on the run. The film angered the people of 
Grimsby by insinuating the town was full of drunken dossers. Could anger many 
more if the jokes don’t manage to hop over the extremely low bar set by the 
trailer. Still, Baron Cohen’s rarely completely unfunny. Maybe the promo has a 
smarter bigger brother?

48) Finding Dory
Finding Nemo’s forgetful, faithful sidekick gets her spin-off. Convinced she 
remembers a family and where they might be, Dory heads back out into open water 
with Nemo and Marlin in her wake. All the original cast are slinging in their 
hook, includingEllen Degeneres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ellen-degeneres> as Dory and Albert 
Brooks as Nemo’s fretful dad, Marlin. Plus, there’s room in the ocean for Diane 
Keaton and Eugene Levy as Dory’s parents and Idris Elba, in an as yet 
unannounced role. Probably not a minnow.

49) Suicide Squad

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPLLQK9la6Go&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPLLQK9la6Go>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPLLQK9la6Go&media=>
We’ve done dark, we’ve done poppy, now let’s try naughty. Directed by David 
Ayer and based on the DC comic about a gang of antiheroes co-opted by the US 
government,Suicide Squad <https://www.theguardian.com/film/suicide-squad> might 
be more raw, more vicious than your average do-gooder superhero story. The cast 
list has some whack: Will Smith is the squad’s de facto leader as expert 
marksman Deadshot, Margot Robbie is popular Batman villain Harley Quinn, and 
Jared Leto will prance around the outskirts as The Joker, the first new 
big-screen take on the character since Heath Ledger played him in the Dark 
Knight trilogy. Subtlety isn’t Ayer’s superpower. He won’t need it for material 
this wacky.

50) Passengers
Way out in space sits Jim (Chris Pratt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/chris-pratt>), twiddling his thumbs after the 
breakdown of his sleep unit has left him the only passenger awake on a giant 
space cruiser heading for a planet that’s still 90 years away. Does he die 
alone? Or push the button and wake up beautiful, smart Aurora (Jennifer 
Lawrence)? It’s a simple premise but Sony’s sci-fi epic, directed by The 
Imitation Game’s Morten Tyldum, has cost an astronomical $150m. Of that, $20m 
goes to Lawrence, with $12m shuttled off to Pratt. That’s significant, since it 
was Sony subsidiary Columbia who were embarrassed by the leaked news that 
Lawrence was paid a lesser percentage of the profits of American Hustle than 
her male co-stars. With Keanu Reeves, Michael Sheen and Laurence Fishburne also 
on board, Passengers is full of stars, but it’s still a big gamble for Sony.

51) The Limehouse Golem


Alan Rickman wades into a bloody mess in a Victorian gothic adapted from Peter 
Ackroyd’s novel Dan Leno and The Lighthouse Golem. A rapacious killer’s on the 
loose in London’s east end. Their crimes are so heinous that the locals 
(Rickman, joined by Douglas Booth and Olivia Cooke) are convinced the murders 
must be the work of a monstrous, mythical beast, the Golem. Said to be similar 
to Se7en and The Woman in Black. Could be precious.

52) Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Ffantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-jk-rowling-harry-potter-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F15%2F1450180647008%2FKP_782088_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fantastic%20Beasts%20and%20Where%20to%20Find%20Them%3A%20trailer%20for%20JK%20Rowling's%20Harry%20Potter%20spin-off%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Ffantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-jk-rowling-harry-potter-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fantastic%20Beasts%20and%20Where%20to%20Find%20Them%3A%20trailer%20for%20JK%20Rowling%27s%20Harry%20Potter%20spin-off%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F15%2Ffantastic-beasts-and-where-to-find-them-jk-rowling-harry-potter-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F15%2F1450180647008%2FKP_782088_crop_640x480.jpg>
JK Rowling’s first screenplay - a Harry Potter spin-off - is escorted to the 
big screen by regular Hogwarts wrangler David Yates. Eddie Redmayne stars as 
Newt Scamander, a scholar whose studies are complicated by the escape of a 
menage of magical creatures from his briefcase. Ezra Miller, Katherine Waterson 
and Colin Farrell are among those joining Eddie on the hunt through 1920s New 
York.

53) Elvis and Nixon

Michael Shannon and Kevin Spacey ham-off in a recreation of the real-life 
meeting. Shannon will play the King, who’s meeting with the Commander-in-Chief 
was sparked by Elvis’s desire to distance himself from the counter-culture he’d 
inspired and Nixon’s attempt to appeal to teeny-boppers. Presley even went so 
far as to offer his services as an undercover agent to the FBI, though J Edgar 
Hoover never took him up on it. The film, which is directed by Hateship, 
Loveship’s Liza Johnson, will play off the absurdity of it all.


54) The Accountant


Action-thriller in which Ben Affleck plays a financial whizz who’s also great 
at adding bullets to targets as a hitman for hire. This will be Affleck’s first 
role since Gone Girl and the last before he becomes the Batman in Dawn of 
Justice (see 38). Affleck + Anna Kendrick + JK Simmons + John Lithgow + Jeffrey 
Tambor + Jon Bernthal + dodgy dealings on Wall Street = killer potential.

55) Personal Shopper
Kristen Stewart plays a fashion lackey working the fringes of Paris couture, 
assisted by her psychic superpowers. Personal Shopper is scripted by Olivier 
Assayas, who helped Stewart to Cesar win for her turn in Clouds of Sils Maria. 
A second collaboration would seem like a good fit.

56) The Legend of Tarzan
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAj7ty6sViiU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAj7ty6sViiU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DAj7ty6sViiU&media=>
More Margot Robbie, this time as Jane opposite Alexander Skarsgård’s 
smalls-wearing Tarzan in David Yates’ take. The trailer (above) promises a dark 
thriller set in a jungle that “consumes everything” and “preys on the weak”. 
Probably closer to Peter Jackson’s apery of King Kong than George of the Jungle.

57) Yoga Hosers

Premieres at Sundance soon. Kevin Smith takes acting as well as directing 
duties in an adventure spinning-off from Depp’s hammy cameo as a 
French-Canadian detective Guy LaPointe in Smith’s comedy-horror Tusk. This one 
stars Depp’s daughter, Lily-Rose and Smith’s daughter, Harley, as a pair of 
convenience store clerks who’ll bend over backwards for their love of yoga, but 
- when Canada is invaded by hordes of demonic creatures - find themselves in an 
uncomfortable position.


58) Bad Neighbours 2


So sue us: we enjoyed the first one. Zac Efron and Seth Rogen return as the 
once-warring neighbours, now united against a common foe: a brattish pack of 
sorority sisters who’ve moved in next door. The original stirred up good 
chemistry between Efron (as the hunky alpha-frat boy, Teddy) and Rogen 
(party-starved new dad Mac). Rose Byrne and Dave Franco are returning, as is 
director Nicholas Stoller.

59) Independence Day 2
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLbduDRH2m2M&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLbduDRH2m2M>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLbduDRH2m2M&media=>
“Today ... we celebrate ... OUR INDEPENDENCE DAY!” etc etc etc. Some 20 years 
after Roland Emmerich blew up the White House, he’s back to wreck more 
destruction on pitiful humanity. That said, perhaps the film won’t be so bad? 
The trailer (above) offers up a doomy vision of alien invasion, perhaps better 
suited to our times than the 90s original’s poppy spirit. And the cast is good 
- Liam Hemsworth, Charlotte Gainsbourg, Jeff Goldblum. Will Smith isn’t 
returning, but - given recent form - that might not be a catastrophe.

60) Bourne 5

Both Paul Greengrass and Matt Damon are back after the Jeremy Renner side 
story, The Bourne Legacy, slumped. Damon will play the titular super-spy, 
apparently OK now after the truth about his manipulation by the naughty 
government caused a grandscale breakdown. Joining him in some kind of accord 
will be franchise regular Julia Stiles and newbie Alicia Vikander. Viggo 
Mortensen and Vincent Cassel will be on the other side of a conflict with more 
sides than Nandos.


61) Untitled Woody Allen

Yes, the two since Blue Jasmine have been disappointing; as was American 
Ultra, Jesse Eisenberg and Kristen Stewart’s most recent team-up. But we’re 
still holding out hope. Plot details are - as ever with Allen projects - 
scarce, but Eisenberg and Stewart’s third film together will see them head a 
drama set in New York’s Chinatown in the 1940s. Bruce Willis, Steve Carell and 
Blake Lively are among the actors ticking the ‘Worked with Woody’ box this time 
around.


62) Anthropoid
Czech soldiers assassinate notoriously brutal Nazi commander Reinhard 
Heydrich, one of the engineers of the Holocaust. Jamie Dornan and Cillian 
Murphy star as two of the allied special operatives assigned with taking down 
the SS-Obergruppenführer who Hitler called “the man with the iron heart”. 
Directed by Sean Ellis, whose Metro Manila was a hit with critics in 2013.

63) Zoolander 2

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4CL4LNWHegk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4CL4LNWHegk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4CL4LNWHegk&media=>
Second helping of Derek’n’Hansel, which is a good thing – even if Zoolander’s 
adoption by humourless fashionista types wore out the welcome mat. This time 
around the author of Le Tigre, Blue Steel and Magnum is out of fashion, but 
in-demand as he’s the only dim bulb who can shed light on a spat of celebrity 
deaths linked to his signature look. Ben Stiller and Owen Wilson walked the 
Valentino catwalk at Paris fashion week last March. Having jumped the shark, 
can the pair turn it into a nice bit of clobber?

64) Midnight Special
Take Shelter director Jeff Nichols is changing tack with his latest and aiming 
for a Close Encounters vibe with this intriguing drama. His second film of the 
year (his first is romantic drama Loving, featured at No 31) might also be a 
breakout for him, telling the tale of a child with magical powers with a set of 
impressive special effects on hand.

65) A Quiet Passion
Terence Davies’ passion project about poetic shut-in Emily Dickinson is a 
must. It’s only this low on the list because it may not actually materialise in 
2016.

66) Elle
Paul Verhoeven’s first film in a decade sees him in “erotic and perverted” 
mode, though what that means in connection with a film about a businesswoman 
who is raped is anyone’s guess. Isabelle Huppert, as fearless as ever, plays 
the lead.

67) The Nice Guys 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTGic0zh8LA4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTGic0zh8LA4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DTGic0zh8LA4&media=>
A Chinatown-y ’tec thriller set in 70s LA ought to float everyone’s boat, 
especially with Ryan Gosling and Russell Crowe pairing up, and Shane Black 
directing.

68) Genius
Highbrow subject matter – like the relationship between author Thomas Wolfe 
and his literary editor – doesn’t always mean great cinema, but leads Jude Law 
and Colin Firth ought to give it some welly.

69) The Standoff
A curious set-up – two people have to stand next to each other for three days 
to win the car of their dreams – could go either way in this teen comedy from 
the writer of, ahem, A Cinderella Story.

70) American Pastoral
Philip Roth’s original novel is an unarguable masterpiece, but as with Genius 
(see No 68) that’s no guarantee, cinematically. It’s also the directorial debut 
of Ewan McGregor, which may or may not be a good thing.

71) Deepwater Horizon
Peter Berg’s directorial output has been patchy (Hancock was fun, Battleship 
really wasn’t) but a script by the on-a-roll JC Chandor should help this oil 
spill thriller with Mark Wahlberg and Kurt Russell starring.

72) 13 Hours 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4CJBuUwd0Os&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4CJBuUwd0Os>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4CJBuUwd0Os&media=>
Michael Bay gets serious and goes to Libya; but this politically charged 
thriller about the death of a US ambassador could go all Pearl Harbor. Or it 
could be good.

73) Deadpool
With fans forever bemoaning the sanitised adaptations of edgy comic book fare, 
this confidently adult take on the sweary antihero fan favourite should be a 
refreshing change and might finally gift star Ryan Reynolds with a successful 
franchise.

74) The Girl on the Train
This year’s Gone Girl, with The Help’s Tate Taylor behind the camera and Emily 
Blunt in front of it. What price a David Fincher-style trash masterwork?

75) David Brent: Life on the Road
Ricky Gervais is returning to the tragicomic creation that originally brought 
him fame for this look at Brent’s post-Office private life.

 * This article was amended on Wednesday 30 December 2015. We mistakenly said 
John Cameron Mitchell’s last film as a director was Shortbus when it was Rabbit 
Hole. This has been corrected.  