
Theresa May, with the general air of a hawk that had a This Morning makeover, 
has launchedthe new investigatory powers bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/investigatory-powers-bill-the-key-points>
. No more drunken Googling: all it takes is a misspelled search for 
“bong-making” and suddenly you’ll be in an orange jumpsuit getting beaten with 
a pillowcase full of bibles. Also, pay attention when searching for a child’s 
prom.

This law will create lots of new jobs, as the person charged with reading all 
our communications (who will see more unsolicited erections than customer 
services at Skype) will regularly feed their screaming face into a meatgrinder.

Tory rebel David Davis: ‘We haven’t had a Stasi or a Gestapo in Britain, so 
are intellectually lazy about surveillance’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/08/david-davis-stasi-gestapo-surveillance-tory-civil-liberties>
The government insists, as it tries to scrap the Freedom of Information Act, 
that only people who have something to hide should worry. People who run for 
public office will be afforded privacy, whileour private lives will become 
public property <https://www.theguardian.com/world/surveillance>. Having our 
privacy exposed is particularly crushing for the British – a nation for whom 
the phrase: “How are you?” really means: “Please say one word, then leave me 
alone.” So why have they just accepted this? Well, for a lot of people it’s the 
only hope that anyone will ever read their tweets.

The PR push for this bill’s launch has shown how similar the legislative 
process has become to the lobbying one. In fact, it’s not even lobbying, 
really, as most things that get lobbied for at least have some notional 
utility. This is more like phishing, asking us to sign up to something that 
looks helpful, but is actually a data breach.

Of course, the government has been reading our social media messages for 15 
years. Imagine the celebrations atGCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq> 
when they see a young couple they used to watch sexting, then wanking on Skype, 
post their first kid’s school uniform pics on Facebook. In its own way, it must 
be quite touching.

The UK government has always stored intelligence, so don’t worry – they knew 
about Assad for years and didn’t act; theyknow about Saudi Arabia’s human 
rights abuses 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2015/country-chapters/saudi-arabia> and do 
nothing; they knew about Hitler and didn’t act. What makes you think that a 
Facebook post you’re writing about a riot would … oh … where did you go?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Ftheresa-may-snoopers-charter-unveils-new-measures-spy-internet-use-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20unveils%20new%20measures%20to%20spy%20on%20internet%20use%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Ftheresa-may-snoopers-charter-unveils-new-measures-spy-internet-use-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20unveils%20new%20measures%20to%20spy%20on%20internet%20use%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F04%2Ftheresa-may-snoopers-charter-unveils-new-measures-spy-internet-use-video&media=>
Theresa May unveils new measures to spy on internet use – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/nov/04/theresa-may-snoopers-charter-unveils-new-measures-spy-internet-use-video>
One of the key areas of concern about the bill is the lack of any real 
judicial check.Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> 
can bypass judicial permission if surveillance is deemed “urgent” – like, if 
Belmarsh’s kitchen rota has a gap for someone who can cook halal. Nonetheless, 
Andy Burnham was quick to offer his support.

Many of Labour’s frontbench seem not to have been caught up in the joyous new 
Corbyn era, and look like people who have been forced by their work to go on 
some kind of awareness course. Currently, much of the Labour party’s policy 
seems to be formulated by encouraging them to just go on camera and say how 
they feel. Burnhamhas since backtracked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/09/andy-burnham-investigatory-powers-bill-judicial-safeguards-letter-theresa-may>
, telling May: “On closer inspection of the wording of the bill, it would seem 
that it does not deliver the strong safeguard that you appeared to be 
accepting.”

Which translates as: he didn’t read the bill very carefully because the 
government had told him it would have judicial safeguards and he believed them. 
Poor Andy. It’s as if you can’t even trust people who are trying to give a load 
of authoritarian powers to their secret police any more.

This bill will lead to every person of colour’s worst fear: more concerned 
white people. Because white people will soon be the only ones who can Google 
the history of Islamophobia without ending up spending a decade watching 
children’s TV at full volume in a variety of stress positions. Ideological 
crime will be prioritised while actual crime is ignored, and we’ll adapt. 
Eventually, when you see a mugging, you’ll just start WhatsApping emojis of 
bombs until you hear sirens.

We will acquiesce to the scanning of Facebook posts to fight terrorism, which 
has killed 56 people in the UK in 10 years, but will still regard the killing 
of two women a week by their partners as a private domestic matter. God knows 
what this whole shambles says about us all psychologically. May herself gives 
the impression that the only childhood affection she got was the time a horse 
mistook her knuckles for a corn cob. At least this bill has allowed me to 
decode her permanently appalled expression: she looks as if she’s just seen my 
internet history.

I suppose that we need to consider what our internet history is. The 
legislation seems to view it as a list of actions, but it’s not. It’s a 
document that shows what we’re thinking about. The government wants to know 
what we’ve been thinking about, and what could be more sinister than that? 
Perhaps we’ve got so involved in the false selves we project on social media 
that we’ve forgotten that our real selves, our private selves, are different, 
are worth saving.

We are starting to spend more time online and less being alive. Our faces feel 
odd when we take our masks off. We live in a culture built on debt, so we are 
encouraged to have no self control. Consumer culture needs us to be impulsive, 
while our political culture fears that we will ever develop discipline. A total 
breakdown of self-control is the perfect backdrop for this bill. We will 
welcome legislation that will finally replace our fathers. We’re like Ted Bundy 
in his last days, leaving teeth-marks on his victims and driving to a state 
with the death penalty. Our lives are empty and bloated with perversion: we beg 
for intellectual death.

Soon our government will know everything we are thinking, and in that moment, 
we will stop thinking.
 