
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> is not much cop at 
forecasting what will happen to the economy. It proved as much before, during 
and after the financial crisis of 2008-09. But even by its own standards, it 
has got the post-referendum economy badly wrong.

Three months ago when it announced a comprehensive package of measures to 
support the economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 after the shock decision to leave the European Union, Threadneedle Street said 
it expected growth of just 0.1% in the third quarter of 2016 followed by no 
growth at all in the fourth quarter. If the Bank had been right, the UK would 
have been a whisker away from a technical recession in the second half of the 
year.

Official figures from the Office for National Statistics show that the economy 
actually expanded by 0.5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/uk-gdp-growth-rises-05-as-annual-rate-slows-to-three-year-low>
 between July and September, and the Bank now believes it will grow by a 
further 0.4% in the fourth quarter. Forward-looking business surveys support 
this assessment.

Bank of England leaves interest rates unchanged and raises growth and 
inflation forecasts – business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-growth-inflation-interest-rates-brexit-business-live>
In its quarterly inflation report, the Bank admits it has been taken aback by 
the resilience of consumer spending and by the strength of the housing market. 
That, together with aplunging pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/plunging-pound-what-does-it-mean-for-britons-foreign-exchange-pensioners-abroad>
, has been enough for its nine-strong monetary policy committee (MPC) to ditch 
plans for a fresh cut in interest rates before the end of the year.

With a warning there are limits to the extent to which inflation at above the 
government’s 2% target can be tolerated, the MPC has handed over responsibility 
for supporting the economy to Philip Hammond at the Treasury.Inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/inflation> is expected to average 2.7% in 
both 2017 and 2018 – higher than expected in August and the biggest overshoots 
since the Bank was made independent almost two decades ago.

The Bank believes stronger growth than it envisaged in 2016 and 2017 will come 
at the expense of weaker growth later and that by the end of 2018 the economy 
will actually be slightly smaller than it predicted in August.

Its critics – of whom there are a growing number – will say its inability to 
map the path of the economy since June means its forecasts for 2017, 2018 and 
beyond should be treated with a large pinch of salt. Some will say that growth 
of 0.5% and 0.4% in the two quarters following the Brexit vote means that the 
August measures – including a fresh cut in borrowing costs and additional money 
creation through the quantitative easing programme – were a mistake and that 
the stimulus will add to the inflationary pressure caused by the fall in the 
value of the pound.

Bank of England signals further rate cuts unlikely and lifts 2017 growth 
forecast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
There is, though, a case for the defence. First, the Bank’s August package has 
helped to support the economy. It helped to boost confidence and support 
activity.

Second, the Bank’s explanation for why growth can be expected to weaken during 
the course of 2017 and into 2018 without diving into recession looks reasonable 
enough. Both monetary and fiscal policy will underpin growth and the labour 
market has so far held up well.

But although consumers are enjoying increases in their real incomes, living 
standards will be squeezed as a weaker poundleads to higher prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/brexit-vote-disposable-incomes-gdp-niesr>
. What’s more, the uncertainty over the timing and the terms of Brexit means 
firms are unlikely to be in any hurry to sanction fresh investment for the next 
couple of years. Even a stopped clock is right twice a day and for the Bank 
this might be one of those times.
 