
If you’re going to start listening to The Guilty Feminist (iTunes), why not 
dive in at the deep end with the latest episode about periods?Sofie Hagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/05/sofie-hagen-edinburgh-comedian-on-mental-health-jokes>
 andDeborah Frances-White <http://www.deborahfrances-white.com/>’s always 
excellent podcast <http://guiltyfeminist.libsyn.com/> has covered a range of 
topics, from promiscuity to porn, but it reaches new heights in the episode on 
menstruation.

Each instalment opens with an illustration of how Hagen and Frances-White feel 
they’re not quite good enough at this feminism business. “I’m a feminist, but 
when my four-year-old nephew insisted on me putting on my wedding dress and 
watchingBeauty and the Beast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/mar/12/beauty-and-the-beast-disney-makeover>
 with him, I also put on my tiara, which he had not requested,” confesses 
Frances-White. Previous “I’m a feminist, but …” moments have involved singing 
along toRobin Thicke’s Blurred Lines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/12/robin-thicke-blurred-lines-banned-another-university>
, fat-shaming Disney characters and reading articles called “Why Cheryl Knows 
Liam Is The One”.

Back to periods, and nothing’s off-limits, from the strange way sanitary 
products are advertised without the mention of blood (“Are you freaks? Because 
mine’s, like, liquid blue,” says Hagen) to Frances-White’sMooncup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ethicallivingblog/2009/aug/17/eco-friendly-periods-mooncup>
 trial. “I can’t get enough of talking about periods … and it makes people so 
uncomfortable,” says witty guestEvelyn Mok <http://www.evelynmok.com/>. It’s 
distinctly for female ears, which makes it very appealing for men to listen in 
on too. That’s if they want to hear about Rapunzel fantasies and lunches that 
don’t pass theBechdel test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/punctuated-equilibrium/2010/nov/24/2>. The 
idioms for periods are laugh-out-loud and original, unless, of course, you’ve 
ever heard: “The communists are in the fun house” before.

If the menstrual chat has lured you in, try the episodes on promiscuity, shoes 
and not having kids. The one-liners bubble along reliably, but it’s when the 
Guilty Feminists launch into monologues that the podcast reaches new heights. 
Frances-White talks with searing honesty about inspiring children without 
having one, and Hagen nails the moment she knew motherhood wasn’t for her. 
“When my friend had a child and I went to visit her and I realised that it was 
just always there,” she admits. “Yes, it never stops,” agrees Frances-White. 
“You put them to bed and they get up.” If being a Guilty Feminist is wrong 
(like wondering why a one night stand called Big Mike didn’t call or throwing a 
strop because a man didn’t sext you back), who wants to be right?

If you like this, try: Made of Human with Sofie Hagen 
<http://mohpod.libsyn.com>.
 