
1. ZZYZX <http://www.mackbooks.co.uk/books/1142-ZZYZX.html> by Gregory Halpern 
(MACK)

Halpern spent six years working on ZZYZX, often travelling to locations in 
California he picked at random from Google Maps. Named after a village on the 
edge of the Mojave desert in San Bernardino County, ZZYZX heightens the sense 
of unreality outsiders often detect in LA. As the veteran documentary 
photographer Chris Killip noted, Halpern has dramatically fractured “the 
sanctified cliched reverence” of traditional American landscape photography. In 
doing so, he has created a place both real and metaphorical, familiar yet alien.
Read review here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/15/gregory-halpern-zzyzx-photography-book-california-los-angeles>

2. Provoke: Between Protest and Performance 
<https://steidl.de/Books/Provoke-Between-Protest-and-Performance-3043465255.html>
 (Steidl)

A timely and informed overview of the Provoke movement that emerged out of the 
turbulent, protest-fuelled upheavals of Japan in the late 1960s. Focusing not 
just on the short-lived proto-zine that carried the grainy, urgent images of 
photographers like Daido Moriyama and Takuma Nakahiri alongside writers like 
Takahiki Okada, but also the social context that spawned it, the book is a must 
for anyone interested in the ongoing adventure that is Japanese photography and 
photobook-making.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5f222b417eb01479f7ff0448a1cd86abdd27dfa%2F0_0_2000_1408%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5f222b417eb01479f7ff0448a1cd86abdd27dfa%2F0_0_2000_1408%2F2000.jpg>
 Daido Moriyama, untitled, from the series Accident (Akushidento), 1969. 
Photograph: © Moriyama Daido/collection of Shadai Gallery, Tokyo Polytechnic 
University 
3. Discordia <http://www.discordiathebook.com/product/discordia/> by Moises 
Saman and Daria Birang (self-published)

A radical take on photojournalism, Moises Saman’s Discordia sits somewhere 
between reportage and art, comprising long, intricate sequences of images that 
dispense with the usual linear narrative of the genre, as well as diaristic 
passages of prose. Culled from four years shooting for Magnum in the Middle 
East during the Arab spring, the book also uses photo-collages created by Daria 
Birang, a Dutch-Iranian artist, in which the repetitive gestures of street 
protest – stone-throwing, running, kicking tear gas canisters – are isolated 
and emphasised. Processand protest: a book for our turbulent times.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b02be253d4179cfcd57b25b37e37920993af51e%2F0_0_4720_7036%2F4720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b02be253d4179cfcd57b25b37e37920993af51e%2F0_0_4720_7036%2F4720.jpg>
 Jack Dracula at a bar, New London, Conn., 1961, by Diane Arbus. Photograph: © 
The Estate of Diane Arbus, LLC. 
4. Astres Noirs 
<http://www.photobookstore.co.uk/photobook-astres-noirs.html#.WEf8sGZ4VRk> by 
Katrin Koenning and Sarker Protick (Chose Commune)

A strange and enchanting visual conversation between two photographers who 
live thousands of miles apart about what might be called the everyday sublime. 
Keonning is a German living in Australia, and Protick is from Bangladesh. Both 
have used their mobile phones to look at the earth and the sky – stars, 
shadows, light rays, water falling, stains on the road – sharing a style that 
tends towards the dark and grainy, and manages to be luminous all the same. A 
small gem of close observation and collaboration.

5. In the Beginning 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Diane-Arbus-Beginning-Jeff-Rosenheim/dp/1588395952> 
by Diane Arbus (Metropolitan Museum of Art)

The catalogue from the brilliant exhibition of the same name at the Met in New 
York chronicles Arbus’s early years as a wandering street photographer. It 
shows her eye for the eccentric and the grotesque was there from the start – 
but these are softer, grainier images than the ones she is known for and betray 
a deep melancholic strain. Alongside circus and sideshow performers from Times 
Square and Coney Island, she captures the sadness of the city in evocative 
images of passing adults and children.

6. Lost in the Wilderness <http://www.kalpeshlathigra.com/publications/> by 
Kalpesh Lathigra (self-published)

In the year of the Standing Rock protest, Kalpesh Lathigra’s self-published 
book, Lost in the Wilderness, is a timely one. The result of several months 
travelling through the Native American landscapes of Wyoming and South Dakota, 
Lathigra’s images carry echoes of a tragic past – the Wounded Knee massacre of 
1890 – as well as the sense of melancholy and remembering that attends the 
present. Lost in the Wilderness moves between the intimate and the subtly 
symbolic. The book captures the reality of life on the reservations – the 
barren land, drab rooms, careworn faces – as well as some moments of dark 
irony: the Custer motel in the town of Custer in South Dakota, a wall in a 
Dairy Queen fast-food cafe covered in photographs of John Wayne as a cowboy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5a6b9d8c61cc361655e331bbc69f854e7b4b3db%2F0_0_6923_8596%2F6923.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5a6b9d8c61cc361655e331bbc69f854e7b4b3db%2F0_0_6923_8596%2F6923.jpg>
 Richard Toledo, Oglala, from Kalpesh Lathigra’s series Lost in the Wilderness. 
Photograph: Kalpesh Lathigra 
7. Border Cantos <http://aperture.org/shop/misrach-border-cantos/> by Richard 
Misrach (Aperture)

Another timely book. Since 2004, Misrach has been photographing the 2,000-mile 
border between Mexico and the US as part of his bigger project Desert Cantos. 
Alongside landscapes and buildings, Misrach has photographed discarded 
artefacts of migration: water bottles, items of clothing, shotgun shells, 
makeshift ladders and parts of the wall itself. The book is a collaboration 
with Guillermo Galindo, composer and musician, and contains scores, instrument 
designs made from the artefacts and links to videos of Galindo’s performances.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05c4f7940dc43b9efbd0eec2594eea4bba767ad1%2F0_0_3000_2254%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05c4f7940dc43b9efbd0eec2594eea4bba767ad1%2F0_0_3000_2254%2F3000.jpg>
 Border patrol target range, Boca Chica highway, near Gulf of Mexico, Texas, 
2013. Photograph: Richard Misrach 
8. The House of Seven Women 
<http://www.dewilewis.com/products/the-house-of-the-seven-women> by Tito Mouraz 
(Dewi Lewis)

Based on a ghost story from his native Portugal, The House of Seven Women sees 
Tito Mouraz evoke the myth of the seven mysterious women, one of whom was 
considered a witch, who continued to cast a spell on his adult imagination. His 
black and white images are atmospheric and, yes, haunting, as trees, buildings, 
nocturnal animals and local people appear as if out of a dream. A book about 
how the power of myth and legend acts on our imaginative understanding of 
landscape.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1233d1c9e6ad55258d7d53590d27fcd40ad44e05%2F0_0_3843_3843%2F3843.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1233d1c9e6ad55258d7d53590d27fcd40ad44e05%2F0_0_3843_3843%2F3843.jpg>
 An image from The House of the Seven Women. Photograph: Tito Mouraz 
9. Maximilian Stejskal: Folklig Idrott 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Maximilian-Stejskal-Folklig-Marie-Isabel-Vogel/dp/3906803023>
, edited by Marie-Isabel Vogel and Alain Rappaport (Edition Patrick Frey)

Found photography archives continue to exert a strong fascination in the 
digital age, and Maximilian Stejskal’s extraordinary recovered archive 
illustrates why. In the 1930s, Stejskal cycled across southern and eastern 
Finland as well as Estonia, carrying two bellows cameras and a box of glass 
plates. An amateur ethnologist and gym teacher, he systematically collected 
information about the “folk athletics” from the older rural men of the region – 
mainly exercises and tests of strength that proved their virility. He 
photographed their younger relatives and farmhands performing the exercises. 
The results, intriguing and surreal, make up this strange and wonderful 
photobook.

10. END <https://www.amazon.co.uk/End-Eamonn-Doyle/dp/0992848725> by Eamonn 
Doyle (self-published)

The final part of Doyle’s Dublin street photography trilogy, END is an art 
object in itself: 13 elaborately designed sections in which Niall Sweeney’s 
drawings and David Donohoe’s soundtrack (a 7in vinyl record) enhance the sense 
of a city unfolding in vivid colour photographs of its mainly working-class 
citizens. As ever, Doyle’s images are both intimate and dramatic, and suggest a 
city of strangers passing, each wrapped up in their own reveries.

11. Wolfgang <http://www.davidfathi.com/wolfgangbook.php> by David Fathi 
(Skinnerboox)

Using the Cern archive, French artist David Fathi has created a semi-fictional 
narrative around the real-life figure of Wolfgang Ernst Pauli, one of the 
founders of quantum physics. A genius, but also someone dogged by bad luck, 
Pauli was seen by his fellow scientists as someone who could cause an 
experiment to fail or a complex piece of equipment to malfunction just by 
entering a laboratory. Fathi reconstructs “the Pauli effect” in a playful, 
humorous book that mixes manipulated images and untouched archival photographs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe63b732414f8eac83c6ee8c46b16dee8f3f06035%2F0_0_1500_1031%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20photography%20books%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-best-photography-books-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe63b732414f8eac83c6ee8c46b16dee8f3f06035%2F0_0_1500_1031%2F1500.jpg>
 An image from Aeronautics in the Back Yard by Xiaoxiao Xu. Photograph: Katrin 
Koenning, Sarker Protick 
12. Aeronautics in the Backyard 
<http://www.photobookstore.co.uk/photobook-aeronautics-in-the-backyard-_signed%5E.html#.WEgUjWZ4VRk>
 by Xiaoxiao Xu (The Eriskay Connection)

A small-edition book about a big subject. In 2015, Xiaoxiao set out to drive 
across three provinces of China to photograph eight different amateur 
aeronauts, all of whom are engaged in building their own flying machines from 
recycled scrap metal, wood and used machinery parts. Working in their backyards 
or makeshift workshops, they are all engaged in a dream of freedom though 
flight, and, though not always successful in their endeavours, share a devotion 
to the idea of attempting the impossible. A deeply symbolic book about 
individual dreams and human resourcefulness.

• More on the best culture of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/best-culture-2016>
 