
Most people would see clean water, food and clothes as essentials, but a phone 
might not be thought of as a necessity. Yet for the thousands of displaced men, 
women and children in refugee camps around Europe, they provide a vital 
connection with home.

Now, a grassroots organisation is offering refugees help to maintain links to 
their families. Members of the Facebook groupPhone Credit for Refugees and 
Displaced People <https://www.facebook.com/groups/1709109339334305/> can 
respond directly to an individual’s request for help, sending them £20 via the 
group to top up their phone.
 A video explainer 
James Pearce, 32, a social services worker from Norfolk, started making 
volunteer runs to the Calais Jungle at the beginning of the year. He was struck 
by the number of people, particularly unaccompanied children, desperate to 
speak to their loved ones. He started the group in February, and was soon 
joined by others who had seen the humanising effect a means of communication 
could have on someone alone and fearful in a foreign country.

Aziz, 29, from Afghanistan, an assistant to an MP, lives in a Red Cross camp 
in Belgium. He told group members: “The refugees who are exactly in need of 
your help, they will never forget your single cent of help (sic) because we 
left our loved ones in war, in darkness, and you help connect us with them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fthe-facebook-campaign-funding-phone-credit-for-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9bd29dddaef03f2e715fadb3947e3f1e08f8b41%2F0_0_1218_648%2F1218.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Facebook%20campaign%20funding%20phone%20credit%20for%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fthe-facebook-campaign-funding-phone-credit-for-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Facebook%20campaign%20funding%20phone%20credit%20for%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Fthe-facebook-campaign-funding-phone-credit-for-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9bd29dddaef03f2e715fadb3947e3f1e08f8b41%2F0_0_1218_648%2F1218.jpg>
 Group founder James Pearce: ‘My hope is to humanise and raise the profile of 
those caught up in the refugee crisis among ordinary people.’ Photograph: 
Facebook 
That simple gesture of acknowledging someone as not just a charity case, but a 
fellow human being, suffering the heartbreak of enforced separation, is what 
has driven so many to join Pearce in his efforts. The group has swelled to 
20,000 members and has raised almost £100,000, but the pile of requests 
increases daily and Pearce fears they won’t be able to keep up with demand.

“My hope for the group is that we will be able to grow to the size necessary 
to meet the need that’s out there,” he says. “And in the process, that we can 
humanise and raise the profile of those caught up in the refugee crisis among 
ordinary people.”

Already working alongside Calais youth services and the local women’s centre, 
Pearce wants a major charity already involved in the refugee crisis to support 
their efforts and enable them to widen their scope.

Those wanting to help can search the Facebook group, send PayPal donations to 
phone.credit.1@gmail.com, text CALA85 and the amount you want to donate to 
70070, or contribute via theMy Donate 
<https://mydonate.bt.com/charities/phonecreditforrefugees> page.
 