
It’s tempting to pile on with the outrage when appraising the 
anti-vaxxer-baiting season finale of the X-Files, called My Struggle II, 
written and directed by Chris Carter, the show’s creator. But if the goal of the
six-episode revival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/16/the-x-files-episode-five-babylon-terrorism-muslim>
 of the series was to remind you of everything the show did regularly, the good 
and the bad, it succeeds: this is one of those X-Files episodes that is so 
strange it’s not like anything else on television.

New X-Files book series will give Mulder and Scully origin stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/22/new-x-files-book-series-mulder-scully-origin-stories>
So instead, here is some dialogue from near the end of the episode, after a 
pandemic has been induced in most of the population using the smallpox vaccine. 
The scene: the Cigarette-Smoking Man (William B Davis) is making the master 
villain’s time-honored pitch to the hero, special agent Fox Mulder (David 
Duchovny): namely that if Mulder would only change sides, he could be saved 
from the coming destruction.

C-SM: We could start the world anew, Fox. You, me … your beloved Scully.

Mulder: Not a rat’s chance in hell!

C-SM: You speak to me of hell … when you look to be the one that’s hellbound.

The X-Files is so silly. A lot of the time it knows it’s silly, and those are 
the times when it’s best. In My Struggle II, Carter brings back hisAlex Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/08/alex-jones-piers-morgan-profile> 
analogue, Tad O’Malley (a valiant Joel McHale), to tell us how serious it all 
is, and perhaps that’s why the revival rarely clicked.

Scully gets a call from O’Malley while watching his show, in one of the 
series’ trademark creepy coincidences; he asks to meet her at Mulder’s place – 
where Mulder is not.

He’s not a quack

Mulder’s vanished, Tad is preaching doomsday and everything’s about to fall 
apart: every American has alien DNA, O’Malley tells the world. He’s had his own 
tested, and it’s teeming with extraterrestrial data. “I have a doctor who says 
this is different,” O’Malley says to Scully. “And he’s not a quack.”

Oh, well, in that case. But if it’s in “every American citizen”, isn’t it … 
the same, rather than different? Also, didn’t they stop distributing the 
smallpox vaccine in 1972? Also, does the alien DNA cause the disease or cure it?

Never mind. In what seems to be an effort to bolster the show’s scientific 
street cred, Carter gets sole credit for the teleplay but the story is credited 
to Carter and two doctors, Anne Simon and Margaret Fearon. The former is the 
author of The Real Science Behind the X-Files; the latter shares a name with a 
character fromThe X-Files: I Want to Believe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/aug/01/sciencefictionandfantasy1>.

The good doctors seem to have gussied up the show’s ubiquitous technical 
jargon, an occasionally endearing staple both of the series and especially of 
the Carter-written episodes.

The trouble is that that’s not really where Carter – or anyone, for that 
matter – needs help; Han Solo claimed to have made the Kessel run in less than 
12 parsecs and nobody thought his using a measure of distance instead of time 
ruined Star Wars (yes, nerds, I know George Lucas retroactively made it make 
sense). Carter needs to understand basic teleplay structure, character 
continuity and theme. Agents Miller and Einstein (Robbie Amell and Lauren 
Ambrose, respectively) are back, for example, and they have absolutely nothing 
to do.

The world in my image
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fx-files-episode-six-recap-finale-full-of-the-good-the-bad-and-the-ugly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3ff653ec9628c5079cff4679de9c0651b72b126%2F0_16_1950_1174%2F1950.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20X-Files%20episode%20six%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20a%20finale%20full%20of%20the%20good%2C%20the%20bad%20and%20the%20ugly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fx-files-episode-six-recap-finale-full-of-the-good-the-bad-and-the-ugly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20X-Files%20episode%20six%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20a%20finale%20full%20of%20the%20good%2C%20the%20bad%20and%20the%20ugly&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fx-files-episode-six-recap-finale-full-of-the-good-the-bad-and-the-ugly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3ff653ec9628c5079cff4679de9c0651b72b126%2F0_16_1950_1174%2F1950.jpg>
 ‘Look what your smoking has done to my shirt!’: William B Davis and David 
Duchovny. Photograph: Ed Araquel/Fox 
Mulder doesn’t show up until nearly 15 minutes into the episode. When he does, 
he’s driving to Spartanburg, South Carolina, for reasons as yet unknown. 
Meanwhile, Scully runs into Monica Reyes (Annabeth Gish), her third and final 
partner over the course of the series, who turns out to be providing services 
to the Cigarette-Smoking Man that include helping him puff on his cigarettes.

“You’re slowly killing yourself while you hold the world hostage,” Reyes tells 
him.

“The world will go on,” says C-SM, “just in my image – not God’s.”

What makes the Cigarette-Smoking Man so compelling? Part of it is certainly 
Davis; among the fabulously gifted performers enthusiastically delivering 
preposterous line after preposterous line, he perhaps above all of them seems 
to know what he’s doing and whom he’s playing, which is doubly fascinating 
because the character is such a mess of contradictions and mysteries.

He did indeed get hit by that missile in the original series finale, but he’s 
better now, although his nose is detachable. Carter has spent a lot of time 
over the last six episodes revisiting everything that drove away frustrated 
viewers during the show’s final seasons – Reyes, Scully and Mulder’s child, the 
“alien DNA” subplot. The Cigarette-Smoking Man, for whatever reason, has mostly 
stayed fresh.

The X-Files episode six recap – a finale full of the good, the bad and the ugly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/23/x-files-episode-six-recap-finale-full-of-the-good-the-bad-and-the-ugly>
He’s the second-most satisfying thing about the episode, which says a great 
deal for the first: at the end of the hour, Scully races to save a dying Mulder 
on a bridge of stalled cars that looks like the beginning of the apocalypse. 
She may have a cure for the diseases that have been distributed to people 
through vaccination, but to cure them all, she needs her stolen son. Suddenly, 
a UFO appears overhead.

Then the series ends.

Perhaps Carter thought he’d be able to goad Fox executives into bringing the 
series back for another go-round; perhaps he’s planning a third movie. I hope, 
and not out of malice, that neither come to pass. That cliffhanger, that 
improbable might-be-rescue on the cusp of the apocalypse, is probably the best 
epitaph the show could ever have.
 