
1 Pressing 

A few years ago possession was the most discussed concept in football. Since 
then there has been a shift from a possession-based approach and more attention 
paid to pressing. Mauricio Pochettino’s Southampton and Tottenham sides pressed 
in advanced positions to win the ball quickly, Klopp popularised 
counter-pressing, winning the ball immediately after it has been lost, and 
Guardiola also emphasises the importance of closing down in advanced positions.

Matches involving these sides have been frantic. Tottenham’s 2-0 victory over 
Manchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> was 
notable as a contest where the sides were determined to shut one another down, 
and in their 1-1 draw at Arsenal last weekend both teams were more focused on 
disrupting the other side’s play than on playing incisive passing combinations.

Matches boasting heavy pressing and technical quality can be enthralling but 
there is a dangerPremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> games are becoming too 
based around spoiling rather than creating.

2 False nines

An impressive start to 2016-17 by Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> and Arsenal owes much to the 
use of unusual centre-forwards.

Roberto Firmino arrived in English football two summers ago as an attacking 
midfielder, set to provide Christian Benteke and Daniel Sturridge with service. 
But Jürgen Klopp sold Benteke, has not taken to Sturridge and has used Firmino 
as Liverpool’s regular No9. The Brazilian is a different beast: more dynamic, 
more selfless, better at starting the press and increasingly a goalscorer too.

Arsenal, similarly, have deployed Alexis Sánchez up front. Although the 
Chilean was sometimes used in that position upon his arrival in 2014, he spent 
the past two seasons as an attacking midfielder, generally starting from the 
left. But Arsène Wenger’s use of Sánchez up front has provided another 
dimension to Arsenal’s attack – he stretches the play more than Olivier Giroud, 
drops deep to link play cleverly and demonstrated traditional centre-forward 
skills witha powerful headed goal against Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/30/alexis-sanchez-arsenal-belief-arsene-wenger-sunderland>
.

3 Three-man defences

Antonio Conte achieved great success with Juventus by deploying a three-man 
defence, a system he replicated with Italy. WhenChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> struggled with the 4-1-4-1 shape 
Conte used at the start of the season, the solution was obvious – switch to a 
back three.

Initially trialled when Chelsea were 3-0 down at the Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 with little hope of a comeback, Conte has used a 3-4-3 in Chelsea’s subsequent 
five league games, with an aggregate score of 16-0. Eden Hazard is freed from 
defensive responsibilities, David Luiz can operate as a spare man and Marco 
Alonso’s purchase makes sense, as he is a natural wing-back.

Last weekend two sides followed suit: Ronald Koeman surprisingly attempted to 
match Chelsea’s system at Stamford Bridge, although thisbackfired spectacularly 
with a 5-0 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/chelsea-everton-premier-league-match-report>
. Tottenham also utilised a three-man defence the following day ina 1-1 draw at 
Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/arsenal-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report>
. With Pep Guardiola’s Manchester City sometimes subtly shifting into a 
three-man defence, that system has been more visible than usual.

Tammy Abraham, Pontus Jansson and the Championship’s most eye-catching players 
| Nick Miller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/10/tammy-abraham-pontus-jansson-championship-most-eye-catching-players>
4 Set-piece goals 

This season there has been a concerted effort by officials to clamp down on 
shirt-pulling by defenders at set pieces. This appears to have particularly 
affected some teams. Last season’s championsLeicester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/leicestercity>, whose centre-backs Robert 
Huth and Wes Morgan were somewhat reliant on grappling when defending set 
pieces, have found themselves penalised for that behaviour.

“They have changed the rules and it’s something we have to learn to adapt to 
as players,” said the Leicester defender Danny Simpson, shortly after they 
conceded three goals from set pieces at Manchester United. “The way it was last 
season, I thought we were very good at defending set pieces and we made it 
tough for the opponents. You have been doing that all your career and suddenly 
you’ve got to change – but it’s the same for everyone.” Across the league, 
there have been 0.65 set-piece goals per game, up from 0.59 last season.

5 Fewer free roles 

Overall, the Premier League’s top sides feel particularly structured and 
systemised this season, thanks to the appointment of managers with very strict 
philosophies. Playmakers who like playing in a free role have found themselves 
in stricter roles, or out of the team.

The most obvious loser has been Cesc Fàbregas, the league’s most creative 
midfielder two seasons ago but a player who required freedom from tactical 
responsibilities to thrive. Conte cannot find a place for him and the Spaniard 
has started only one league game.

Elsewhere, Kevin De Bruyne and David Silva have continued as Manchester City 
regulars but in much deeper, more disciplined roles than they have been 
accustomed to, and Adam Lallana has been excellent at Liverpool – again, with 
stricter positional instructions. Henrikh Mkhitaryan cannot get a look-in at 
Manchester United, however, which arguably leaves Arsenal’s Mesut Özil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/nov/04/arsenal-mesut-ozil-emboldened-talent-relishing-spotlight>
 as the only top-level No10 allowed freedom to drift where he pleases.
 