
• Spoiler alert: this blog is published after The Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead> airs in the US on 
Sundays. Do not read unless you have watched season seven episode eight, which 
airs in the UK on Fox on Mondays at 9pm.

Good grief. Don’t the makers of the Walking Dead realise that we don’t want 
characters exchanging significant looks? We want significant carnage. But in 
this final episode of the current half season, we got too much of the former 
and not enough of the latter. We’ll have to wait until spring for that ratio to 
get the old switcheroo. Which is too damned long.

True, Negan did find that Spencer had guts in a crudely literal way; and yes, 
Lucille did take a bullet during Rosita’s failed assassination attempt. But, 
really, this episode concluded – totally unacceptably – with 10 minutes of 
emotion, as Rick and his gang decided to conquer the sentiments of defeatism 
that have hobbled them for the past eight hours’ airtime. Rick blubbed. Eugene 
blubbed. Hell, even Michonne blubbed. Strewth!

“You were right,” said Rick to Maggie during this extended scene in which he 
and his principals reunited at the Hilltop compound to treacly incidental 
music. “You told us to get ready to fight. I didn’t listen. I can now.” And 
then they – Daryl, Michonne, Maggie, Uncle Tom Cobley and all marched off 
stage-right towards the end credits. All portent, no action.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff755ad060444bf6d669dacae70a6ea96a5cb58a1%2F0_0_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20Hearts%20Still%20Beating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20Hearts%20Still%20Beating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff755ad060444bf6d669dacae70a6ea96a5cb58a1%2F0_0_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
 ‘You told us to get ready to fight. I didn’t listen. I can now’ … Rick to 
Maggie when they reunited at the Hilltop compound to treacly incidental music. 
Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
The sensible TV rule of Seinfeld was “No hugs, no learning”, by which its 
makers meant no sentimental fat where the narrative beef should be. In this 
season the makers of the Walking Dead have forgotten that golden rule. Too much 
of this episode was all hugs, all learning, all deferred gratification. Yawn.

Now that’s out of my system, let me add this. Negan remains the living 
corrective to this treacle. We saw him first, emblematically, shaving with – 
naturally – a cutthroat razor. “Against the grain, kid,” he told Carl. “Always 
against the grain.” Truly, he’s such a captivating character that you can see 
why the makers are deferring his comeuppance until next year.

Negan was preparing, in his appealingly twisted way, for a family supper. He’d 
made spaghetti, Carl had been charged with baking rolls, and Olivia was tasked 
with holding baby Judith at the table. Once again, they sat down to a parody of 
domestic bliss.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4021d527b0a78b160cab1a15aa1004088d79d527%2F0_143_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20Hearts%20Still%20Beating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20Hearts%20Still%20Beating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4021d527b0a78b160cab1a15aa1004088d79d527%2F0_143_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
 Rosita plans how to try and pull off her assassination attempt on Negan. 
Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
And then we cut, to and from a series of subplots. This season, there have 
been too many characters and too many subplots that have dissipated the superb 
dramatic energy of the harrowing premiere. Michonne gone rogue in the woods 
with the Savior at the wheel. Sasha, Enid and Maggie breakfasting at the 
Hilltop. Father Gabriel and Rosita exchanging thoughts on murder in the chapel. 
And then there was Daryl’s subplot. We kept cutting back to him as he made his 
soooo slow escape from the Saviors’ jail. Every time we did, Daryl seemed no 
further out of chokey, but had acquired another accessory – one time a new 
T-shirt, then a work shirt, a rinky-dink cap, and later a metal bar. It was a 
relief when, finally, he used that bar on Fat Joe and commandeered a motorbike 
to ride back to his Alexandrian mates. But even then the makers missed a trick: 
couldn’t we have had Daryl emulating Steve McQueen in The Great Escape? Could 
have. Should have.

Another subplot. Remember Ezekiel, ruler of the Kingdom? Well, his chief 
lackey paid a visit to Morgan and Carol and invited them to overcome their 
abjuration of violence and join him in fighting the Saviors. He was going 
behind his boss’s back because he’d lost faith in the deal Ezekiel had cut with 
the Saviors to supply them with tributes without his people’s knowledge. His 
lackey thought this policy was deluded and had to end. And so he needed Morgan 
and Carol to help him. They were unconvinced, especially Carol who, most 
likely, was more interested in her burgeoning romance with Ezekiel and, anyway, 
has done enough killing for one lifetime.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f5a7170549cb89613fdb2170568da38f3562016%2F0_0_2126_1276%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20Hearts%20Still%20Beating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20Hearts%20Still%20Beating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f5a7170549cb89613fdb2170568da38f3562016%2F0_0_2126_1276%2F2126.jpg>
 Carol’s done enough killing for one lifetime. Yawn. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
To be honest, though, I didn’t want to hear from the monkey, I wanted to hear 
from the organ grinder, the captivating Ezekiel himself with his diverting 
dreads and Shakespearean patter. What’s more, I wanted to see his CGI tiger 
Shiva one more time. Unless I see Shiva again in the season seven finale 
chomping on Negan’s windpipe, I’m going to be seriously disappointed.

The problems with this episode’s clog up of characters was typified by Jesus, 
who we often saw lingering at the back of shots enigmatically though, in 
narrative terms, borderline irrelevantly. I feel sorry for Tom Payne who plays 
Jesus, because he’s been charged with wearing far too many layers – leather 
coat? gloves? – in the Georgia summer. They say actors suffer for their art. 
Now, looking at Jesus sweltering pointlessly plot-wise, I know that to be true.

That said, I quite liked the storyline in which Rick and Aaron had to row 
across a lake filled with walkers in a boat perforated with bullet holes. How 
best to make it without sinking and getting bitten? It was like the river 
crossing puzzle with a fox, goose, bag of beans. Maybe Rick should have left 
Aaron on the shore. I’m just saying. But he didn’t and, even when they reached 
the safety of a canoe, Aaron fell into the walker-clogged water. Did he get 
bitten? Apparently not, though that eventuality seemed improbable.

Once at their destination – a boat in the middle of the lake where there was a 
cache of weapons – they were confronted with a written curse: “Congratulations 
for winning, but you still lose.” What could it mean? We saw what Rick and 
Aaron did not, a pair of boots belonging – presumably – to the writer of that 
curse who was surveying the pair even as they stole his or her weapons. Nothing 
like a bit of foregrounding for the second half of season seven next year.

But there was a twist. Once Aaron and Rick returned to Alexandria, full of 
hopes of using this ammunition to take down Negan and the Saviors, they found 
they had been wrongfooted. Negan was already there, playing pool with Spencer. 
Or rather, he had been playing pool until he got irritated by Spencer’s 
oleaginous yip-yap.

Spencer’s loony plan was to appeal to Negan to oust Rick so he could take over 
as Alexandria’s leader, a title formerly held by his dead mother. Negan 
demurred, arguing Rick was more useful to him alive: “He’s swallowing his hay 
and getting shit done.” By contrast, he noted, Spencer was just sneaking behind 
Rick’s back and pleading with Negan. “Why not just kill Rick yourself and just 
take over?” Negan asked, before answering his own question. “It’s because you 
got no guts.” Then he stabbed Spencer in the stomach, and slashed it open, 
spilling his victim’s entrails into the dirt. What words would you use to 
describe those guts? “Risibly copious” would be mine.

And then came Negan’s dark humour, such as it was: “How embarrassing!” he 
exclaimed as Spencer died before him. “They were there inside you all the time 
… I have never been so wrong in my whole life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd1da688f8ebe49eaa87de119b51fa5502e635e3%2F0_0_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20Hearts%20Still%20Beating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20Hearts%20Still%20Beating&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-eight-hearts-still-beating%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd1da688f8ebe49eaa87de119b51fa5502e635e3%2F0_0_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
 The appalled Alexandrians cowered after Negan spilled Spencer’s guts in the 
dirt. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
Negan looked around the appalled crowd of Savior lickspittles and cowering 
Alexandrians and asked if anyone fancied finishing the game of pool. No takers, 
unsurprisingly. But Rosita stepped up and shot at Negan, spurred to take action 
now after seeing her former lover so brutally murdered. She missed but hit the 
bat, to Negan’s confected chagrin. “Lucille’s beautiful smooth surface is never 
going to look the same – so why should you?” he asked Rosita as his thug held a 
knife to her beautiful smooth face. But the thug, when invited to kill someone 
in revenge for Rosita’s assassination, turned and shot dead Olivia with whom 
she had some dreary previous.

Minutes later Rick and Aaron showed up. “Look everybody!” said Negan at his 
most faux-broromantic. “It’s Rick!” And then he brought Rick up to speed. Carl 
had machine-gunned two of Negan’s men. Negan had suppressed a coup by Spencer 
and minutes earlier survived an assassination attempt.

What Negan wanted to know now, though, was who made the customised bullet 
Rosita had fired. Eugene, trembling to the ends of his ill-judged mullet, 
fessed up and for that confession was taken to the Saviors compound. For Negan, 
it’s not the peacemakers who are blessed, but the bullet makers.

And then Negan and his cronies biffed off with the booty back to their 
compound, taking with them not just guns and Eugene but something more 
important – the Walking Dead’s dramatic energy.

When Rick and his crew get around to exacting revenge in 2017 they had better 
deliver the terrors of the Earth because I’m getting seriously exasperated by 
this clunkingly portentous drama of deferral.

See you in 2017, Negan – missing you already

“Running water? Air conditioning? Welcoming gifts? That settles it. I’m 
getting a vacation home here. Oh Spencer you may be my new best friend!” Negan, 
savouring the delights of Alexandria, including Spencer’s proffered whisky, 
minutes before disembowelling his new best friend.

“You are such a badass!” Negan appreciatively to Rosita, seconds after she 
attempted to shoot him dead.

“I’ll be relieving you of your bullet maker, Rick, and whatever you left at 
the front gate. But you’re still in a serious hole after today.” Negan takes 
his leave from Alexandria with a parting threat.
 