
Tip for Labour frontbenchers: next time you’re looking for a quote, ditch the 
Mao for a splash of Lenin. Specifically, this bit: “There are decades where 
nothing happens; and there are weeks where decades happen.” This week, George 
Osborne made a decade happen in local government. As a result ofhis spending 
review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/26/autumn-statement-ifs-warns-on-tax-rises-spending-cuts-george-osborne>
, independent economists predict a “genuine revolution” will sweep England’s 
town halls. It may not be as eye-catching as a quick U-turn on tax credits – 
but it will mark a permanent and drastic change in how local councils fund the 
provision of core services. It will certainly prompt the scrapping of many of 
those. And it will also lead to something that governments of all stripes have 
tried to avoid for decades: a postcode lottery, in which where you live 
determines how frequently your bins are collected, whether your streets and 
parks are kept clean,whether street lights go on after dark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/25/views-from-local-government-on-george-osbornes-spending-review>
 – even whether your mum or sister can count on a decent level of care.

David Cameron came to power promising localism – then promptly stripped out 
the cash that might have made that transition a smooth one. By the end of this 
decade of cuts, the department for local government will have had the biggest 
cuts of all, witha total of 79% lopped off its day-to-day spending since 2010 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/budgets/Budgets%202015/Autumn/Tetlow_public_spending.pdf>
. Money from Whitehall is not the only thing that counts for town halls, but 
it’s still a major component of council budgets. Mr Osborne’s clear calculation 
was that cuts to local government services would largely be blamed by voters on 
their councillors, not Downing Street. It was a shrewd political calculation 
that has had disastrous effects on some of the poorest places in England. As 
the Institute for Fiscal Studies points out, those councils most reliant on 
central government grants have already suffereda near 40% drop in their 
spending power 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/budgets/Budgets%202015/Autumn/Phillips_local_government_and_devolution.pdf>
. That is twice as big a hit as those at the opposite end of the scale – and it 
is compounded by the way the welfare reforms introduced by the coalition 
government have, in the words of economists Steve Fothergill and Christina 
Beatty, hit“the poorest places hardest” 
<http://www.shu.ac.uk/research/cresr/sites/shu.ac.uk/files/hitting-poorest-places-hardest_0.pdf>
. Put those two forces together, and a leafy shire such as Mr Cameron’s 
west Oxfordshire has got off relatively lightly, even while deprived places 
such as Blackpool have been kicked to the floor.

By the end of this decade, the chancellor plans to reduce grant funding of 
local authorities further, while allowing them to jack up council tax and keep 
all of the rise in business rates made off new enterprises. This sounds good – 
haven’t local councils long complained about those purse strings held by 
Westminster? But consider the situation of an inner-city council for a deprived 
conurbation. Doncaster, say, or Liverpool. Such places have cheap residential 
properties, which will not yield much council tax, and where getting new 
businesses to set up is often a struggle. In such places, councils will simply 
not be able to raise the money to fund their leisure centres and social care. 
In places such as Westminster and Windsor the opposite logic will apply.

This, then, is a charter to exacerbate the historic regional inequalities 
between the affluent south-east and the rest of the country. Forget the 
chancellor’s rhetoric about the northern powerhouse: in reality he is creating 
something like a northern poorhouse. This is certainly what the IFS describes 
as a “revolution” – and in revolutions, a lot of people often get hurt.
 