
I was very lucky to get a part in Gladiator and had a couple of scenes with 
Oliver Reed. I was basically a bit frightened of him. He had scared the life 
out of me as Bill Sykes [inOliver!] and he had this reputation for being a 
hellraiser. I’d seen him onMichael Aspel 
<http://www.screenonline.org.uk/people/id/1140478/> and assumed he was a drunk. 
I didn’t know then that he had promised to be teetotal for the shoot – 
Spielberg and some of the other Dreamworks producers were worried about casting 
him – and hadn’t had a drink for months before filming started.

In the script Ollie was meant to punch me in the face and say: “You sold me 
queer giraffes.” I’d worked with some of the crew a few months before onThe 
Mummy <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120616/>, and they knew I was scared of 
Ollie so they decided to play a trick on me. They thought it would be funny to 
get Ollie to grab me by the nuts during the scene.

Ollie said: “Do you mind if I really grab you hard, to make it authentic?” I 
said “fine”, so he did. Usually you do the scene, they say “cut”, and you have 
a few minutes to reset before you go again. Ollie continued to hold my nuts 
during the reset. I was so frightened of him that I thought it was part of his 
acting process, so I allowed him to hold me while we talked about the food in 
the hotel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Foliver-reed-grabbed-me-by-the-balls-omid-djalili%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa224ee56ba7021ee668a7b2f29bca9bfff7957d8%2F3_0_1003_1504%2F1003.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20day%20Oliver%20Reed%20grabbed%20me%20by%20the%20balls%20%7C%20Omid%20Djalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Foliver-reed-grabbed-me-by-the-balls-omid-djalili%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20day%20Oliver%20Reed%20grabbed%20me%20by%20the%20balls%20%7C%20Omid%20Djalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Foliver-reed-grabbed-me-by-the-balls-omid-djalili%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa224ee56ba7021ee668a7b2f29bca9bfff7957d8%2F3_0_1003_1504%2F1003.jpg>
 Oliver Reed in a playful mood with members of the cast on the set of 
Gladiator. Photograph: Mediaficient/Rex/Shutterstock 
By take three I became aware of a massaging sensation. By take four he said: 
“You do realise this is a wind-up, don’t you?” Everyone thought it was so funny 
they kept it in the final cut and he didn’t have to punch me. The film got an 
Oscar, Russell Crowe got an Oscar, Ollie got a posthumous Oscar. I got a 
partial erection.

After that we got on very well, and he told me his life story. He was a very 
benign presence, with these piercing blue eyes. He would always leave a pause 
after you spoke, to be sure you had finished what you wanted to say – he 
couldn’t stand people who interrupted. And his work was of the highest order. 
He had such gravitas. I don’t think anyone else could have played that role.

Right from the start there was a feeling that we were working on a very 
special film. My first scene began with a camera push-in on Reed, and I 
remember Ridley Scott saying: “We’ve got one second of dead-time. I need a 
midget or a dog.” Someone came forward with both. I thought: “My God, that’s 
the forensic level of detail we’re working with here.”

Scott never gave directions to actors and in the downtime I once asked him 
why. He just said, with a cigar in his mouth: “If you’re cast in a Ridley Scott 
film you don’t need direction.” I looked at Ollie and he winked at me as if to 
say: “Join the club.”

Ollie died a few weeks later. Everyone said he went the way he wanted, but 
that’s not true. It was very tragic. He was in an Irish bar in Malta and was 
pressured into a drinking competition. He should have just left, but he didn’t.

Omid Djalili Live 2016 runs from 1 March - 14 May (omidnoagenda.com 
<http://omidnoagenda.com/>)
 