
What is the deal with unwelcome third series of once-loved British dramas? 
First ITV announces that Broadchurch is following up its disappointing second 
seasonwith a third outing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/24/broadchurch-third-series-david-tennant-olivia-colman>
, and now the BBC follows suitwith The Fall. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/10/gillian-anderson-jamie-dornan-bbc-the-fall-series-three-fifty-shades>

Not that The Fall’s return is a tremendous surprise, of course, for those who 
stuck with last autumn’s increasingly frustrating game of cat and mouse – as 
DSI Stella Gibson and her covetable wardrobe of silk blouses reeled in serial 
murderer Paul Spector. Slowly doesn’t quite do the investigation justice: by 
the time the two finally faced off across the interview table, we’d endured 
five hours of increasingly implausible television. (I find myself wondering: 
can there really have been an episode where Spector hid in Stella’s wardrobe 
while she had a massive argument with a man occasionally put on screen to 
progress a storyline about corruption that literally just disappeared? Yes? Why 
didn’t we all just switch off?)

Gillian Anderson and Jamie Dornan to return in BBC's The Fall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/10/gillian-anderson-jamie-dornan-bbc-the-fall-series-three-fifty-shades>
The arrival towards the end of series two of smart young cop Tom Anderson – 
played by Colin Morgan of Merlin fame – flagged that writer/director Alan 
Cubbitt had further ambitions for his detective and her nemesis. Andthe season 
finale only made that clearer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/18/the-fall-recap-season-two-episode-six-finale>
, with an ending that acted more like set-up for a third instalment than any 
kind of satisfying pay-off for committed viewers. Thanks to the incredible 
tracking powers of right-time-right-place Jimmy and his shooting skills 
(spoilers!) Anderson lies injured and Spector apparently on the brink of death, 
with Gibson desperately trying to keep him alive. A cliffhanger to reel us back 
in for a third outing that, according to writer/director Allan Cubitt “was 
conceived in the hope of further exploring the characters and the themes that 
are at the heart of The Fall”.

Forgive me if I’d have preferred an ending that actually came to a conclusion.

You can understand, of course, why broadcasters, writers and actors are loathe 
to let go of the characters and worlds they’ve so painstakingly created. And 
it’s not that The Fall’s Stella Gibson (or indeed Broadchurch’s Alex Hardy and 
Ellie Miller) aren’t worthy of more screentime. Gibson, in particular, is a cop 
who deserves future adventures. Intelligent, contained, unpredictable and not 
afraid of shagging her colleagues, she manages to seem both dramatically 
interesting enough to sustain future series, and an original character in a 
crowded crime-drama market. I’d be happy to hear her throaty mutter float down 
the police-station corridors as she handpicks those colleagues she trusts by 
her side.

The Fall recap: season two, episode six – an infuriating cop-out of an ending
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/18/the-fall-recap-season-two-episode-six-finale>
And you can understand too, the allure of hanging on to Fifty Shades’ Jamie 
Dornan, now a massive star, who will also return for The Fall’s third season. 
But we really don’t need to see more of Paul Spector, whose character really 
fell apart in the second series as his delusion became more unbelievable. 
(Let’s not even start reminding ourselves of his relationship with “the 
Benedetto girl”.) But according to Ben Stephenson, the BBC’s controller of 
drama commissioning: “Allan has known the end game from the beginning – the cat 
and mouse game between Gillian and Jamie has one last act to play out. Who will 
win?”

For a show that has struggled with criticism of its lingering gaze upon the 
bodies of murdered women, and the glamourising of a man who sees killing as his 
art and is portrayed as intellectually fascinating, I can’t really imagine where
The Fall <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-fall> is going to go 
with Spector. Please not as some kind of advisor to Gibson: a clever and 
capable woman who surely should not be relying on a killer to solve her crimes. 
Especially one who still appears to believe that his murders are something more 
than violent, ugly death.

In the same way that Broadchurch 2 would have likely been stronger had it 
focused purely on the Sandbrook murderers, instead of splitting its focus 
between Joe Miller’s court case and the unsolved mystery haunting DI Hardy, the 
Fall needs to shrug off Paul Spector – and his hold over Stella – and move on 
to a new mystery. (Where that corruption case disappeared to might be a start.) 
That doesn’t mean reducing The Fall to a Midsomer-case-of-the-week type format. 
But it does mean leaving behind a storyline that has already far out-stretched 
its welcome.

Instead the BBC says that the new series will see the relationship between 
Spector and Gibson “intensify”. It’s not a promise that has me reaching for my 
TV planner in anticipation.
 