
The news this week that a bank helped wealthy customers to dodge taxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/08/hsbc-files-expose-swiss-bank-clients-dodge-taxes-hide-millions?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 should not come as a surprise to many. The super-rich have long held some 
profoundly distorted ideas about the world. They are more than averagely likely 
to believe their achievements are the product oftheir superior brains and hard 
work 
<http://www.salon.com/2014/10/11/this_is_your_brain_on_money_why_americas_rich_think_differently_than_the_rest_of_us/>
. They may believethe Selfish Gene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2012/aug/31/the-selfish-gene-richard-dawkins-review>
 rhetoric that those with the best genes rise to the top of the pond, and at 
the bottom is genetic sludge. They are oblivious to any evidenceto the contrary 
<http://karnacbooks.metapress.com/content/g36lh6453711570r/>. They have no idea 
that had they been born on a sink estate they too would have sunk.

This is partly because the super-rich are no longer exposed to data and 
experiences that contradict their worldview. Flitting between their various 
homes around the world, they know nothing of our lives. They have never, ever 
had to sit on the phone waiting for the next available customer support agent – 
“your call really matters to us” – to not fix their phone/internet/energy bill 
issue.

How to make the wealthy pay tax | Jolyon Maugham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/12/coalition-radical-tax-avoidance-failed-uk>
Of particular concern is that they only consume media that support their 
worldview. Recently, an Oxbridge-educated CEO in all seriousness told me that 
there has been no increase in inequality in this country. My jaw was slack with 
amazement when another told me that “inner London secondary pupils have the 
best exam results of any in the world”. They are living in the la-la land that 
Polly Toynbee and David Walker painstakingly exposed in their bookUnjust Rewards
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/2008/sep/14/1>.

Consider your response to the following information. About 15,700 
under-two-year-olds live in a family that is classed as homeless, according toa 
new report 
<http://www.insidehousing.co.uk/care/welfare-of-thousands-of-homeless-babies-at-risk/7008211.article>
. Homelessness adversely affects parental responsiveness, and early 
responsivenesshas been proved 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/jcpp.12198/abstract> to affect the 
capacity of the brain to process positive experiences.

My response to this would be: “Since early care profoundly affects the size 
and content of our brains and subsequent mental health, government should act 
to eradicate involuntary homelessness. If Thatcher had not sold off the council 
housing stock this problem would be far less. A Labour government should 
reverse that policy.”

When I put that to a super-rich man whom I know, he said: “It’s a shame there 
are so many babies with homeless parents but it is not the role of the state to 
house them. My charity does not directly address this issue but I am sure there 
are others that do. The role of government is to leave people like me free to 
create jobs which will enable those parents to earn enough to pay rent and live 
in decent accommodation.”

The super-rich have no idea that had they been born on a sink estate they too 
would have sunk

After his privileged private education, this man inherited substantial sums of 
money and has increased its value through a hedge fund. Mostly, that fund plays 
the global casino – moving its capital around the world between currencies, 
shares and various financial instruments. On the rare occasions it buys 
businesses it is in order to introduce “cost savings” – what used to be called 
asset-stripping. It fires as many employees as possible, outsourcing the work 
to companies with casual, low-paid workers, and sells off any assets that can 
turn a quick profit. It then sells the company on to another hedge fund, at a 
further profit. This does nothing to provide employment for homeless parents 
and their babies.

Needless to say, my super-rich man does not pay tax in this country: his 
domicile is atax haven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/25/tax-havens-here-to-stay-city-uk>
. This is despite the fact that the CEO of a commercial law company recently 
described London to me as a “tax haven” – my man is not even prepared to pay 
the low rates that George Osborne (and before him Alistair Darling and Gordon 
Brown) is so proud to herald. He (or his company) owns several expensive London 
properties, unoccupied. When I suggest that some of the homeless babies could 
live there, he just laughs that it would be “inappropriate”.

Likewise, he compartmentalises off the crucial role that the state plays in 
enabling him to thrive. His children live in London. If one of them became 
acutely ill, they would be rushed to a state-fundedemergency ward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/22/nhs-creaking-at-the-seams> in 
a state-funded ambulance, driven along state-funded roads. The infrastructure 
that his business depends on – such as transport, telecoms, water, energy – is 
massively subsidised by taxpayers. That he contributes nothing at all to this 
is rationalised by the idea that he is simply cleverer than the rest of us, so 
more fool us for coughing up. If we were as clever as him, we too would not 
pay. He is part of the Ayn Rand elite, the ones who grasp that we were put on 
this earth to be selfish, to look after ourselves and our kin ahead of everyone 
else.

The super-rich are only one subset of our ruling elite in general. Like the 
MPs withtheir duck ponds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/may/23/mps-expenses-conservatives> 
and the menagerie of slimy creeps on show at theLeveson inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/leveson-inquiry>, they are self-focussed 
plutocrats who are no longer fit to make the rules. Their lack of social 
obligation and ignorance of the most simple realities means they will 
inevitably be superseded by something else, hopefully something better. If in 
no other respects,Russell Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/27/revolution-review-russell-brand-beverly-hills-buddhist>
 is right about that.
 