
Tired of your real city? Then immerse yourself in a virtual one - or even 
create your own. Our readers seem to be particularly active on Second Life and 
we received an impressive array of creations inour callout for the best virtual 
cities <https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/10/best-video-game-cities>.

Here's our pick of the best - including some great thoughts and reflections on 
how virtual cities shape the way you see and navigate your own metropolis. Get 
involved and share your thoughts in the comments below oradd more spectacular 
cityscapes to our GuardianWitness gallery 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc>. What 
about all the Sim City or Minecraft masterplanners? We want to see what an 
ideal city might look like to you.
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1022425> 
Forgotten City in Second Life, Role Play Community 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1022425>

A once great city where the prosperous residents were served by the miraculous 
mechanical automatons. The people have long since disappeared, but the 
automatons remained and still take care of the crumbling stone walls, abandoned 
halls and rusty fences.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By sineadmcmillan <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/sineadmcmillan> 

14 June 2014, 22:28 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1017520> 
New Babbage: Steampunk City 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1017520>

New Babbage is a steampunk city constructed by its residents in Second Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/secondlife>. It's the virtual home of a 
variety of mad inventors, intrepid engineers, arch villains and street urchins. 
It has its own calendar with annual events such as the Oiling Festival (when 
everyone cleans the amazing engines that power the city and keep the airships 
afloat). The city's motto is - "What could possibly go wrong?" There's a 
website at cityofnewbabbage.com/

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By SaffiaWiddershins <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/SaffiaWiddershins> 

11 June 2014, 21:59 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1017040> 
Clouds drift across the sky as if biding their time.... 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1017040>

A digital 3D version of a silkscreen print I previously exhibited at the Third 
International Print Biennale at Bradford....

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Jan Kaliciak <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Jan Kaliciak> 

11 June 2014, 14:27 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1020198> 
Neva Sky Villi in Second Life 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1020198>

This image, taken in September 2013, shows a section of the town of Neva Sky 
Villi. Everything in Second Life is created by its users, in this case by Neva 
Crystall (using materials and objects created by others).

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Ziki Questi <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Ziki Questi> 

13 June 2014, 12:58 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1021944> 
Luxembourg City in Second Life 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1021944>

Find this replica of Europe's most treasured capital, Luxembourg City, in 
Second Life.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By DurandirDarwin <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/DurandirDarwin> 

14 June 2014, 15:11 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1023778> 
An Ariel shot of Hotel Chelsea sim 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1023778>

An Ariel view of the NYC area with the Hotel chelsea and Soho that has become 
a Mecca for artists of all description in Sl .

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Kevin Martin <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Kevin Martin> 

15 June 2014, 20:48 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1018721> 
1920s Berlin Project community in Second Life 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1018721>

In Second Life everything you see was build by regular people, not game 
designers.

So you get to build your own world, just the way you want it.

For some this is a deserted tropical island but for me paradise lies in the 
exploration of the past, witnessing a world that is now gone.

I build 1920s Berlin, with its cabaret clubs, back streets, small court yards, 
cinemas, etc, etc.

A very active community of people from all over the world moved in and by 
recreating the past we learn about it in a unique way.

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By Jo Yardley <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Jo Yardley> 

12 June 2014, 15:20 
 <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1017236> 
A city in Utopia  
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1017236>

I wish this was my only city of this size in my minecraft world (Utopia) or at 
least other people where involved in its making................

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By gruniadreader666 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/gruniadreader666> 

11 June 2014, 17:45 

GTA Liberty City 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc/1016681>

I liked Vice City, but I loved Liberty City. Driving around a stunning and 
reasonably accurate New York was amazing, complete with shops, bars, landmarks, 
and new yorkers too! When I later went to New York I had a really good 
understanding of the layout!

Sent via Guardian Witness <https://witness.theguardian.com/>

 By ID8273857 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/ID8273857> 

11 June 2014, 9:22 
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12484139> BC CVAV  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12484139> 10 June 2014 4:00pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36793030>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
I got lost in Boston recently on a holiday, but found my way around through 
far too many hours struggling with the buggy, virtually unplayable, 
immediate-post release Assassins Creed 3. Remembering the layouts of the game 
helped me navigate from tourist spot to tourist spot. Never have I felt 
simultaneously so proud and embarrassed that I play so many games.

One of the few (very few) things the troubled third/5th game in the series got 
absolutely right was colonial Boston. It looks, sounds and feels like the city 
must have been - carrying on the atmospheric and fascinating cities in the 
previous games - Jerusalem, Damascus, Acre, Florence, Rome, Venice and 
Constantinople-turned-Istanbul.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4416445> SyntheticMan  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4416445> 11 June 2014 1:32pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36830872>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
For me it's still all about Shenmue 1 and 2. No game has ever captured that 
sense of being just another person in a vibrant town/city and it really added 
to the charm of the game. Characters had their own stories to tell and there 
was so much you could miss out on if you just powered on with the story 
(particularly in Shenmue 2). For example, supporting characters would appear in 
various locations at different times of the day/week/month that felt right for 
them - Cool Z in Shenmue 2 would often appear watching street fights.

Add in to that the way the game made the progression of time a big feature, so 
as the game neared Christmas in the first game you'd see decorations being put 
up, then a guy dressed as Santa wandering around (drunk if I remember at one 
point).

Shenmue 2 took things a step further by making virtually every building, and 
every room within that, accessible to the player. I don't think we've seen a 
game with that sense of scale since. Sure the cities are bigger, but they don't 
feel as detailed or as lived in.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2438014> nilpferd  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2438014> 10 June 2014 9:14pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36803584>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Video games prioritise the visual, their sound effects are generally 
restricted to music and "mission related" sounds like car engines or 
discussions. That might sound obvious but it reduces their ability to stand in 
for "real" cities.

We experience cities as much through touch- the roughness of paving, the feel 
of heat or cold, sudden draughts- smell- sweat, soot, or the surprising 
freshness of a tree in bloom- and taste as we do through visual and aural 
stimuli.

Even then, cities contain background noises far more diverse than any game has 
yet managed, and our visual mapping of a city is less dependent on the "iconic" 
features which overpopulate GTA, and more dependent on subtle cues, such as 
Kevin Lynch's nodes, paths, edges, districts and landmarks... on light and 
shadow, signage, cultural phenomena.

It's the small things that count, in other words. The single most "true" city 
portrayal I've witnessed is in Lego City Undercover- passersby muttering 
amusing little fragments of non-information... "I like ice-cream!" or "I hope 
he calls me later" hit the spot far more successfully than an extensively 
rendered background.

In fact my daughter and I have taken to collecting "real" versions of these... 
anytime someone goes by and says "I thought he was so rude!" or "I wonder where 
Bob is" we'll nod at one another... "Lego city conversation".

 Which are your favourite cities in games? Have you created fantastical urban 
landscapes that beat any real ones? How do you think virtual cities are shaping 
our experience of urban life? Share your thoughts in the comments below oradd 
your images on GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/5395eb3ee4b0a6aad6394acc>.
 