
Windscreens frozen, ground like iron, a vichyssoise of fog in the valleys – 
we’ve had the first intimations of a proper winter, and my friend’s blood is 
coursing. “Isn’t it the most exciting time of year?” he mumbled, from the 
depths of many layers of warm clothing. “I love the sharpness of the air, the 
crunch of frost underfoot.”

I’m with him. A lucky chum who has a house in the Caribbean told me about the 
temperature variance on Nevis; it will be 30C at Christmas, just as it was 30C 
in July. A superficially seductive prospect, I admit, but who wouldn’t rather 
have the drama of the changing year? Icicles hanging from the eaves, mulled 
wine simmering on the stove. As the 18th-century nature poetJames Thomson 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/45406> put it, 
“Welcome kindred glooms!”

I don’t expect all readers to share this sentiment. It’s not much fun when 
Thomson’s “big torrent burst” is coming from a ruptured pipe. Life for 
commuters can be miserable, as they slither along icy lanes in the dark, or 
wait on windy platforms for cancelled trains. Nobody likes chilblains, or
Marian’s nose <http://www.poetryloverspage.com/poets/shakespeare/winter.html> 
looking “red and raw”, as Shakespeare had it. Besides, the garden has been 
blown to pieces.

But this is also a time of wonder. The beauty of the countryside in winter is 
subtler than that of the blousy months. Yes, it is a driftwood landscape, pared 
to the bone and bleached of colour; but it’s easier to spot woodpeckers when 
the leaves are off the trees.

You can also see mistletoe, rooks’ nests or the ragged nests (dreys) that 
squirrels make for themselves out of twigs: reds hibernate in them, greys stay 
half awake. This is the best time for seeing ducks. Not only are there greater 
numbers of them but the drakes have put on their brightest plumage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwinter-a-time-of-wonder-starlings-frost-robin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55ecae579ab7cf9b2e78acf2031e0f57627b7a67%2F0_1506_2668_1601%2F2668.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20crunch%20of%20frost%2C%20starlings%20at%20dusk%2C%20a%20solitary%20robin%3A%20winter%20is%20a%20time%20of%20true%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwinter-a-time-of-wonder-starlings-frost-robin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20crunch%20of%20frost%2C%20starlings%20at%20dusk%2C%20a%20solitary%20robin%3A%20winter%20is%20a%20time%20of%20true%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwinter-a-time-of-wonder-starlings-frost-robin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55ecae579ab7cf9b2e78acf2031e0f57627b7a67%2F0_1506_2668_1601%2F2668.jpg>
 Frost crystallises on a window. Photograph: Ernest Manewal/Getty Images 
While the solitary robin is a faithful garden friend, some other species are 
more clubbable; they get through the winter by making flocks. Suddenly a patch 
of woodland will be full of goldcrests, chaffinches or tits, devouring what 
they can before they just as suddenly move on. Thousands upon thousands of 
chattering starlings wheel from fields into the dusk sky in smoke-like 
murmurations. Watch out for them;populations have fallen by two-thirds 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/s/starling/population_conservation.aspx>
 since the 1970s, according to the British Trust for Ornithology.

Gardens become wraiths, a ghostly memory of their former selves. Some of 
summer’s pomps have been reduced to a collection of stalks and seed pods that 
barely merits the trip to the compost heap. But the architecture remains – not 
only walls, paths and (if you’re grand enough) statuary or urns, but the 
evergreens and plucky herbaceous plants that hang on with browning leaves. 
Wispy clematis seed heads seem all too like grey hairs, but falling leaves 
provide a store of gold. There will also be the diamonds of sparkling hoar 
frost with any luck; let’s hope so, because we need a good freeze to kill off 
themega slugs <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-36166774> that 
have been stalking the flower beds this summer, following a mild winter and 
cold spring.

Winter <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/winter> is the big reveal. 
Fine houses that would otherwise be hidden behind foliage are a delight to 
behold, their windows shining with an inviting light. Admittedly, winter does 
get cold, and it gets dark early. But the night air is scented with wood smoke, 
and the sharpness of a clear night seems to magnify the stars. Listen! You can 
almost hear the frost coming down. This is when condensation on the inside of 
windowpanes freezes into patterns unequalled by Tiffany – if you don’t have 
central heating. And after all, who needs it? Evolution has provided a sure 
means of keeping Jack Frost at bay: it’s called sloe gin. Which may be 
supplemented by a dram of whisky on Burns Night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwinter-a-time-of-wonder-starlings-frost-robin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b245dbb5e76c89046f663550960b48fc0a104d8%2F0_541_7216_4330%2F7216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20crunch%20of%20frost%2C%20starlings%20at%20dusk%2C%20a%20solitary%20robin%3A%20winter%20is%20a%20time%20of%20true%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwinter-a-time-of-wonder-starlings-frost-robin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20crunch%20of%20frost%2C%20starlings%20at%20dusk%2C%20a%20solitary%20robin%3A%20winter%20is%20a%20time%20of%20true%20wonder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwinter-a-time-of-wonder-starlings-frost-robin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b245dbb5e76c89046f663550960b48fc0a104d8%2F0_541_7216_4330%2F7216.jpg>
 Keep warm by roasting chestnuts Photograph: LauriPatterson/Getty Images 
This is the time of nature’s annual disappearing act, when the earth retreats 
within itself and sensible animals, like the hedgehog, go to sleep. Home calls 
to us. We may stagger outside for a Boxing Day walk, but the great feast of 25 
December is about the cheeriness of fireside, with the bleak midwinter kept 
firmly in its place.

So pull close the draught-excluding curtain and keep cold air from whistling 
under the door. Fill the hot water bottles. Put some chestnuts in the oven. Lay 
the table for a meal of stews, root vegetable soups or that sublimest of 
not-so-delicacies, steak and kidney – a heavy suet crust isn’t for summer 
eating. There are cost-free pleasures too, such as the walk through city 
streets on Christmas Eve when every window seems to glow with Christmas trees 
and festive preparation.

Rural homes rejoice in another kind of glow – from the logs on the hearth. If, 
like ours used to be, they are of the half-rotten kind that are pressed on you 
by a kindly relative, you may be blessed with the additional bounty of a stag 
beetle or two. Cherish them. They’re battling for survival in the 21st century.

As the song says, these are a few of my favourite things. And I’ll make the 
most of them. It may seem that winter – like the Brexit negotiation – goes on 
for ever but already spring bulbs are pushing their green noses above the brown 
quilt of our flowerpots. Camellia buds are forming. Enjoy what you can of the 
snow, if, as predicted, it arrives. Even now, with winter barely begun, you can 
sense the promise of spring.

Clive Aslet is editor-at-large of Country Life
 