
Imagine what’s going to happen at 10.01pm on Thursday 23 June. The polls will 
have just closed in thereferendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> on Britain’s membership of 
the European Union and, in an instant, the rest of Europe will be able to relax 
– and revert to type.

Suddenly, the migrant boats will be back on the water, heading for the Greek 
coast. The floodgates that have been slammed shut will be flung back open. In 
Brussels, the bureaucrats will reach for the desk drawer they’ve kept dutifully 
locked and pull out their grand plans to imposestraight bananas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/jan/19/eu.politics> and ban tasty 
crisps. And the central bankers will be able to tighten the screws on Greece 
once more. No longer obliged to play nice – as they did in the early hours of 
Wednesday morning, when they agreedto release €10.3bn in bailout money for 
Athens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/eurozone-officials-hope-to-give-greece-next-tranche-of-bailout>
 – they’d now be able to revive their demand that Greece live on ever more 
meagre rations in penance for its huge debts.

Eurozone unlocks €10.3bn bailout loan for Greece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/eurozone-officials-hope-to-give-greece-next-tranche-of-bailout>
I jest of course. None of these things is going to happen on the evening of 23 
June. And yet observing Britain’s 27 EU partners these last few months has been 
like watching a usually clumsy man hiding in a cupboard and holding his breath, 
determined not to make even the slightest disturbance. Just imagine the racket 
he’s going to make when the referendum is over and he can at last exhale.

Of course, Britons should not be so naive or egocentric as to think this is 
all about us. EU decision-making has its own rhythms and its own multiple 
pressures. But it’s been hard to avoid the sense that Brussels and our fellow 
EU member states have been on best behaviour since February, whenDavid Cameron 
struck his renegotiation deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/02/eu-deal-key-points-what-cameron-wanted-and-what-he-got>
. They all got the message: don’t do anything that will play into the hands of 
the Brexiteers.

Top of the list has been avoiding the kind of images that dominated the news 
during last summer’s migration crisis. The last thing the remain campaign needs 
is TV pictures of boatloads of migrants heading for Europe’s shores: 
#Refugeeswelcome – but not until 24 June. No one had a greater interest in the 
deal struckbetween the EU and Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/refugees-will-be-sent-back-across-aegean-in-eu-turkey-deal>
, sending back those who had crossed the Aegean sea, than Cameron and his 
fellow remainers. Whatever long-term issues that arrangement ducks, whatever 
price has to be paid, as far as the in campaign is concerned, it just needs to 
hold till after Britons have cast their votes.

The standoff with Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> is not 
quite as pressing, but it still matters. Remain cannot win without the support 
of Labour voters, and plenty of those have been appalled by the fiscal whipping 
meted out to the impoverished Greeks. Whatever the rights and wrongs of that 
austerity argument, Cameron has wanted the issue to go away – at least for 
another month. Today’s bailout loan has achieved that.

So far everyone has been doing their bit. Brussels has been careful to issue 
no centralising edicts that might confirm the leavers’ caricature of the 
meddling EU. On the contrary, European commission president Jean-Claude 
Juncker’s sole intervention in the referendum campaign has been an 
uncharacteristic admission that theEU interferes too much 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/eu-lost-favour-europe-citizens-commission-president-warns>
.

They all need to keep it up for just one more month. Four more weeks of 
holding their breath. After that they can breathe out – so long as we vote in.
 