
Was a law passed recently that mandated every person under 30 own one of those 
blue and brown Herschel backpacks? How else can we explain how ubiquitous they 
are? Step onto a university campus and 90% of the students will be wearing one, 
seemingly in defiance of the laws of supply and demand.

Jessica Reed (@GuardianJessica) 
@marrowing <https://twitter.com/marrowing> @adambrereton 
<https://twitter.com/adambrereton> pic.twitter.com/kWbkZkmgXN 
<http://t.co/kWbkZkmgXN>
 <https://twitter.com/GuardianJessica/status/605524265308434432> June 2, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianJessica/status/605524265308434432> 
The Herschel trend is fascinating. In 2014 the Guardian’s Paula Cocozza went 
digging for thesource of the bags’ popularity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jul/08/why-backpacks-became-cool-again>
. Brothers Lyndon and Jamie Cormack, both apparel industry veterans, founded 
the company in 2009 because they “did not feel there was a very compelling 
story being told about bags”.

They named the company after Herschel, a tiny town in Saskatchewan where their 
great-grandparents settled after emigrating from Scotland in 1906.

“We as kids got to go back there all the time. Just used to wander the hills, 
shoot bottles, maybe the occasional gopher,” says Lyndon Cormack.

Cocozza points out that this association with exploration, frontiers, beards, 
maps, etc. is very now, and the Herschel, with its vintage feel and pointless 
utilitarian flourishes (the little diamond-shaped leather leather badge is
actually a lashtab 
<http://speakeasyohiou.com/2013/12/03/a-fashion-statement-to-carry-with-us/>), 
is designed to play on aesthetic themes that reject mass production in favour 
of the vintage, handcrafted and self-reliant.

In other words, the Herschel backpack is a bag for the rugged individual 
<http://www.dailykos.com/story/2012/06/08/1098429/-Rugged-Individualism-is-a-Myth>
.

The Cormacks’ decision to craft the brand around their homesteading 
great-grandparents is not an accident:homesteading 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homestead_principle> is a crucial mythology of 
capitalism. It’s the supposed process by which previously un-owned natural 
resources come to be validly possessed by one individual, who is then allowed 
to defend them using force and transfer ownership through contract.

Put most famously by John Locke 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/locke-political/#Pro>, homesteading is 
central to anarcho-capitalism, rights-based libertarianism, and 
propertarianism. It is amazing, and in some ways perfect, to see this 
individualistic ideology clearly reflected in the marketing of a backpack that 
is made in 15 factories in China and adorns the shoulders of every second young 
person in the Western world.
Rohan Salmond (@RJSalmond) 
@adambrereton <https://twitter.com/adambrereton> @marrowing 
<https://twitter.com/marrowing> Colleague: "This is very awkward, Rohan" 
pic.twitter.com/DX8GWp8BuE <http://t.co/DX8GWp8BuE>
 <https://twitter.com/RJSalmond/status/605508027286839296> June 1, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/RJSalmond/status/605508027286839296> 
I doubt the Cormacks intended it this way, but as master marketers they know 
which stories appeal to people. At this point in history, homesteading, 
exploration and frontiersmanship areit.

The material conditions in which the backpack exists – in which it is actually 
manufactured and worn – reflect the reality of global capitalism. It’s made by 
factory workers and worn by precariously-employed inner-city knowledge workers 
– journalists, designers, and students.

It is not worn while traversing a mountain in search of a hitherto-unknown 
gold deposit, or while fishing ruggedly in a pristine lake. But that’s story 
that its designers have woven in order to make the bag attractive to millions 
of urbanites: a repudiation of their lifestyle as students and employees.

And everybody loves it, because, as John Steinbeck may or may not have said 
about the American poor 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/weigel/2011/09/21/temporarily_embarrassed_millionaires.html>
, they see themselves “not as an exploited proletariat, but as temporarily 
embarrassed millionaires”. This sentiment doesn’t just exist in America any 
more, but Australia as well.

When I first started to notice Herschel backpacks a couple of years ago, I 
thought their slightly childish simplicity and drab brownness made the young 
men who wore them look like orphans. Now that they are so pervasive, they’re a 
constant reminder of the weight on my generation’s shoulders of the myths we 
must shrug off.
 