
As the EU referendum debate enters its hideous final stages, both sides of the 
Tory party are furiously branding each other liars, while the rest of the 
country thinks, “Yes, that seems reasonable to me.” Ken Clarke has claimed that 
in the event of Brexit,Cameron would be out of No 10 in 30 seconds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/16/cameron-wouldnt-last-30-seconds-if-he-lost-eu-vote-says-ken-clarke>
. Probably even quicker if you said the ghost of his dead dad was on the 
doorstep with a sack of used euros.

With the vote coinciding with Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>, England’s games could have a 
major bearing on the result. Imagine, as a footballer, stepping up to take a 
free kick late in the game and suddenly realising that the whole future of the 
continent as a political entity, the integrity of Nato and the progress ofTTIP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/ttip-what-why-angry-transatlantic-trade-investment-partnership-guide>
 rests on it. The pressure will be too much for Ryan Bertrand and he will sky 
it.

The politicians supporting Brexit are all dreadful, as are all the politicians 
against it, and most of the politicians for and against most things. The Leave 
movement <http://www.voteleavetakecontrol.org/> looks like a group of villains 
cornered by Batman in a hall of mirrors. Who better to head up a campaign 
against unelected people ruling over us thanLord Lawson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/02/nigel-lawson-on-brexit-i-love-europe-but-eu-has-no-purpose>
? Nigel Farage, a sort of end of level boss for Freudian psychoanalysis, has a 
face that only a mother could abandon to the boarding school system. And I’m 
always a bit wrongfooted by Michael Gove, possibly because I half expect to see 
him in a Hammer horror film, his tiny wooden hands tightening mercilessly round 
his owner’s throat as he cries, “Gichael! Gichael! Stockik Gichael!!”. Boris 
Johnson, looking like a Harry Potter spell that’s brought all the hair in 
Dumbledore’s plughole to life, said he would debate with Cameron, “Anytime, 
anyplace, anywhere”. How about everyday for the next four weeks in Aleppo?

As awful as both sides are, we have to accept that there are strategic 
interests manoeuvring for position in their own struggles for personal gain. 
But there are also fixed interests. Things like corporations, military 
alliances, banks and superpowers – and they are entirely in favour ofRemain 
<http://www.strongerin.co.uk/>. The roll call has been extraordinary: JP 
Morgan, Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs, the IMF, Richard Branson, Nato, the 
president of the United States. It’s hard to think of people more psychotically 
opposed to the interests of Britain’s citizens. Why stop there? What doesVictor 
Von Doom <http://marvel.com/universe/Doctor_Doom_(Victor_von_Doom)> think? Or 
Mothra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4bhoWfC1L9k>?

The most obvious beneficiary of a Remain vote will be George Osborne, a man 
who exudes all the warmth of Scott of the Antarctic’s last dump, who made 
detailed claims about what the British economy would be like in 2030, despite 
not being able to predict the recession a week after it happened. It was like 
someone telling you they can predict what the weather will be like on any given 
day in 14 years time, while standing in the rain without an umbrella. If I try 
to picture Osborne as a child, for some reason all I see is a toddler so 
desperate not to share an icelolly that he’s suffocating his conjoined twin 
with the hat from his sailor suit, then passing it off as a novelty rucksack 
till it shrivels up and drops off. Of course, I’m joking. He throttled his twin 
in the womb with its own umbilical cord as a difficult but necessary measure to 
ensure he would hit his own arbitrary milk consumption targets. And yet he’s 
not all bad: Osborne is arguably the number one homicide target in the country, 
yet he can’t stop himself pulling on hi-vis jackets. Possibly the desperate 
actions of some subconscious crumb of his near-extinguished decency.

Yes, the EU has brought us stability. A massive relief, as without that 
European peace we would have never had the spare resources to go into 
Afghanistan, Iraq or Libya. And admittedly, the EU does a certain amount to 
mitigate the ravages of a Tory government. It would have been amusing to see 
Cameron run a campaign where he admitted this, chortling to every interviewer 
that the public needs the EU to keep him chained up or he won’t be able to stop 
himself from destroying us. Paul Masonmade an interesting case against Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/16/brexit-eu-referendum-boris-johnson-greece-tory>
, asserting that it would lead to a few years of a rightwing Tory government, 
probably led by Boris, freshly empowered by the result. Yet I think we have to 
factor in that Cameron is, unlike Boris, a fantastically competent radical 
rightwinger, and he will be equally energised by a Remain vote.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Brexit%20for%20non-Brits%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20referendum%3A%20Brexit%20for%20non-Brits%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer&media=>
EU referendum: Brexit for non-Brits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer>
The protections offered by EU membership aren’t to preserve things like the 
right to strike. They are the protections you would expect in an economic 
union, designed to make things run smoothly; the character of the whole 
enterprise has always been technocratic. Cameron’s alleged deal on the EU was 
made in a five star hotel over a round of sandwiches: real people don’t make 
important decisions like that. They make the most important decisions in their 
life at 2am, in a taxi to their mum’s house while drinking a bottle of gin. 
Interestingly, the Remain camp has portrayed the EU almost entirely as an 
economic union, and it’s hard to find any real arguments about why it exists as 
a political one. As a Glaswegian, I’m not convinced that I really have so much 
more in common with people in Seville than I do with those in Kabul, who at 
least have a similar life expectancy and standard of club football.

In many ways the pro–Europe left’s message is the same as Cameron’s: remain 
and reform. Let’s stay in something that doesn’t exist. A British left that in 
our most recent elections struggled to convince its own traditional base that 
it could be trusted to collect the bins, somehow feels that its arguments will 
be better understood when delivered through an interpreter to a vast 
bureaucracy, partly composed of fascists. I suppose the left is so used to 
selling hope that, on a dying planet, it has found itself increasingly unable 
to describe reality. And the real left reason for leaving is a pretty bleak one 
to try to sell:Let’s try to get one arm out of this straitjacket before the 
shooting starts isn’t ever going to look great on the side of a battle bus. The 
left saw what Europe did to Greece and despite that, they want to stay, like a 
Scout group on Jim’ll Fix It determined to still enjoy meeting Kim Wilde.

There’s been the usual rightwing scaremongering that instability will scare 
away the rich. Thank God it hasn’t, and it’s only their money that has gone 
overseas. This must be the first time Johnson and Cameron have been opposite 
each other since sharing a fresher at an Oxford dining club.

Boris probably doesn’t even think we should leave the EU, he just needs to get 
enough of the Parliamentary Party’s Lithium Tasting Club onside for a 
leadership tilt. And things are pretty desperate for him: Osborne has all the 
patronage available to a chancellor, Boris has a column in the Telegraph.

Perhaps Boris should stick to doing what he does best: playing the endpoint of 
a recurring dream where I forcefeed the frozen head of Walt Disney mescaline 
and force him to invent a talking dog. But even in this kind of speculation, we 
allow ourselves to get drawn into the spectacle, staring enraptured at the 
play, while the pickpockets move among us. Let’s not forget the nihilism of 
fixed interests, their indifference to even maintaining a habitable world. 
Soon, rising inequality will see our cities split into heavily-armed gated 
communities and a Mad Max style wasteland that’s home only to tent cities of 
prostitutes and cleaners, their survival dependent on shooting down Amazon 
drones with catapults made from animal intestines tied between a forked stick. 
“Sorry kids. No food today. It’s just an Adam Sandler box set.”

The campaign has been full of surprises. Who would have thought the Daily Mail 
would turn out to be so against us taking orders from the Germans,an idea they 
couldn’t get enough of in the 1930s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/apr/01/pressandpublishing.secondworldwar>
? Of course, a vote to remain in the EU can’t be seen as a rejection of racism 
as both campaigns have been thoroughly racist. But are people really the 
hideous bigots each of these campaigns has assumed them to be? Are British 
people really, on the whole, intolerant, unwelcoming, and fearful? I’d almost 
say that they define themselves as being the opposite of those things, and 
still within living memory actually fought a war against them. There’s little 
doubt that Britain has a problem with racism. We want immigrants to speak 
English, even though we’re never going to speak to them, because we want to be 
sure that they don’t have a chip on their shoulder about us, the way we do 
about them.

But referendum campaigns are supposed to be trying to speak to a majority of 
the population, and both sides of this one seem aimed at its very worst 
minority.

Isn’t part of the problem here that we’re accepting a hateful view of 
ourselves projected on to us by politicians who never actually meet any of us? 
Perhaps the best thing we can do is set ourselves against this whole hideous 
European debate and go as contrary to its spirit as possible. Cameron’s low 
estimation of the public can be seen in his decision to hold the referendum 
before people fleeing war and drought begin their attempts to cross the 
Mediterranean this summer. He imagines that dead bodies on beaches, and news 
reports from refugee camps would make us vote against the EU, as our primary 
concern would be keeping those people out. I think it’s more likely that this 
refugee crisis will create an outpouring of compassion. We can register our 
disgust at being spoken to as racists in this referendum by how we behave 
towards these refugees. People are drowning in the Mediterranean while we have 
a navy that could save them. We can press our government to act, and I refuse 
to be told that’s fanciful by people who think it would be easier to reform the 
EU. And we can act ourselves. People already are. Donating money, driving to 
Calais with supplies, trying to create political pressure, and let’s join them, 
each in our own little way, in a sort of Dunkirk of the spirit. We should do 
this because these are desperate human beings who need our help. As an added 
bonus, remember that whatever you do, no matter how small, will appal both 
sides of this intellectually enfeebled and poisonous campaign, and that the 
most radical message we can send them is that we still feel love.
 