
What is it? A solemn and stately procession through the early reign of ER II.

Why you’ll love it: Because it cost a reputed £100m 
<https://www.ft.com/content/96017f64-a0f1-11e6-86d5-4e36b35c3550>? Because the 
cast drips with almost every jewel in our nation’s treasury, including Claire 
Foy (last seen as Ann Boleyn inWolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wolf-hall>) and Matt Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/matt-smith>? Because Stephen Daldry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-daldry> directs the early episodes 
with such a delicate yet sure touch it makes your lip quiver?

Peter Morgan’s script is probably the hardest thing to love about it, with its 
heavy use of thwack-bong exposition for the hard of understanding. “Your 
uncle’s affair and abdication almost destroyed the monarchy. This could too,” 
says Victoria Hamilton’s tremulous Queen mum when Princess Margaret (an 
excellent Vanessa Kirby) takes a fancy to a married equerry. It is a ridiculous 
sentence when everyone present knows the Edward and Mrs Simpson story rather 
well, considering they are all in Buckingham Palace because of it.

They speak to each other like nurses on an amnesia ward, but that aside, the 
story is an absorbing one if you can find it in your heart to care about the 
crucial tension in the script: namely, the fight between public duty and 
personal freedom. If you can do it forGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, you can do it for 
the fictionalised Windsors. The Americans are going to love it. Early reviews 
from across the pond declare it “easily digestible” (Variety), which is a 
lovely way of saying you barely have to chew before swallowing.

It’s the performances that so enrich the viewing experience. The story of the 
birth of the modern monarchy may leave you cold, but you cannot fail to simper 
atJohn Lithgow <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/john-lithgow>’s astonishing 
Winston Churchill, all chops and wattle. I had to check twice that it really is 
him behind the cigar and that perfect cut-glass accent.

Above all, it’s an opportunity to gawp at Foy’s unendingly expressive eyes as 
the weight of the entire world comes to rest on her slight, pale shoulders. As 
the young Princess Elizabeth she steals the show, and that takes some doing 
when you’re playing opposite Smith as a flop-haired Prince Philip. “Nice hat,” 
he grins at a Nairobi tribesman sporting an enormous headdress, showing early 
signs of the booby we know and love today. With all the “royal” acting going 
on, his much-needed informality, and that of Kirby’s spirited Margaret, gives 
some variation in texture while everyone else is busy comporting themselves 
with smooth dignity.

My only regret is the early departure of Jared Harris as King George VI who 
(spoilers), must inevitably repeat history by dying part-way through episode 
two. He is an actor of such charisma and quiet power, you’ll be willing the old 
boy to pull through, particularly after an incredibly moving scene with some 
carol singers.

It is, undoubtedly, a huge, ocean-going blockbuster shot in multiple stunning 
locations, starring superb actors in the most beautiful costumes. If you can 
get past the sometimes crunchy dialogue, it works rather well as an escape from 
the coming transatlantic Armageddon.

Where: Netflix <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80025678>.

Length: 10 episodes all available to stream from tomorrow.

Stand-out episode: episode two is when the story truly gets going with the 
accession of Elizabeth to the throne.

If you liked The Crown, watch: The Windsors 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-windsors> (All4), Wolf Hall (DVD), 
Horrible Histories <https://uk.newonnetflix.info/info/70298728/s> (Netflix).
 