
The Artist <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142801/artist> continued 
its promising run up to the Oscars after taking three major prizes at the 
London Film Critics' Circle awards.

Michel Hazanavicius's silent, black-and-white tribute to Hollywood's golden 
era took home gongs for film of the year, director of the year and actor of the 
year (Jean Dujardin) at the ceremony in central London, ahead the announcement 
of the Oscar nominations next Tuesday. The evening's other big winner was 
Golden Globe-winning Iranian filmA Separation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142608/separation>, which took the 
foreign language film of the year, screenwriter of the year award for its 
director, Asghar Farhadi, and supporting actress of the year for Sareh Bayet.

No other film was garlanded with more than one award. British film of the year 
went to Lynne Ramsay'sWe Need to Talk About Kevin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/141828/we-need-to-talk-about-kevin>, 
her adaptation of the 2003 Lionel Shriver novel about a mother struggling to 
cope with a seemingly vindictive and evil child. "It's quite a dark film, so 
I'm really proud of the fact that a film as challenging as Kevin is getting an 
audience," said the Scottish film-maker.

Actress of the year was a tie between Meryl Streep for The Iron Lady and Anna 
Paquin forMargaret <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144989/margaret>, 
the belatedly released drama from Kenneth Lonergan which has not figured 
largely in awards season thus far despite achieving rave reviews from key 
critics.

Kenneth Branagh was named best supporting actor. The star of My Week With 
Marilyn <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142796/my-week-with-marilyn> 
has received nominations from the Screen Actors Guild and the Hollywood Foreign 
Press Association, curators of the Golden Globes, and is beginning to look like 
a decent bet to be named in the equivalent Oscars category next week for his 
portrayal of Laurence Olivier. He told the audience he had sent Olivier a 
letter asking for acting advice as a teenager. "His advice was to have a bash 
and hope for the best, which was a simple and very effective way of saying 
you've just got to do it," said Branagh.

The British actor of the year award went to Michael Fassbender for A Dangerous 
Method <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142798/dangerous-method> and 
Shame <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142860/shame>, with Olivia Colman 
winning British actress of the year forThe Iron Lady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/140396/iron-lady> and Tyrannosaur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142849/tyrannosaur>. Young British 
performer of the year went to Craig Roberts forSubmarine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137865/submarine>.

Dujardin said he had been taken aback by The Artist's huge success so far 
during awards season. "We were never prepared for this. It is very new so I am 
so proud, for the crew, for the film. It's a very new experience but I'm 
happy," he said.

Critics' circle chairman Jason Solomons said: "Judging from the quality of 
films and performances honoured tonight, it is clear that the critics – who see 
every film, not just those with awards campaigns behind them – have an 
increasingly influential voice in awards races."

The awards, held at the BFI Southbank in London, are voted for by 120 British 
film critics, broadcasters and writers.
 