
Prediction is best avoided, as the chancellor, George Osborne, has discovered. 
In 2010, he forecast that the deficit would fall to £40bn by 2015; instead, it 
is likely to more than double to over £90bn. Mr Osborne is undaunted. He aims to
cut public spending to 35% of GDP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/03/george-osborne-pay-tax-deficit>
. According to the Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), that isits lowest 
level for 80 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/03/autumn-statement-2014-george-osborne-spending-cuts>
. Paul Johnson of the independentInstitute for Fiscal Studies 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/> described this as “on a colossal scale”, changing the 
role of the state “beyond recognition”.

Mild-mannered Norman Smith, the BBC’s assistant political editor, ventured to 
say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/04/bbc-defends-what-osborne-calls-hyperbolic-coverage-of-spending-cuts>
that this would take us back to the 1930s andThe Road to Wigan Pier, a period 
in which citizens could seek little support from the welfare state. A furious 
Osborne described this as “hyperbolic”. The economy is growing, he pointed out, 
and employment is at a record high. A thousand jobs a day are being created, 
85% of them full time. Stagnant wages may finally see a real rise over the next 
year. “We stay on the course to prosperity,” he thundered last week. So what 
lies ahead? Prosperity or penury?

For voters, the experience is akin to walking through a hall of distorting 
mirrors. Truthful reflection is frustratingly difficult to find. But the clues 
are there, if only a tongue-tied opposition would articulate them more 
passionately and clearly. A society with coalition-planned cuts of £47bn by the 
end of the next parliament is a very different proposition from a society 
experiencing Labour’s cuts of less than half that amount, at £21bn over the 
same period. Profligacy is the charge that mutes Labour. The accusation that 
can rightly be laid at Osborne’s door is one of extreme risk in failing to 
address now, not over the next parliament, the fault lines already in place, 
and most visible not in welfare but in the shaky health of the labour market.

According to the Office for National Statistics, the fall in unemployment to 
6% (two million) is thelargest annual fall since records began in 1972 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/15/uk-unemployment-falls-6-percent-lowest-lehman-brothers>
. However, productivity is improving only slightly. Low investment and a 
plethora of poorly paid posts dull the shine on Osborne’s boast of 1,000 new 
jobs a day. According to TUC analysis, these new full-time jobsinclude four out 
of 10 self-employed 
<http://jobmarketmonitor.com/2014/08/13/uk-becoming-the-self-employment-capital-of-europe/>
, concentrated at the lower end of the income distribution.

That can mean working for a single employer with minimal rights or working in 
your own enterprise on inadequate wages. A longer-term view shows thatonly one 
in 40 of the net jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/12/one-40-jobs-created-recession-full-time-employee-tuc-employment>
 added to the economy between 2008-2014 has been a full-time employee post.

According to the OBR’s chilling analysis, “subdued earnings” caused a 
shortfall in tax revenue from income tax and national insurance contributions 
of £8bn this year. That is predicted to rise to £15.2bn by 2018-19. By the end 
of the next parliament, the country will have experienced 18 years of lost wage 
growth, while the top 5% will have become ever richer.

As economist Özlem Onaran writes: 
<http://classonline.org.uk/pubs/item/state-intervention-for-wage-led-development>
 “The share of income in the national income pie will contract in favour of the 
owners of capital.” And that brings with it the related problem of spiralling 
debt. In this country, the ratio of household debt to incomes is predicted to 
reach a staggering 184% by 2020. In 2010, at 170% it was high. Many of us don’t 
earn enough, so we continue to borrow – a tightrope for the clumsy-footed, 
unbalanced as soon as interest rates rise.

In November, the Bank of England appointed Michael Kumhof, formerly of the 
IMF, as a special adviser. In 2010, he co-authored an authoritative paper,
Inequality, Leverage and Crisis 
<https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2010/wp10268.pdf> that also made 
reference to the 1930s. The paper argues that two periods – 1920-1929 (followed 
by the Great Depression of the 30s) and 1983-2008 (followed by the recession) 
both exhibited a large increase in the income share of the rich, a large 
increase in leverage (borrowing) for the remainder, and an eventual financial 
crisis. Kumhof’s favoured more effective solution to avoid this is the 
“restoration of the lower income group’s bargaining power”.

That seems a distant dream. In parallel with a decline in the collective clout 
of trade unions and drastic changes to employment law, as illustrated in the 
plight of the Saatchi cleaners, Citizens Advice reports a huge rise in 
insecurity and dissatisfaction in the workforce reflected in millions last year 
contacting the CA’sKnow Your Rights at Work 
<http://www.adviceguide.org.uk/wales/work_w/work_rights_at_work_e.htm> 
helpline. Osborne is definitely not taking the Kumhof route.

On the contrary, he announced last week, the public sector pay freeze will 
continue and a million public sector jobs will be axed. This causes a chain 
reaction that has the opposite effect to that intended by the chancellor. Anita 
Charlesworth, chief economist of theHealth Foundation 
<http://www.health.org.uk/>, points out that new targets mean more staff on 
wards. The pay freeze makes it difficult to recruit. Agency staff fill in, 
costs soar. The bill for agency staff in the NHS increased by a billion this 
year to £4.5bn. The result is 80% of acute hospitals are running at a deficit. 
The Osborne strategy fails to achieve cuts while it fuels discontent and costs 
him an extra £2bn a year; bad management disguised as good housekeeping. So 
what’s the alternative? How do you create a wage-led, not a debt-led, economy? 
How do you restore, not diminish, “bargaining power”?

Improved training and skills (more likely to be found in the public sector), 
investment not just in roads but also the social infrastructure such as 
affordable high-quality childcare; innovation and upskilling in social care; 
strengthened unions, an enforced pay ratio to reduce the gap between the 5% and 
the rest; a rise in the minimum wage – and an end to viewing taxation as a 
socially transmitted disease.

It pays for our civic life; it should secure fair redistribution. Instead, 
according to the Resolution Foundation, the richest 20% will gain 48p 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2014/12/01/osborne-tax-cuts-rich-help-most_n_6246540.html>
 in every £1 of the Tories’ tax cuts (34p per £1 in a Labour tax cut). 
“Excessive inequality is corrosive to growth. It is corrosive to society,” the 
IMF’sChristine Lagarde said at the World Economic Forum 
<https://www.imf.org/external/np/speeches/2013/012313.htm> last year.

Inequality is always about the poor but today it is also about the majority 
and the very richest. The ideologue chancellor pays no heed. Osborne’s record 
to date shows he has little real idea where the economy will end up five years 
hence, should he win power. What is likely is that with him in charge the way 
to prosperity will lead resolutely into even harder times.
 