
Connecticut and New York’s bans on assault weapons, both passed in the wake of 
the 2012 Sandy Hook shooting that left 26 people dead in Newtown, Connecticut, 
were partially upheld Monday in a circuit court decision. But that doesn’t mean 
the laws won’t end up before theUS supreme court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court>, perhaps as early as this 
term – or, in this gun-happy country, that their days aren’t numbered.

It took me two hours to get my hands on an AK-47. Welcome to America | Eric 
Rodriguez
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/07/it-took-me-two-hours-to-get-ak-47-black-market-welcome-to-america>
The Second Circuit Court of Appeals upheld the core provisions of both 
statutes, including the requirements that existing assault weapons be 
registered with the state and the ban on the sale, transport or possession of 
non-registered assault weapons. The laws were both being challenged by a 
variety of supporters of gun rights, including the New York State Rifle and 
Pistol Association, the Westchester County Firearms Owners Association and the 
New York State Amateur Trapshooting Association.


But the three-judge Second Circuit panel did not uphold 
<http://www.ca2.uscourts.gov/decisions/isysquery/8822389b-1b35-4c6e-baa0-695f1666ca76/3/doc/14-36_14-319_opn.pdf#xml=http://www.ca2.uscourts.gov/decisions/isysquery/8822389b-1b35-4c6e-baa0-695f1666ca76/3/hilite/>
 either statute in its entirety. A provision of New York’s Safe Act mandating a 
load limit of seven rounds and a provision of the Connecticut law banning a 
non-semiautomatic Remington rifle were struck down.

Readers may wonder how upholding so many gun restrictions could be compatible 
with DC v Heller, the 2008 case which held that the Second Amendment entailed 
an individual, rather than solely collective, right to bear arms when it struck 
down a ban on handguns in Washington DC. While that case represented a major 
shift in US supreme court doctrine, however, the substantive effects of the 
shift have been relatively modest – and make the New York and Connecticut 
regulations plausibly constitutional. As the court said in Heller, “[l]ike most 
rights, the right secured by the Second Amendment is not unlimited.”

Justice Antonin Scalia echoed that sentiment in his opinion for the court. 
“[N]othing in our opinion,” he wrote, “should be taken to cast doubt on 
longstanding prohibitions on the possession of firearms by felons and the 
mentally ill, or laws forbidding the carrying of firearms in sensitive places 
such as schools and government buildings, or laws imposing conditions and 
qualifications on the commercial sale of arms.” In another passage that was 
crucial to the Second Circuit’s analysis, Justice Scalia argued that “the 
historical tradition of prohibiting the carrying of ‘dangerous and unusual 
weapons’” made such restrictions compatible with the Second Amendment.

Given the supreme court’s reasoning, it was not difficult for Monday’s 
opinion, written by Judge José A Cabranes, to find the core provisions of the 
New York and Connecticut laws constitutional. The ban, as Judge Cabranes 
observed, does not eliminate the right to personal self-defense that was 
guaranteed by Heller: “citizens may continue to arm themselves with 
non-semiautomatic weapons or with any semiautomatic gun that does not contain 
any of the enumerated military‐style features.” Cabranes relied heavily on an 
opinion by the influential DC Circuit Court of Appeals, whichreached similar 
conclusions 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2011-10-04/washington-d-c-assault-weapons-ban-constitutional-appeals-court-rules>
.

This is far from the end of this constitutional question, however. The US 
supreme court will soon decide whether to hear an appeal of a 7th Circuit 
decisionupholding an Illinois ban 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/assault-weapon-ban-u-s-supreme-court-n442056>
 on semiautomatic weapons. The top court may decide to stay its hand, as there 
is not yet a direct contradiction among the circuit courts for the state to 
resolve.

Guns kill people in the US because we pervert the Second Amendment | Penny 
Okamoto
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/02/oregon-college-shooting-guns-kill-people-in-us-pervert-second-amendment>
If the US supreme court does decide to take the case, it’s unclear what will 
happen, as this is relatively uncharted territory in American constitutional 
law. Heller was focused on establishing an individual right to bear arms and 
did not do a great deal to clarify that right’s precise scope. What constitutes 
a “dangerous” and/or “unusual” weapon is not a self-evident question.

The fact that gun control laws are Democratic policies coming before a 
Republican-dominated court is not a good sign, but it’s certainly possible that 
Chief Justice John Roberts or Justice Anthony Kennedy could be persuaded to 
uphold the bans, or at least some aspect of them. (Despite the moderate 
language of Heller, I wouldn’t have much hope for theincreasingly partisan 
<http://gawker.com/scalia-is-a-twitter-egg-1714198342> Scalia.)

Until the US supreme court rules, however, states and localities should be 
aggressive in passing gun control measures. Firearm violence is amajor American 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/26/gun-control-political-refusal-to-address-politics-of-gun-violence>
, and, as of now, the US supreme court and the circuit courts have given plenty 
of leeway for governments to experiment with gun control measures.
 