
In the annals of modern democracy, 2016 has been pretty eventful. For some in 
Britain and the US, it has been a great year: in this version of events the 
will of the people, in the form of votes for Brexit andDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, has smashed triumphantly 
through the complacent expectations and blinkered preoccupations of a political 
elite.

For others, though, electorates have delivered results that will be 
self-evidently harmful both to citizens of these nations, and to stability in 
the wider world. There has been a distinctly authoritarian streak visible, too, 
from leaders of democracies including India and Turkey. Demagoguery, the 
scourge of democracy, has reared its head. According to this view, security – 
the bottom-line responsibility of government – seems imperilled, particularly 
in the US, where fears grow that internationally agreed measures to alleviate 
climate change may well be overturned, and loose words from a verbally 
incontinent incoming president could spark who-knows-what consequences.

Under these circumstances, some might silently hanker after the rule of 
philosopher kings or wise guardians – the trained statesmen and stateswomen 
suggested in Plato’s thought experiment, theRepublic 
<http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0168%3Abook%3D1%3Asection%3D327a>
 – rather than the emotionally erratic people, motivated by anger, frustration 
and fear. Anger, indeed, was the keynote of 2016: when the world’s most furious 
Twitter troll has been elected to the presidency of the US, rationalism looks 
to be in short supply, andThomas Hobbes 
<https://www.gutenberg.org/files/3207/3207-h/3207-h.htm>’s notion that man is 
at heart an unruly morass of passions and desires gains traction.

The word democracy derives from the Greek demos, people, and kratos, grip. 
That grip has recently seemed violent and uncomfortable to some. In these 
disturbing circumstances, headlines have begun to ask whether democracy is in 
crisis, a question that political scientists have been mulling over for some 
years, with thinkers such asColin Crouch 
<http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/five-minutes-with-colin-crouch/> 
wondering whether we are moving into a “post-democratic” era. Professor 
Crouch’s idea is that we may be entering a phase in which the energy is ebbing 
from the democratic process, in which turnout is largely on the wane, and in 
which democracy may become, increasingly, a shell from within which a 
socioeconomic elite actually runs things. If you accept that line of thought, 
Brexit and Trump certainly look like howls of protest.
A decade of decline for democracy 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/freedom-zip/giv-3902jEPxKk0un5HZ/>
 A decade of decline for democracy 
Claiming precise parallels between our modern democracies and those of ancient 
Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> is a fool’s game. Today’s 
representative democracies are very different from their distant ancestors, the 
direct democracies that developed in different forms in the Greek world, 
notably in Athens, in the 5th century BC. There, an assembly of the adult male 
citizenry (a minority of the population, since women and slaves were excluded) 
voted on, for example, even intricate matters of foreign policy. That meant 
every vote was effectively a referendum (though a referendum, it is worth 
noting, with checks and balances, since the measures voted for could be revised 
through the people’s law courts). Most officials, too, were chosen by lot; and 
then there was ostracism, a rarely invoked method by which politicians could be 
ejected from the city state for a decade.

And yet it can often be illuminating to think with the debate-loving Greeks in 
mind, not least since they bequeathed to later thinkers the earliest examples 
of political theory in action, back in those moments when democracy was newly 
minted. The very first comes courtesy of the historian Herodotus, a native of 
what is now the Mediterranean coast of Turkey. Recounting the deposing of a 
usurper on the throne of Persia in hisHistories 
<https://global.oup.com/academic/product/the-histories-9780199535668?cc=gb&lang=en&>
 (c440BC), he sets forth a debate between the leading conspirators, who discuss 
what form of government they should choose. (It is an imagined scene: this is 
the atmosphere of Greek debate transposed to a Persian court that was not about 
to abandon monarchy.) Each of the three plotters speaks up for a different form 
of government – democracy, oligarchy and monarchy. In defending democracy, 
using the then current catchword isonomia, equality before the law, the plotter 
Otanes says: “It is government by lot, it is accountable government, and it 
refers all decisions to the common people.” Megabyzus contends, on the other 
hand, that democracy is a kind of mob rule, and “there is nothing more stupid 
or given to brutality … the approach of the general populace is that of a river 
swollen with winter rain: they rush blindly forward and sweep things before 
them”. An image that might ring bells in 2016.

The Athenian Michael Gove

An even more telling episode, perhaps, is that narrated in Thucydides’s 
History of the Peloponnesian War 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/34696/history-of-the-peloponnesian-war/>, the 
conflict between Athens and Sparta that wore on between 431 and 404BC. In 427, 
the Athenians debated what to do about the town of Mytilene on Lesbos, which 
had revolted from their alliance. They voted to kill all the male citizens of 
the town, and to enslave the women and children – and duly set off in the ship 
of the day, a trireme. But overnight they thought better of it and held a 
second debate. The hawkish Cleon, who turns out to be a distant intellectual 
ancestor of thepro-leave campaigner Michael Gove 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GGgiGtJk7MA>, and indeed of Mr Trump, speaks 
out against experts. “As a general rule states are better governed by the man 
in the street than by intellectuals,” he says. On the other side, Diodotus 
urges the citizens to reconsider their fury: “Haste and anger are, to my mind, 
the two greatest obstacles to wise counsel.” The second referendum delivers a 
different result. A second trireme is sent out to Lesbos, and, miraculously, 
overtakes the first. The Mytilenaeans are spared.

Democracy back from margins

Despite the intriguing persistence of these discourses of anger and expertise, 
there is no glib comparison to be drawn here. No second referendum on Brexit 
will be offered, no trireme sent out to Brussels in the nick of time. The most 
productive way of comparing Athens of the 5th century BC with our modern 
democracies is by way of difference. As Professor Paul Cartledge, author of 
this year’sDemocracy: A Life 
<https://global.oup.com/academic/product/democracy-9780199697670?cc=&lang=en> 
has pointed out, democracy was a way of life in 5th-century Athens. It was not 
something that others got on with while the rest attended to their own 
business; it was Athenian culture as much as it was its system of government.

It has never, of course, been quite that in Britain; but at the moment it can 
feel that politics is less a part of citizens’ culture than it ever has been 
since the franchise was fully extended in 1928. The decline of industry and the 
reduction of the importance of trade unions have not helped. There have been 
signs of a kickback – thepassionate engagement in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/12/guardian-view-scottish-independence>
 in the run-up to the 2014 referendum, for example, and the growth of movements 
such as Momentum, and, briefly, Occupy. And yet if our democracy is to function 
as something more than a shell, it needs to be stitched back into citizens’ 
lives. Democracy will never be quite our way of being, as it was for the 
Athenians, but we must find ways to bring it back from the margins. A properly 
functioning everyday democracy is one in which people have the chance to 
participate in shaping public life – and who take the opportunity to do so. 
That, sadly, is not quite where we are in 2016.
 