
There is something missing from fashion in 2016. It hasn’t been there in any of
Alicia Vikander <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alicia-vikander>’s Louis 
Vuitton <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/louis-vuitton> romantic, softly 
scoop-necked gowns, on the premiere tour ofThe Light Between Oceans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-light-between-oceans>. It wasn’t there on 
the best-dressed lists of theMet Gala in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/gallery/2016/may/02/met-ball-2016-red-carpet-photos-celebrity-fashion>
, which were dominated byBeyoncé <https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> in 
high-necked skin-toned latex. It didn’t happen at Cannes, where Bella Hadid 
slayed all pretenders to her fashion throne in a red satin dress with a deep V 
to the waist, the smooth line from navel to waist accentuated by her swept-up 
hair. It was nowhere to be seen at the Oscars, whereJennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence>’s black lace Dior gown was 
free of obvious cantilevering.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a871e2749c31ad6c5352dd96c6da82f57f73994%2F0_16_2279_1366%2F2279.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20the%20cleavage%3A%20breasts%20piled%20together%20like%20cream%20buns%20do%20not%20make%20a%20subtle%20statement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20the%20cleavage%3A%20breasts%20piled%20together%20like%20cream%20buns%20do%20not%20make%20a%20subtle%20statement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a871e2749c31ad6c5352dd96c6da82f57f73994%2F0_16_2279_1366%2F2279.jpg>
 Bella Hadid at Cannes. Photograph: Samir Hussein/WireImage 
“Whatever happened to the cleavage?” asks the new issue of Vogue. The 
squished-together, hoicked-up presentation of bosoms has all but vanished from 
fashionable circles. Scaffolding breasts under the chin and framing them with a 
low-cut top, which has for decades been a shorthand for allure – the 
four-four-two of getting dressed up for a night out, if you like – is over. The 
go-to after dark neckline from catwalk to high street this year is a straight 
horizontal line that exposes the shoulders. The must-have Gucci blouses on 
Net-a-Porter have elaborate pussy bows that demand to be fastened around the 
neck. Any self-respecting It girl of the moment knows that the photo the 
paparazzi want is the one in gym leggings and a crop top, exposing this year’s 
must-haveab-crack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/sep/14/ab-crack-taylor-swift-serena-williams>
. Eva Herzigová, whose 1994 Wonderbra advert (“Hello Boys”) did more than any 
other image to put cleavage at the bullseye of sex appeal, has this year chosen 
for her most high-profile appearances a pie-crust collared white blouse under a 
trouser suit for the Vogue centenary party, and a buttoned-up denim coord at the
Venice film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/venicefilmfestival>. I 
think we can safely call that a goodbye.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb66cc13bc6ba4fa3800f1d9e25398c147bb050b%2F0_62_2288_1396%2F2288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20the%20cleavage%3A%20breasts%20piled%20together%20like%20cream%20buns%20do%20not%20make%20a%20subtle%20statement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20the%20cleavage%3A%20breasts%20piled%20together%20like%20cream%20buns%20do%20not%20make%20a%20subtle%20statement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb66cc13bc6ba4fa3800f1d9e25398c147bb050b%2F0_62_2288_1396%2F2288.jpg>
 Eva Herzigová wore a pie-crust collared white blouse under a trouser suit for 
the Vogue centenary party. Photograph: Jeff Spicer/Getty Images 
The odd part about this, though, is that you would be hard pressed to look at 
the year 2016 and say – yay, isn’t it brilliant how women don’t feel any 
pressure to have perfect bodies any more. I mean, I’m all for looking on the 
bright side, but when a recent survey by Dove found that just20% of women in 
the UK 
<http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/new-dove-research-finds-beauty-pressures-up-and-women-and-girls-calling-for-change-583743391.html>
 are confident about how their body looks, I don’t think we’re quite ready to 
punch the air and say: “Hurrah, thank goodness all those issues about women’s 
plummeting body image are solved.” Women are as critical of their physical 
selves as ever, and as likely to spend their time and money on bodily 
self-improvement. But when it comes to buying bras, that money is no longer 
spent on structures that create the once all-important effect of two extra 
large scoops of ice-cream upholstered by scalloped lace. A third of 
Net-A-Porter bra sales are now soft bras, without underwire. Elle Macpherson 
has returned to the lingerie market with a range that foregrounds comfortable, 
triangle-shaped bras, citing research that shows young women prefer this type 
of lingerie. Even Victoria’s Secret, spiritual home of the pneumatic cleavage, 
is marketing a new range of “bralettes” without underwire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23167374d820868abcc41652c42bcff7db4bb9d4%2F0_0_3062_2036%2F3062.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20the%20cleavage%3A%20breasts%20piled%20together%20like%20cream%20buns%20do%20not%20make%20a%20subtle%20statement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20the%20cleavage%3A%20breasts%20piled%20together%20like%20cream%20buns%20do%20not%20make%20a%20subtle%20statement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23167374d820868abcc41652c42bcff7db4bb9d4%2F0_0_3062_2036%2F3062.jpg>
 Eva Herzigová’s 1994 Wonderbra advert. 
This is not, to be clear, about an anything-goes era. There is still very 
definitely an ideal, when it comes to bosoms. But what Naomi Wolf once dubbed 
the “official breast <http://www.economist.com/node/1487595>” looks different 
now than it did in the first heyday of cosmetic surgery. The new look is what 
fashion insiders, with their wilful clinging to the fashion singular, have long 
dubbed “a 70s boob”, for its aesthetic connection to the soft-focus, earthy 
femininity of that decade. It isJane Birkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jane-birkin> in a cotton T-shirt, or 
Michelle Pfeiffer inScarface <https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarface> (1983, 
but still). It is also Elizabeth Debicki in this year’sThe Night Manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-night-manager>, all swan-like 
neck and clavicle and sweeping cream satin.

Victoria’s Secret, spiritual home of the pneumatic cleavage, is marketing a 
new range of 'bralettes' without underwire

As anyone who has known the particularly grating discomfort of wire digging 
into soft flesh will testify, the demise of the push-up bra is a step in the 
right direction, even if it is not a happy ending. The cleavage’s function as 
an essential part of looking glamorous but a barrier to being taken seriously 
in a professional context was a tiny, irritating example of the kind of double 
standards with which women endlessly have to deal. And the body parts that are 
being showcased instead – shoulders, upper arms and abs, for the most part – 
might not be attainable by all, but at least they speak of strength and action, 
rather than the quivering spectacle of a trophy cleavage. The way one presents 
to the world is always a power play: a statement about what you can offer, and 
what you expect in return. Breasts piled together like a pair of cream buns do 
not make a subtle statement, to that effect – a fact that Wonderbra nailed, 
back in 1994, in the way that only the straightforward wording of ads can.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0efff537fab2c370a9fccebbfacd0a8f4beee4f5%2F0_0_1880_1866%2F1880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20end%20of%20the%20cleavage%3A%20breasts%20piled%20together%20like%20cream%20buns%20do%20not%20make%20a%20subtle%20statement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20end%20of%20the%20cleavage%3A%20breasts%20piled%20together%20like%20cream%20buns%20do%20not%20make%20a%20subtle%20statement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fend-of-the-cleavage-bras-70s-boob-comeback%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0efff537fab2c370a9fccebbfacd0a8f4beee4f5%2F0_0_1880_1866%2F1880.jpg>
 The new 70s boob look: Michelle Pfeiffer in Scarface. Photograph: 
Sportsphoto/Allstar 
Look a little closer, however, and there is a subtle but significant 
difference between the 70s boob of the actual 1970s, and the new 70s boob. The 
new version is not so much natural, as faux-natural. It may not be hoicked, but 
it is certainly perky. The look is as much about breasts that don’t need a bra, 
as it is about not wearing a bra. In celebrity-ville, there are a lot of 
cosmetically enhanced breasts, and cosmetically enhanced breasts do not need 
bras. In this way, the goalposts of the perfect body have been moved, once 
again. Cosmetic surgery has a insidious impact on the beauty and fashion 
industries. Just as the effect of rhinoplasty and fillers is aped by Superdrug 
counters bulging with cheap contouring creams, so the rise of silicone buoyancy 
has created a new market for lace bralettes. The end of cleavage does not mean 
the path to a more realistic, more diverse, more empowering world of female 
body image has got any easier. But at least we get to make the journey in more 
comfortable underwear.

• This article was amended on 4 November 2016 to correct the spelling of 
“silicone buoyancy”.
 