
There are moments in history that leave their mark in buildings. With 
hindsight, these structures define a period, its ambitions, values, skills and 
frailties. Like fossils in a geological layer, they are precisely recognisable 
– they could not come from another time. So it is with the baroque churches of 
the counter-reformation, the colossal palaces of America’s gilded age and the 
spare modernism of the Attlee government’s buildings for health, education and 
housing.

So it is also with the greying Teflon and white-painted steel, the straining 
cables, the walls of planar glazing and the gaudy graphics that tell you that a 
building project was started in the early years of the national lottery. This 
month, it will be 20 years since Noel Edmonds and Anthea Turner hosted the 
first draw, and the strange alchemy started by which eminent committees 
converted the spinning coloured balls into art galleries, sports stadiums, 
parks, discovery centres, bridges and places of more-or-less vague 
environmental purpose. This spree of public building was often wasteful and 
absurd. The way the lottery was set up encouraged constructions of unclear 
purpose and insufficient means of maintenance. It helped launch the 
ill-conceived idea that to “regenerate” a place you need only install a 
cultural icon and leave the rest to the private sector.

It was confused about its cultural and democratic values. It helped create a 
bizarre attitude to risk, which is still with us, whereby it is acceptable to 
blow a billion pounds on something as uncertain as theMillennium Dome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/dome>, yet the lesser details have to be 
micromanaged by expensive consultants until the life is squeezed out of 
buildings or other cultural projects.

The lottery had disasters – the short-lived pop music museum in Sheffield, 
something calledThe Public in West Bromwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2013/nov/18/public-arts-centre-west-bromwich-museums-funding>
, the dome. The Earth Centre near Doncaster received £41.6m, with the idea of 
reviving a former mining area with tales of ecological hope. It foundered and 
ex-pitmen retrained as guides and greeters found themselves out of a job again. 
But the lottery building boom also had triumphs – theEden Project 
<http://www.edenproject.com/>, Tate Modern 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-modern> – and plenty of well-conceived, 
well-executed projects that continue to enrich the life of the country. It 
stood for something that had been forgotten, which is the importance of 
investment in places for shared public experience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414672973966%2F80dac1a0-b20a-42f8-9d75-95116cf814d0-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414672973966%2F80dac1a0-b20a-42f8-9d75-95116cf814d0-1020x612.jpeg>
 What’s the big idea? The Mind Zone inside the Millennium Dome, which the 
lottery funded to the tune of £603m. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod 
It was only half-intended. John Major’s government decided there should be a 
national lottery, the proceeds of which should be spent on good causes, but 
there was a concern that they should not be spent on things that would normally 
be paid for out of taxes, such as teachers or road repairs. So lottery money 
had to follow the principle of “additionality”, meaning that it would go to 
projects that wouldn’t happen without it, and it had to be spent only on 
capital projects. Capital projects, give or take such things as buying 
instruments for brass bands, are usually buildings and so an era of accidental 
architectural patronage began.

There were other forces at play. The turn of the millennium was looming, along 
with a feeling that Something Should Be Done to celebrate an impressive if 
empty number. There was growing confidence in British art, design and 
architecture, which would be consecrated in the Blair years as Cool Britannia. 
There was burgeoning environmentalism. Interest was growing in the renewal of 
British cities and of the wastelands left by the disappearance of 
manufacturing. In 1997, theBilbao Guggenheim 
<http://www.guggenheim-bilbao.es/en/> would be launched, and with it the idea 
that iconic buildings could be at the centre of “culturally led regeneration”.

So optimism and futurism were back in fashion along with some sense, if vague, 
of social purpose. It was a striking contrast with the preceding decade, when 
Margaret Thatcher’s government all but killed off the idea of public building 
and Prince Charles insisted that whatever was built should look to the past. In 
the recessionary early 1990s, British architects had looked yearningly across 
the Channel at thegrands projets with which President Mitterrand and other 
French politicians adorned their cities.

Suddenly it was happening here. “Distributors” were set up, public bodies 
handed theBrewster’s Millions problem of spending torrents of cash. They 
included the Arts Council, the Sports Council, theHeritage Lottery Fund 
<http://www.hlf.org.uk/> (HLF) and the Millennium Commission. Lord Rothschild, 
chair of the HLF, invited people of influence to lunch and asked for their 
ideas to help relieve his embarrassment of riches, a subject in which a 
Rothschild, of all people, might be expected to be expert.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414673351132%2F614e0507-9875-4bf8-9e65-c0c12f8f1444-1682x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414673351132%2F614e0507-9875-4bf8-9e65-c0c12f8f1444-1682x2040.jpeg>
 The National Space Centre in Leicester; the project received £26m from lottery 
funds. Photograph: Robert Morris/Alamy 
There was no shortage of suggestions. It was proposed that all British 
cathedrals should be repaired and restored by the year 2000. Cities and towns 
raced to claim local specialisms that could be the basis of a museum or 
“centre” –glass in Sunderland 
<http://www.nationalglasscentre.com/about/partners/ourpartners/>, pop music in 
Sheffield,space exploration in Leicester 
<http://www.spacecentre.co.uk/?gclid=CNTaj5npz8ECFSuWtAodRyMAxg> and 
(unsuccessfully) laughter in Morecambe. Ecological themes were spun into 
multimillion-pound proposals of varying degrees of lameness, some of which were 
built. Few stopped to notice that it’s not very green to put up a 
half-redundant structure.

Newspapers and journalists were bombarded with ideas. Among those I received 
was a new age-y proposal for celebrating the millennium. It came with a sketch 
of a large circular structure, with smaller circles attached to its 
circumference, to be built on the Greenwich peninsula in London. The group in 
question said this circle had been designed by the celebrated architectRichard 
Rogers <http://www.rsh-p.com/rshp_home>, so I checked with his office. Oh no, 
came the slightly embarrassed reply, it was not really one of the practice’s 
projects. It was just a doodle done by one of Rogers’s partners, as a favour to 
some friends of his.

The awarding of grants started and with it the inevitable rows. There was 
outrage that the Royal Opera House, seen as a toffs’ playground, should get 
£73.5m from the Arts Council for its long dreamed-of improvements.Zaha Hadid 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/> won a competition to design a different opera 
house – in Cardiff – where key figures then did everything they could, 
eventually successfully, to stop her design being built. It was announced that 
there should be a national festival to celebrate the year 2000, inspired by the 
Festival of Britain and the Great Exhibition of 1851. The Greenwich peninsula 
beat Birmingham and other contenders to be the site of this event. Richard 
Rogers’s office designed a structure whose plan bore a curious similarity to 
the previously disowned big circle. This was the Millennium Dome, that 
unintended self-parody of Blairism, that wonderful engine of farce, hypocrisy 
and non-fatal cataclysms.

Twenty years on, cities and regions are defined by their lottery landscapes. 
Take Tyneside, for example, where Gateshead has acquired some of the lottery’s 
successes: Antony Gormley’sAngel of the North 
<http://www.gateshead.gov.uk/Leisure%20and%20Culture/attractions/Angel/Home.aspx>
, theSage concert hall <http://www.sagegateshead.com/>, the Baltic Centre for 
Contemporary Art <https://www.balticmill.com/>. Newcastle has had less success 
in capturing the imagination, with the ticky-tackyCentre for Life 
<http://www.life.org.uk/> – currently drumming up visitors with the tasteless, 
two-decades-oldBody Worlds 
<http://www.life.org.uk/whats-on/body-worlds#.VE_ODvSsUWA> exhibition of 
preserved corpses – and the Blue Carpet, an over-budget, not-on-time public 
space by Thomas Heatherwick, whose blue glass surface was supposed to last a 
century but now looks very grey. The famous bridge-laden view of the two towns’ 
shared river has meanwhile changed forever, with the Sage off to one side and 
the curving, tiltingMillennium Bridge  
<http://www.gateshead.gov.uk/Leisure%20and%20Culture/attractions/bridge/Home.aspx>
in the centre. The lottery prompted too many bridges in the manner ofSantiago 
Calatrava <http://www.calatrava.com/>, with exaggerated parabolas, tense wires 
and moving parts, but the Tyne’s version, having a decent-size river to cross, 
makes more sense than most.

If the lottery had a style it was hi-tech, the approach developed in the 1960s 
that aimed to liberate architecture from rigid traditional patterns with the 
power of industrial technology. Up until the 90s, it was seen as dangerously 
radical and its most famous practitioners,Norman Foster 
<http://www.fosterandpartners.com/> and Richard Rogers 
<http://www.rsh-p.com/rshp_home>, had found their opportunities in Britain 
limited. With the lottery it became mainstream, perhaps helped by a 
subconscious recognition that its nostalgia for Victorian engineering was 
something every Briton could share. Its futurism, being a look back to a 60s 
way of looking forward, was not threatening either. The message of Hadid’s 
ejection from Cardiff, meanwhile, was that anything too challenging would be 
off-limits.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414673661414%2Fdbb05443-65cf-4267-9a62-d464691503e7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414673661414%2Fdbb05443-65cf-4267-9a62-d464691503e7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Olafur Eliasson’s Weather Project in the Turbine Hall of Tate Modern, 2003. 
Photograph: Dan Chung 
Foster picked up some of the more notable lottery commissions – the Great Court
 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/about_us/the_museums_story/architecture/great_court.aspx>
 of the British Museum, theMillennium Bridge 
<http://www.londonmillenniumbridge.com/> in London, the Sage 
<http://www.fosterandpartners.com/projects/the-sage-gateshead/>. Rogers did the 
dome. Projects with a particular stress on science or the future, or a tendency 
towards the visionary, would go toNick Grimshaw 
<http://grimshaw-architects.com/>, who was always the most wide-eyed of 
technology-lovers. When there was some heritage to worry aboutMichael Hopkins 
<http://www.hopkins.co.uk/l/> might get the call. A former partner of Foster’s, 
Hopkins had shown at Lord’s cricket ground andGlyndebourne opera house 
<http://glyndebourne.com/new-opera-house> a skill for inserting well-crafted 
new buildings into sensitive surroundings.

There was a particular fondness for things that hang and float and for 
surfaces that deny friction. Gravity and contact with the ground were too old 
century and the future would know no dirt. A material was developed, ETFE, 
Ethylene tetrafluoroethylene, which perfectly captured the ethos of the era. A 
kind of translucent plastic, it made for example the air-filled pillows with 
which Grimshaw’sEden Project 
<http://grimshaw-architects.com/project/the-eden-project/> is covered.

At the same time, there was aching concern that lottery projects should be 
popular. The lottery was played by the people, and particularly poorer people, 
so its proceeds should go on things inclusive. Which at the same time had to be 
somehow cultural, improving or educational, to distinguish them from the theme 
parks, shopping centres and multiplexes that get built without public subsidy. 
If the lesson of one opera house row, in Cardiff, was not to get too fancy with 
the architecture, the message of the other, in Covent Garden, was to avoid 
looking elitist.

This agonising issue gave rise to the Sunderland Chip Incident. One day, a 
resident of the city walked into its newNational Glass Centre 
<http://www.nationalglasscentre.com/>, ordered a bag of chips, was dismayed to 
find only four in her serving and alerted the national press. Really, the Glass 
Centre’s representative rushed to explain, she had not been short-changed. 
There was really quite a lot of potato in her portion. It was just that the 
chips had been cut fashionably fat. In other words, in a microcosm of 
lottery-inspired concerns, chips were on the menu because they were popular, 
but they had to be an unusual kind of chip (more cultural, more interesting, 
more what would now be called hipster) so as to differ from the products of 
non-lottery-funded chippies.

In this climate, a particular kind of design flourished, in which the 
techniques of theme parks and trade shows were applied to museum displays. Out 
went theGeological Museum 
<http://www.nhm.ac.uk/visit-us/history-architecture/geological-museum/> in 
South Kensington, with its rock specimens in ancient display cases; in came the
Earth Galleries 
<http://www.nhm.ac.uk/business-centre/filming/images/earth-galleries/index.html>
, a grinding, squawking, escalator-assisted, gameshow-like experience of 
multicoloured interactive fun. Specialist consultancies seized with relish the 
opportunities offered by the technology of the time – screens, buttons, noises, 
the freedom of digital printing to spew out more colours, fonts and shapes than 
you could possibly want.

Peter Jenkinson, the director of the New Art Gallery in Walsall 
<http://www.thenewartgallerywalsall.org.uk/> who got its building realised, 
used to say that if popularity was his only concern all his exhibitions would 
be called “Egyptian Impressionist Dinosaurs”. Not everyone had his nerve, 
however, and often lottery attractions tried so hard to ape their commercial 
rivals that they ended up being less good imitations, in the process losing 
sight of any cultural aspiration, and often ending up not being particularly 
popular.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414674001514%2F74a75422-bc23-49a1-b261-6a91246d453f-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414674001514%2F74a75422-bc23-49a1-b261-6a91246d453f-1360x2040.jpeg>
 £15.75m well spent: The New Art Gallery in Walsall, West Midlands. Photograph: 
Images of Birmingham Premium/A/Alamy 
The formula of the 1851 Great Exhibition was rerun several times. There, a 
superstructure was created, the Crystal Palace, which used and expressed 
advanced engineering, while the contents were motley and kitsch. The dome did 
this, as did the Hopkins-designedDynamic Earth <http://www.dynamicearth.co.uk/> 
in Edinburgh. So does the Grimshaw-designedNational Space Centre in Leicester 
<http://www.spacecentre.co.uk/>, built after the city had successfully drawn 
attention to its previously little-known connection with space travel.

The Space Centre, in fact, sums up many lottery characteristics. The principle 
of additionality meant that projects were dreamed up that few had known they 
wanted, on sometimes slender pretexts. The stress on capital projects meant 
that a building had to be built, which should also communicate millennial 
optimism. And so there stands a dramatic ETFE-clad tower, as it happens 
slightly condom-like, with a lower structure alongside, containing a display 
that is a little light on actual exhibits, but eked out with clanging, 
flashing, quite often broken interactive displays. Both structure and displays 
look dated now and worn at the edges, like the set for a forgotten sci-fi 
series, but they still excite the troops of schoolchildren for whom it seems 
mostly to exist. It is, at least, a public facility dispensing some kind of 
education and pleasure where previously there was none.

Like many other lottery projects, the Space Centre is in an off-centre 
location, being seen as a catalyst for regeneration. It was a worthy idea, and 
sometimes worked, but it hit two snags: one was that, if the prospects of a 
place were too dire, a jaunty bit of hi-techery was not enough to rescue them; 
the other was the modern British inability to plan new places coherently or 
well, and thus extend the architectural ambition of the lottery building to its 
immediate surroundings. And so the half-regenerated wilderness is as emblematic 
of lottery projects as straining cables and ETFE cladding.Millennium Point 
<http://www.millenniumpoint.org.uk/> in Birmingham has such a wilderness, for 
example, while the Space Centre stands in a queasy, unlovely territory, made up 
of car park, industrial relics and some new but very un-futuristic brick houses.

Often, the secret of lottery success was to get the balance right between 
actual and hoped-for content. Tate Modern, for example, started off with a 
not-bad collection of art, but it wasn’t completely obvious how it would fill 
the vast voids of Bankside Power Station. It did so with art installations of 
unprecedented size in the formerTurbine Hall 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/context-comment/articles/turbine-hall-commissions-2015>
, and was rewarded with visitor numbers that still greatly exceed the original 
projections.

In Walsall, the New Art Gallery is a home for the works bequeathed the town by 
Jacob Epstein’s widow. As with Tate Modern, the building is bigger than the 
collection requires but after some rocky years, and with the help of a 
crowd-pleasing Damien Hirst show in 2012-13, it is now averaging respectable 
visitor numbers of 200,000 a year. Walsall’s gallery also chose, as Tate Modern 
did, an architectural alternative to hi-tech:Caruso St John 
<http://www.carusostjohn.com/projects/new-art-gallery-walsall/>’s design does 
not create a vision of an imaginary future, but was based in the place and time 
in which it was made. It drew inspiration equally from Victorian civic 
buildings and neglected 1960s towers and, while plainly modern, was happy to 
use traditional shapes of window and room, and materials such as terracotta and 
wood. Now that an actual future has arrived, and we are well into the 21st 
century, it wears better and looks less dated than works that aimed to be 
prophetic.

Things have now changed. Since the early years, ways have been found to divert 
lottery money into things other than buildings. Millennium fever has been and 
gone, although the London Olympics, which conceivably only happened because the 
country had first acquired a taste for grand projects, saw a revival of what 
might be called lotteryism. Lessons have been learned, such that spectacular 
screw-ups are less common.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414674371527%2Ffd45aeb6-b741-434d-b417-be18f7111798-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414674371527%2Ffd45aeb6-b741-434d-b417-be18f7111798-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A palpable miss: the former National Centre for Popular Music in Sheffield, 
which got £11m from the lottery. Photograph: Bill Stephenson/Alamy 
The Early Lottery Period has, however, left us many things. It has left large 
numbers of institutions and structures ranging from the crass to the brilliant. 
It launched or enhanced the careers of good architects who are still doing 
their bit for the fabric of the country. It has left a large number of rooftop 
restaurants (Walsall,Tate Modern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern>, the National Portrait 
Gallery, the Baltic), this being a simple way to give the public a sense of 
ownership of their cities. The lottery has also bequeathed more Imax cinemas 
and Calatrava-esque bridges than we possibly need, and too many peeling, 
part-functioning interactive displays that, in the age of the iPhone, look old 
hat indeed.

Away from the millennial pomp, there have been plenty of intelligent, useful, 
sensibly delivered projects. Some were not new buildings, but parks, public 
spaces and restorations of historic structures. There were differences in style 
between the distributors – the Heritage Lottery Fund has generally been better 
at backing discreet successes, whereas the Millennium Commission went for the 
headline-grabbing triumphs – Tate Modern, theEden Project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/eden-project> – and disasters: the dome and the 
Doncaster Earth Centre.

The lottery’s main issues centred on its weird combination of extravagance and 
caution. It started with gambling, and quickly became a huge splurge of cash 
with imperfectly defined objectives, an amazingly reckless venture by a 
famously grey prime minister. At the same time, proposals were intensively 
vetted, scrutinised and subjected to tests of viability that often turned out 
to be illusory. It coincided with the rise of building contracts where, in the 
interests of eliminating risk, architects are made marginal in the process, 
often with ill effects on the quality of the finished work. Yet the whole 
lottery adventure was one enormous, uncalculated, unspecified risk.

At its worst, it favoured form over content and inflated box-ticking pieties 
into multimillion-pound structures. It expanded the apparatus of state-financed 
consultancy and over-management. It sometimes promoted phony populism and 
cultural cowardice. But would we rather it hadn’t happened, that there had been 
no revival in public works? No, we wouldn’t. Thank you, John Major.

Case study: Millennium Point, Birmingham
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414775536697%2F7194f0a4-2988-4c7b-9515-1a2690533d39-2060x1368.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414775536697%2F7194f0a4-2988-4c7b-9515-1a2690533d39-2060x1368.jpeg>
 Millennium Point in Birmingham, completed in 2001, received £50m of lottery 
funding. Photograph: David Jones/Alamy 
One of the larger beneficiaries of the lottery was Millennium Point in 
Birmingham, a potentially model project in terms of the requirements of funded 
projects. It was intended to be regenerative, forward-looking, educational and 
entertaining. It could also attract the matching funding from various other 
public pots, which, as the lottery would never pay all the cost of a project, 
was essential. Looking at it now, it’s hard to escape the feeling that it was 
built because it ticked the right boxes rather than answered a real need.


It received £50m from the Millennium Commission, the same as was initially 
awarded to Tate Modern, a donation rumoured to be a consolation prize after the 
second city failed in its bid to host the planned national millennium festival. 
The idea of Millennium Point was to combine a museum of science, called 
Thinktank, with parts of Birmingham City University and a giant cinema. It was 
to be located in the run-down Eastside area of the city, and spur regeneration 
there.

Thinktank took over some of the exhibits from the city’s Museum of Science and 
Industry, magnificent machines from Birmingham’s manufacturing history. The 
move was criticised for the fact that the old museum had been centrally located 
and free to enter whereas the new one would be more remote and ticketed. It now 
costs £39 for a family of four.

Like many millennium projects with a scientific theme, the building was 
designed by the practice of Nicholas Grimshaw, although it was built under a 
type of construction contract that reduced the influence of the architect over 
the final realisation of the design, an early example of something that has now 
become commonplace. It is one of Grimshaw’s least spectacular buildings, a 
large oblong box that, despite finding room for a huge atrium, somehow manages 
to squeeze the space devoted to the historic machines.

Millennium Point, which opened in 2001, has yet to capture the imagination in 
the way that Tate Modern or the Eden Project did. Thinktank’s visitor numbers 
have varied between 150,000 and 250,000 a year, fewer than the 300,000 that the 
old science museum attracted. Around Millennium Point remain large areas of 
open land still awaiting regeneration. The giant cinema screen has closed, 
reopened and closed again.

Its name was always a hostage to fortune – what exactly is the point of the 
Point? However, its chief executive, Philip Singleton, who has held the post 
since 2012, wants to stress positives. The project has, he says, “challenged 
partnership development to a really deep level” and been “a catalyst” in a 
“really disconnected part of the city”. He is delighted that Birmingham City 
University is investing in the area, which has also attracted a new hotel and 
two academies. “We have created a buzz about Eastside and we continue to do 
so,” says Singleton.

Lottery funding: the hits...

Tate Modern, London
Some people didn’t get it – why would the Tate want to move into a dirty old 
power station when it could get a spanking new palace designed by one of 
Britain’s high-tech giants? And why hire the Swiss practice of Herzog & de 
Meuron, then known mostly to cognoscenti? But the power station gave the Tate 
the mighty Turbine Hall, whose imaginative installations have played a key part 
in attracting about 5 million visitors a year.

Eden Project, Cornwall
The Eden Project might have seemed one of the wackier of the many 
lottery-inspired environmentally themed projects, but it was the one that 
worked best. Nicholas Grimshaw’s geodesic domes climb over former clay pits in 
Cornwall, to form a series of biomes that recreate the climates and flora of 
different regions of the world. It captured the public imagination and earned 
impressive visitor numbers. It hit a rocky patch recently, but the latest 
reports are that it is back in the black.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414775669063%2Fcb7b8f76-0680-489d-bdab-637d43dc3211-1456x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20buildings%20that%20won%20the%20national%20lottery%20jackpot%20%E2%80%93%20the%20hits%20and%20misses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Fnov%2F02%2Fnational-lottery-funding-buildings-won-jackpot-architecture-hits-and-misses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F31%2F1414775669063%2Fcb7b8f76-0680-489d-bdab-637d43dc3211-1456x2040.jpeg>
 Photograph: Kuligssen/Alamy 
Angel of the North, Gateshead 
Antony Gormley’s wide-winged steel tribute to northern industry attracted 
scepticism when first proposed. Among other things, it was thought it would 
cause accidents by distracting passing motorists. But it has firmly established 
itself as a symbol of Gateshead, and one that other towns seek to emulate.

American Air Museum, Duxford 
A labour of love by the aerophile Norman Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/norman-foster> that elegantly fulfils 
its purpose. Winner of the Stirling prize. One of the quietly effective 
projects that the Heritage Lottery Fund likes to back.

...and the misses

Millennium Dome
A billion pounds was spent to achieve a vast heap of patronising gunk, which 
failed to meet its visitor targets or its lofty aspirations for engendering 
national pride. It now houses the successful O2 entertainment centre, but only 
after the further investment of £350m by the private sector. In 2009 the lease 
on the dome itself was sold for a modest £24m.

The Public, West Bromwich
Completed late and over budget, and with a hazy purpose that its name did 
nothing to explain, this was an arts centre whose design made the display of 
art challenging, The Public was otherwise a great idea. It closed five years 
after it opened and has recently reopened as a sixth-form college.

National Centre for Popular Music, Sheffield
The pop museum that went pop. Attracted a quarter of its hoped-for visitors. 
Closed after 15 months. Its building, which resembles a drumkit, is now the 
students’ union for Sheffield Hallam University.

Earth Centre, Doncaster
At the same meeting that the Millennium Commission turned down Zaha Hadid’s 
Cardiff Bay Opera House on grounds of viability, it gave £41.6m to the highly 
speculative Earth Centre, a “world centre for sustainable development” in a 
former mining area of Yorkshire. But it was not itself sustainable and closed 
after five years.
 