
Nearly 43 years ago the captain of the South Korean football team arrived in 
Sydney to play for a New South Wales state league side. The program under which 
he came and the story of his involvement in the country’s football is little 
more than a footnote in Australia’s sporting history, but it shouldn’t be.

Fast forward to 2015, and the Asian Cup could hardly have ended on a sweeter 
note for the host nation, Australia, who beat South Korea in the final. People 
of South Korean background form one of Australia’s largest Asian diaspora 
communities, while fans linked to the continent’s other football heavyweights 
supported the tournament in the thousands. Australia’s relationship with Asian 
football was at an all-time high, and yet just two days after the final,
Football Federation Australia announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/02/a-league-u-turn-proposed-reduced-foreign-quota>
 that an Asian visa player category “was not part of the discussion” for the 
A-League.

Over the past few years journalists 
<http://theworldgame.sbs.com.au/blog/2012/11/02/building-bridges> and people 
with contacts in various Asian communities in Australia have championed the 
introduction of an Asian-specific player position to the sport’s governing 
body. The response from the FFA is usually the same – they fear Australian 
clubs will be priced out of the market and won’t be able to attract the best 
talent in Asia. Instead of implementing a policy, the FFA prefers A-League 
clubs to take their own initiative. “It’s fair to say that individually there’s 
a number of clubs that are starting to understand the opportunities of Asia, 
and where they can recruit players from to increase their market exposure both 
here and on our doorstep,” the head of the A-League Damien De Bohun told 
Guardian Australia before the Asian Cup.

But there is no institutional will for an Asian visa player category, and the 
attitude of the governing body means Australia fails to reciprocate a ruling 
that has afforded many Australians the opportunity to continue their career in 
Asia. In recent years  
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/football/socceroos/australias-sasa-ognenovski-named-2010-asian-footballer-of-the-year/story-e6frf4l3-1225960555573?nk=642d0a01a293251b0e92397bdb0849fa>
Sasa Ognenovski 
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/football/socceroos/australias-sasa-ognenovski-named-2010-asian-footballer-of-the-year/story-e6frf4l3-1225960555573?nk=642d0a01a293251b0e92397bdb0849fa>
,  <http://www.fifa.com/world-match-centre/news/newsid/214/977/8/index.html>
Joel Griffiths 
<http://www.fifa.com/world-match-centre/news/newsid/214/977/8/index.html> and 
many others have benefited enormously from the “3+1” ruling that is legislated 
in many countries in the Asian Football Confederation. The rewards Australia 
has reaped from becoming part of Asia seems to far outstrip the value it has 
put back in.

It wasn’t always this way. For decades, Australia was rebuffed as it tried to 
leave the Oceania Football Confederation and join the AFC. In 1972, after a 
fact-finding mission through South East Asia, the Australian Soccer Federation 
introduced their own so-called “Colombo Plan” to encourage integration and 
cultural exchange with the region. Although the experiment is largely forgotten 
about these days, it remains an interesting example of Australia’s troubled 
sporting relationship with Asia, and of wasted opportunities in the region. It 
also serves as a historical precedent to the “3+1” policy.

The ASF’s Colombo Plan wasn’t part of the broader government-sponsored Colombo 
Plan 
<http://www.nma.gov.au/collections/collection_interactives/endurance_scroll/harvest_of_endurance_html_version/explore_the_scroll/colombo_plan>
, but it took the nickname as it was a one-off exchange program designed to 
curry favour with the AFC. In the ASF president’s report in September, 1971, 
Sir Arthur George lamented the lack of “international matches of competitive 
interest” in Oceania. “I think this aspect calls for a complete reappraisal of 
our membership of Oceania,” wrote George. “I therefore pose the question – 
should we consider at this late stage, whether we would be better placed by 
associating ourselves with the Asian Confederation.”

The ASF Colombo Plan was first reported on in January 1972 by the Soccer World 
newspaper in a front-page article titled Our Isolation Resented By Asian 
Neighbours, which stated that the “creation of a soccer “Colombo Plan” by the 
ASF will... improve relations with Asia.” The first arrivals were rumoured to 
be two international players from Hong Kong and South Korea.

Three months later, the South Korean player Kim Jung-nam landed in Sydney. He 
had been part of the starting XI in both World Cup qualifiers against the 
Socceroos in 1969. Kim wasn’t Australia’s first Asian import – Singaporean 
Johnny Wong played with APIA in the 1960s. He arrived, of course, before the
White Australia Policy 
<http://www.abc.net.au/archives/80days/stories/2012/01/19/3415230.htm> was 
abolished by the Whitlam Labor Government, a policy that was a major reason for 
the resentment towards Australian football among AFC nations at the time.

It was arranged that Kim would play for Sutherland, a newly promoted and 
ambitious team. He stayed in Sans Souci with Sutherland captain Colin Bennett. 
Sans Souci, an idyllic beachside suburb with sand as white as the locals, is 
like something out of a tourism colour-brochure. Overlooking Botany Bay, Sans 
Souci translates from French as “no worries”, but for Kim it must have felt a 
long way from the bustling capital city of Seoul, which was rapidly expanding 
and in the process of post-war reconstruction.

Bennett was happy to take on the responsibility of acting as host and tour 
guide. “We had a spare bedroom, so he came and lived with us,” he says. “My 
parents took him on board like he was one of their own. He would call my mother 
and father ‘mum’ and ‘dad’, so it was a pretty close affection.” Kim, who was 
paid a flat rate of $65 a week, remembers his time in Sydney and with the 
Bennett family fondly. “Colin’s family were very good to me and I’m very 
grateful towards them,” he wrote in an email to Guardian Australia.

Kim made his debut in the reserves against Prague in April, and then his first 
team debut against South Coast United, coming off the bench for Paul Smith in a 
1-0 loss. It was a quiet, inauspicious start, but for the ASF, his presence was 
politically important. In June, the governing body left the Oceania Football 
Confederation, with the AFC firmly in their sights. Joining Asia, warnedSoccer 
World, “could be a long, even painful process”.

For Kim, joining an Australian club was equally painful. “Teams would go out 
there and just try toget him,” says Bennett. “Sometimes, because he was so 
quick and skilful, there’d always be one or two guys that would tag him every 
game.”

In July 1972, the Sydney Morning Herald reported that Kim was “disillusioned 
with Sydney football” and wanted to return home. “I’m not doing you any good 
playing half fit, and every time I go on the field I am kicked,” Kim was 
reported to have said to his coach, Mike Johnson. “I don’t feel like I am 
earning the money Sutherland are paying me. Perhaps it would be better if I 
went home earlier.” Johnson refused, instead blaming the “blatant violence” of 
the domestic game.

Bennett recalls the situation slightly differently. He says Kim was resolute 
and would ice his legs after every game to ease the pain. “He’d back up every 
week and recover pretty quickly, because he knew next week the same would 
happen to him again! I tell you, honestly, every game he would just burn the 
pitch up. The only way you were going to stop him was by bringing him down, and 
he knew that. Sometimes he would ride the tackles, sometimes he would come out 
worse off, but he played some cracking games.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-kim-jung-nam%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb69fd7463a16dbc964db43c5111964d34fbc392d%2F0_0_2500_1499%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20...%20Asian%20trailblazer%20in%20Australia%20Kim%20Jung-nam%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-kim-jung-nam%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Forgotten%20Story%20of%20...%20Asian%20trailblazer%20in%20Australia%20Kim%20Jung-nam%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fthe-forgotten-story-of-kim-jung-nam%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb69fd7463a16dbc964db43c5111964d34fbc392d%2F0_0_2500_1499%2F2000.jpg>
 Newspaper clippings of former football player Kim Jung-Nam. Photograph: 
clippings 
Fitting in was made easier by the fact that people could see his immense 
quality. The press called him “talented”, “polished”, “clever”, while team-mate 
Peter Wykes remembers him being “very skilful on the ball”. Bennett says he was 
an instant hit with Sutherland’s players and supporters. “Kim was a very 
friendly person who got on well with the team and was always prepared to share 
his experience with us,” says Wykes. “I certainly relished the opportunity to 
play with him, especially as he was captain of his national team.”

Despite Sutherland being an average side firmly anchored to the lower reaches 
of the ladder, after matches against top sides such as APIA, Pan Hellenic, 
Prague and Croatia, Kim was regularly named inSoccer World’s Team of the Week. 

There was, understandably, a fair amount of confusion and misunderstanding 
about Kim, and the language barrier presented significant difficulties. The 
press, accustomed to dealing with Anglo and European players, reported his name 
under three variations – Kim Chung Nam, Chung Nam Kim and Kim Jung-wan. With 
little English, the diminutive South Korean would carry a small dictionary 
wherever he went. “Every time someone said something he didn’t understand he’d 
consult the dictionary and find out what it meant,” says Bennett.

Kim was a quick and eager learner. After Mike Johnson’s training sessions he 
would return to his room and write detailed notes. “Mike was more of an 
intellectual coach,” wrote Johnny Warren in his biographySheilas, Wogs and 
Poofters. “Whereas some coaches were basically just trainers, in the sense that 
they simply physically prepare players for matches, Mike wanted the players to 
think about every aspect of the game – all of its tactics, psychology and 
subtleties.”

“Mike Johnson was a very good coach, passionate and friendly,” says Kim. 
“During that period it was quite a tough time. From his coaching, a lot was 
learned.” Indeed Johnson seemed to be a formative influence on Kim, who at 28 
could see his playing days drawing to an end. “I think I’ll start coaching when 
I get back to Seoul,” Kim toldSoccer World in July 1972. “Eventually I’d like 
to coach the Korean national team.”

By the end of the season, Sutherland just managed to stay in the first 
division, and their website proudly states they’ve never been back to the 
second division since. What’s not remembered is that in September 1972, Johnson 
singled out Kim for praise, listing him as a central reason they survived the 
relegation battle.

Yet despite the apparent success of Kim’s season with Sutherland, in following 
seasons there are no documented traces of Asian imports or the ASF’s Colombo 
Plan. Having left the Oceania Football Confederation, Australia were in 
international purgatory, and one can only assume that the exchange program died 
with Australia’s hopes of membership to the AFC. In 1974, the ASF were 
officially rejected for membership at a congress in Iran, and returned with 
their tail between their legs to Oceania.

Kim returned to Seoul in September 1972 in a cloud of confusion. “Kim is 
alleged to have complained bitterly during his entire stay with Sutherland and 
when he came home two months ago many newspapers carried his criticism in 
interviews,” reportedSoccer World in November. In an open letter to the 
editors, the assistant director of the Korean Football Association admitted the 
ASF “led us to expect” that Kim would be sent to a “top club”. However he 
rubbished suggestions that Kim had complained about his stay. In an email Kim 
maintained the report wasn’t correct, and that he was treated well by his hosts.

On his return home, Kim was immediately re-integrated into the South Korean 
squad for a World Cup qualifier against the Socceroos. His old housemate, Colin 
Bennett, was part of the Socceroos squad and remembers the joy of meeting Kim’s 
parents in Korea. But while Bennett spent the rest of his career in Australia, 
Kim went on to much greater heights.

In 1977, Kim coached the South Korean national team against the Socceroos in 
Sydney in two World Cup qualifiers. In 1986 he took South Korea to the World 
Cup, facing Argentina, Italy and Bulgaria before coaching club sides in both 
China and South Korea. Recently he served as vice-president of the Korea 
Football Association and won the K-League with Ulsan Hyundai in 2005. It’s a 
long way from Seymour Shaw Park, but according to Kim, “the experiences I had 
in Sydney were very helpful”.

So what can we learn from this brief part of Australia’s football past? First, 
the current buzz around “engagement with Asia” is hardly new. The ASF’s Colombo 
Plan is just one of many forgotten engagement projects by the sport’s governing 
body. It should also be remembered that Australia played a small but not 
insignificant role in helping develop a South Korean player, coach and 
administrator.

If we were happy to sponsor an Asian player to come to Australia as a way of 
scoring political points way back in 1972, perhaps we have a responsibility to 
continue to create opportunities now that we’ve finally been accepted into the 
AFC. With the Asian Cup still fresh in the collective memory, FFA might have 
missed a chance to show the AFC nations that we want to contribute, not just 
benefit from their “3+1” arrangement. Hopefully next time the issue of foreign 
players is raised, FFA will remember the spirit of the ASF’s Colombo Plan. It 
is, asSBS commentator Scott McIntyre said 
<https://soundcloud.com/sbstheworldgame/the-world-game-podcast-29-january> 
during the Asian Cup, “just good family behaviour”.

Indeed the benefits of properly integrating with Asia go well beyond football. 
A lifelong friendship developed between Kim and Colin – a South Korean hero and 
a dinki-di Australian. “I was his bloody lift and everything for about six 
months,” says Bennett. “Training together, going out together, you learn a lot 
about their culture and he learned a lot about ours, you know? I learnt a few 
Korean words along the way too – because Kim is like Smith in Korea; he’d say 
‘you climb mountain in Korea and drop rock, you’d hit Kim!’”

They may have lost contact over the years – both lamented the difficulty in 
communicating over the phone – but the memories are fond. Bennett’s voice 
swells with pride as he tells me about his old friend’s achievements, while Kim 
asks me to relay a simple message. “I’d like to thank Colin as he is a really 
good friend. I wish him and his family all the best. I miss Colin very much.”
 