
On Monday night’s episode of Q&A, Joe Hockey agreed to lobby the states to 
remove GST from menstrual products 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-05-25/joe-hockey-says-he-will-put-tampon-tax-question-to-states/6496512>
. A petition,Stop taxing my period! 
<https://www.communityrun.org/petitions/stop-taxing-my-period>, has attracted 
over 90,000 signatures.

At the risk of menstruating on the activists’ parade, there is no good reason 
that pads and tampons, specifically, shouldn’t attract the GST. Back in 2000,
Anne Summers pointed out 
<http://www.sakes.com.au/sakes-articles/2000/1/20/when-pmt-meets-gst/> that 
there has always been widespread anger from women at having to pay tax on pads 
and tampons but that feminists have a history of misidentifying the real 
issues. The “tampon tax” debate comes up every couple of years like clockwork 
and it seems the discussion hasn’t moved past the idea that there is a “luxury 
tax” applied to menstrual products, which as Summers explains, isn’t and never 
has been an actual measure.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftampon-tax-gst-australia-hockey-budget-waters-greens-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432600043122%2FLarissa-Waters-tampon-tax-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tampon%20tax%3A%20why%20are%20women%20paying%20GST%20on%20an%20essential%20health%20item%2C%20Larissa%20Waters%20asks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftampon-tax-gst-australia-hockey-budget-waters-greens-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tampon%20tax%3A%20why%20are%20women%20paying%20GST%20on%20an%20essential%20health%20item%2C%20Larissa%20Waters%20asks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F26%2Ftampon-tax-gst-australia-hockey-budget-waters-greens-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F26%2F1432600043122%2FLarissa-Waters-tampon-tax-001.jpg>
 Tampon tax: why are women paying GST on an essential health item, Larissa 
Waters asks –video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/may/26/tampon-tax-gst-australia-hockey-budget-waters-greens-video>
This time around, the arguments against taxing menstrual supplies boil down to 
pretty much the same contentions as they always have: 1) that applying a tax to 
items used almost exclusively by women constitutes institutionalised sex 
discrimination; 2) that pads and tampons are a necessity and therefore 
shouldn’t attract the GST, which is again misidentified as a “luxury tax”; and 
3) that the GST is a flat and therefore regressive tax that hits low income 
women harder.

The idea that menstrual GST is just straight-up sexist seems pretty clear, but 
it’s not really. The Stop taxing my period! petition makes the point that 
“[half] the population menstruates and shouldn’t be financially penalised for 
it”. This is true: women have periods and men don’t. The state is being asked 
to compensate for a consequence of sexual difference, in other words.

As someone who believes the state should take measures to promote gender 
equity, I don’t find this a ridiculous argument. Rather, I think it doesn’t go 
far enough. If it’s wrong for the state to charge women for having menstruating 
bodies, it’s wrong for the state to allow an industry to profit from women for 
the same reason.

This argument, taken to its conclusion, requires us to lobby the government 
for tampons and pads to be free, not just fractionally cheaper. This point is 
well illustrated byRosie 
<http://rosierespect.org.au/news/its-time-to-put-a-stop-to-the-sanitary-tax/>, 
an initiative of the Victorian Women’s Trust:

Every girl should have access to hygienic, affordable and safe sanitary 
products – and she shouldn’t have to pay more than what is absolutely necessary.

Why is GST, a public revenue collection measure, conceived of as unnecessary, 
but the profits of the tampon industry are necessary? In Summers’ words:

Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> who feel ripped off can 
take comfort from the fact that two separate prices surveillance inquiries into 
tampon prices concurred with them. [...] In other words, women are not wrong 
when they perceive the price of these products to be high but it has nothing to 
do with taxes.

Another common refrain is that tampons should be exempt on the basis that 
they’re necessities. Accepting that they are, this reasoning doesn’t just apply 
to tampons, it applies to a whole host of items captured by GST. Toilet paper 
attracts GST, and women use more toilet paper than men; shouldn’t toilet paper 
be exempt from GST? What about nappies, an essential item that’s far more 
expensive than tampons, the costs of which are borne exclusively by families 
with young children? Menstruation is a fact of life; baby poo is a fact of life.

At this stage the point about necessities collapses into the argument that the 
GST is a regressive tax disproportionately impacting the poor, because they 
spend a higher proportion of their income on necessary goods. This is 
unequivocally true.

The material consequences of regressive sales taxes are completely within our 
control: we could, for instance,design a compensation package 
<http://www.businessspectator.com.au/article/2015/1/19/tax/case-widening-gst> 
for low income earners (or women, if we wanted to) that offset some or all of 
the money they pay in GST.

If Hockey manages to exempt menstrual products from the GST (even though it 
appears Tony Abbott has ruled it out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2015/may/26/tony-abbott-plans-frontbench-role-to-combat-radicalisation-politics-live#block-5563e952e4b0cffd869174e5>
), he will probably receive substantial accolades for pursuing an 
inconsequential reform. But zooming in on the tampon tax makes little sense.

The case for free tampons | Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/11/free-tampons-cost-feminine-hygiene-products>
If people are really interested in political campaigns to promote gender 
equality, here are a couple of ideas:

1. an even more targeted campaign to ensure homeless women have access to 
menstrual supplies 
<http://www.dailylife.com.au/health-and-fitness/dl-wellbeing/how-do-homeless-women-deal-with-their-periods-20150420-1moqpo.html>
,

2. a more holistic assessment of how our tax system affects women,

3. a campaign to stop male politicians smirking every time they say the word 
“tampon”.

Reducing the cost of a pack of tampons by a few cents doesn’t do profoundly 
disadvantaged women many favours.
 