
There was a body washed up on the beach. Don’t know about you, but I was 
discombobulated. Had I mistakenly tuned in to Lost? Or that film where Tom 
Hanks gets unacceptably beardy and bare-chested? No, it was Tara and, if 
someone didn’t act fast, she was going to get stabbed by a spear-wielding 
little terror called Rachel.

I’d forgotten about Tara. But now her story comes back to me. After Rick and 
his crew offed a bunch of Saviours at a satellite station near the end of 
season six, she and Heath headed off on a scavenging trip in an RV. As a 
result, they missed out on the plot developments that have been preoccupying us 
in season seven. They don’t know that the victory at the satellite station did 
not exterminate the Saviours but only awoke Negan and his hoods to vengeful 
fury over the deaths of their fallen comrades. After Tara and Heath headed off 
on their trip, Negan captured Rick’s gang, beat Glenn and Abraham to death, 
then put Alexandria’s spirit-crushed survivors to work providing fortnightly 
tributes to this hellish band of thugs.

All the time that was going on, we now learn, Tara and Heath were having 
adventures of their own. In a flashback near the start of this episode, the 
pair were sitting disconsolately in the RV after two weeks of unsuccessful 
foraging, wondering if they should return to Alexandria with their 
disappointing haul – eight rusty cans of okra and a bottle of aspirin. “We need 
ammo,” said Tara. “We need medicine. We can’t go back like this.”

 But Heath had deeper worries. For him, the mass slaying of Saviours at the 
satellite station showed that Rick’s gang had become another bunch of 
post-apocalyptic, tooled-up social Darwinist hoodlums without an ounce of 
fellow feeling. He didn’t want to be part of that.

They headed off on a final scavenger hunt, and found an abandoned camp on a 
bridge where they saw a massive sand pile spilling from a dumper truck. It 
looked, thought Tara, like there might be something worthwhile in the sand. But 
in rummaging she only awoke a bunch of walkers. Can walkers survive buried in 
sand? Frankly, I don’t know about the walker respiratory system, but it seems 
unlikely. In the resulting unpleasantness, the pair became separated and Tara 
fell off the bridge into the river. Again, the resulting storyline seemed 
pretty far-fetched, but we are to believe that, probably comatose, Tara drifted 
down the river, into an estuary and washed up on a beach on the Atlantic coast.

As for Heath, last time we saw him he was surrounded by walkers bent on eating 
his face. To be fair I’ve been in worse scrapes. I’m kidding. But things didn’t 
look good for him.

Back to the beach. After stabbing a walker to death, Rachel wandered over to 
the washed-up body. As she raised her spear, a woman shouted at her to stop. 
This was Cyndie who, like Rachel, was living in an all-woman community called 
Oceanside. But, unlike Rachel, she had compunctions about Oceanside’s policy of 
killing, not just interloping walkers but humans on sight. Instead of allowing 
Rachel to slay Tara, she dragged Tara’s apparently unconscious body up the 
beach and left the stranger in the shade with some food (salted perch – yummy) 
and a spear.

Minutes later, Tara, who had been faking unconsciousness, followed Cyndie from 
the beach through a forest to Oceanside’s secret camp.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fwalking-dead-season-seven-episode-six-swear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9c1b4432df2460efdcc754ad7340e6593bff69%2F0_0_1419_2126%2F1419.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20Swear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fwalking-dead-season-seven-episode-six-swear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20Swear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fwalking-dead-season-seven-episode-six-swear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f9c1b4432df2460efdcc754ad7340e6593bff69%2F0_0_1419_2126%2F1419.jpg>
 Tara spies on Oceanside. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
While she was spying on the community – and wondering, no doubt, what happened 
to all the dudes – she noticed that alarmed-looking women were grabbing guns 
from the arsenal. Then she realised they were tooling up to shoot her. After 
dodging bullets and knocking out a woman with a rifle butt, Tara was captured 
and brought before Oceanside’s leader for questioning.

The leader, Natania, who is Cyndie’s grandmother, explained how Oceanside came 
into being. Its women and children were once part of a larger community who, 
during a skirmish with the Saviours, saw all their men die. Natania lost her 
daughter and grandson in the fight.

Chastened, the survivors fled and holed up in remote woods where, they hope, 
they can live away from the menacing Saviours. To keep their village secure, 
they kill any human on sight. “I know,” said Natania to Tara, “we must seem 
monsters to you.” Tara couldn’t possibly comment, but you’d think she did feel 
that way. After all, she looked set for an appearance on Oceanside’s kill list.

But, Natania wanted to know, where had Tara come from. Initially, Tara didn’t 
want to compromise Alexandria by revealing its existence and said she had been 
working on fishing boat. What kind of fishing boat – a larder? asked one of the 
women, Beatrice. That’s it, replied Tara. Oh Tara, don’t you know anything 
about boats? It was a trick question, you chump. Caught in the lie, Tara told 
the story of Alexandria and how she and the rest of Rick’s gang had routed the 
Saviours at the satellite station. Natania thought the story was fishy, not 
least because she and her community had found that the Saviours were alive and 
well and terrorising the part of America they had fled for sanctuary.

Tara proposed that Oceanside and Alexandria link up to take on the Saviours. 
Natania affected to be interested in such an alliance and proposed that two of 
her toughest looking women, Beatrice and Kathy, chaperone Tara back to the 
bridge where she could find her friend and make her way back to Alexandria. 
Once there, she could speak to Rick about the mooted alliance.

For a few minutes, it looked as though Natania and Tara had reached an 
agreement. Tara, joking even in extremis in this episode, asked Oceanside’s 
leader: “Are you sure there isn’t a fishing boat called a larder because…” 
“There isn’t,” retorted Natania, apparently good humouredly.

But Natania was not to be trusted. Out in the woods, Beatrice and Kathy 
attacked Tara. Clearly, they’d been instructed to kill her by Natania. Tara ran 
for her life. But then, in a helpful plot development, we saw that Cyndie had 
been shadowing the three women. She helped Tara get away from her would-be 
murderers and took her back to the bridge, where she hoped to reunite with 
Heath.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fwalking-dead-season-seven-episode-six-swear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b7182f03a8f0ae4b1d0a6edee7be744261ec19c%2F0_16_724_434%2F724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20Swear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fwalking-dead-season-seven-episode-six-swear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20Swear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fwalking-dead-season-seven-episode-six-swear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b7182f03a8f0ae4b1d0a6edee7be744261ec19c%2F0_16_724_434%2F724.jpg>
 Cyndie lays down covering fire for Tara. Photograph: AMC/Fox 
At the bridge, walkers were milling. Cyndie laid down some covering fire while 
Tara ran past them. But Cyndie’s help came at a price: she insisted that Tara 
swear that she won’t reveal to the Alexandrians the existence of Oceanside. 
Tara agreed she would keep Oceanside a secret.

But before she left the bridge, Tara noticed something. A pair of glasses on 
the ground. Could they be Heath’s? Did he survive? Her fears were piqued when 
she saw a walker with braided hair tied back in a ponytail – that was how Heath 
wore his. Had he become a zombie? Maybe, but this isn’t him. It proves to be a 
woman walker.

Later, Tara arrived back at Alexandria, wearing a great sunny grin because she 
was glad to be home – even if she didn’t yet know whether Heath had made it. 
But her smile faded when she saw a crushed Eugene crying at the gate.

The community she was returning to was not the triumphant one she left. And 
then she got the killer blow – learning that her girlfriend, Denise, had been 
killed.

At the end, Tara was talking to Rosita who, we know, is plotting revenge 
against Negan and the Saviours. While Tara was away, asked Rosita, did she see 
anybody who might help the Alexandrians in that struggle? “There’s got to be 
someone,” said Rosita. Tara, true to her vow to Cyndie, told a lie: “I didn’t 
see anything like that out there.” In any case, what kind of allies would the 
women of Oceanside be, given how they’d just plotted to kill Tara in the woods? 
But here’s my worry: if Negan and his goons question Tara about her wanderings, 
it’s possible she will fold under pressure and reveal the existence of 
Oceanside.

That’s one worry. The other is that my autocorrect keeps changing Negan to 
Vegan and one day that’s how his name is going to appear here. On the plus 
side, that would make him sound a lot less terrifying.

Words of wisdom

“I get it now. If it’s you or someone else you choose you, you take out who 
you have to and you keep going. Nobody’s in this together, OK, not any more. 
That’s me. That’s you. That’s anybody who wants to stay alive. That’s the 
truth.” Heath to Tara, questioning what he sees as the selfish philosophy of 
Rick’s crew.

“If you keep seeing people as enemies, enemies are all you’re going to find. 
Sooner or later you’re going to have to make a friend.” Tara to Natania, 
questioning Oceanside’s shoot-strangers-first-ask-questions-later philosophy.
 