
Spoiler warning: This blogpost contains references to episode five of The Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-game-tv-show> on BBC2 in the UK. 
Please do not post spoilers if you have watched further in the series on BBC 
America.

To read the recap for season one, episode four of The Game, click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/may/21/the-game-season-one-episode-four-has-operation-glass-been-smashed>
.

I wondered what was going on. As Alan’s duplicity was revealed, the MI5 
traitor framed by the saloon doors of a dowdy hotel phone booth, I found myself 
also checking my watch. Why give us this prime information – the result of five 
weeks of Operation Glass escapades – so early in the episode, I wondered? 
Because, it turned out, the big reveal was yet to come: Odin abandoning his 
tradecraft to arrive at Sarah’s front door, spelling out what some might have 
already suspected: Phoenix, with his useful habit of signing off letters with 
their codename, is not merely one rotten apple in MI5’s inner circle. But how 
many others may be involved?

Operation Glass

No instalment of The Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-game-tv-show> is complete without 
someone roaring on about what Operation Glass really is. Next week, from the 
looks of the teaser, it appears that Daddy might finally crack it. But, this 
time around, we had a few more examples of what it is not, courtesy of Captain 
Philip Denmoor, he of the burned face, and his blowing up of the Conservative 
Party foyer. (And, presumably, the End of the World is Nigh! man, who should at 
least have been prepared for the worst.)

The team chances upon Denmoor after he receives a call from an IRA member – 
the same one, I presume, who delivers the explosive at the docks – who puts him 
in touch with Sarah’s missing informant, Colin Blakefield, a petty thief who 
smuggles behind the iron curtain. Thanks to Wendy’s excellent impression of a 
very nervous, babbling nurse, Blakefield’s remote detonator is also uncovered 
and temporarily disabled. In among all this to-ing and fro-ing – I’m not sure I 
entirely bought the explanation for Denmoor’s actions – there was a line about 
whether this represented the coming-together of the IRA and the KGB, and the 
danger that would pose. Has that definitely been discounted?

The idea that Joe would be able to identify the exact location of Denmoor’s 
phone booth based on the call of one apocalyptic sandwich-board wearer is so 
unlikely it made me guffaw out loud. Just when The Game gets interesting, it 
does something completely ludicrous.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fthe-game-season-one-episode-five-theres-more-than-one-mi5-rotten-apple%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432830421120%2F31422916-36ce-4e2a-8f14-522a5c098514-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Game%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20there's%20more%20than%20one%20MI5%20rotten%20apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fthe-game-season-one-episode-five-theres-more-than-one-mi5-rotten-apple%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Game%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20there%27s%20more%20than%20one%20MI5%20rotten%20apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fthe-game-season-one-episode-five-theres-more-than-one-mi5-rotten-apple%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432830421120%2F31422916-36ce-4e2a-8f14-522a5c098514-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The IRA Monkey (Laurence Kinlan) and Sarah Montag (Victoria Hamilton). 
Photograph: BBC/Des Willie 
Phoenix – and beyond 

Hurrah for the return of Kate – set up by Kasimir, thanks to the Firebird – 
who undoubtedly has the best lines in The Game, including, this week: “All 
right, boy scout. Be at the gates tomorrow with my lipstick and my cigarettes,” 
and “Oh, Joe, you broke into my flat again. How sweet.” There is more than a 
touch of the Doctor’s companion, as written byStephen Moffat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/stevenmoffat>, about her.

I quite enjoyed the idea of Kate, Jim and Joe forming a crack 
mole-flushing-out team, although it feels like that might have been something 
of a one-off (not least from next week’s trailers). Shame. Unless, of course, 
Kate is, in fact, a double agent and is laying some kind of trap for Joe. 
Possible?

The queen and the 10 of hearts

So, Alan. I didn’t see that coming. In fact, I think I even did a bit of a 
Paddy Ashdown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/paddy-ashdown> in an 
earlier blogpost about him being the mole. Apparently, he was recruited during 
his first year working at British Aerospace. “I’m sorry, my love – this must be 
such a shock,” he says to Sarah. Given her meeting with Odin, one doubts it; 
although I’m not sure I entirely dismiss it.

I find it odd that Joe, Bobby and Daddy would take the idea that Sarah didn’t 
know at face value: that someone they think so brilliant would be outsmarted by 
her husband. They’re so sure of it that they don’t think to follow her home or 
accompany her about the office, and even tell her he’s about to be moved. 
Curious. (Equally curious: the reluctance of Joe and Bobby to bring in any 
outside help when it comes to interrogating their former colleague.)

It does all put Alan’s earlier conversation with Sarah into a different light. 
I had been rather slow to realise the possible significance of Sarah’s 
contraceptive pill: I presumed it was all about her wanting to avoid having 
Alan’s baby, rather than the possibility that she was having an affair with 
someone else. There was also some telling dialogue in their exchange: “I’ve 
asked myself what I would be willing to endure for you and the answer, it 
appears, is an awful lot,” Alan told Sarah.

Is it me wanting to make excuses for Alan here, or could he be essentially 
taking the fall for Sarah? That line to Daddy could be read two ways, too: 
“Betrayal isn’t easy … I suspect it’s exhausting, heartbreaking and perhaps 
noble.”

Either way, I think this very effective storyline would seriously have 
benefited from us spending more time with the couple. A longer run of episodes, 
with a larger list of characters, might have allowed us to know them more 
outside of work, and for more of the spadework that would have resulted in an 
“Oh, of course!” moment, rather than my, “Really?” reaction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fthe-game-season-one-episode-five-theres-more-than-one-mi5-rotten-apple%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432830517207%2F93fc8935-a511-4823-a73e-669de5a7ec84-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Game%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20there's%20more%20than%20one%20MI5%20rotten%20apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fthe-game-season-one-episode-five-theres-more-than-one-mi5-rotten-apple%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Game%3A%20season%20one%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20there%27s%20more%20than%20one%20MI5%20rotten%20apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F28%2Fthe-game-season-one-episode-five-theres-more-than-one-mi5-rotten-apple%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F28%2F1432830517207%2F93fc8935-a511-4823-a73e-669de5a7ec84-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Joe Lambe (Tom Hughes) takes a peek. Photograph: BBC/Des Willie 
The two of diamonds

Given how nervous Wendy was when asked to pose as Grace the nurse, it would be 
a bit of a stretch to think she was in league with Sarah and Alan. But not 
impossible: as Jim noted, that move into Bobby’s house was smart. Although it 
would surely have been smarter to have stayed put if it was all about 
infiltrating MI5 at its highest levels.

The jack of clubs

Speaking of whom … we’ve seen relatively little of Bobby this week, and I’m 
not sure being a bit cross about not getting the boss’s job seems enough of a 
reason for this establishment-man to spy for the KGB. Also, imagine if his very 
establishment mother found out.

The king of clubs

Is Daddy involved in all of this, too? Apart from that rather odd bit with the 
ballet dancer, we know so little of him that I’m not sure I’d be particularly 
bothered either way. He feels really underdeveloped.

The seven of spades

Jim rules Joe out instantly on the basis that “Moscow would never recruit you 
because you don’t believe in anything”. But we know Joe does believe in love – 
this week we see Yulia and Joe in London, a year before her death at the hands 
of Odin – and is determined to avenge his agent and lover’s death. Which, to my 
mind, rules him out when it comes to double-crossing Daddy. But who knows?

Thoughts and observations

 *  “Could we possibly lurch forward to the moment it concerns me?” Bobby in 
dismissively excellent mood.

 * I enjoyed the direction ahead of the phone-booth sting: all the MI5 members 
going about their morning routines.

 * I wonder if we might see more of Colin Blakefield next week: he apparently 
told Sarah about Operation Glass in advance, which she largely ignored; he 
immediately disappeared again after delivering the detonator.

 * Captain Denmoor on war: “Grown men in Whitehall get the working-class boys 
drunk on lies and then send them out to be sacrificed. There aren’t any heroes. 
There’s just … meat.”

 * More of that lovely le Carré-esque jargon from Alan: “You brought me up 
from the Watchmakers.”

 * Would Sarah really have been creeping around the deserted docks in clacky 
high heels?

 * “I’d rather be getting a foot massage from Paul Newman,” says Wendy. Who 
wouldn’t?
 