
Each year on the BBC’s Strictly Come Dancing, a consistent trend has emerged 
in the results from the public vote: black and minority ethnic celebrities are 
voted off much sooner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/10/bbc-defends-strictly-come-dancing-accusations-racism>
than white contestants. The current series is no exception, withMelvin Odoom 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/2WtYWSc6f5rz7bxgt6lkd7h/melvin-odoom> 
and Tameka Empson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/3L9qqx2VLYL78QVkWygFTxX/tameka-empson>
 both making early exits.

BBC defends Strictly Come Dancing as viewers are accused of racism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/10/bbc-defends-strictly-come-dancing-accusations-racism>
A common response to the suggestion that black and minority ethnic celebrities 
leave the competition early is to point out that bothAlesha Dixon 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/328VJ0QBHcr2bdl0n1sSRDX/alesha-dixon> 
(of Jamaican and English descent) andMark Ramprakash 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/26ggnvYXTfcVn27SL8mycFX/mark-ramprakash>
 (of Indian-Caribbean and English descent) won the contest in 2007 and 2006 
respectively; indeed,Ore Oduba 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/4PM8ZqC3Pd5swPd2DFCc8n1/ore-oduba> is 
still in this year’s finals, despite being twice in the bottom two. But these 
arguments run contrary to the data.

Our analysis (which has yet to be published) of past results supports the 
claim that white celebrities are more likely to remain in the competition, 
keeping other factors constant. Estimates from previous series suggest that, 
after controlling for where the couple have come in the judges’ scoring, an 
ethnic minority celebrity is statistically significantly more likely to be in 
the bottom two and therefore to have received a lower public vote.

The odds of this occurring increase by 71% compared to a white celebrity, all 
else being constant. The analysis also suggests that being a woman increases 
the odds of being in the bottom two by 66%, and being both black and female by 
83%.

Strictly is a primetime, family-friendly show which is in its 14th series in 
the UK, has been exported to 40 other countries and has won a number of major 
TV awards. It is designed to promote family values and a sense of British 
national identity, which is largely constructed through a prism of whiteness. 
This is an insidious process and not always something of which we are conscious 
(although there are also specific examples: Anton Du Beke, the nation’s 
favourite pro-dancer, referred to his celebrity partner as a “Paki” off screen 
in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/oct/05/strictly-come-dancing-race>).

The recent proliferation of The Great British … TV shows (The Great British 
Bake Off, The Great British Menu, The Great British Sewing Bee) is an example 
of how this construction of national identity takes place. These are shows that 
represent both British and traditionally white, middle class values, and they 
are designed for enjoyment and escapism. While some might argue that race 
shouldn’t be brought into discussion of these popular TV shows, the point is 
that our enjoyment of them is only possible if we indulge in a kind of colonial 
amnesia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fblack-strictly-come-dancing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff288be9073b8d6cfb3cd8844d66247ce97fe7bcc%2F69_205_2919_1751%2F2919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20data%20is%20in%3A%20black%20Strictly%20contestants%20are%20more%20likely%20to%20be%20voted%20off%20%7C%20Julia%20Carter%20and%20Richard%20McManus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fblack-strictly-come-dancing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20data%20is%20in%3A%20black%20Strictly%20contestants%20are%20more%20likely%20to%20be%20voted%20off%20%7C%20Julia%20Carter%20and%20Richard%20McManus&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fblack-strictly-come-dancing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff288be9073b8d6cfb3cd8844d66247ce97fe7bcc%2F69_205_2919_1751%2F2919.jpg>
 Ian Cumming, Nadiya Hussain and Tamal Ray attend a book signing. ‘Colonial 
amnesia is enabled by a thin veneer of multiculturalism. So when Nadiya Hussain 
won The Great British Bake Off, the country rushed to congratulate her.’ 
Photograph: Anthony Harvey/Getty Images 
This amnesia is enabled by a thin veneer of multiculturalism. So, for 
instance, whenNadiya Hussain 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/1nynWvbwk3bKjQKGVsLVGJH/nadiya> won 
The Great British Bake Off, the country rushed to congratulate her and all 
involved, because this suggested we had finally overcome our long struggles 
with racial integration. Ironically though, it demonstrated the opposite. A 
fuss was made preciselybecause it is not the norm for a Bangladeshi Briton, 
born in Luton, to be seen as a baker, or to win a (Great British) cookery show.

Hussain’s win allowed people to celebrate their own tolerance at someone from 
an ethnic minority being welcomed in to the white establishment, which is what, 
in our view, these shows represent. The ballroom, of course, is traditionally a 
white space in British history, associated with well-recognised hierarchies of 
gender and class.

How can we interpret the results? It is clearly not possible to say for 
certain that Strictly’s voting patterns are because of racist British 
attitudes. But what we can say is that, perhaps surprisingly, in neither the US 
nor Australia (two countries that have most successfully imported the show 
outside the UK), were similar results found with regards to race. Although 
being a woman did increase the chances of being voted out early in Australia 
(to a lesser extent than in the UK), being of black or minority ethnic 
background had no impact on the popularity of a contestant in the US or 
Australia. So this does seem to be a peculiarity of Britain.

We would suggest that Strictly and this genre of programming reflect a 
distinctly “British” race narrative; a narrative that is at odds with 
multiculturalism and ethnic diversity. The public’s voting in the contest, and 
the results from this voting behaviour, reflect modern-day Britain: presenting 
a veneer of inclusivity to hide the more troubling racial undertones.
 