
A team of the year

If a horse designed by committee is a camel, then an XI picked by the 
Guardian’s cabal of cricket writers is, of course, The Spin’s best Test team of 
2016. As well as myself, this year the 11-man panel included Vic Marks, Ali 
Martin, Tim de Lisle, Rob Smyth, Barney Ronay, Russell Jackson, Vish 
Ehantharajah, Will Macpherson, Dan Lucas and Nick Miller. Between the shortage 
of in-form openers, the surfeit of middle-order batsmen, and because England 
had played so much more than any other team, it was a particularly tricky year. 
Everyone picked their own XI, and when all the votes were tallied up, this is 
what we finished with:

Alastair Cook (England): 17 Tests, 1,270 runs at 42.33 It was July before Cook 
made his first century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/22/england-pakistan-second-test-day-one-match-report>
, 105 against Pakistan, an innings driven by England’s batting collapse at 
Lord’s the week before. Either side of that, he passed 40 or more in seven of 
the eight innings he played, without ever pressing on past 85. His form has 
been similar this winter.He made 130 to set up the declaration at Rajkot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/alastair-cook-england-india-first-test>
, but otherwise his batting has been a little bitty: 59 in Dhaka, 54 in 
Visakhapatnam, 46 in Mumbai, a final 49 in Chennai. Altogether, he seems like a 
man with a lot on his mind, a country squire so busy thinking about his estate 
that he hasn’t noticed he’s wearing odd socks or that his jumper is on 
back-to-front. But it was a poor year for openers, only Tom Latham and Azhar 
Ali made even half as many runs. Even in ordinary form, Cook scores more than 
most.

England report card: five areas to focus on before the Ashes series next 
winter | Rob Smyth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/dec/20/england-india-test-series-alastair-cook>
Joe Root (England): 17 Tests, 1,477 runs at 49.23 “A natural opener,” 
according to Tim de Lisle; “The England opener that got away,” agreed Vish 
Ehantharajah. And up the order here because, spectacular as David Warner has 
been in ODI cricket, he’s only averaged 35 in Tests, and brilliant as Kraigg 
Brathwaite’s century against Pakistan was, it was the only one he made all year 
long. Root, on the other hand, scored three, all extraordinary.The first was 
his 110 at the Wanderers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/15/england-south-africa-third-test-day-two-report>
, on a pitch where nobody else made it far past 50.Then there was his epic 254 
at Old Trafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/23/england-pakistan-second-test-day-two-match-report>
, when he flattened the Pakistani attack that had rolled England over at 
Lord’s. And finally there was hisdapper 124 against India in Rajkot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/09/joe-root-century-batting-england-india-day-one>
, the first century by an overseas batsman in India in over three years. In 
between, there were, as ever, a lot of 50s and flibbertigibbet dismissals.

Cheteshwar Pujara (India): 11 Tests, 836 runs at 55.73 Pujara sometimes seem 
like a penny-farthing pootling through a Grand Tour. He doesn’t play in the 
IPL, because even his home team, the Gujarat Lions, decided they didn’t need 
him when he went up at auction in the spring. On tour in the West Indies he 
chiselled out 62 runs in five hours of batting across two Tests, and was duly 
dropped to make room for Rohit Sharma. Virat Kohli asked him to be more 
positive in his play. Head coach Anil Kumble is on his side, but then as Kumble 
says, “I’m a bit old-fashioned”, and even he admitted that “the sword is always 
hanging on his head”. Pujara followed up with three 50s and a fine unbeaten 
century against New Zealand. By the time England arrived he seemed entirely 
imperturbable,and made back-to-back hundreds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/11/india-england-cheteshwar-pujara-local-hero-century>
.

Virat Kohli (c): 12 Tests, 1,215 runs at 75.93 Kohli has the kind of numbers 
that demand double-takes. He’s scored mind-boggling quantities of runsin all 
three formats of the sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/19/india-pakistan-world-twenty-20-match-report>
. He’s been the leading limited overs batsman in the world for a long time now, 
but this was the first year yet in which he could fairly claim to be the best 
in Test cricket too. He started it with one double century against the West 
Indies in Antigua, followed up with another double century against New Zealand 
in Indore, and finishedwith a third double century against England in Mumbai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/india-england-fourth-test-day-four-report-cricket>
. There was the small matter of his 167 in the second Test against them, too. 
On top of all that,his captaincy seemed to add up to more than the sum of its 
parts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/23/england-india-virat-kohli-third-test-mohali>
, India are undefeated in their last 18 Tests. So he was one of two players all 
11 selectors agreed on.

Steve Smith (Australia): 10 Tests, 914 runs at 60.93 Smith held on to top spot 
in the world batting rankings all year long, though his form has cooled off a 
little after running white-hot in 2015. He bossed New Zealand in their own 
backyard in February, when he helped settle the series with successive scores 
of 71, 138 and 53 not out in the three innings he played. After that, though, 
came that queasy, uneasy tour of Sri Lanka, when Australia’s spin-sick batting 
line-up fell apart around him. He made a fighting 55 in the first Test, and a 
fine 119 in the third, but that wasn’t enough to stop his side being 
whitewashed. Back on home soil, he strung together five good starts against 
South Africa without kicking past 60, beforefinished with 193 runs in the first 
Test against Pakistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/15/smith-century-puts-australia-in-charge-of-first-test-against-pakistan>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-spin-best-cricket-xi-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d756e3428f0a93339268f186b359b40f6a27c94%2F0_38_2406_1444%2F2406.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Spin%E2%80%99s%20best%20Test%20cricket%20XI%20of%202016%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-spin-best-cricket-xi-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Spin%E2%80%99s%20best%20Test%20cricket%20XI%20of%202016%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-spin-best-cricket-xi-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d756e3428f0a93339268f186b359b40f6a27c94%2F0_38_2406_1444%2F2406.jpg>
 Steve Smith in action against Pakistan. Photograph: Dave Hunt/AAP 
Ben Stokes (England): 12 Tests, 904 runs at 45.2/33 wickets at 25.81 When 
Durham played Surrey in September, Stokes delivered a spell of off spin, the 
most surprising thing about which was that he didn’t take a wicket in it, 
because he’s shown himself to be expert at every other last little thing he’s 
turned his hand to. Before the first weekend in January was over, he’d battered
one of the most breathtakingly brilliant innings played anywhere in the world 
this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/03/england-ben-stokes-second-fastest-double-century-test-history>
, his 258 against South Africa in Cape Town. That was Botham-esque, but by the 
other end of the summer, he proved he knew another way to play, and produced 
some deft innings in both Bangladesh and India. With the ball there was a 
four-wicket haul against South Africa at Centurion,five against India in Mohali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/27/england-ben-stokes-shows-restraint-last-laugh-virat-kohli-india>
. Then in Bangladesh he emerged as the leader of the attack. Like Kohli, he was 
a unanimous pick.

Jonny Bairstow (England): 17 Tests, 1,470 runs at 58.8/66 catches, 4 stumpings 
Eighteen months ago, Bairstow wasn’t even in the England team. But at the end 
of 2016, he’s scored more runs and made more dismissals than any other ’keeper 
has managed in a calendar year of Test cricket. Ever so flaky first time 
around, Bairstow has now becomeone of England’s most consistent players 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/26/england-india-third-test-day-one-match-report>
, and has made as many hundreds as he has single-figure scores this year. Among 
his 17 scores of 40 or more, three peaks:his 150 in Cape Town 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jan/03/england-centurion-jonny-bairstow-test-south-africa-ben-stokes>
, when he and Ben Stokes wreaked merry havoc on South Africa’s attack,his 140 
on his home ground at Headingley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/20/jonny-bairstow-england-sri-lanka-ted-dexter>
, when he made more on his own than the entire Sri Lankan team managed in 
either innings, and his 167 against them at Lord’s the following week. In any 
other year, Quinton de Kock would have been a lock. But 2016 belonged to 
Bairstow.

Ravi Ashwin (India): 12 Tests, 612 runs at 43.71/72 wickets at 23.9 A level 
again above and beyond everyone else, Ashwin is the leading wicket-taker in the 
world this year by a distance. He played his 43rd Test just the other week,when 
India routed England in Mumbai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/12/ashwin-takes-six-wickets-as-india-clinch-series-against-england>
 and he took six for 112 in the first innings and six for 55 in the second. 
They were his 23rd and 24th Test five-fors. It’s not the numbers that are 
telling, though, but the company he’s in. In the long history of Test cricket, 
only SF Barnes has ever reached those marks in fewer matches. Likewise, that 
was Ashwin’s seventh 10-wicket haul, and again, only Barnes and Clarrie 
Grimmett have done it quicker. He also bowled out the West Indies in Antigua, 
with seven for 83, New Zealand, twice, in Indore, with seven for 59 and six for 
81, and then again in Kanpur, with six for 132. Promoted up to No6 in the West 
Indies, he’s also had his best year with the bat, which makes him the leading 
all-rounder in the ICC rankings.

Rangana Herath (Sri Lanka): 8 Tests, 54 wickets at 17.53 A fortnight or so ago 
some wag sent messages to Channel 7 news offering them video footage of a short 
Sri Lankan man attacking a group of Australian tourists in Colombo. What they 
got, when they bit, were thehighlights of Herath’s performance in August’s 
third Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/17/sri-lanka-australia-third-test-match-report>
, when he took 13 wickets for 145 runs. Herath had already taken nine for 103 
at Pallekelle, and six for 109 in Galle –28 wickets, all told 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/19/emperor-herath-leaves-australianssnowblind-in-a-winter-penguin-crush>
, for just 13 runs each. Australia were utterly foxed. After that, Herath was 
made captain for a short tour of Zimbabwe, and, in his jovially roly-poly way, 
he tore them apart too, with 19 wickets in two Tests. Earlier in the year he’d 
only been so-so on the early summer tour of England, though he took four for 81 
in the first innings at Lord’s, and clobbered 61 at Chester-le-Street.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-spin-best-cricket-xi-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a4a9fd27d5229ccd76cf1d057d4f4d72bc0f24f%2F0_16_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Spin%E2%80%99s%20best%20Test%20cricket%20XI%20of%202016%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-spin-best-cricket-xi-of-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Spin%E2%80%99s%20best%20Test%20cricket%20XI%20of%202016%20%7C%20Andy%20Bull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fthe-spin-best-cricket-xi-of-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a4a9fd27d5229ccd76cf1d057d4f4d72bc0f24f%2F0_16_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 The jovially roly-poly Rangana Herath. Photograph: Eranga Jayawardena/AP 
Mitchell Starc (Australia): 7 Tests, 45 wickets at 21.51 Starc missed the 
first six months of the year while he was recovering from an ankle injury, but 
has been so sharp since that he makes it into the XI anyway. “Watching him bowl 
in Sri Lanka was up there with Ben Stokes’s 258 in Cape Town for sheer 
uncounterable brilliance,” reckoned Vish Ehantharajah. In that series, Starc 
took 24 wickets at 15 apiece. On a spinning pitch at Galle he was ferociously 
good, as if bowling quick was the best way to work through his issues with 
Australia’s own batsmen. He took 11 for 94, and among quicks, only Chaminda 
Vaas had ever taken more wickets in a Test in Sri Lanka. Back in Australia he 
bookended the series against South Africawith four for 71 at Perth, and four 
for 80 at Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/03/starc-and-warner-punish-south-africa-to-put-australia-on-top-in-perth-test>
, then he steered his side through that perilous fourth-innings against 
Pakistan at the Gabba.

Kagiso Rabada (South Africa): 8 Tests, 42 wickets at 22.23 A gift, sent to 
warm the hearts of everyone who loves Test cricket. This was Rabada’s first 
full year, after he made his debut against India last November.He began it by 
shredding England at Centurion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/24/kagiso-rabada-south-africa-makhaya-ntini>
, with seven for 112 in the first innings and six for 32 in the second, the 
best-ever match figures at the ground. He was only 20 at the time, and only one 
man, Narendra Hirwani, had ever bowled better in a Test at a younger age. 
Rabada picked off five more in a match back at that same ground against New 
Zealand in August. Then when Dale Steyn came down injured in the first Test at 
Perth, Rabada led the attack against Australia, with seven wickets in their 
victory in Perth and five more in their win in Hobart. He took a wicket with 
every 35 balls he delivered, another key reason why he edged out older bowlers 
such as James Anderson and Stuart Broad.

• This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>.
 