
This current divide must be especially sad for the Tories. The idea that 
Europe, the place where they buy their cheese, the place where they took their 
first five mistresses on minibreaks, the place where they cried at Hitler’s 
bunker, this collection of potential second homes, this was the place that tore 
them apart. And so we have aConservative leadership election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jul/05/brexit-live-tory-leadership-tom-watson-unions-jeremy-corbyn>
, a sort of X Factor for choosing the antichrist. Already, the cast looks like 
the episode of Come Dine With Me they show in hell before Top Gear comes on.

Stephen Crabb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/stephen-crabb-to-run-for-conservative-leader>
 has come under fire for links to a group that claims it can cure 
homosexuality, and, having had a quick look at him, he’s definitely cured me: 
his beaming face is like a grim party game where blindfolded children have to 
try to place the eyes on to an identikit photograph of a murderer.

The frontrunner, Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>
, communicates something horrifying, not through her appearance, but rather her 
unique expression of unwavering, furious disgust. It is the expression some 
nameless, pitiless archon will wear 50 years from now as it signs a contract to 
rent out our city centres to pharmaceutical companies so they can crop-spray 
viruses and harvest antibodies from any survivors. It is the expression Lucifer 
wore when the other angels attempted an intervention. Surely May, of all 
people, could make a positive case for migration just by saying: “If you can’t 
see the potential of a free-moving workforce, simply imagine how great it would 
be if I fucked off somewhere else.” Bizarrely, it looks like she’ll be involved 
in a runoff againstAndrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/01/andrea-leadsom-serious-contender-tory-leadership-spurning-boris-johnson>
, who was created by Nazi scientists as a response to Dame Vera Lynn.

Michael Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> needs to get 
50 signatures, but at the moment he doesn’t look like he could persuade his 
mother to sign him off a cross-country run after a leukaemia diagnosis. And 
then there’sLiam Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox>. I seem to 
remember some sort of opprobrium being attached to him. Whatever it was, no 
doubt there can’t have been much to it (even though he was forced to resign or 
something) or it wouldn’t be getting comprehensively buried every news cycle by 
Jeremy Corbyn not indicating when leaving a roundabout or something.

Now that it’s over, the idea that Boris was ever going to be prime minister 
seems like an act of collective madness. If Boris was the answer, then what on 
earth was the question? Why should I check whether my boiler is leaking carbon 
monoxide? Of course, the thing about media commentators saying that Boris won’t 
even clean up the mess he’s made is that most of us have cleaners, but I think 
the point still stands.

But are we really to believe that he abandoned the ambition of his entire 
adult life because Michael Gove’s wife thought it might not be a good idea? 
That a man who pursues sex and food like a cautionary character in a Roald Dahl 
novel suddenly discovered discretion when it came to the lure of power and 
narcissistic fulfilment? No, Boris will have been warned not to stand with a 
gesture so subtle it will have been recognised only by him: a single word 
whispered in an elevator, one wrong note in an opera, a friendly wave from a 
black-cab driver, or that front page and double inside spread they ran in the 
Sun explicitly stating that he would be destroyed.

In any case, the real issue is that a country led by such an autoparodic 
figure would have been tough for satirical columnists. Commentating on the 
Johnson administration would have been like writing a cutting review of a 
dancing dog. Which, of course, is exactly the sort of thing I used to do when I 
had a column in the Sun, but I very much doubt I could sustain it on a weekly 
basis over the life of a five-year parliament.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftory-leadership-election-x-factor-choosing-antichrist-brexit-frankie-boyle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f8b0703b2a2c3b5f626d65a959acda0aadd39b%2F0_0_2903_3241%2F2903.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Tory%20leadership%20election%20is%20a%20sort%20of%20X%20Factor%20for%20choosing%20the%20antichrist%20%7C%20Frankie%20Boyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftory-leadership-election-x-factor-choosing-antichrist-brexit-frankie-boyle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Tory%20leadership%20election%20is%20a%20sort%20of%20X%20Factor%20for%20choosing%20the%20antichrist%20%7C%20Frankie%20Boyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Ftory-leadership-election-x-factor-choosing-antichrist-brexit-frankie-boyle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7f8b0703b2a2c3b5f626d65a959acda0aadd39b%2F0_0_2903_3241%2F2903.jpg>
 Michael Gove ‘doesn’t look like he could persuade his mother to sign him off a 
cross-country run after a leukaemia diagnosis’. Photograph: Peter 
Nicholls/Reuters 
Sadly, it seems that the only people in Britain who truly have more that 
unites them than divides them are the parliamentary Labour and Conservative 
parties.The PLP wants rid of Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/04/jeremy-corbyn-issues-defiant-video-urging-labour-unity>
, showing all the patience of Prince waiting for his paracetamol to kick in. 
They say they need a leader who knows how to oppose, albeit primarily their own 
party membership. The idea is that Corbyn is unelectable, and it’s just one of 
life’s sad ironies that none of the people who believe this will be able to 
beat him in an election. I suppose it’s worth following this argument to its 
conclusion: his unelectability stems from him having failed to secure enough 
support for something the general public decided to vote against.

With the Chilcot report about to be published, presumably the PLP will have to 
find a candidate they find acceptable, but who didn’t vote for the Iraq war, 
which narrows the field down to people who didn’t enter politics until after 
the war. This will create the unique challenge of having to win what is, let’s 
face it, a popularity contest with someone who, by definition, nobody will ever 
have heard of. Of course, the report itself will be a disappointment to anyone 
wanting anything like truth or justice, but it will nonetheless be damaging for 
Labour because, well, there just isn’t enough whitewash in the world.

One of the PLP’s main worries will be that Labour’s vote will crumble to Ukip 
under Corbyn, who won’t produce enough racist mugs and mouse mats to reassure 
everybody. And, to be fair, it must be galling to a party that invaded Iraq, 
rendered Libyans to be tortured by Gaddafi and detained asylum seekers with 
Dickensian cruelty to lose voters on the race issue.

I think it’s understandable at moments like this to long for a return to the 
status quo, but let’s remember that the status quo, whatever its advantages and 
disadvantages, was not survivable. We cannot survive an endless escalation of 
inequality, not even physically. Many areas that voted to leave Europe will 
probably within our lifetimes be forming a much more challenging union with the 
sea. Neoliberalism has taken a stranglehold on our societies by seeing chaotic 
events as opportunities. Well, maybe we should take this opportunity to do 
something decent. To elect a government that will retain the best parts of EU 
legislation and strengthen them in the direction of workers, rather than 
corporations. There is a reason that so many banks, multinationals and, of 
course, the United States feared Brexit. I think if I had to say what the most 
feared thing in the course of human history is, it’s probably a good example.

Admittedly, many leave voters were not inspiring, and seemed to contain a 
large group of people who think shouting “COMMON SENSE” overrides studying 
economics to degree level. But remain ran an almost incomprehensible campaign. 
The central idea was that Britain needed to be fully involved and engaged in 
Europe so that it had enough power to stay completely on the fringes. Then they 
got businesses and banks to tell everybody it was a good idea, hoping that the 
public would enjoy being told how to vote by the people who gambled their house 
and job into a digitised void for cocaine money.

The most remarkable thing was the sheer narrowness and uniformity of the 
debate. If you fight propaganda with propaganda, you end up with simplistic 
discourse where truth is not a priority. Let’s not forget that it was actually 
Gove who sought to engage a distrust of experts. What if evidence-based policy 
ideas are coming up against a public that is not actually sceptical of experts, 
but of public relations? Of advice generated by thinktanks and advisory bodies 
that are either simply created to be biased or refracted through the prism of 
media organisations that struggle to recognise their own systemic bias? A news 
media that regularly portrays commentators with vested interests as impartial 
and thinktanks with neoliberal sympathies as neutral obviously runs the risk of 
losing its audience’s trust. It’s not the whole story, but perhaps this is a 
part of what has happened.

I also wonder if decades of this has created a culture where we confuse 
rhetoric with reality. Saying we’re under siege by immigrants shouldn’t have 
any more weight as a metaphor than “Britannia rules the waves” (we share an 
aircraft carrier with France). We’re entering a time where all attempts at 
honesty are radical and can only hope to alienate both sides of an argument. 
Public intellectuals have been replaced by public morons, drama by musicals and 
comedy by mere seriousness. The referendum was an exchange of rhetorical 
ordnance, as smoothed and uniform as artillery shells.

The main campaigns were a pitched battle between two very slightly different 
types of racism, while the liberal alternatives dismissed leave voters with the 
same preprogrammed classist pomposity you would expect fromConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives>.

Let’s just try to imagine for a second what a broader debate might have 
involved. Personally, I doubt that Brexit will be a financial disaster in 
itself.

The City of London is a giant money-laundering pirate zeppelin, so Britain 
can’t be punished by the troika in the same way as the Greeks were because a) 
London is too useful to them and b) they don’t all own flats in Greece. Also, 
the same factors that caused the last financial crash here are being stoked up 
again. In a debate supposedly about things like trade and sovereignty, you’d 
think this might have come up somewhere.

Equally, there is an antifascist case to be made for leaving the EU. Yes, 
there will be an upswell in racism in Britain in the short term, as some of the 
worst, most damaged people in our society will feel empowered by this result. 
I’d suggest the best defence against this is the rule of law, and the 
insistence that it is applied in every instance of racial hate crime. Yet, the 
far right in Britain is still a tiny, disorganised minority, while a lot of 
Europe are voting in far-right parties – Finland, Hungary (to be fair, 
countries that still associate socialism with only being able to visit their 
dad on the one day a year when his gulag thawed). EU elections are a vital part 
of their growth cycles, and the issue of EU membership itself a useful 
recruiting issue. I’m not saying these are the most air-tight arguments in the 
world; the point I’m making is that I seem mad for asking you to consider them.

To reach other people with honesty involves risk, and in our media we seem to 
be risking communication a lot less and watching each other bake a lot more. 
Culturally, it’s now like the very idea of taking a risk is seen as bad form, 
which seems remarkable in a country where the economy essentially revolves 
around gambling. Telling someone your real opinion is supposed to be a risk, 
telling them a joke is supposed to be a risk, kissing someone for the first 
time, it’s all a risk. And what would life be without original thought, without 
laughter, without love? Well, there are some people who are really quite keen 
to show us, just as soon as they get their little leadership election out of 
the way. Maybe we should start to talk to each other honestly about what we’re 
going to do about that.
 