
The writer LP Hartley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jun/17/lp-hartley-go-between-ali-smith> 
wrote: “The past is a foreign country, they do things differently there.” 
Hartley was not wrong because, at 93, my foot rests more in that far-off land 
called history than today. But if I were to rely upon how television drama has 
interpreted the story of my generation, I would not be able to recognise it. 
Sadly, dramas about events that occurred in my youth deal almost exclusively 
with the pageant of nobility.

'As dazzling and disparaging as the Queen herself': Jennie Bond fact-checks 
The Crown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/05/the-crown-netflix-royal-watcher-jennie-bond-fact-checks>
It concerns me that the history of my generation may be lost to my 
grandchildren because television producers would rather anaesthetise viewers 
from the unpleasantness of our past with idolatry for the aristocracy and the 
monarchy.

It’s why I am angry that Netflix has spent $130m (£105m) on the 10-part series 
The Crown <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-crown>. This is a 
biopic concerning the marriage of Queen Elizabeth when she was still a princess 
in 1947, followed by her coronation in 1953. Unfortunately, The Crownviews 
postwar Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/03/the-crown-windsor-claire-foy-elizabeth-blockbuster>
 from the perspective of our sovereign and all who inhabited her world. This 
does an enormous disservice to the epoch, because it was a time when a 
socialist tide raised all boats. History was literally being made from the 
bottom up because, while Princess Elizabeth was being fitted for her wedding 
dress, ordinary Britons were dismantling a thousand years of feudal mentality 
through thecreation of the welfare state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/mar/14/past.education>.

We’ve seen this approach before. Nothing better illustrates TV’s lush treacle 
homage to the landed gentry thanDownton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey>, a drama that ran for 
six series as a parlour-room interpretation of historical moments that shaped 
Britain at the turn of the 20th century. But Downton has not been the exception 
to the rule, rather a template used by TV and movie producers to crush the 
truth from history and make the entitled the heroes of narratives about our 
nation’s collective past.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-crown-portrayal-of-history-insult-to-my-generations-struggles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9d31365395667b41f7f2d15cc123c74a3371ddb%2F0_0_3600_2396%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Crown%E2%80%99s%20portrayal%20of%20history%20is%20an%20insult%20to%20my%20generation%E2%80%99s%20%20struggles%20%7C%20Harry%20Leslie%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-crown-portrayal-of-history-insult-to-my-generations-struggles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Crown%E2%80%99s%20portrayal%20of%20history%20is%20an%20insult%20to%20my%20generation%E2%80%99s%20%20struggles%20%7C%20Harry%20Leslie%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-crown-portrayal-of-history-insult-to-my-generations-struggles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9d31365395667b41f7f2d15cc123c74a3371ddb%2F0_0_3600_2396%2F3600.jpg>
 ‘The Crown depicts moments in history as a pageant in which the wealthy, the 
entitled and the nobility oversee the lives of millions with benevolence, 
wisdom and grace.’ Photograph: Alex Bailey/Netflix 
The Crown, like Downton Abbey, Victoria or even Indian Summers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/indian-summers>, depicts moments in 
history as a pageant in which the wealthy, the entitled and the nobility 
oversee the lives of millions with benevolence, wisdom and grace. As I have 
been both a witness to and participant in history since 1923, I can tell you 
that was not the case. Millions lived lives of abject misery during the 1930s 
while the 1% of that time enjoyed an obscene opulence. Despite the vast wealth 
of 19th-century history a TV dramatist can draw upon, our nation’s rich 
heritage too often becomes an infomercial for monarchy and empire.

The Crown <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-crown> is like an 
expensive painting in which the only subjects in focus are the rich and 
privileged. Everyone else, people like me or your grandparents if they came 
from the working class and even the middle class, are considered no more than 
background scenery. We are the undefined face in the crowd waving religiously 
at our so-called betters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-crown-portrayal-of-history-insult-to-my-generations-struggles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0211341b0d1885bad2d6cf6d333d2d55c786406d%2F0_517_5385_3231%2F5385.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Crown%E2%80%99s%20portrayal%20of%20history%20is%20an%20insult%20to%20my%20generation%E2%80%99s%20%20struggles%20%7C%20Harry%20Leslie%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-crown-portrayal-of-history-insult-to-my-generations-struggles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Crown%E2%80%99s%20portrayal%20of%20history%20is%20an%20insult%20to%20my%20generation%E2%80%99s%20%20struggles%20%7C%20Harry%20Leslie%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-crown-portrayal-of-history-insult-to-my-generations-struggles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0211341b0d1885bad2d6cf6d333d2d55c786406d%2F0_517_5385_3231%2F5385.jpg>
 ‘We need now more than ever our great film-makers and television producers to 
tell the stories from our collective past that reflect all its pathos and 
wonder.’ Stoke on Trent in the 1950s. Photograph: Dave Bagnall Collection/Alamy 
To my mind, The Crown is an insult to the struggles my generation overcame and 
the triumphs we earned from our sacrifices in both war and in peace. But what 
is most frightening is that the tableau of our past shown onNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> and other TV networks will be most 
people’s window on my generation’s history. Too many in the 19th and early 20th 
century lived thwarted lives because of the exploitation they endured in the 
mines and mills. Yet no one tells the tale of these workers unionising, 
fighting for their rights or trying to find and maintain love in the harsh 
conditions of the slums they called home.

Too many of my generation died young because they lacked the money to pay for 
a doctor, but in The Crown our sympathies are directed to a king dying of lung 
cancer rather than the thousands of miners who died painfully of black lung 
because that monarch and his society didn’t believe the average citizen 
deserved medicine if they couldn’t afford to pay for it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-crown-portrayal-of-history-insult-to-my-generations-struggles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4af22533b64e40c4d3a33c2677ff691b011ee1f0%2F0_426_5965_3578%2F5965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Crown%E2%80%99s%20portrayal%20of%20history%20is%20an%20insult%20to%20my%20generation%E2%80%99s%20%20struggles%20%7C%20Harry%20Leslie%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-crown-portrayal-of-history-insult-to-my-generations-struggles%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Crown%E2%80%99s%20portrayal%20of%20history%20is%20an%20insult%20to%20my%20generation%E2%80%99s%20%20struggles%20%7C%20Harry%20Leslie%20Smith&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fthe-crown-portrayal-of-history-insult-to-my-generations-struggles%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4af22533b64e40c4d3a33c2677ff691b011ee1f0%2F0_426_5965_3578%2F5965.jpg>
 Londoners in 1953 celebrating the Queen’s coronation. Photograph: Paul 
Springett A/Alamy 
Our Queen, no matter how much we should respect her service to the state, 
doesn’t deserve to be turned into a cinematic icon. In the great sweep of 
events our monarch is like a garden ornament sitting immutably on the field of 
history because she is not the author of our nation’s destiny.

Because of austerity and Brexit, Britain has become a house divided. We need 
now more than ever our great film-makers and television producers to tell the 
stories from our collective past that reflect all its pathos and wonder. And 
they need to tell it from the perspective of those ordinary, brilliant and 
profound men and women who, a lifetime ago, helped shape the way we live today 
through their deeds.
 