
Imagine for a moment that you’re a torturer. You’ve got someone in a prison 
cell and every time they nod off, you want to jerk them awake by playing 
something unbearable over the PA. Which earworm song would really drive them 
nuts?Chuck Berry’s My Ding-a-Ling <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UaEC-lWSlmI>?
Atmosphere by Russ Abbot <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RFPLk5mJ1D4>? 


In The Cell, Daryl was trying to catch some shut-eye in gangmaster Negan’s 
prison block when the music kicked in, making sleep impossible. Drum intro. 
Banjo twang. And then the singer’s insufferable upbeat vibe: “We’re on Easy 
Street … <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JoQ4GidQP-k>” There was genius in 
Negan’s track selection: he may not have been aware ofrecent research into 
earworm songs 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/04/science/earworms-lady-gaga-bad-romance.html?_r=0,>
, which suggests that the tunes that stick in our brains tend to be fast, with 
a simple melodic structure that goes up and down repeatedly like, say, Twinkle 
Twinkle Little Star, but his torture music had the same infernal principle as, 
say, Lady Gaga’s Bad Romance.

Worse, the lyric was fit for Negan’s vile purpose: when, like Daryl, you’re 
beaten and bloody and you’ve just finished a dog food sandwich for dinner, the 
last thing you want to hear is someone singing about how great their life is. 
Pharrell’s Happy, used judiciously, might well have made Daryl’s head explode. 
That said, if I were Negan, I’d have deployed Kenny Rogers’ Lucille to remind 
Daryl that on the other side of the door was that baseball bat wrapped in 
barbed wire that the Saviour’s diabolical overlord named after a woman and to 
which he imputes pervy bloodlust whenever he gets the chance.

The only problem with episode three was that it wasn’t just Daryl getting 
tortured by this auditory cruelty – we had to listen to the bloody song 
repeatedly too. But that has been one of season seven’s unwitting themes: the 
TV audience suffers along with members of Rick’s crew. It’s as if us voyeurs 
are finally being called to account for our sick viewing habits. The pleasures 
of watching zombie slaying that sustained us through six seasons now have their 
pains: do we like to see humans suffer, and feel some of that suffering 
ourselves? Not so much.

 When Fat Joe failed to lock the prison door, Daryl slipped out. After 
wandering the corridors looking for an escape route, he met a woman lurking in 
the shadows like some forlorn spirit eternally residing in some Dantean ring of 
hell. “Get back while you can,” she advised. “Whatever he’s done to you there’s 
more. There’s always more.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-three-the-cell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49b9747f0785b2e2d200b9fa5bfaba6598aff220%2F0_0_707_424%2F707.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20three%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Cell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-three-the-cell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20three%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Cell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-three-the-cell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49b9747f0785b2e2d200b9fa5bfaba6598aff220%2F0_0_707_424%2F707.jpg>
 A misogynistic, megalomaniac, polygamous nutjob … Negan. Photograph: FOX 
The “he” was Negan, the psychopath played by Jeffrey Dean Morgan who, 
apparently, is making some real-life women (well, one Telegraph columnist) come 
over ashot and bothered as they did earlier this year 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/tv/2016/10/31/help-i-fancy-negan-is-jeffrey-dean-morgans-walking-dead-psychopa/>
 over Great British Bake Off contestant Selasi Gbormittah 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/tv/2016/10/31/help-i-fancy-negan-is-jeffrey-dean-morgans-walking-dead-psychopa/>
. Which not only seems unfair on Selasi, but also disturbing about the 
ethically problematic parameters of human desire: don’t Telegraph columnists 
realise Negan’s a misogynistic, megalomaniac, polygamous nutjob whose business 
model feeds on human woe? Or is the fact that he’s all dark side why they fancy 
him? Answers on a postcard, please.

The woman in the shadows turned out to be Sherry, ex-wife of Dwight, one of 
Negan’s spirit-crushed henchmen – both of whom Daryl had met in season six. 
Sherry was right: Daryl shouldn’t have bothered leaving his cell. He reached a 
yard in the Saviours’ complex, and was figuring out which of several fine 
looking motorbikes he should use to escape like some latter-day Steve McQueen, 
and get back to Alexandria where Rick’s crew is – no doubt – contemplating 
revenge, when he found himself surrounded by Negan’s henchmen. And then the 
superbly sleazy, sinister Negan emerged. “Are we pissin’ our pants yet?” he 
inquired, waving Lucille unpleasantly.

Before the goons duffed up Daryl and chucked him back in the slammer for more 
dog meat and auditory torture, Negan set out what he wanted from our favourite 
crossbow-toting renegade: namely for him to abandon his identity and call 
himself Negan. To clinch the point, Negan asked his goons: “Who are you?” 
“Negan,” they chanted in unison.

Negan wanted Daryl to sing the same song. Unlikely. He waved the bat close to 
Daryl’s head, but our hero didn’t flinch. “Wow! You don’t scare easy. I love 
that,” he said. “Lucille? Well, it kind of pisses her off. She finds it to be 
disrespectful – lucky for you, she’s not feeling too thirsty today.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-three-the-cell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54c27c46b142f9b35bd728aa320e6783c25e57e0%2F0_0_722_433%2F722.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20three%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Cell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-three-the-cell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20three%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Cell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-three-the-cell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54c27c46b142f9b35bd728aa320e6783c25e57e0%2F0_0_722_433%2F722.jpg>
 ‘You don’t scare easy. I love that’ … Negan waves his baseball bat Lucille 
close to Daryl’s head, but our hero doesn’t flinch. 
 Is it just me who finds Lucille’s appetites, as defined by Negan, 
misogynistic and yet chiming with the woman-hating way he treats women as 
disposable commodities? In Negan’s post-apocalyptic worldview, humans are 
things – either men to be broken down and put to work to sustain his empire, or 
lovers to be used up and discarded.

Much of the episode was taken up with the relationship between Dwight the 
prison guard and Daryl. The suggestion was that Dwight was in the worse prison, 
having surrendered so much of his will and humanity just to survive. Such 
defeatism was not Daryl’s. “I’m never going to kneel,” he told Dwight. “Yeah, I 
said that too,” Dwight replied. Sure, but Daryl’s made of sterner stuff.

We learned that Sherry had offered to marry Negan to make life easier for both 
Dwight and herself under his rule. Negan had accepted her proposal, adding her 
to his collection of wives, until he got bored and cut her loose. Not only had 
Negan taken Dwight’s wife, but he had also burned Dwight’s face with an iron as 
punishment for trying to escape the Saviours.

Negan explained to Daryl what happened next. “Dwight saw the light. He manned 
up – he asked my forgiveness. I like that. And after all that, he got on board 
and now look at him. Pow! One of my top guys! We are totally cool.” Cut to 
hangdog Dwight’s eyes. He was so not cool. Face ruined, wife taken, spirit 
crushed – and all for what?

One reason Dwight was evidently not cool, no doubt, was that earlier Negan had 
offered him the choice of sexual services from any woman in the compound. The 
implication was that he had tired of Sherry, Dwight’s ex-wife, and that Dwight 
could have her back. As though she were a discarded thing, scarcely human at 
all.

In another scene, Dwight tracked down a friend fleeing from the Saviours. “I 
can’t go back,” said the friend. “That’s the only way,” said Dwight. His friend 
disagreed: “There’s nothing back there for me.” Then he started to walk away.

Dwight turned threatening: “I’ll dig up your wife’s dead body and feed it to 
the crows, you feel that?” But his friend’s mind wasn’t changed. “OK D,” he 
said, knowing that Dwight would soon kill him and bring blessed release from a 
world made unliveable by Negan’s rule. “You won. But you know there’s nothing 
left.” And then he walked on – almost inviting Dwight to put him out of his 
misery. Which Dwight did.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-three-the-cell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ed1a63bfe3e5774d6acc6774e9195ab4d69a612%2F0_143_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20three%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Cell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-three-the-cell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20three%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Cell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-three-the-cell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ed1a63bfe3e5774d6acc6774e9195ab4d69a612%2F0_143_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
 ‘I’ll dig up your wife’s dead body and feed it to the crows, you feel that?’ 
Dwight gets threatening. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
The scene dramatised the bigger themes of this episode. What is left of us 
when we become just surviving machines, enduring pointlessly to serve an 
oppressive master? This chimed with Carol’s existential angst in episode two, 
where she worried what is the point of living in a world that consists only of 
Sisyphean killing in order to survive. Life, if it is to be worth living, if it 
is to confer human dignity, has to be about more than 24/7 slaying of walkers 
or serving the evil Negan.

Fortunately for us viewers who want to imagine that life is worth living, 
Daryl exists in his prison cell, bloodied and bruised, but still free in the 
empire of his mind. “What’s your name?” Negan asked him near the end. “Daryl,” 
he replied. And we were cheered that all Negan’s hellish instruments – baseball 
bats, earworm songs, zombiefied henchmen – hadn’t crushed his spirit.

The Walking Dead <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>, 
then, continues to ask the big questions. What is necessary to make life worth 
living? Can we become mere tools of others without losing our humanity? Dwight 
proves a disturbing character because he seems to have reached a hellish 
accommodation with Negan’s rule, surrendering what is valuable about being 
human as he becomes a functionary of an evil regime. We imagine, don’t we, that 
Third Reich concentration camp guards made the same degrading accommodation?

Poignantly, at the end, Dwight saw the friend he shot through the back 
transformed into a walker. Cut to Dwight’s reaction shot: it was a look that 
said how much he envied the undead, how much he realised that, truly, he was 
the one in prison.

Would-be words of wisdom

“Better stop dreaming of the quiet life/cause it’s the one we’ll never 
know/and quit running for that runaway bus ‘cause those rosy days are few.” 
Paul Weller, making an unexpected guest appearance in The Walking Dead in the 
curious opening montage set to The Jam’s A Town called Malice.

“We did the right thing. It’s a helluva lot better than being dead.” Dwight, 
justifying to Sherry why he submitted to Negan’s rule. If not very convincingly.

 