
The September GDP figures 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/5206.0Main+Features1Sep%202016?OpenDocument>
 released yesterday marked the point that the Australian economy ran out of 
luck, and while that misfortune might only be temporary, it highlights how 
fragile the economy has been for some time, even as it outgrew most of the 
developed world.

While there was a general consensus among economists that the Australian 
economy went backwards in the September quarter, it was still a shock when the 
ABS announced that in seasonally adjusted terms it shrunk 0.5% – the second 
biggest drop in a quarter of a century:

The annual growth picture is not much better – a drop in seasonally adjusted 
terms from 3.1% to 1.8%. It’s the biggest drop in over 15 years, and gives us 
the worst annual growth this century outside the GFC period.

Even the trend figures offer little solace. 

The quarterly trend growth of 0.2% is as bad as the worst experienced during 
the GFC, and the annual growth of 2.2% is a full percentage point below the 20 
year average of 3.2%:

It therefore wasn’t surprising that the treasurer Scott Morrison chose to 
focus on comparison with overseas than with the past.

In his press conference he suggested that Australia’s “annual real growth is 
still higher than six out of the world’s G7 economies”, was “second only to the 
United Kingdom”, and was higher than “the US, Canada, Japan, Germany, and 
higher than the OECD average.”

That is all true, although when comparing us to the whole of the OECD rather 
than just the G7 we are rather more middle of the pack, and when you look at 
this latest quarter, we are now second last:

So what happened?

Well it is more the case of what did not happen.

In much of the past year, our economy has been teetering on the edge of going 
backwards, but there has always been one thing to keep us in positive territory.

Walkley Awards: wins for Guardian Australia's Ben Doherty and Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/walkley-awards-wins-for-guardian-australias-ben-doherty-and-greg-jericho>
Last quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/sep/08/48bn-found-down-the-back-of-the-couch-doesnt-leave-much-confidence-in-gdp-figures>
 it was an abnormal and mostly coincidental surge of public investment in a 
couple states, in the March quarter it was a surge in net exports, as it was 
thistime last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2015/dec/03/australias-gdp-up-09-over-quarter-great-headline-but-not-the-full-story>
.

The problem with being reliant upon exports and public investment is that 
those two measures are notoriously erratic.

In the September quarter, because imports grew by more than our exports, net 
exports (exports minus imports) detracted 0.2% from GDP growth. But just two 
quarters ago net exports added 1% to growth, three quarter ago they added 
nothing, and this time last year, they contributed 1.2%.

In short, not the type of thing you want to rely on for steady growth:

Public investment is much the same. 

In the June quarter, public investment contributed 0.7% towards GDP – that is 
more than the actual 0.6% GDP growth of that quarter. Take that away, and our 
economy would have shrunk.

This quarter it was taken away – rather than adding to GDP growth, this 
quarter public investment detracted 0.5% pts:

But while it would be easy to say it was just a confluence of bad timing that 
led to our economy shrinking, the reality is given the fragility of the economy 
it is more a confluence of good timing that has kept us going, and this quarter 
without such luck, it all went bad.

GDP growth is essentially a combination of five things – government and 
household consumption, private and public investment (which make up “final 
demand”), and net exports.

For the first time this century, four of those five aspects detracted from GDP 
growth. Only household consumption added to growth:

The drop in public investment was across the nation – only Northern Territory 
had an increase in the September quarter:

And while it is no surprise that private investment continues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/dec/06/are-workers-right-to-be-sceptical-about-productivity-improvements>
 to fall, the bad news for the government in this quarter was that private 
dwelling construction also fell. There are certainly signs that the housing 
construction boom is coming slightly off the boil.

The annual growth of the construction of dwelling is the lowest is has been 
for two year in trend terms – something that would have many wishing the 
Reserve Bank board met today rather than on Tuesday before these figures were 
released:
 Annual growth of dwelling construction (new and used) 
The only segment of the economy this quarter that was really driving growth 
rather than holding it back was household consumption. But even here things are 
not all that rosy.

In the past 12 months households increased their consumption by 2.6% – down 
from 2.9% in the June quarter.

And the level of household consumption is among the most marked change in the 
economy since the GFC.

Australia has always relied upon household consumption to drive growth. In the 
eight years prior to the GFC consumption grew on average by 3.95%; since then 
it has been just 2.5%:

And this weakness of consumption and investment means a weakness in what has 
traditionally been Australia’s driver of GDP growth – demand.

Despite our position as a mining nation, net exports have not traditionally 
been a bigger driver of growth than demand. Demand is much more stable – 
household consumption and private investment are less subject to spot prices 
and one-off occurrences – such as a large purchase of mining equipment that 
causes a bounce in imports.

But now net exports contribute as much as do consumption and investment 
combined:

That makes for a generally lower and also more unstable type of growth. 

In the 30 years prior to the GFC, demand contributed on average 3.6% to annual 
GDP growth – a level net exports has never reached.

The reliance upon a number of small aspects means it doesn’t need too many 
things to have a bad quarter, for the entire economy to take a hit. That hit 
occurred in the September quarter, and the only shock really is that it hadn’t 
happened before.
 