
Helen Titchener was found not guilty of the attempted murder of her husband, 
Rob, by a jury in a special episode ofThe Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> that has brought to a 
conclusion the domestic abuse storyline that has gripped the nation.

The Archers trial: verdicts from the counsellor, the lawyer and the prison 
expert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/05/archers-trial-verdict-helen-titchener-attempted-murder-husband>
Column inches, hashtags and fundraising campaigns have all been inspired by 
the storyline of more than three years, which hasseen Helen emotionally abused 
by the apparently charming Rob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/09/louiza-patikas-ive-read-scripts-and-thought-i-dont-want-this-to-happen-to-helen-i-cant-bear-it>
.

The special episode, tuned into by millions, was extended to an hour for the 
first time in the 65-year history of the BBCRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 4 drama, to allow fans to listen in 
on the deliberations of the jury at Borchester crown court before the verdict 
was handed down. #thearchers was the top trending Twitter hashtag during the 
show and #freehelen has been trending all week.

Listeners heard evidence during the five-day trial from the defence arguing 
that she acted in self-defence after months of mental and physical abuse and 
due to the need to protect her five-year-old son Henry, who was present during 
the stabbing. The prosecution portrayed her as unstable and volatile.

Some famous voices were heard in the episode, including that of Nigel Havers, 
the Chariots of Fire actor, and Catherine Tate, star of Doctor Who. They were 
joined by Dame Eileen Atkins, the co-creator of Upstairs Downstairs and 
screenwriter of Mrs Dalloway, as well as a special appearance for Graham Seed 
who played Nigel Pargetter in the Archers for 27 years until his character died 
in the show’s 60th anniversary special in 2011.

Tensions in the deliberation room ran high throughout the decision-making 
process, with several jurors competing to have their say and arguing about what 
constitutes domestic abuse and self defence.

The episode flicked between the jurors arguing and the other characters – 
including Helen in her cell with her baby – and her parents waiting anxiously 
for the decision.

The verdict may have come as a surprise to listeners. The jury had to return a 
majority 10 to one verdict but at one point in the show six jurors believed 
Helen to be guilty.

Commenting on the verdict, Louiza Patikas, who plays Helen, said: “I feel 
relieved – the secret’s out. Finally I can talk to friends and family about it 
and I’m really intrigued to see what the public makes of the verdict.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-archers-verdict-on-helen-tichener-aired%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa37abd5661312d2ebd30fb4f0ff29e1dfbabedbe%2F0_8_4122_2474%2F4122.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Archers'%20verdict%20on%20Helen%20Titchener%20concludes%20storyline%20that%20gripped%20the%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-archers-verdict-on-helen-tichener-aired%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Archers%27%20verdict%20on%20Helen%20Titchener%20concludes%20storyline%20that%20gripped%20the%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-archers-verdict-on-helen-tichener-aired%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa37abd5661312d2ebd30fb4f0ff29e1dfbabedbe%2F0_8_4122_2474%2F4122.jpg>
 Louiza Patikas as Helen Archer and Timothy Watson as Rob Titchener. 
Photograph: Pete Dadds/BBC 
Patikas, who has played the character for 16 years, met with survivors of 
domestic violence through the charities Refuge and Woman’s Aid, who worked with 
the radio soap on the story’s development. “My hope is that anyone listening to 
the programme who is experiencing domestic abuse finds the courage to get the 
help that’s out there,” Patikas said. “There are people who understand what 
you’re experiencing and millions of members of the public who are rooting for 
you, as the reaction to this storyline has demonstrated.

'Frighteningly relevant and superbly handled': readers on the Archers' verdict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/12/frighteningly-relevant-and-superbly-handled-readers-on-the-archers-verdict>
“I hope that she’ll soon get back behind the wheels of her car and start some 
therapeutic cheese-making when she feels up to it. In fact, therapy all round 
is probably needed.”

The special episode was Sean O’Connor’s finale as the editor of The Archers. 
He moved to EastEnders earlier in the year but has continued to oversee the 
Helen and Rob storyline – which he created – until the end of the trial. “It 
has been humbling and very moving to be able to shine a light on an urgent 
social issue that affects millions of women and to see the audience embrace 
Helen’s story in such an extraordinary way,” he said.

“I was very keen that having accompanied Helen on every step of her painful 
story, there would be hope for her and her future. We know that life isn’t 
always like that but sometimes drama can and needs to offer us a sense of 
redemption. That’s why we decided to conclude the trial with the verdict that 
we did.”

Polly Neate, chief executive of Women’s Aid, told the Guardian: “Up to 80% of 
women experience domestic or sexual violence or both so women do retaliate and 
when they do they very often find themselves in the position of being cast as 
the perpetrator. From experience I know it’s far from over, particularly where 
children are concerned. There are lots of avenues where he can still exercise 
his power and control.”

She also felt that the controversial way that the jurors discussed the issue 
as they deliberated the verdict was realistic. “I get into a lot of 
conversations as you can imagine about domestic abuse and about women and men 
and abusive relationships. I thought the range of views expressed were very 
typical really.

“Helen was jolly lucky to have someone like Jacqui in the jury actually, but 
it’s not surprising that there would have been jurors with personal experience 
of domestic abuse because actually the vast majority of us know someone who has 
been affected even if we don’t realise it.”

“There were some people in the jury who understood coercive control and 
understood domestic abuse and what I really hope what this storyline will mean 
is that in future for women there might more jurors who are more likely to 
understand the issues. It’s as basic as that. It’s awareness that saves lives 
when it comes to domestic abuse, which is why this storyline has been 
overwhelmingly positive.”


My donation page inspired by The Archers has raised over £135,000 | Paul 
Trueman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2016/sep/08/my-donation-page-inspired-by-the-archers-has-raised-over-135000>
The Helen Titchener fund 
<https://www.justgiving.com/fundraising/helentitchener>, which was set up by a 
fan of the show, Paul Trueman, reached its target of £150,000 as the episode 
was on air. The money raised will go to Refuge, the domestic-violence-support 
charity.


Trueman, who set up the fundraising page in February as the abuse became more 
painful to listen to, said: “What a day. I couldn’t be more surprised and 
delighted by the fund’s success than if the Grundys were revealed as the 
rightful heirs to Loxley Hall. Thousands of people have helped me hit the 
target for Refuge – and they will change thousands of others’ lives in turn.”

There were hints that the storyline may continue, in a sense, beyond the 
trial. A custody battle is due to take place on 14 September and at the end of 
Sunday’s episode Helen had a chilling run-in with Rob. “Did you think you could 
tell all those lies about me and I’d just disappear?” he said. “Well, you might 
have fooled everyone else, but we both know the truth … You haven’t got rid of 
me. As long as we have a child together, you never will.”
 