
“It was so much fun,” John Oliver writes in an email. “It was basically an 
hour of laughing at Andy every week.” Oliver is talking aboutThe Bugle 
<http://thebuglepodcast.com/>, the clever, biting, and 
laugh-out-loud-in-your-cubicle-at-work audio newspaper that Oliver and Andy 
Zaltzman created back in 2007.

John Oliver on Trump: 'A Klan-backed misogynist internet troll' is president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/14/john-oliver-trump-wins-election-last-week-tonight>
The Bugle started out at the Times in London with weekly doses of what they 
called “satire and bullshit”, with Oliver and Zaltzman cracking each other up 
with a steady string of puns from Zaltzman and hysterical outrage from Oliver. 
The show became one of the most popular comedy podcasts in the UK with roughly 
400,000 weekly downloads. Then came the News of the World phone hacking scandal 
in 2011, and Zaltzman and Oliver did not hold back, despite the fact that 
Rupert Murdoch owned the paper where they worked. When The Bugle was eventually 
chucked out of its cradle at the Times for repeatedly, brutally mocking Murdoch 
and the News of the World, it wasn’t much of a surprise. In fact, Oliver and 
Zaltzman had been joking about it on-air for weeks before it actually happened. 
“Should this not have been stopped by now?” Oliver asked in one episode, and 
Zaltzman had already developed a back-up plan: “I can take up busking, John, 
it’s all right.” When the axe fell, they were prepared.

That near-death experience didn’t stop the Bugle, though. They brushed 
themselves off and kept going. They went independent and continued producing 
the show, even though Oliver had absconded to the States to work on The Daily 
Show. The show’s production and release schedule became increasingly erratic as 
they accommodated Oliver’s work schedule. It was possible for Oliver to still 
host The Bugle when he worked as a correspondent on The Daily Show, but when he 
moved to HBO to helm his own series, Last Week Tonight, it proved too difficult 
to continue with both. “It eventually became impossible for me to find enough 
time to write for it properly,” Oliver writes, “But we used to have an absolute 
blast recording it.”

While many shows would have folded when a founding member and co-host walked 
away, Zaltzman is bringing the show back from what could have been its second 
death, and not letting reports of its possible demise slow it down. Instead, he 
is determined to reanimate the show that has been part of his life for years 
and is something he clearly loves. “It’s the thing I’ve enjoyed most in my 
career,” says Zaltzman. “Obviously a big part of that was working with John. I 
just had to decide whether to start something fresh or ‘reboot’ – in the modern 
parlance – The Bugle with different people. I thought it would be interesting 
to use the existing format and the existing following to create a show that’s 
not entirely new, but has new elements while keeping the old stuff.”

Now The Bugle is firmly in Zaltzman’s hands and after a successful comedy tour 
of the US, he’s back in England hard at work getting The Bugle back on a 
regular schedule. “It’s what we did for the first seven years or so of the 
show, before it started getting more irregular,” said Zaltzman. “Now I’m aiming 
for it to be properly weekly again.”

The result is a newly invigorated version of The Bugle, with a series of 
co-hosts replacing the dearly departed Oliver, including comedianHari Kondabolu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/03/hari-kondabolu-mainstream-american-comic>
, former Daily Show contributor Wyatt Cenac (“John knows him very well and 
recommended him,” explains Zaltzman), Nish Kumar, and Helen Zaltzman, Andy’s 
sister and the host of both Answer Me This! and the etymology podcastThe 
Allusionist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/10/the-allusionist-podcast-helen-zaltzman-words-english>
. (“She’s one of the most successful podcasters there is,” says Zaltzman, 
proudly.) “I wanted a range of different perspectives from around the world, a 
broader range than just two white guys who went to Oxford and Cambridge,” says 
Zaltzman. “It’s a good thing, I think.” The show also has a new home, joining 
The Allusionist at the Radiotopia podcast network.

How John Oliver started a revolution in US TV's political satire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jun/15/john-oliver-started-a-revolution-in-us-tv-political-satire>
Thanks to the fact that the show is no longer solely hosted by “two white 
guys” and Brits, The Bugle now takes a more global approach to politics, which 
Zaltzman is excited about. “I wanted to make it a much more global show,” he 
says. “The advantage of having different co-hosts is that I can have people 
from different parts of the world.” While the news coverage may be more global, 
The Bugle won’t stray much from its original structure, because it always 
covered a wide variety of topics from the news cycle, including sports 
(Zaltzman is a world-renowned cricket expert) tovolcano porn 
<http://podbay.fm/show/652483579/e/1211673600?autostart=1>, babies 
<https://soundcloud.com/the-bugle/bugle-216-were-having-a-baby>, whether 
Stonehenge was an ancient tax dodge 
<http://podbay.fm/show/652483579/e/1207872000?autostart=1>, and even male 
genitalia drawn on rooftops <http://thebugle.leekworld.com/thebugle069.mp3>. 
“The show won’t change that much, because we always did whatever we wanted 
anyway,” says Zaltzman, chuckling. “That’s sort of the joy of podcasting, you 
don’t have people standing over your shoulder saying, ‘We’re not really sure 
about this.’”

As for the exact format of the revived show, according to Zaltzman, it’s a 
work in progress by design. “It depends slightly on the different co-hosts and 
what they bring to it,” Zaltzman says. “It will hopefully have a lot of the 
stuff from before, but new voices, new angles. It will evolve in different ways 
with different people. I hope it will still be funny and topical.”

As for those new hosts, Oliver had a bit of advice: “You’re going to need to 
develop a physical ability to withstand puns. That’s not easy, and it’s not a 
natural state for the human body, but it’s important if you hope to survive,” 
he wrote. “Also, do not under any circumstances try to ‘out-bullshit’ Andy, 
because you’re going toe-to-toe with the master there. He has weapons-grade 
nonsense at his disposal, and is more than happy to use it.”

Subscribe to The Bugle on iTunes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/the-bugle/id265799883?mt=2> 

 