
Strewn across Melbourne’s northern suburbs are the remnants of a once-great 
football club. Juventus, one of the most successful Victorian sides during the 
1950s and 1960s, has gradually been whittled away to nothing. Thirty years ago 
to the day Juventus lifted their one and only National Soccer League trophy, 
yet within three seasons the club was relegated from the NSL, and by 1996 they 
were kicked out; this time for good.

A few years ago, a family tree of the Italian clubs in Victoria was published 
online <https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B-GeBc7j6xA6ZHNuY3ZTaVBHWXc/edit>. 
Trying to follow the maze of splinters, mergers and breakaways makes for 
head-spinning reading. Triestina, for example, became Essendon Royals by virtue 
of mergers with Fiorentina, Moonee Ponds, East Brunswick Reggina and a host of 
other clubs.

Formed out of the predecessor club Savoia in 1949, Juventus was supposed to be 
the great unifier. According to the official history book, Juve! Juve!, the 
name “Juventus” was chosen for its neutrality, and because black and white 
striped shirts were “always easy to find in Melbourne”.

Published in 1990, the club history book – half in English, half in Italian – 
is out of print, out of date and long forgotten. The little poem on the inside 
cover – “To the fans of yesteryear, those of today, and to the ones of the 
future” – is both beautiful and haunting in the current context. These days the 
trophies, pennants and memorabilia are housed at Whittlesea Ranges; Moreland 
Zebras have the photos, host the anniversary events and officially trade under 
the name Juventus International Soccer Club; while Brunswick Zebras play at 
Juventus’ junior ground at Sumner Park, Northcote. All the clubs claim a link 
to the original Juventus, based either on colours, history and shared memory.

 Fabio Incantalupo, 51, was the favourite son of Juventus. His father Greg was 
the mayor of Brunswick, served on the club committee in the late seventies, and 
helped Juventus secure a training base. He took Fabio to see Juve play from a 
young age, and at 10 years old, Fabio started his career with the club. 
Although he had the chance to trial for Australian rules side Collingwood in 
his late-teens, he always loved football, and it was from this platform that he 
represented the national team at youth level, and in 1989 was named 
Italo-Australian Sports Personality of the Year.

“It got ripped apart,” he says of his childhood club. “They went from Juventus 
to being the Bulleen Inter Kings, then the Thomastown Zebras, then Whittlesea… 
everyone claimed a little bit of nostalgia of the club. The ones that play in 
the black and white are still a little bit connected, but it’s symbolic. It’s 
sad.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fforgotten-story-brunswick-juventus-1985-nsl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F818f84199a15069ab6268116cb689846c2172944%2F0_36_3953_2599%2F3953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Brunswick%20Juventus%E2%80%99%201985%20NSL%20championship%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fforgotten-story-brunswick-juventus-1985-nsl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Brunswick%20Juventus%E2%80%99%201985%20NSL%20championship%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fforgotten-story-brunswick-juventus-1985-nsl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F818f84199a15069ab6268116cb689846c2172944%2F0_36_3953_2599%2F3953.jpg>
 Incantalupo in action for Brunswick Juventus, circa 1985. He is described by 
the official club history as the “product of Italo-Australian soccer par 
excellence”. 
The solitary success story of Brunswick Juventus in 1985 can only be 
understood within the context of football in the mid-eighties – the lost years 
of the NSL. The original, commercially oriented ideals of the competition, 
which began in 1977, had been forgotten or simply ignored. The league’s main 
sponsor, Philips Industries, withdrew in 1982, while Channel 10 stopped 
broadcasting games after just two seasons. No crowds, no money and no exposure 
forced the league to revert to a ridiculous conference system in order to 
survive. In 1984 the league expanded from 16 teams to 24, split into a 
so-called “Australian” or “Northern” Conference and the “National” or 
“Southern’ Conference”.

The conference system was a cost-cutter. The idea was that less interstate 
travel for clubs would save money and more local derbies would draw in the 
crowds. In reality it was total anarchy. Both conference had sub-sections 
relating to the city the teams came from, and there were occasional 
inter-conference challenge rounds. The Australian or Northern conference was 
basically the teams from NSW, the National or Southern conference was the rest, 
including Brisbane, who of course were geographically the furthest team in the 
north.

The much-vaunted “local derbies” between Blacktown City and Penrith City at 
Cook Park, for example, drew less than 1,000 people, while the first ACT derby 
between Canberra City and Inter Monaro in Queanbeyan was played in front of 
just 2,100 people. There was promotion and relegation, but it didn’t extend to 
Newcastle, Canberra or Wollongong, who were were granted development status by 
the NSL. In the latter half of the 1985 season, Fairy Meadow, a tiny club from 
the sleepy coastal town in the Illawarra, looked to be a real possibility for 
promotion to the national league.

The Forgotten Story of ... Reg Date, the Don Bradman of football in Australia 
| John Davidson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/apr/02/the-forgotten-story-of-reg-date>
Looking back, even the names of the teams that entered in 1984 seem to 
forecast the impending downward spiral: there was the Croatias of Melbourne and 
Sydney, the most difficult of all the ethnic communities in Australian 
football; the Maltese teams Sunshine George Cross, Green Gully and Melita 
Eagles; Blacktown City and Penrith City from Sydney’s outer-western suburbs; 
and Inter Monaro, who were backed by the Italian Marco Polo Club. And, of 
course, Brunswick Juventus, the third-placed team from the 1983 Victorian State 
League season.

The clubs held sway over the federation, and after Melbourne and Sydney 
Croatia resolutely refused to change their nationalistic names, the labels 
Hellas, APIA, Juventus and Makedonia crept back. While Australian rules and 
rugby league were looking to expand beyond their traditional geographic 
boundaries, football was doing the reverse.

In a sense, this was reflective of the times – it was the European migrants 
and their children that gave Australian football its unique character. SBS, the 
multicultural television station, began screening the games, while in 
Melbourne, the premier football newspaper Soccer Action dedicated space every 
week for foreign-language columns. The author of Juve! Juve!, Egilberto Martin, 
wrote: “For the European migrant the code of soccer, besides its essentiality 
as a sport, represents also a piece of that gigantic mosaic which makes up his 
socio-cultural structure and has retained it in spite of the mockery, the 
popular derision, and the powerful hold of other football codes, and in 
Victoria, by Aussie Rules.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fforgotten-story-brunswick-juventus-1985-nsl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59663bb770190391c1c7dfe920b4c369b5a0456a%2F0_0_4607_2863%2F4607.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Brunswick%20Juventus%E2%80%99%201985%20NSL%20championship%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fforgotten-story-brunswick-juventus-1985-nsl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Brunswick%20Juventus%E2%80%99%201985%20NSL%20championship%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fforgotten-story-brunswick-juventus-1985-nsl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59663bb770190391c1c7dfe920b4c369b5a0456a%2F0_0_4607_2863%2F4607.jpg>
 The former footballer Fabio Incantalupo in his old No.17 Brunswick Juventus 
jersey. Incantalupo played for Brunswick in the 1980s. Photograph: Joe Gorman 
for the Guardian 
Brunswick Juventus entered the 1985 season led by the well-connected 
Italian-Australian triumvirate of Tony Schiavello, Sam Manenti and Vince 
Verducci. The team manager was Joe Caruso, a colourful local identity who owned 
an espresso bar in Coburg and a travel agency in Sunshine. Rocco Di Zio, a 
journalist, administrator, volunteer and raconteur was, as usual, omnipresent 
in the club operations.

 They were coached by the late, great John Margaritis. A former South 
Melbourne Hellas player, Margaritis had been sacked and re-hired several times 
by South Melbourne and West Adelaide Hellas in the early years of the NSL, and 
returned to Juventus in characteristically chaotic circumstances. He led 
Brunswick Juventus to the National League in 1983, stayed on in 1984, left at 
the end of the season, but when Tommy Traynor was fired after just three 
pre-season games, returned in time for the 1985 campaign.

It was an argument with Incantalupo that sealed Traynor’s fate. He told the 
team he was under pressure from the press to pick Incantalupo because he was 
Italian. “It wasn’t like I instigated it,” remembers Incantalupo, “I just think 
it was supporters who were upset because we weren’t winning. I was sitting on 
the bench, things started to get a bit heated. They said to me, ‘why aren’t you 
playing’, you know? I said go and ask him… he’s the coach. It just snowballed 
from there and he got the sack. The vibes weren’t good from the start.”

Aside from the dressing-room dramas, Caruso had signed well in the off-season. 
At the time, Lou Sticca,the man responsible for bringing Alessandro Del Piero 
to the A-League in 2012 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/sport/football/how-a-suggestion-from-player-agent-lou-sticca-planted-a-seed-in-the-mind-of-alessandro-del-piero/story-e6frfg8x-1226468243850>
, was a 25-year old fan. “Led by a good committee, [Caruso] was able to build a 
football structure and team and attracted the right players and coaches,” he 
remembers. Soccer Action’s Lawrie Schwab wrote that without Caruso, Margaritis 
“would be like a man with one arm”.

Signing a contact with Caruso was an experience in itself. Incantalupo 
remembers going to his cafe, hopping in his white, beat-up Mercedes and being 
taken to the races, the customary cigar always hanging out the side of Caruso’s 
mouth. “Friday night at Moonee Valley, just to negotiate my contract for the 
following year,” laughs Incantalupo.

The big name recruits of Peter Lewis, Paul Wade and Yakka Banovic, 
complemented the solid core of Brian Brown, Mike Petersen, Joe Sweeney and 
Eddie Campbell. The young starlets were Reno Minichello, Mehmet Durakovic, 
Andrew Zinni and Incantalupo. Sticca says the captain, Brown, was “the main 
reason Juventus had any success at all”, while Incantalupo was the “love child” 
and the “flagship” of the club. Yet at the beginning of the season, Margaritis 
told the press: “we are not saying we will win the championship this year”.

Juventus’ first win came over Green Gully at Olympic Park in March, and in 
April Incantalupo scored his first goal of the season in a 2-2 draw with South 
Melbourne. Elsewhere, a two-game stint by England international Kevin Keegan at 
Blacktown City drew large crowds and media attention, and a scintillating 3-1 
Juventus victory over South Melbourne drew rave reviews as “the game of the 
season”.

But things took a turn for the worse in July. Incantalupo got into a heated 
argument with team-mate Richard Miranda during a match against Brisbane Lions, 
and was sent off. Things escalated quickly after the pair started arguing over 
whether to press high or drop off while defending a throw-in. “It was just one 
of those things in the heat of the moment,” says Incantalupo now, “I might be 
the first time a player has been sent off for swearing at his own player!”

A week later in Sydney, the infamous Pratten Park riot 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lHlsIy812kU> saw the referee punched, kicked 
and spat on by unruly fans in a match between Sydney Olympic and Sydney City. 
“At long last, soccer has grabbed public attention,” lamented Andrew Dettre in 
Soccer Action. “True, it needed the prodding of an ugly riot, the mindless 
savagery of a few dozen or perhaps hundred lunatics – but we’ve made it.”

Indeed the crowds just would not show. By 1985 the clubs barely attracted fans 
outside the various ethnic groups, and furthermore, they didn’t even have full 
support from their own communities. Consider the “game of the season” between 
South Melbourne and Juventus in June – held at the best football stadium, 
Middle Park, between two of the best Victorian sides who purported to represent 
the state’s largest and most vibrant ethnic communities. Only 5,000 people 
turned up.

Fernando Spano is illustrative of this dilemma. His father arrived from 
Calabria in 1956 and became a Juventus fan, his cousin played for the club, but 
Fernando’s first sporting memories are of watching Australian Rules side 
Collingwood. Spano followed his father to Australia in 1965, and although he 
followed Juventus through the Italian newspaper Il Globo, he was instantly 
attracted to the roar of Australian Rules football at Victoria Park. Without 
much English, he says Collingwood helped him fit in to a new society, and that 
the violence and hatred at the football put him off. “You couldn’t go and not 
be taunted,” he says. “It’s not in the spirit of the sport.”

Sticca also had an affection for both football and Australian rules. “I’d go 
and watch Carlton play in front of 30-35,000 people at Princes Park, and then 
I’d go and watch Juventus play in front of 2,000 at Olympic Park,” he says. “To 
me, I loved it. Same same.” Still, by the early nineties, Sticca also realised 
that football needed drastic reform. “There was only one way I could see soccer 
progressing in this country, and that was to break away from the little ethnic 
club model,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fforgotten-story-brunswick-juventus-1985-nsl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf4167c26548ee6d3ab47162b479d9a7ae7d1499%2F0_0_3913_2680%2F3913.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Brunswick%20Juventus%E2%80%99%201985%20NSL%20championship%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fforgotten-story-brunswick-juventus-1985-nsl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forgotten%20story%20of%20%E2%80%A6%20Brunswick%20Juventus%E2%80%99%201985%20NSL%20championship%20%7C%20Joe%20Gorman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fforgotten-story-brunswick-juventus-1985-nsl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcf4167c26548ee6d3ab47162b479d9a7ae7d1499%2F0_0_3913_2680%2F3913.jpg>
 Incantalupo is held aloft in the dressing room at Olympic Park after the 
second leg of the 1985 NSL final. 
The only thing that remains of Juventus is memory, and the best memory is the 
1985 grand final victory. After defeating South Melbourne in the major 
semi-final and Preston Makedonia in the conference grand final, Juventus faced 
Sydney City in the national grand final. Sydney City, known by most as Hakoah, 
were run by current FFA chairman Frank Lowy and were the best team in the NSL, 
having won four national titles in eight seasons. But Juventus had an extra 
incentive – Schiavello had promised an all-expenses-paid end of season trip to 
Italy to play Roma if they players brought the title home.

Brunswick Juventus won 2-0 on aggregate over the two legs, with one goal in 
Sydney and one in Melbourne. After just two minutes of play in the second leg 
at Olympic Park, Juventus player Robbie Cullen received a head-knock and was 
taken to hospital with concussion. In the reshuffle, Incantalupo was moved into 
the forward-line. When Cullen woke up, he immediately asked: “did we win?” and 
“who scored?”

The answer, of course, was Fabio Incantalupo. After missing the entire 1984 
season after a knee reconstruction, an argument with the coach in pre-season, 
an on-field skirmish with his team-mate in round 18 and having scored just 
three goals all season, it was Incantalupo who scored the winner in both legs. 
The first, in Sydney, was a shot from outside the box; the second in Melbourne 
a tap-in from a corner. In the crowd, his father watched on proudly, and his 
girlfriend cheered for the man she would later marry. “They looked after me,” 
says Incantalupo, who had his knee operation paid for by the club. “Maybe 
because of that I had to repay them, and that was the best way I could do it.”

Later this month the 30-year anniversary dinner will be held at the Casa 
D’Abruzzo Club in Melbourne. The playing group will reminisce about the good 
old days, the colourful characters like Caruso, as well the hard-working 
volunteers like Di Zio and Joe Castelli who would fork out their own money to 
help players settle, or mortgage their family home in order for the club to 
have financial security. Sticca, who remains one of the most influential 
figures in the Australian game, still credits Di Zio as a central reason he got 
involved in the administration of the game. He learned a great deal watching 
the older guys, “their love of their sport, their community and their love of 
their club”.

But apart from the memories, there is little else to hold on to. Incantalupo 
believes the failure to set down firm roots with a social club and a home 
ground is the cause for the demise. Juventus’ plans for a $3 million sports 
complex at Clifton Park never eventuated, and the site is now home to a 
council-owned synthetic field. “If they had owned a club, a home ground, and a 
club room,” says Incantalupo, “I think Juventus would still be going.”

Others, however, believe that the Italians assimilated quicker than the other 
ethnic groups, and thus no longer needed their club as a social lubricant. In 
1990, Victorian Soccer Federation president, John Dimtsis, wrote: “The story of 
Juventus in Victoria tells us a great deal not only about a successful soccer 
club; it tells us much about Italian life in Victoria. Juventus was for many 
years… one of the main foci of Melbourne and Victoria’s Italian community.”

Those days are long gone, for the Italians and increasingly also for the other 
European migrant groups and their once-mighty football clubs. With theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> and its non-denominational 
clubs now firmly entrenched, perhaps Juventus are the canary in the coal mine 
for the ethnic clubs. “Juventus,” says Sticca, “is a club that lost its 
community.”
 