
The aversion that many in Britain now feel towards the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/30/nigel-farage-ukip-pro-brexit-campaign-uk-eu-exit>
 springs from the right instinct but leads to the wrong answer. Undoubtedly, 
Brussels disdains democracy and luxuriates in unaccountability.David Cameron’s 
hollow compromise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/02/eu-deal-key-points-what-cameron-wanted-and-what-he-got>
 will do precisely nothing to address this. Yet at the same time, a vote for 
“Brexit” in the forthcoming referendum is not the answer either.

The European Community was, in its early incarnation, a magnificent 
undertaking. Its construction allowed for the revitalisation of national 
cultures in the spirit of European cosmopolitanism, disappearing borders, 
common institutions and shared prosperity. Despite different languages and 
diverse cultures,Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> began 
to pull together, in peace and ostensible harmony. Alas, the serpent’s egg was 
hatching inside the foundations of the emergent union.

Normal states, such as Britain, evolved through the centuries as political 
mechanisms to contain social and economic conflicts between antagonistic groups 
and classes (eg the monarchy, the barons, later the merchants, the trades 
unions, etc). This is not at all how the EU, and its Brussels bureaucracy, 
developed.

It began life as a cartel of heavy industry (coal and steel, then car 
manufacturers, later co-opting farmers, hi-tech industries and others). Like 
all cartels, the idea was to manipulate prices and to redistribute the 
resulting profits through a purpose-built, Brussels-based bureaucracy.

This European cartel and the bureaucrats who administered it feared the demos 
and despised the idea of government by the people, just like the administrators 
of oil producers Opec, or indeed any corporation, does. Patiently and 
methodically, a process of depoliticising decision-making was put in place, the 
result a relentless drive towards taking the “demos” out of “democracy”, at 
least as far as the EU was concerned, and cloaking all policy-making in a 
pervasive pseudo-technocratic fatalism. National politicians were rewarded 
handsomely for their acquiescence to turning thecommission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission>, the Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/council-of-europe>, Ecofin 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Economic_and_Financial_Affairs_Council> (EU 
finance ministers), theEurogroup 
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/council-eu/eurogroup/> (eurozone finance 
ministers) and theEuropean Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> into 
politics-free, democracy-free, zones. Anyone opposing the process was labelled 
“un-European” and treated as a jarring dissonance.

This is, in an important respect, the deeper cause of the aversion that many 
in Britain instinctively harbour for the EU. And they are right: the price of 
de-politicising political decisions has been not merely the defeat of democracy 
at EU level but also poor economic policies throughout Europe.

In the eurozone, to maintain their unenforceable fiscal rules, the Brussels 
and Frankfurt-based “technocracies” ensured that economies sharing the euro 
were being sequentially marched off the cliff of competitive austerity, 
resulting in permanent recession in the weaker countries and low investment in 
the core countries. The more their policies failed, the more authoritarian they 
became and the more irrational the policies they imposed.

Meanwhile EU member states such as Britain that had had the good sense to stay 
outside the eurozone were also affected by Europe’s overall slide into 
deflation and are now alienated, seeking inspiration and partners across the 
Atlantic, or in China, where only disappointment andgreat losses of sovereignty 
await 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/20/china-to-take-one-third-stake-in-24bn-hinkley-nuclear-power-station>
 (as any reading of theTTIP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/ttip-what-why-angry-transatlantic-trade-investment-partnership-guide>
 andTISA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/12/ttip-your-data-privacy-is-a-barrier-to-economic-growth>
 trade deal documents confirm).

Today Europeans everywhere, from Helsinki to Lisbon, from Dublin to Crete, 
from Leipzig to Aberdeen, are feeling let down by EU institutions. Many are 
attracted to the idea of tearing up the EU, except that they remain wedded to 
the single market. Brexit campaigners are promising voters that they can have 
their sovereignty and access to Europe’s single market. But this is a false 
promise.

A truly single market, a genuinely level playing field, requires a single 
legal framework, identical industry, labour and environmental protection 
standards, and courts that will enforce them with the same determination 
throughout the single jurisdiction. But this then also requires a common 
parliament that writes the laws to be implemented across the single market as 
well as an executive that enforces the courts’ decisions.

Cameron’s EU deal: the verdict from our panel | Matthew d’Ancona, Daniel 
Hannan, Tom Clark and Natalie Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/02/eu-renegotiation-donald-tusk-draft-deal-referendum-panel>
A people such as the British, where all sides of politics cherish the idea of 
a sovereign national parliament, cannot envisage such an institution coming 
into being. They are right to be prepared to sacrifice, for a loftier cause, 
the ease of buying second homes in Normandy or settling on a Greek island.

But what is the alternative? If neither the retreat into the cocoon of the 
nation state nor surrender to the disintegrating democracy-free zone known as 
the EU are good options, is there a third way?

Yes, there is. It is the one that official “Europe”, and some local elites, 
resist with every sinew of their authoritarian mindset: a surge of democracy, 
orchestrated by Europeans seeking to regain control over their lives from 
unaccountable technocrats, complicit politicians and opaque institutions.

On 9 February some of us, convinced of the above, are gathering in Berlin to 
found a new movement –DiEM25 <http://diem25.org/> (Democracy in Europe Movement 
2025). We come from every part of the continent, including Britain, and are 
united by different cultures, languages, accents, political party affiliations, 
ideologies, skin colours, gender identities, faiths and conceptions of the 
good society.

One simple, radical idea is our motivating force: to democratise the EU in the 
knowledge that it will otherwise disintegrate at a terrible cost to all. Our 
immediate priority is full transparency in decision-making (live-streaming of 
European councils, Ecofin and Eurogroup meetings; full disclosure of trade 
negotiations; ECB minutes, etc) and the urgent redeployment of existing EU 
institutions in the pursuit of policies that genuinely address the crises of 
debt, banking, inadequate investment, rising poverty and migration.

Our medium-term goal is to convene a constitutional assembly where Europeans 
will deliberate on how to bring forward, by 2025, a fully fledged European 
democracy, featuring a sovereign parliament that respects national 
self-determination and shares power with national parliaments, regional 
assemblies and municipal councils.

Is this utopian? Of course it is. But no more so than the notion that the 
current EU can survive its anti-democratic hubris, and the gross incompetence 
fuelled by its unaccountability. Or the idea that democracy can be revived in 
the bosom of a nation-state asphyxiating within transnational “single” markets 
and opaque free trade agreements.

Yes, our movement seems utopian even to us. However, the only alternative is 
the terrible dystopia unfolding before our eyes as the EU disintegrates; David 
Cameron celebrates the potential exclusion of some eastern Europeans from 
social security benefits; ambition is renationalised; xenophobia surges; and 
newer and taller fences are built begetting insecurity in the name of … 
security.

The rightwing press can’t be allowed to bully us out of the EU | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/04/eu-referendum-rightwing-newspapers-cameron-fate> 