
What is it? A sci-fi mystery about which you will definitely have an opinion.

Why you’ll love it: The problem with launching a show in secrecy is that you 
have no way to guide viewer response. This has been the case with The OA. The 
only thing that Netflix revealed about The OA prior to its release last week 
was its genre and, in a post-Stranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
 world, that is dangerous. Now, when you tell people that they are about to 
watch a sci-fi mystery show, they expect cute kids, easy nostalgia and 
references to films they already like.

The OA is not that show. Sure, it opens in a grabby enough manner – we see 
iPhone footage of a beautiful young woman hurling herself off a bridge, then 
learn that she has been missing for seven years. Then it seizes up for 
three-quarters of an hour. What starts as a hooky thriller devolves into a 
mumblecore indie about Brit Marling staring mournfully out of windows.

Needless to say, this has upset a lot of viewers. They wanted something as 
emptily calorific as Stranger Things, but they were handedUpstream Color 
<https://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/upstream_color/>. Had Netflix offered more 
information about The OA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/16/netflix-the-oa-brit-marling-zal-batmanglij>
 prior to its release – had the show been pitched as slow and meditative or 
included the word “arthouse” in the description – perhaps this backlash could 
have been avoided.

What this means is that those who actually like The OA have to bat a little 
harder for it. And, for better or worse, I count myself among that group. Even 
though The OA was not what I was expecting, it has stayed with me like few 
other shows I have seen this year.

Take the first episode. Once you realise that it is going to be more about 
mood than a propulsive quest for answers, you are able to retune your 
expectations and appreciate it for the meandering tone poem it is. If you stick 
it out – if you stick out only this one episode – you are rewarded in spades. 
When you think the episode is about to end, something extraordinary happens. 
Without giving too much away, the show lifts into the stratosphere. The whole 
show shifts completely: formally, chronologically, cinematically. Just at the 
point when you start to think about giving up on The OA, it whooshes into life 
in the most unexpected of ways. It is a truly dazzling moment.

And, there or thereabouts, that is where it stays. While slowly filling in the 
central mysteries from the opening episode, The OA flits between mumblecore 
domestic life and thrillingly ostentatious pretension. Two of the set pieces of 
the finale – two big, long moments that explain a lot of the series – are 
delivered via an extended piece of abstract choreography and discordant Johnny 
Greenwood-style viola music.

The OA is that sort of show. It is cryptic and impressionistic and it has a 
vision all of its own. The leaps it takes are so huge that you cannot doubt its 
confidence for a moment.

The OA will bewilder many who watch it. It is not, by any means, an easy 
watch. But those who get it will love it. It is strange and beautiful and, if 
you let it, it will stay with you.

Where: Netflix <https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80044950>.

Length: Eight one-hour episodes.

Standout episode: The first. If you like it, you will love the rest of the 
series. If you feel otherwise, it might be smart to back out.

If you liked The OA, watch: Stranger Things 
<https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80057281> (Netflix), Sense8 
<https://www.netflix.com/gb/title/80025744> (Netflix).
 