 Tony Blair's memoir The Journey is due out in September. Photograph: Random 
House 
1. Gosh, well, bless you for leaving £25 in the collection. But as I look out 
the windows of my Buckinghamshire temple – which Cherie has renamed Jerusalem – 
while Pope Benedict bathes my stigmata, I find the time is right to share with 
you the holy scripture of my pilgrimage to the Promised Land, a land flowing 
with milk, honey and a £5m advance.

2. My early years were spent in Fettes's lowly cattle shed from where God 
summoned me to Oxford. Here I battled sorely against the temptation of Sympathy 
for the Devil, but I was a crap rock star and the Lord guided me to Chambers 
where I met the Blessed Virgin Cherie. Or at least that's what she told me, 
guys!

3. For many years I toiled at the Bar, until an Angel came unto me in a dream 
and commanded me to go hence and do Good Work. Or failing that, become a 
politician. So I headed north to Sedgefield – or rather my people did – to live 
among the little people and preach the gospel of the downtrodden and oppressed. 
"Blessed are the filthy rich," I said in one of my sermons to the faithful at 
Communion, "For they have no need of principles, and the meek shall inherit the 
economic downturn."

4. The passing of John Smith the Baptist was a time of much sorrow, and there 
was a wailing and gnashing of teeth in the restaurants of Islington. "Get thee 
behind me, Satan," I shouted to Gordo the Doubter. "Nobody likes you. Remember, 
they also serve who only stand and wait. And you will be waiting a fuck of a 
long time, pal."

5. And lo! an election was declared and I was crowned King of Kings and rode 
into Downing Street on the back of an ass. Though it took some members of the 
country rather a long time to realise that's what they had been taken for. Many 
days and nights did the world rejoice that a Third Way had been found, a way 
where the the Forces of Goodness could walk hand in hand with the Prince of 
Darkness. "Blessed are the money-lenders," I said to Archangel Mandy, "For they 
shall inherit the House of Lords."

6. Then into our land – or rather 45 minutes away – came a great Evil and Our 
Lord who art in Washington commanded me to smite the Heathen with my sword. Or 
get some of my minions to do so on my behalf. "Blessed are the warmongers, for 
they shall inherit the Middle East," I said astride my winged chariot. "Cry God 
for England, Prince Harry and George Bush."

7. And a mighty battle was fought until a light was once more shone among the 
Gentiles and a Peace was declared. Though not everyone saw it quite that way 
and Lo! some – well, all, really – of the people turned against their Saviour 
and I was cast out into the wilderness.

8. Yet the lord said to me, "Fear not, Tony. A prophet is not without honour 
save in his own country. Go forth to the US and multiply your income with 
lucrative lectures and a visiting professorship at Yale. And if you can con the 
UN into making you a peace envoy to the Middle East, Respect!"

9. And in mine own land, the Four Horsemen of the Bonus Culture did wreak 
havoc among the markets and a vile pestilence did reign for seven long years. 
Or probably longer. And Gordo wept. Tee hee.

10.Thus spake the Lord. At least I assume I will get a title sooner or later. 
Praise be upon Me.
 