
Spoiler alert: this recap assumes you’ve seen the last episode of The Night 
Manager <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-night-manager>. Don’t 
read on if you haven’t.

Well, I’m confused! For weeks, the Night Manager has trodden a terribly fine 
line. Would a man as sensibly paranoid as Richard Roper welcome an interloper 
like Jonathan Pine into his Injustice League without batting an eyelid? The 
idea always stretched the suspension of disbelief beyond breaking point, and so 
everything else that’s so good about the series seemed to depend on the 
resolution of that problem. If, as I (and I think a lot of others) thought was 
inevitable, the point was that Roper had been playing a double game, had known 
about Jedathan and that Pine had been a spy all along, the denouement promised 
a lot. There would be a confrontation that turned everything on its head, maybe 
the revelation that one of the unimpeachable goodies – David Harewood’s Joel 
Steadman, I was sure of it – had been a Tradepass mole, and real tension in the 
question of whether Pine could possibly prevail when a supervillain had had his 
number from the start. The Night Manager has had a cruel enough edge that you 
could have imagined the credits rolling over an image of Jonathan tending to 
Jed’s corpse, his victory made meaningless – or even Burr finding the two of 
them dead together. Every time Pine leered at the psychotic criminal 
mastermind’s girlfriend or casually sent a text in the allegedly locked down 
Mallorcan Fortress of Evil, it was that danger that kept you from rolling your 
eyes.

Welcome to Dragon School – the lair of the British acting elite
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/shortcuts/2016/mar/28/dragon-school-tom-hiddleston-tom-hollander-hugh-laurie-night-manager>
Yeah Right Manager

And look where we’ve ended up. For a good part of this finale, I still thought 
Roper might at any moment show his hand and take Pine for everything he had, or 
at least give him a run for his money. But, as it turns out, The Worst Man In 
The World is also the most sweetly naive. He really did think Pine was, in the 
terms that he applied to the dearly departed Corky, “a good man”. He really 
didn’t notice his cuckolding by a coupling of such flagrant sexual electricity 
that you half expected his hair to lift gently into the air when he went near 
them. He really did have faith.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe718e6b723952a3280009cef45f1a30464234889%2F0_0_3600_2396%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Night%20Manager%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20an%20explosively%20Oedipal%20climax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Night%20Manager%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20an%20explosively%20Oedipal%20climax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe718e6b723952a3280009cef45f1a30464234889%2F0_0_3600_2396%2F3600.jpg>
 ‘You must care very deeply about the person you’re protecting’ ... Jed 
(Elizabeth Debicki) and Roper (Laurie). Photograph: Des Willie/BBC/The Ink 
Factory 
When the penny did finally drop, the consequence should have been a deep sense 
of jeopardy, but Roper was so slow on the uptake that the prospect of him being 
able to do anything about it still seemed remote. “I think you must care very 
deeply about the person you’re protecting,” he said to Jed, with the suppressed 
tremble of a child who’s found out about Father Christmas a little later than 
his classmates. And then his display of sorrowful pique when he finally – and 
temporarily – had his nemesis where he wanted him: “It is a very rare thing, 
Jonathan Pine, for me to trust a person. But you were special. I knew it the 
first moment I saw you. You saved my son, risked your life. I should have known 
something was wrong.” At about 9.42pm this evening, Britain’s living rooms 
resounded to the collective mutter of incredulous spy intrigue enthusiasts 
remarking that yes, you bloody well should have, you great arms-dealing baby.

So that’s it, right? The BBC’s glossiest, smartest, most indecently 
entertaining Sunday night drama in ages, blown to smithereens: all that 
careful, incremental work made irrelevant, fine performances and direction 
rendered forgettable by a simple credibility gap. Except: to my very great 
surprise, I didn’t really care. I suspect, given the frustration a lot of 
commenters have expressed with the central implausibility we’ve all noticed, 
that this will not be a view everyone shares – but I loved the finale of the 
Night Manager. In its masterful pacing, its explosively satisfying climax, and 
the Oedipal unravelling that followed, it did something fairly remarkable: it 
took the disbelief we were self-consciously putting back on and asked, gently, 
if we wouldn’t rather take it off again. And for reasons that we still might 
not fully understand, we said yes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8c0ae0c860f9c407dcf7e816813e0d5f28aedae%2F0_118_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Night%20Manager%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20an%20explosively%20Oedipal%20climax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Night%20Manager%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20an%20explosively%20Oedipal%20climax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8c0ae0c860f9c407dcf7e816813e0d5f28aedae%2F0_118_3600_2159%2F3600.jpg>
 Blue-eyed boy ... Jonathan Pine (Tom Hiddleston). Photograph: Des 
Willie/BBC/The Ink Factory 
Bier boils a frog

Above all, that was possible because director Susanne Bier handled her story 
with such irresistible confidence. Throughout the series, she’s known exactly 
when to put the foot down and when to ease off. After the breathlessness of 
last week’s episode, you might have expected the finale to go up another gear; 
instead, she held back, boiling us like the proverbial frog. We had tea at the 
Nefertiti, dangerously entwined fingers at the bar, and Angela Burr subjected 
to a tediously overpopulated episode of Dragon’s Den at the beginning; even 
Pine’s killing of Freddie Hamid drew its power from the clinical calm of its 
execution. As the pace gathered, Bier still let critical moments linger, most 
deliciously as we watched Pine key in a detonation code that would change 
everything right in front of Roper’s unseeing eyes. It was intoxicating, weird, 
a mixture of indulgent and traumatic; instead of biting our nails, it felt like 
having themnibbled away by those little fish you can get to give you a pedicure 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_xdw6yiC8Mw>. (I haven’t done this, to be 
clear.)

The explosions were The Night Manager’s moment of redemption, I thought. Even 
if the setup was a stretch (hop in the back guys – why would they bother 
searching my van when I make an unscheduled late-night visit to this top secret 
munitions facility?), the clues were scattered with sufficient guile to leave 
us unclear about exactly what was going to happen, and then reassembled as they 
were about to come to fruition, providing a lovely moment of realisation just 
before they clicked into place. Even if only by dint of being on the other side 
of the smartphone, we felt the inevitably of the payoff the second before Roper 
did. We felt smarter than the supervillain.

Sorry dad

My favourite line of the finale: Roper, gazing at Pine as he processes Sandy’s 
question about where the first $300m payment has gone, and a sour little smile 
taking hold of his mouth as he exclaims: “Oh, you beauty.” It tells us so much 
about Roper, and so much about his relationship with Pine. We get his 
appreciation for a good con, predicated on a psychopathic feeling that none of 
this is anything more than a game. I thought of the philosophy he expounded to 
Pine in episode three, in which he advises him to realise that life is all 
rotten, and to find freedom in learning to celebrate it; I wondered if Pine’s 
seizure of his own sort of freedom, his own celebration of that rottenness, 
intersects with doing the right thing more by chance than by design. And we get 
that Roper is experiencing the curious, simultaneous feeling of pride and 
obsolescence that a father might feel the first time his son beats him at chess.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6009880a7d1eb1ba3bdb716fb5331464efe50177%2F0_0_3600_2396%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Night%20Manager%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20an%20explosively%20Oedipal%20climax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Night%20Manager%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20an%20explosively%20Oedipal%20climax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6009880a7d1eb1ba3bdb716fb5331464efe50177%2F0_0_3600_2396%2F3600.jpg>
 ‘Oh, you beauty’ ... the penny finally drops for Roper (Laurie) as Pine 
(Hiddleston) and Sandy Langbourne (Alistair Petrie) look on. Photograph: Des 
Willie/BBC/The Ink Factory 
Their relationship could hardly be more Oedipal, really. (Let’s not think too 
much about who that makes Jed.) Pine has persistently shown flashes of the 
remorselessness that makes Roper the best at what he does, has, I think, 
enjoyed killing people, has fallen for the gazillionaire arms dealer lifestyle, 
has slotted seamlessly into the world he is supposed to despise: has found, 
just as Burr predicted he would, that inside him there is half a psychopath. 
(“I was living half a life when you met me,” he told Burr this week, implicitly 
acknowledging what it was that made him whole.) Half a psychopath is bound to 
look up to a complete one, surely. But he has also accepted that his only route 
to redemption is to bump the old man off.


At the end, when father and son have their last exchange, Pine refers back to 
the observation Roper made about Corky earlier on: “You have to commit. You 
have to make a decision.” You might read that as a sort of apology – an 
acknowledgement that his place on the other side of the table to his mentor is 
almost arbitrary, driven by a series of events that unfolded before the two of 
them had even met. But you might also read it as the final proclamation of his 
victory: whereas Pine picked his side and relentlessly pursued a corresponding 
agenda, Roper was too besotted with the boy in his own image to see what was 
staring him in the face – to commit to the truth that he must, must, have 
known. Do you remember Jed’s grudging acknowledgement of Pine’s superpower in 
episode four? “Everyone’s attracted to you,” she said. “Who are you?” At the 
time, we might not have understood how broad the category of “everyone” was. 
But in the end, it turned out that Jed and Corky’s weakness for the blue-eyed 
boy was merely incidental. Roper wasn’t betrayed by their yearning: he was 
betrayed by his own.

Notes and observations

The deep relief that came from seeing Jed and Jonathan finally allowed to 
spend the night together was short-lived. Before long, she was shipping back to 
the US, facing up to her horrible family situation and finding herself apart 
from her beloved again. That contingent resolution felt of a piece with 
everything that had gone before; it also set us up nicely for a second series 
that goes beyond Le Carre (whose source novel had the couple setting up home in 
the south of England), denying Pine the domestic life that seems anathema to 
spies. Except Burr, that is.

Another spoiler for the novel: this is only Wikipedia-based 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Night_Manager> so forgive me if it’s got 
holes in, but apparently the original story doesn’t give Pine anything like the 
same victory – instead, Burr is discredited, Roper completes the deal, and the 
hero’s only consolation prize is that he and Jed get away in one piece. If that 
makes this telling quite a step away from the source, it also seems like a 
sensible one: Sunday night telly is not the venue for too much ambiguity, and 
Roper’s blindness to Pine’s betrayal would be a lot more irritating if he got 
away with it regardless.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb84458afea9a81777087b8958f7bc2efa0e24957%2F0_185_3600_2158%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Night%20Manager%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20an%20explosively%20Oedipal%20climax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Night%20Manager%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20an%20explosively%20Oedipal%20climax&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmar%2F27%2Fthe-night-manager-finale-recap-an-explosively-oedipal-climax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb84458afea9a81777087b8958f7bc2efa0e24957%2F0_185_3600_2158%2F3600.jpg>
 An additional layer of dread ... Angela Burr’s (Olivia Colman) bump loaded 
every close call with horrific tension. Photograph: Des Willie/BBC/The Ink 
Factory 
Olivia Colman might have been left without an awful lot to do here, but this 
was her most interesting episode by a mile. Her pregnancy became much more than 
a scriptwriter’s workaround this week, the bump on her front loading every 
violent confrontation or close call with an additional layer of dread. I loved 
her childlike pleasure when she got Pine’s call from Cairo, and her sourly 
amusing response to Roper’s question about who the hell she was in the grand 
scheme of things: “Oh, the grand scheme of things? Dunno, I live in Bermondsey?”

I don’t mind admitting that I was a bit disappointed not to see Frisky shot in 
the head. Still, it’s another good reason to hope for a second series. If it 
does happen, I anticipate a comeback from Dickie Roper: he might have been 
taken away by a guy who you suspect has his own claim on being The Worst Man In 
The World, but we never did see where they wound up.

Recap of the recaps

Episode five recap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/20/the-night-manager-recap-episode-five-nothing-quite-as-pretty-as-napalm-at-night>

Episode four recap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/13/the-night-manager-recap-episode-four-tv-review>

Episode three recap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/mar/06/the-night-manager-recap-episode-three-roper-hugh-laurie-tom-hiddleston-hollander>

Episode two recap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/28/the-night-manager-recap-episode-two-welcome-to-camp-roper>

Episode one recap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/feb/21/the-night-manager-recap-episode-one-as-sexy-and-sumptuous-as-tv-gets>
 