
‘Early rising,” wrote Isabella Beeton, “is one of the most essential qualities 
which enter into good Household Management, as it is not only the parent of 
health, but of innumerable other advantages. Indeed, when a mistress is an 
early riser, it is almost certain that her house will be orderly and well 
managed.”

It is indicative, surely, of the sorry decline in housekeeping standards since 
1861 that identical advice should still need dispensing, in a new book by a US 
life coach,Samantha Ettus <http://www.samanthaettus.com/>. Ms Ettus has been 
extolling, to women who have forgotten – if they have not sluggishly denied it 
– the transformative potential of early rising.

“Take advantage of what I call the ‘Magic Hour’,” she urges them in her 
motivational manual,The Pie Life: A Guilt-Free Recipe for Success and 
Satisfaction.

“This is the blissful hour in the morning before your kids’ alarms go off – 
when you can get yourself showered, dressed and ready for the day at a pace 
that is human.” The result, you gather, will be a housewife on the guilt-free 
lines set out in the Bible, and quoted by Beeton, herself a professional 
journalist. “She looketh well to the ways of her household; and eateth not the 
bread of idleness. Her children arise up and call her blessed; her husband 
also, and he praiseth her.”

In Ms Ettus’s case, the rewards for getting up early and telling the world 
about it have been yet more blissful: a lucrative career as a life coach and 
speaker and, as of last week, as an acknowledged authority, in this country 
too, on appropriate female conduct. Indeed, such was the awe and interest in 
Ettus/Beeton’s whole early rising concept, when it was reintroduced to British 
women last week, that while welcoming its revival, you wondered how many other 
basic tenets of good housekeeping were forgotten, during the long years when 
women’s self-help manuals focused more on not loving too much or on running 
with wolves. An assumption had taken hold, courtesy of various slatternly 
feminists, that self realisation was probably incompatible with top-notch 
housekeeping.

Ettus obviously believes that a zero-hours warehouse job is just as fabulous 
as a career

Ms Ettus seems to have also factored in a sharp falling off in female 
intelligence, for, like Mrs Beeton, specifying a “cold or tepid” bath every 
morning, she prefers to court accusations of condescension than to leave less 
competent women in the dark over, for instance, how often to have sex. Keep a 
calendar, she advises – too late, alas, for those of us who have never come 
across this brilliant alternative to tying knots in a hanky – chop onions at 
the weekend, stock up on birthday cards, find a good plumber, make lists. Is 
there any hint so contemptuous of her readers’ intelligence that Ettus will not 
include it? There is not. Do things near your home, she suggests – as opposed 
to driving, willynilly, to a distant part of the country – “you’ll wonder why 
you didn’t think of it”. “Use the school run as an opportunity to fit in tasks 
such as shopping.” Save time by not straightening your hair. Or simply: “hire a 
personal assistant”.

Admittedly, the book includes some evidence that a career as a famous life 
coach may involve more than readiness to state the numbingly obvious, in terms 
that conjure up wartime information broadcasts. Never before have I seen her 
“genius tip”: wear a protective plastic cape until ready to leave the house, 
like a mass murderer. And it’s rare, at least outside the pages ofViz, to find 
hints on extracting measurable value from friendships. True, Mrs Beeton 
explained why “friendships should not be hastily formed”, to ensure companions 
who “reprehend vice”. But to Ettus, these relationships, if carefully 
regulated, add up to a precious “favour bank”.

Another of her hints, never to entirely give up work, has been described as 
controversial, even though it is framed entirely as an argument about 
fulfilment, as opposed to independence or equality, and informed by Ettus’s 
obvious belief that a zero-hours warehouse job is just as fabulous as a career 
telling women to get up early. For someone in the top tips trade, it probably 
makes complete sense.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fgranny-teach-you-how-to-suck-an-egg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce0fedb4df011c4e4c40afa9bf65ecb838664313%2F248_43_4330_2597%2F4330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20new%20self-help%20book%20that%20tries%20to%20teach%20Granny%20how%20to%20suck%20an%20egg%20%7C%20Catherine%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fgranny-teach-you-how-to-suck-an-egg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20new%20self-help%20book%20that%20tries%20to%20teach%20Granny%20how%20to%20suck%20an%20egg%20%7C%20Catherine%20Bennett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F01%2Fgranny-teach-you-how-to-suck-an-egg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce0fedb4df011c4e4c40afa9bf65ecb838664313%2F248_43_4330_2597%2F4330.jpg>
 Pippa Middleton, another noted purveyor of vacuous advice. Photograph: 
Jonathan Hordle/REX/Shutterstock 
Pippa Middleton <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pippa-middleton> 
recently acknowledged there might have been something amiss with her widely 
ridiculed domestic advice, for instance to remember “to remove the price tag 
from the gift”. But to compare Pippa’s hints with Samantha’s is to marvel much 
more at the latter’s uncompromising commitment to female servitude. Moreover, 
though it relied entirely on her princess connections, there is little as Marie 
Antoinetteish, in Middleton’sCelebrate as Ettus’s instruction to stay-at-home 
mothers: “work part time, run a home-based business, consult”.

Nor, where insulting the reader’s intelligence is concerned, can Middleton 
compete with a number of affluent, alpha women whose books and websites now 
counsel followers on everything from throwing stuff away and drawer-tidying, to 
food-chewing, steam-douching, small talk and how to “assemble the perfect 
cheese plate”, in the manner recommended long ago by Milton, inParadise Lost. 
“Nothing lovelier can be found in Woman, than to study household good.” 
Actually, given the ongoing purge of potentially troublesome women speakers, 
these experts on fulfilled living could be the very influencers our 
universities need for their safe spaces. When did Germaine Greer, for instance, 
ever have anything useful to share with women about colour-grouping their 
closets?

Not that the discipline is conflict-free: in advocating early rising, Ettus 
now finds herself, though in agreement with Beeton, in open defiance of the no 
less learnedArianna Huffington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ariannahuffington>, who made sleep the focus 
ofThrive: The Third Metric to Redefining Success and Creating a Happier Life”. 
“Sleep is a fundamental and non-negotiable human need,” writes Huffington, who 
appears, however, to agree with Ettus, and probably a vast number of men, that 
what women should now prioritise is not old-fashioned assaults on the status 
quo, but even older-fashioned hints on how to make the best of it, by way of 
phone-free nights and speedy dressing. “I purposefully wear the same dresses 
over and over again,” Huffington confides. “It saves so much time and energy 
that you can use getting other things done.”

Presumably millions of women have, indeed, been dressing incompetently all 
their lives or Arianna Huffington would not risk infantilising the ones who 
figured out, for themselves, how best to complete this operation, just as they 
had concluded, before she advised them, that there’s nothing like a good 
night’s sleep, even in a bedroom that is not (like hers) “an oasis: a beautiful 
escape from the day”.

If there is, indeed, a need for this level of advice you can’t but notice that 
men are still waiting, in vain, for male Huffingtons, Paltrows, Kondos and 
Ettuses to come along and explain how to throw things out, get up early and, 
after steaming their bottoms clean, create the Danishhygge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/11/hygge-the-danish-art-of-living-cosily-on-its-way-to-uk-bookshops>
 mood with candlelight. Then again, with so many achieving women to remind the 
world that not much has changed, domestically, since 1861, what would be the 
point?

• Comments will be opened later today
 