
Think for one second about all the TV you don’t watch – home renovation 
reality shows, dramatic re-enactments of obscure civil war battles, bass 
fishing highlights, and whatever the hell Freeform is. There’s just not enough 
time in the day to consume every TV show. Then there’s the shows that you not 
only won’t watch, but you literally can’t watch. These are the failed pilots, 
the little lost three-legged puppies of Hollywood. They get buried in an 
abandoned missile silo or melted down and turned into episodes of The Big Bang 
Theory. But what if, for one shining moment, we could imagine a world where 
these shows not only exist, but they thrive? This is what I have done for five 
genuine unsold pilots that sound the least appealing. For your pleasure, I have 
charted out a path forward for these shows.

Spark
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11b0c93819059b8e1624ac4f8d463e204bd4b571%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20worst%20TV%20pilots%20ever%3A%20a%20Waterworld%20prequel%2C%20drag-racing%20PIs%20and%20furry%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20worst%20TV%20pilots%20ever%3A%20a%20Waterworld%20prequel%2C%20drag-racing%20PIs%20and%20furry%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11b0c93819059b8e1624ac4f8d463e204bd4b571%2F0_0_1200_720%2F1200.jpg>
 Edison light bulbs, popular hipster staple but completely useless in Spark. 
Photograph: DeRailleur/GuardianWitness 
Try, if you might, to imagine a world in which no one invented electricity. 
All of your gadgets are powered by fossil fuels. So, I guess your smartphone 
needs a portable furnace attached to it, which seems very practical. That’ll 
fit in your pocket. Two families fight for control of the energy infrastructure 
of the planet … until a young girl invents electricity. Considering I have not 
seen this pilot and know nothing about it, I must assume that this girl (who I 
will call Tabitha, unless told otherwise) is not only spunky, but also a bit of 
a misfit. You see, Tabitha is an orphan, preferably from the wrong side of the 
tracks. Her father should, ideally, be a coalminer himself. He should also be 
suffering from the black lung, which pushes her to inventing a cleaner source 
of energy. There are betrayals, lots of tame, broadcast TV sex scenes where 
people grind on each other while wearing overalls, and a special guest 
appearance by 3rd Rock from the Sun star French Stewart as Nikola Tesla. In the 
final episode, climate change occurs at an accelerated rate and the entire 
planet drowns under the rising tide of the oceans, revealing that this had been 
a prequel to the movie Waterworld the entire time.

The Kicker
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f134f11371152c95a7966d10c5988c851a21760%2F0_169_4652_2791%2F4652.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20worst%20TV%20pilots%20ever%3A%20a%20Waterworld%20prequel%2C%20drag-racing%20PIs%20and%20furry%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20worst%20TV%20pilots%20ever%3A%20a%20Waterworld%20prequel%2C%20drag-racing%20PIs%20and%20furry%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f134f11371152c95a7966d10c5988c851a21760%2F0_169_4652_2791%2F4652.jpg>
 Traumatic brain injury need not be an impediment to solving crimes, albeit 
tedious ones. Photograph: Jeremy Brevard/USA Today Sports 
It’s about a football kicker who gets cut from his team and tries to fit into 
the real world. The gag here is that he’s a bit crazy, so he has a hard time 
relating to other people. In my version of this pilot, the poor bastard learns 
that he can’t function in the real world because he has a traumatic brain 
injury and sues the National Football League for millions of dollars. His 
intrepid lawyer is portrayed by Casey Affleck (because Ben Foster said no) and 
NFL commissioner Roger Goodell is played by a box of instant mashed potatoes 
(also because Ben Foster said no). The twist here is that each week, Affleck 
and his football player friend solve crimes. Mostly petty offenses like a 
stolen purse or a guy who waters his lawn on Tuesdays instead of legally 
mandated Thursdays. The show goes on for longer than even Law & Order did, as 
the procedural element allows for multiple cast changes – so many, in fact, 
that future generations will not even know why the show is called The Kicker, 
as the football aspect gets dropped after five seasons once football is 
outlawed by President Chelsea Clinton.

Furst Born
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcaec278d93c2876b07b72244981cddd669936f6d%2F0_24_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20worst%20TV%20pilots%20ever%3A%20a%20Waterworld%20prequel%2C%20drag-racing%20PIs%20and%20furry%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20worst%20TV%20pilots%20ever%3A%20a%20Waterworld%20prequel%2C%20drag-racing%20PIs%20and%20furry%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcaec278d93c2876b07b72244981cddd669936f6d%2F0_24_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 You were born to drag racers and consequently have won 57th place in the 
lottery of life. Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
Based on an Australian TV series, Furst Born tells the story of a woman who 
learns she was adopted and that her birth parents are drag racers. I’m 
struggling to see the dramatic (or comedic) potential here. Was there a 
fishbowl full of professions the parents could have and some poor sap happened 
to draw “drag racers”? What other options were there? Podiatrist? Soapmaker? 
Cheesemonger? Suicide assistant? Journalist? Also, drag races are not 
particularly engaging to watch, as they’re over in a few seconds. We’re going 
to really have to spice things up on this one. I’d suggest they fight crime 
with their drag racing cars, but I already used that one for The Kicker. I 
don’t believe anyone’s ever thought about this, though. What if the drag racing 
cars … turned into robots? They’re actually aliens from another planet that 
came to Earth in the guise of automobiles – the perfect disguise.

Zoobiquity
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48eee08c356bca360663219eee3845e58d122ef6%2F0_333_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20worst%20TV%20pilots%20ever%3A%20a%20Waterworld%20prequel%2C%20drag-racing%20PIs%20and%20furry%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20worst%20TV%20pilots%20ever%3A%20a%20Waterworld%20prequel%2C%20drag-racing%20PIs%20and%20furry%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48eee08c356bca360663219eee3845e58d122ef6%2F0_333_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Help! It’s the hair bear bunch – when experimental inter-species medical 
treatment goes wrong … Photograph: Vitaly Nevar/Tass 
 A cardiologist teams up with a veterinarian to cure exotic diseases by 
blending human and animal medicines. This is based on a nonfiction book by 
Barbara Natterson-Horowitz and Kathryn Bowers, so even if it sounds stupid, 
it’s based in some semblance of real science. Still, I can’t help but picture 
someone being fed the pills meant for a baboon or a gorilla popping Viagra. I’d 
rather die than take the same drugs you’d give my dog for giardia. This would 
be a better show if instead of real science informing fake TV stories, they go 
full Island of Dr Moreau and spice animals with people. Again, I gotta go for 
the crime-fighting angle. I’m thinking Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles meets 
Moonlighting or Castle. More specifically, I see a young cardiologist teaming 
up with a zebra. At first, there’s some tension. The cardiologist plays it by 
the book, but the zebra is a damned hothead, consistently bending the letter of 
the law to get the job done. It’s a classic odd couple, in that one is a 
strait-laced doctor and the other is literally a horse with stripes.

The Fluffy Shop
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabc99b4e883cd3fcc7f5bbcffe0061d0c5742277%2F141_0_3292_1975%2F3292.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20worst%20TV%20pilots%20ever%3A%20a%20Waterworld%20prequel%2C%20drag-racing%20PIs%20and%20furry%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20worst%20TV%20pilots%20ever%3A%20a%20Waterworld%20prequel%2C%20drag-racing%20PIs%20and%20furry%20fetish&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fworst-tv-pilots-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabc99b4e883cd3fcc7f5bbcffe0061d0c5742277%2F141_0_3292_1975%2F3292.jpg>
 Gabriel Iglesias, far right, and the rest of the Magic Mike cast share a laugh 
over the thought of The Fluffy Shop. Photograph: Allstar/Warner Bros 
Comedian Gabriel Iglesias stars as himself in a semi-autobiographical sitcom 
about a comedian named Gabriel Iglesias. Contrary to popular belief, the Fluffy 
Shop is not a fetish outlet for furries, like it is in my version. Mr Iglesias 
works the counter at a store that sells only furry outfits and furry 
accessories. It’s not the ideal job, but he has to pay the bills while he 
struggles to make his dreams of comedy stardom come true. Eventually, he has 
the brilliant idea to host a weekly standup show in the store. Boy is there a 
wacky cast of characters who show up each week. Think of Cheers, but substitute 
alcoholics for people who like to have sex through layers of synthetic hair. 
It’s a real shame that no one will ever see this show, as I’m sure they 
jam-packed the pilot with more dunderheaded fat jokes than anyone else in the 
history of television, until the upcoming season finale of Kevin Can Wait.
 