
Of all the children stuck in the Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> camp, 13-year-old Jawaad (not his 
real name) was one of the best able to articulate the horror of his situation, 
living in a tent for months, with no adult to care for him.

I met him in August  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/02/child-refugees-calais-failed-by-britain>
and was impressed by his elegant English, which he had learned from his father, 
a Nato translator who was targeted by the Taliban for working with western 
forces, and who had been forced to flee the country separately. Jawaad had no 
idea where his father was, and had travelled from Afghanistan to France alone. 
He was finding the conditions in Calais hard to bear. “Every second you are 
scared that something dangerous will happen to you. The French police are 
familiar with beating. They don’t care if you are a child or a grownup. They 
send dogs after us. The dog’s mouth is covered but they can get you with their 
nails,” he told me, in the tarpaulin shack known as the Kids’ Cafe.

There are still 1,000 children from Calais in refugee centres. They need 
sanctuary | George Gabriel and Janet Darley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/1000-children-calais-refugee-centres-need-families-guardian-appeal>
When the camp in Calais was demolished, he was one of 1,700 young people put 
on buses to youth hostels and former old people’s homes and given temporary 
accommodation while their applications for asylum in the UK were processed. 
When we spoke by phone in mid-November, he was in a hostel in Talence, 
Bordeaux. He said he was relieved to be somewhere warm, where he could have a 
shower, but he hated the feeling of being in limbo. He said the interviewing 
process by Home Office officials who were assessing his application to join his 
cousins and uncle in Southampton was “disorganised”. He complained that because 
none of the boys spoke French and the staff did not speak English, they were 
communicating through Google Translate on phones. “People feel unhappy and 
angry,” he said.

We know that he travelled to the UK at the end of November, one of 750 
unaccompanied refugee children. He is in care while officials consider his 
application, but beyond that there are very few details of his current 
existence. He is no longer in touch with Mary Jones, who helped run the Kids’ 
Cafe. Once the children are taken into care in the UK, they often fall out of 
contact; usually they are encouraged by their foster parents to cut ties, to 
avoid any risk that they could be targeted by people smugglers, who may be 
anxious to have travel debts repaid.

Jawaad “is one of the lucky ones”, says Jones, “if you can call a child lucky 
when he has no idea where his parents are, just that his father is in hiding 
from the Taliban and his mother had to flee their village when it was overrun 
by fighters from Daesh”. At least we know now that he is safe, able to study 
and work towards his ambition of becoming a doctor.

Volunteers who worked with the Calais refugee children are more worried about 
those who remain in France, waiting for a decision on their future. Some have 
gone on hunger strike. The Home Office announced earlier this month that it has 
ended the emergency transfer programme to the UK, which means thatup to a 
thousand more Calais children are still waiting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/09/home-office-transfers-of-calais-child-refugees-to-uk-cease>
.

Jones is very worried about reports that several children have left the 
hostels and are sleeping rough again. “The journey is not yet over for 
[Jawaad], but hopefully it will just be a matter of weeks before he can get on 
with his life. For his friends and other refugee children left in France, most 
of them have given up hope and several have attempted suicide. It is only a 
matter of time before they go back to Calais and put their faith in smugglers 
again.”

Donate to our refugee appeal at guardian.charitiestrust.org 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx>
 