
Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> shares have come under 
pressure this week as investors express fears that the sector will be badly hit 
by a global economic downturn. Financial institutions have strengthened their 
balance sheets since the 2008 financial crisis, but they could be in for a 
turbulent year if potential flashpoints such as emerging markets or the energy 
sector produce a cascade of debt defaults. Here are the five biggest threats to 
the banking sector:


China

A property boom and frenzy of manufacturing in the aftermath of the 2008 
financial crash kept the global economy motoring, but stored up huge private 
debts that investors fear will soon destabilise theChinese economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/chinese-economy>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fa7a737d89bd1c9c5f2f0e695275dd753c5b1c6%2F0_172_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20fears%20stalking%20the%20global%20banking%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20fears%20stalking%20the%20global%20banking%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fa7a737d89bd1c9c5f2f0e695275dd753c5b1c6%2F0_172_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 A Chinese investor monitors stock prices in a brokerage house in Beijing. 
Photograph: Mark Schiefelbein/AP 
Beijing is working hard to wean itself off being the world’s source of cheap 
manufactured goods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/china-economy-grows-at-slowest-pace-in-25-years-latest-gdp-figures-show>
, but it is a painful transition, full of pitfalls. Some banks have called in 
bad loans, forcing firms to go bust. But these are rare, leaving international 
investors to fear that more are in the pipeline, without knowing the extent of 
the problem.

Property developments and infrastructure projects stand half-finished while 
the authorities take stock of the situation.

Some analysts fear Beijing is covertly depreciating the yuan to gain a 
competitive advantage while it moves towards a more western-style consumer 
economy. That would spark a currency war and a wave of competitive devaluations.

The stock market is dominated by individual investors who treat the market 
like a casino. Efforts to shift share ownership to institutional investors and 
impose stricter regulations have proved ineffective so far, leaving the 
Shanghai and Shenzhen exchanges to cope with wild swings each time there is bad 
economic news.

Emerging markets

The list of developing nations suffering the after effects of the slowing 
global economy and the slump in oil prices grows every week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e8d0bc04946c710c6a304feb08fe782e22e0927%2F0_197_2998_1800%2F2998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20fears%20stalking%20the%20global%20banking%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20fears%20stalking%20the%20global%20banking%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e8d0bc04946c710c6a304feb08fe782e22e0927%2F0_197_2998_1800%2F2998.jpg>
 Soldiers holds a portrait of late Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez. 
Photograph: Federico Parra/AFP/Getty Images 
Last year, Brazil slid into a recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/05/brazil-faces-steep-hurdles-ahead-of-olympics-zika-and-economic-crisis>
 made worse by a corruption scandal that could topple the government.
Venezuela’s ailing post-Hugo Chávez administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/political-showdown-in-venezuela-as-opposition-takes-control-of-parliament>
 is expected to default on its loans after oil revenues dried up.

Nigeria, Russia and the Middle Eastern producers are also badly hit by falling 
oil prices, leaving government budgets under water.Turkey 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-01-04/turkey-seeks-to-curb-banks-short-term-dollar-borrowing-binge>
, South Africa and Mexico are braced for corporate insolvencies after strong 
signals from the US Federal Reserve that years of borrowing heavily at rock 
bottom interest rates will soon come to an end. The Fed raised rates in 
December and could do so again soon, jeopardising the finances of large 
corporations that borrowed heavily in dollars.

East Asian economies Malaysia 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-12-10/1mdb-fix-leaves-oil-as-malaysia-debt-risk-with-najib-digging-in>
,Thailand <http://www.cnbc.com/2015/07/26/thailands-economy-in-trouble.html> and
South Korea 
<http://www.economist.com/news/business-and-finance/21662952-steepest-year-drop-trade-2009-mark-sagging-global-demand-why-big-slump>
, which depend on trade with China’s manufacturing sector, are suffering a 
dramatic slowdown as the world’s second-largest economy focuses on tackling 
corruption and boosting consumer demand. Sovereign debts that only last year 
appeared to be manageable are coming under scrutiny by the international 
ratings agencies.

Only India, which is large enough to be relatively insulated from the recent 
market turmoil, has maintained its growth, outstripping Beijing’s official 6.9% 
rate with a 7.5% expansion in 2015.

Eurozone

When the European Central Bank cut its already ultra-low main interest rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/04/ecb-cuts-rates-help-eurozone-economies>
 from 0.15% to 0.05% in the autumn of 2014, the Ukraine crisis was cited as a 
risk to Europe’s hopes of recovery.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe803150629c106450aae53fcf879dc7156e5ac83%2F0_66_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20fears%20stalking%20the%20global%20banking%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20fears%20stalking%20the%20global%20banking%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe803150629c106450aae53fcf879dc7156e5ac83%2F0_66_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Germany’s Deutsche Bank in Frankfurt. Photograph: Kai Pfaffenbach/Reuters 
Since then, the Syria crisis and the exodus of refugees to Europe’s shores has 
become a more serious threat to the stability of the 19-member currency bloc and
the ECB has cut rates further 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/03/ecb-launches-new-stimulus-package-eurozone>
 and hinted of more to come next month.

While stock markets have welcomed cheaper borrowing costs, fears that European 
banks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/europeanbanks> have returned to 
their bad old ways and become embroiled in risky lending has come to dominate 
discussions in the City.

Bank shares, led by Deutsche Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/09/deutsche-boss-tells-staff-the-bank-is-rock-solid>
 and Barclays, dived this week as investors scrambled to buy safer assets.

Some countries are suffering more than others. Finland has fallen into a 
recession deeper than anything Portugal experienced. France is lagging and 
Italy’s burst of activity last year is waning. Worse, Germany’s industrial 
output has come under pressure from the decline in trade along the Silk Road 
that leads back toChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

Oil

JP Morgan believes the exposure to the oil sector of US and European banks 
amounts to about $250bn (£173bn), although it thinks big losses on that money 
are unlikely.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22a97827573f1647814839655ca4cd2459921835%2F0_118_4335_2600%2F4335.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20fears%20stalking%20the%20global%20banking%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20fears%20stalking%20the%20global%20banking%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22a97827573f1647814839655ca4cd2459921835%2F0_118_4335_2600%2F4335.jpg>
 The Bahrain International Airshow in Sakhir, Bahrain. Photograph: Hasan 
Jamali/AP 
The oil industry had $455bn of bonds outstanding in 2006, but that figure 
increased to $1.4tn by 2014, according to the Bank for International 
Settlements (BIS).Oil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> companies had 
$1.6tn of syndicated loans in 2014, although that does not take into account 
repayments or loans that were never drawn.


Both numbers are likely to have increased significantly since the BIS last 
crunched the numbers. Debts have ballooned in part because of the boom in shale 
oil and gas extraction in the US. Companies borrowed heavily to fund investment 
in shale when the oil price was high.

Now that prices have tumbled, those debts look increasingly unsustainable. 
America’s second-biggest natural gas firm, Chesapeake Energy, threatens to 
provide the first significant example of a big company driven under by debt. It 
was forced to deny this week that it was on the verge of bankruptcy, with debts 
of $10bn and a market value of just $1.2bn.


It is not just in the US where such disasters could arise. Firms that operate 
in regions where it costs a lot to extract oil, such as the UK North Sea, are 
seeing their profits wiped out.

Prolonged rock-bottom oil prices raise the prospect that some of these oil and 
gas companies will default on their debts, sending shockwaves through lenders 
such as banks and bond investors.

There is also a knock-on effect in countries that rely on oil reserves for 
income. Falling oil revenues result in lower tax receipts, which could force 
greater austerity and depress economic activity further, triggering debt 
defaults across a variety of businesses.

Commodities

In a report at the end of last year, credit rating agency Moody’s warned of a 
“spike in defaults” among commodity companies, as well as oil producers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e7394a8ceb522c8830f23002e4241260672b449%2F0_123_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20five%20fears%20stalking%20the%20global%20banking%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20five%20fears%20stalking%20the%20global%20banking%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fbanking-shares-under-pressure-as-investors-fear-effects-of-global-downturn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e7394a8ceb522c8830f23002e4241260672b449%2F0_123_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 1kg gold bar. Photograph: Ruben Sprich/Reuters 
“The sheer volume of commodity-related debt poses challenges because it means 
that credit losses from commodity investments will be substantial for many 
investors,” said Mariarosa Verde, Moody’s group credit officer.

The group said $2tn of bonds had been issued by mining companies since 2010, 
many of them now rated as junk, meaning there is a high risk investors will not 
get their money back.

Mining companies have suffered badly because they spent big when metals prices 
were high and cannot sustain their operating costs now that prices are low.

One of the hardest hit has been commodities giant Glencore, which has $36bn of 
net debt and a market value of $20bn.

Observers have warned that because Glencore’s metals trading arm deals with so 
many companies around the world, it poses a risk.

If it were to fall into severe financial trouble, it might trigger a Lehman 
Brothers-style event, creating a domino effect of debt similar to the banking 
crisis of 2008.

Bank of America has estimated that the financial sector’s exposure to Glencore 
could be as high as $100bn – and that’s just one company. The company has 
insisted that it has plenty of financial room for manoeuvre if things get tight 
and it has since moved to cut its debts.

But ultra-low commodity prices could cause big problems for more than just the 
banks and investors who lend to mining firms.

For instance, the copper price has more than halved to below $2/lb since 2011. 
This is largely because China’s slowdown means the metal, used in electrical 
wiring among other things, is not in such demand.

The economy of some countries – such as Zambia, for instance – are built 
almost entirely on copper. Low metals prices could force mining-dependent 
countries to default on their debts, spreading the problem to sovereign debt 
markets. too.
 