
How fitting that in Movember, The Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead> foregrounded the 
man with the show’s most impressive facial hair. No, I don’t mean Jesus with 
his totally wrong centre parting, martial arts moves and boring beard. I mean 
Negan’s leading lickspittle Simon, the hood redeemed by his moustache. That 
moustache had such a divertingly Southern retro 70s vibe that it was easy to 
imagine that, before the zombie apocalypse, it had a leading role in an Allman 
Brothers tribute band. Its previous owners may well have included Dennis Weaver 
and Burt Reynolds. Was it a dream, or did one of the baddies in The Dukes of 
Hazzard have its sibling parked on his upper lip?

Back in the day, TV teemed with guys like Simon – prickly Southern gents with 
slimeball politesse barely covering their latent savagery. Today, not so much. 
Because I’m a child of the 70s, I got a Proustian rush every time Simon 
strutted into shot, his facial hair arriving a split second before the rest of 
him.

You may have guessed I’m riffing on Simon’s moustache to conceal my 
disappointment at this week’s episode, surely the weakest of the current 
season. Are we all suffering Negan withdrawal symptoms? Of course we are. Where 
are his gaudy entrances (“Hot diggity dog!”), his rococo realpolitik (“Welcome 
to a brand new beginning, you sorry shits”) and his lubricious misogyny (like 
last week when he was drooling over putting the moves on recently bereaved 
widows)? Hopefully, normal service will be resumed next week. I miss that 
nasty, verbose low-life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-five-go-getters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10052db7ff2b22e9ce10b823bf72f43094cda15c%2F77_0_700_420%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20Go%20Getters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-five-go-getters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20Go%20Getters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-five-go-getters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10052db7ff2b22e9ce10b823bf72f43094cda15c%2F77_0_700_420%2F700.jpg>
 Divertingly Southern retro 70s vibe … Simon with Gregory. Photograph: AMC 
Here, we had to make do with his deputy. “From now on I’m your Negan,” Simon 
told Gregory, the leader of the – frankly effete – Hilltop compound’s citizens 
when he and his Saviours goons came to exact their tribute.

The tension, such as it was, revolved around the possibility that Gregory – 
morally invertebrate and apparently falling prey to dementia – would surrender 
not just whisky and paintings to the Saviours, but two renegade women from 
Rick’s Alexandria crew, Maggie and Sasha. Gregory, in his more lucid though 
cowardly moments, made it plain he was prepared to sacrifice these fugitives 
rather than risk reprisals for being found out for harbouring the women.

The episode began with an extreme close-up of Maggie. Nice to see her again: 
ever since she witnessed Negan off her husband Glenn with a baseball bat, we’ve 
been worrying what happened to her. Did one of the freshly dug graves at 
Alexandria contain her and her unborn child? That was certainly what Rick, 
Michonne and Father Gabriel managed to dupe Negan into believing last week, 
though we knew better: that she was still alive. And now we know more. Maggie 
is staying at the Hilltop, ideally until she gives birth, because there she 
will receive the medical care she needs (I’m no doctor, but separation of the 
placenta from Maggie’s uterus doesn’t sound a negligible injury).

At the Hilltop, she and Sasha visited the graves of their loved ones Glenn and 
Abraham, both of whom were battered to death by Negan. She placed a family 
heirloom watch that she had given Glenn on his grave – then later spotted that 
Gregory had stolen it. Another sign that he is not to be trusted. (Later still, 
Maggie retrieved it and gave the heirloom to Enid. After all, she reasoned, she 
didn’t need anything to remember Glenn by – the suggestion being that her 
looming baby would be reminder enough.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-five-go-getters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F805ef3c3573e44896adeb1b746f6f53eae2eecb5%2F0_0_2124_1417%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20Go%20Getters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-five-go-getters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20Go%20Getters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-five-go-getters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F805ef3c3573e44896adeb1b746f6f53eae2eecb5%2F0_0_2124_1417%2F2124.jpg>
 Gregory’s rebellious underling Jesus. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
Gregory complained about the graves; at the Hilltop, the custom was not to 
bury but burn the dead. Maggie asked Jesus, Gregory’s rebellious underling, 
why. “The idea,” he replied, “was just to keep going.” The implication was that 
the Hilltop exists as a kind of organised denial of the harsher realities of 
post-apocalyptic life. Death is something intolerable, so its signs need to be 
erased. Similarly, the milling hordes of undead beyond the Hilltop walls may 
exist but the citadel’s citizens never have to confront them, still less get up 
close and homicidal with them.

This last fact made the episode’s showpiece scene quite compelling. Maggie and 
Sasha woke to find the Hilltop’s gates opened, fires burning inside the 
compound and classical music blaring to attract hordes of walkers. Only these 
two women, plus Jesus, took out the zombie trash – Maggie reversed over several 
in a souped-up tractor, while Sasha offed them with short sharp stabs to the 
head. If only the rest of Rick’s crew could have provided such an effective 
pest control service in season six.

The fugitive women proved their worth, but Gregory still wanted them gone. But 
how did the walkers get into the compound in the first place? Simon explained 
later, when he arrived with his tooled up goons: they had arranged the invasion 
so the Hilltop denizens could appreciate their need for the Saviours’ services.

One of the Walking Dead’s chief virtues is that whenever there is a schmaltzy 
moment, it comes as such a blessed relief as to overcome accusations of 
sentimentality. And so it was when Carl and Enid found some roller skates and 
skated hand-in-hand up the road. I was so entranced by this sweetly burgeoning 
affair – even though their perfectly conditioned and combed hair seemed a 
little far-fetched – that I forgot for a moment why they were on the road at 
all. They were journeying from Alexandria to the Hilltop so Carl could exact 
revenge on the Saviours and Enid could see her friend Maggie.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-five-go-getters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc64d07fecaecd5c6ee469d025a4869a2252a1e9f%2F0_136_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20Go%20Getters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-five-go-getters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20Go%20Getters&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-five-go-getters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc64d07fecaecd5c6ee469d025a4869a2252a1e9f%2F0_136_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
 Enid brings this week’s much-needed schmaltzy moment. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC
 Back at the Hilltop, the Saviours had almost completed plundering the 
compound. “Anything else you want me to know?” Gregory asked Simon. Would 
Gregory turn in Sasha and Maggie, who he’d told Jesus to hide in a closet until 
the Saviours left? Of course he would. But when he opened the closet door, they 
were gone, replaced by boxes of scotch. Jesus had spirited the women away into 
another closet, unbeknownst to Gregory.

But then Simon had an idea – he would offer the whisky to his boss. “Negan 
loves this stuff. I’m going to say this is from me and not mention you OK? I 
really want the headline on this one.” Spoken like a true lickspittle.

But before he and his henchpersons departed, he wanted one last thing from 
Gregory: “Could I just get a kneel from you?” “Excuse me?” “Kneel.” Gregory 
obliged. “That’s a solid kneel, Gregory,” said Simon appreciatively. Would 
Rick, now apparently as hobbled as Gregory, have done the same had Negan asked?

Gregory glossed this horrible humbling like a spin doctor refusing to accept 
defeat. He told Jesus, Maggie and Sasha that he had made progress with the 
Saviours. “We play nice, they play nice.” He walked up to Maggie. “See my dear, 
the Saviours can actually be quite reasonable.” But he was offloading his guff 
on the wrong woman: he had forgotten that the leader of the Saviours had 
murdered the love of her life with a baseball bat. No wonder she smacked 
Gregory for that thoughtless remark, then told him what her name is: “Not dear, 
not honey, but Maggie Rhee.” Rhee was the name she took when she married Glenn.

 Towards the end, there was a noise on the soundtrack. Whittling perhaps? A 
barber sharpening an old-timey razor on a strop? No, the sound of Sasha 
sharpening a knife. She charged Jesus with finding out where Negan lives, 
presumably so she can pay him a visit and – who knows – cut the throat of the 
man who clubbed her beloved Abraham to death. Jesus accepted the mission and in 
the last scene had smuggled himself into the back of a Saviours truck that was 
leaving the Hilltop crammed with booty. There was something else in the truck, 
too: Rick’s errant son, Carl, bent on revenge.

Even though Rick and his crew have been always outnumbered and outgunned so 
far this season, perhaps Negan is going to get his comeuppance. Maybe it will 
be the women and children – Sasha and Carl leading the way – who will take down 
the Walking Dead’s most captivating villain.

Simon says

“Any hitches on the giddy-up I should be aware of?” Simon asking Gregory if 
there were any problems he wanted to disclose. Last time I heard giddy-up on 
telly it was Kramer on Seinfeld. How nice to hear this idiom making a comeback.

“Thank you. Means a lot that you recognise what we bring to the table. That’s 
why you’re still here … and others aren’t.” Simon explaining to Gregory why he 
and his Hilltop citizens haven’t been murdered in the manner of Abraham and 
Glenn.

“Hate that stuff,” said Simon dismissively when Gregory offered him a bottle 
of scotch. “ Tastes like ashtrays and window cleaner. I’m a gin man.” What a 
revelation. I would never have guessed that.
 