
Europe, the source of the Enlightenment, the birthplace of modern science, is 
in crisis. This part of the world, which hosted the Industrial Revolution that 
led to unprecedented changes in standards of living in the past two centuries, 
has been experiencing a long period of near-stagnation.GDP per capita 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/refreshTableAction.do?tab=table&plugin=0&pcode=tsdec100&language=en>
 (adjusted for inflation) for the eurozone – the countries of Europe that share 
the euro as their currency – was estimated to be barely higher in 2015 than it 
was in 2007. Some countries have been in depression for years.

When the US unemployment rate hit 10% in October 2009, most Americans thought 
that was intolerable. It has since declined to less than 5%. Yet the
unemployment rate in the eurozone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/apr/30/eurozone-unemployment-record-high>
 reached 10% in 2009 as well, and has been stuck in double digits ever since. 
On average, more than one out of five young people in the labour force are 
unemployed, but in the worst-hit crisis countries, almost one out of two 
looking for work can’t find jobs. Dry statistics about youth unemployment carry 
in them the dashed dreams and aspirations of millions of young Europeans, many 
of whom have worked and studied hard. They tell us about families split apart, 
as those who can leave emigrate from their country in search of work. They 
presage a European future with lower growth and living standards, perhaps for 
decades to come.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fjoseph-stiglitz-the-problem-with-europe-is-the-euro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8838dd066899fdd652a98b32136cb86b2ddd700%2F654_0_2272_2591%2F2272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joseph%20Stiglitz%3A%20The%20problem%20with%20Europe%20is%20the%20euro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fjoseph-stiglitz-the-problem-with-europe-is-the-euro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joseph%20Stiglitz%3A%20The%20problem%20with%20Europe%20is%20the%20euro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fjoseph-stiglitz-the-problem-with-europe-is-the-euro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8838dd066899fdd652a98b32136cb86b2ddd700%2F654_0_2272_2591%2F2272.jpg>
 Joseph E. Stiglitz is University Professor at Columbia University, recipient 
of the 2001 Nobel Memorial Prize in economics. His most recent book is The 
Price of Inequality. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
These economic facts have, in turn, deep political ramifications. The 
foundations of post-cold war Europe are being shaken. Parties of the extreme 
right and left and others advocating the breakup of their nation-states, 
especially in Spain but even in Italy, are ascendant, and in JuneBritain voted 
to leave Europe altogether 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/how-did-uk-end-up-voting-leave-european-union>
. What had seemed inevitable in the arc of history – the formation of 
nation-states in the 19th century – is now being questioned. Questions are 
arising, too, about the great achievement of post-second world war Europe – the 
creation of the European Union.

While there are many factors contributing to Europe’s travails, there is one 
underlying mistake: thecreation of the single currency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1998/dec/31/euro.eu>, the euro. Or, more 
precisely, the creation of a single currency without establishing a set of 
institutions that enabled a region of Europe’s diversity to function 
effectively.

The common currency was an outgrowth of efforts that began in the mid-20th 
century, asEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> reeled from 
the carnage and disruption of two world wars. Europe’s leaders recognised that 
a more peaceful future would necessitate a complete reorganisation of the 
politics, economics and even the national identities of the continent. In 1957, 
this vision came closer to being a reality with the signing of the Rome treaty, 
which established the European Economic Community (EEC), comprising Belgium, 
France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and West Germany. In the following 
decades, dominated by the cold war, various other western European countries 
joined the EEC. Step by step, restrictions were eased on work, travel and trade 
between the expanding list of EEC countries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fjoseph-stiglitz-the-problem-with-europe-is-the-euro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82d56310fe4b3700c8f9ab3a8bdb1a3bc37b737d%2F0_70_5418_3254%2F5418.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joseph%20Stiglitz%3A%20The%20problem%20with%20Europe%20is%20the%20euro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fjoseph-stiglitz-the-problem-with-europe-is-the-euro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joseph%20Stiglitz%3A%20The%20problem%20with%20Europe%20is%20the%20euro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fjoseph-stiglitz-the-problem-with-europe-is-the-euro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82d56310fe4b3700c8f9ab3a8bdb1a3bc37b737d%2F0_70_5418_3254%2F5418.jpg>
 The fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989. Photograph: Rex Features 
But it was not until the end of the cold war that European integration really 
gained steam. Thefall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/06/-sp-fall-berlin-wall-what-it-meant-to-be-there>
 showed that the time for much closer, stronger European bonds had grown near. 
Hopes for a peaceful and prosperous future were higher than ever, among both 
leaders and citizens. This led to the signing of the Maastricht treaty, which 
formally established the European Union in 1993 and created much of its 
economic structure and institutions – including setting in motion the process 
of adopting a common currency, the euro.

Advocates of the euro rightly argue that it was not just an economic project 
that sought to improve standards of living by increasing the efficiency of 
resource allocations, pursuing the principles of comparative advantage, 
enhancing competition, taking advantage of economies of scale and strengthening 
economic stability. More importantly, it was a political project; it was 
supposed to enhance the political integration of Europe, bringing the people 
and countries closer together and ensuring peaceful coexistence.

The euro has failed to achieve either of its two principal goals of prosperity 
and political integration: these goals are now more distant than they were 
before the creation of the eurozone. Instead of peace and harmony, European 
countries now view each other with distrust and anger. Old stereotypes are 
being revived as northern Europe decries the south as lazy and unreliable, and 
memories of Germany’s behaviour in the world wars are invoked.

The eurozone was flawed at birth. The structure of the eurozone – the rules, 
regulations and institutions that govern it – is to blame for the poor 
performance of the region, including its multiple crises. The diversity of 
Europe had been its strength. But for a single currency to work over a region 
with enormous economic and political diversity is not easy. A single currency 
entails a fixed exchange rate among the countries, and a single interest rate. 
Even if these are set to reflect the circumstances in the majority of member 
countries, given the economic diversity, there needs to be an array of 
institutions that can help those nations for which the policies are not well 
suited. Europe failed to create these institutions.

Worse still, the structure of the eurozone built in certain ideas about what 
was required for economic success – for instance, that the central bank should 
focus on inflation, as opposed to the mandate of the Federal Reserve in the US, 
which incorporates unemployment, growth and stability. It was not simply that 
the eurozone was not structured to accommodate Europe’s economic diversity; it 
was that the structure of the eurozone, its rules and regulations, were not 
designed to promote growth, employment and stability.

Why would well-intentioned statesmen and women, attempting to forge a 
stronger, more united Europe, create something that has had the opposite 
effect? The founders of the euro were guided by a set of ideas and notions 
about how economies function that were fashionable at the time, but that were 
simply wrong. They had faith in markets, but lacked an understanding of the 
limitations of markets and what was required to make them work. The unwavering 
faith in markets is sometimes referred to as market fundamentalism, sometimes 
as neoliberalism. Market fundamentalists believed, for instance, that if only 
the government would ensure that inflation was low and stable, markets would 
ensure growth and prosperity for all. While in most of the world market 
fundamentalism has been discredited, especially in the aftermath of the 2008 
global financial crisis, those beliefs survive and flourish within the 
eurozone’s dominant power, Germany. These beliefs are held with such conviction 
and certainty, immune to new contrary evidence, that they are rightly described 
as an ideology. Similar ideas, pushed by the IMF and the World Bank around the 
globe, led to a lost quarter-century in Africa, a lost decade in Latin America, 
and a transition from communism to the market economy in the former Soviet 
Union and eastern Europe that was, to say the least, a disappointment.

Germany, however, holds itself out as a success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/12/germany-enjoys-economic-growth-spurt>
, providing an example of what other countries should do. Its economy has grown 
by 6.8% since 2007, but at an average growth rate of just 0.8% a year – a 
number that, under normal circumstances, would be considered close to failing. 
(By comparison, the US growth rate in the same period averaged 1.2%.) It’s also 
worth noting that developments in Germany before the crisis, in the early 2000s 
– when the country adopted reforms that aggressively cut into the social safety 
net – came at the expense of ordinary workers, especially those at the bottom. 
While real wages stagnated (by some accounts decreased), the gap between those 
at the bottom and the middle increased – by 9% in less than a decade. And 
through the early years of the century, poverty and inequality increased as 
well. Germany is talked about as a “success” only by comparison with the other 
countries of the eurozone.

It is perhaps natural that the eurozone’s leaders want to blame the victim – 
to blame the countries in recession or depression or reeling from a referendum 
result – for bringing about this state of affairs. They do not want to blame 
themselves and the great institutions that they have helped create, and which 
they now head. But blaming the victim will not solve the euro problem – and it 
is in large measure unfair.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fjoseph-stiglitz-the-problem-with-europe-is-the-euro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee653e5372caa0168911ca719667431c62a6f8d3%2F0_138_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joseph%20Stiglitz%3A%20The%20problem%20with%20Europe%20is%20the%20euro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fjoseph-stiglitz-the-problem-with-europe-is-the-euro%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joseph%20Stiglitz%3A%20The%20problem%20with%20Europe%20is%20the%20euro&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F10%2Fjoseph-stiglitz-the-problem-with-europe-is-the-euro%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee653e5372caa0168911ca719667431c62a6f8d3%2F0_138_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 David Cameron speaks outside No 10 after announcing that he would hold a 
referendum on EU membership. Photograph: Toby Melville/Reuters 
It should have surprised no one that Europe’s response to the UK’s referendum 
was dominated by the same harsh response that greeted Greece’s June 2015 
ballot-box rejection of its bailout package. Herman Van Rompuy, a former 
European council president, expressed a widespread feeling when he said that 
David Cameron’s decision to hold a referendum “was the worst policy decision in 
decades”. In so saying, he revealed a deep antipathy towards democratic 
accountability. Understandably so: in most of the cases in which voters have 
been directly turned to, they have rejected the euro, theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> and the European constitution. Moreover, 
polls at the time of Brexit showed that a majority of those in many European 
countries besides the UK had an unfavourable view of the EU (including Greece, 
France, and Spain).

The economic and political consequences of Brexit will, of course, depend a 
great deal on Europe’s response. Most assume that Europe will not cut off its 
nose to spite its face. It seems in the interests of everyone to work out the 
best economic relationship consistent with the democratic wishes and concerns 
of those on both sides of the Channel. The benefits of trade and economic 
integration are mutual, and if the EU takes seriously its belief that the 
closer the economic integration the better, that implies an attempt to make the 
closest ties possible under the circumstances. Anything the EU does to the UK 
to try to punish it would have an equal and opposite effect, hurting itself at 
least as much in the process. The fact that European stock markets were down 
markedly and European banks were particularly hard hit at least suggests that 
Brexit was bad for Europe as well.

But Jean-Claude Juncker, the proud architect of Luxembourg’s massive corporate 
tax-avoidance schemes and now the head of the EU commission, has taken ahard 
line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/europe-plunged-crisis-britain-votes-leave-eu-european-union>
 – perhaps understandably, given that he may go down in history as the person 
on whose watch the dissolution of the EU began. His line is that Europe must be 
unrelenting in its punishment, and should offer little more than what the UK is 
guaranteed under normal global agreements, such as the World Trade 
Organisation, lest others join the rush to the exit. What a response! According 
to Juncker, Europe is not to be held together because of the benefits that 
accrue – benefits that far exceed the costs, the economic prosperity, the sense 
of solidarity, the pride in being a European. No, Europe is to be held together 
by threats and fear – of what would happen if a country leaves.

On both sides of the Channel, politics should be directed at understanding the 
underlying sources of anger
Joseph Stiglitz 
The euro is often described as a bad marriage. A bad marriage involves two 
people who never should have been joined together making vows that are 
supposedly indissoluble. The euro is more complicated: it is a union of 19 
markedly different countries tying themselves together. When a couple in 
trouble goes for marriage counselling, old-style counsellors would try to 
figure out how to make the marriage work, but a modern one begins by asking: 
Should this marriage be saved? The costs of dissolution – both financial and 
emotional – may be very high. But the costs of staying together may be even 
higher.

One of the first lessons of economics is that bygones are bygones. One should 
always ask: given where we are, what should we do? On both sides of the 
Channel, politics should be directed at understanding the underlying sources of 
anger; how, in a democracy, the political establishment could have done so 
little to address the concerns of so many citizens, and figuring out how to do 
that now: to create within each country, and through cross-border arrangements, 
a new, more democratic Europe, which sees its goal as improving the wellbeing 
of ordinary citizens. This can’t be done with the neoliberal ideology that has 
prevailed for a third of a century and played such an important role in the 
construction of the euro. And it won’t be done if we confuse ends with means – 
the euro is not an end in itself, but a means, which, if well managed, might 
bring greater shared prosperity, but, if not well managed, will lead to lower 
standards of living for many or possibly the majority of citizens.

While there are many reasons for pessimism, more important are those for hope: 
that so many throughout Europe have held on to their faith in the European 
project, that even in countries where there is every reason for despair, there 
is still hope – hope that the EU can and will be reformed. There are political 
leaders throughout Europe who have become politicians because they still 
believe that democratic politics can bring about changes that will deliver 
shared prosperity to ordinary citizens. And throughout Europe, there are 
people, many of them young, who have marched, in the tens of thousands, for a 
different Europe; one, for instance, in which new trade agreements serve not 
just corporate interests but broader societal interests.

There are alternatives to the current arrangements that can create a true 
shared prosperity: the challenge is to learn from the past to create this new 
economics and politics of the future. The Brexit referendum was a shock. My 
hope is that the shock will set off waves on both sides of the Channel that 
will lead to this new, reformed European Union.

This is an edited extract from The Euro and Its Threat to the Future of Europe 
by Joseph Stiglitz, published by Allen Lane on 16 August at £20 and available 
at theGuardian bookshop <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/euro-398163.html>
 