
The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has unveiled a former Sky 
executive as the new editor of the Archers to shepherd the show beyond the 
domestic abuse storyline that culminated on Sunday night.

Huw Kennair-Jones is taking over the Archers on a high after Sunday night’s 
gripping hour-long special which saw Helen Titchener acquitted of the attempted 
murder of her controlling and abusive husband Rob 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/11/the-archers-verdict-on-helen-tichener-aired>
.


Previous editor Sean O’Connor left in late spring for EastEnders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/18/bbc-seeks-an-archers-editor-who-can-plough-on-without-upsetting-listeners>
, but had continued to oversee the long-running story about Helen which he 
created after joining in 2013. BBC head of audio drama Alison Hindell has been 
in charge of day-to-day running of the show, and Kennair Jones will join the 
team in Birmingham on 26 September.


The Archers' verdict on Helen Titchener concludes storyline that gripped the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/11/the-archers-verdict-on-helen-tichener-aired>
The Helen and Rob storyline has been widely praised both for its subject 
matter and sensitive handling. However, O’Connor’s tenure in Ambridge has 
occasionally proved controversial, with some of the programme’s 5 million 
listeners initally complaining about high-octane story lines and an increased 
sense of jeopardy on the world’s longest-running soap.

The BBC said Kennair-Jones has a strong record of creating compelling stories 
and working on high quality drama. His most recent credits include producing 
Medici: Masters of Florence for Big Light Productions, starring Dustin Hoffman 
and Richard Madden, and New Tricks for Headstrong Pictures, where he also 
series produced Waterloo Road.

Previously he worked as commissioning editor for Sky drama between 2009 and 
2014, while also producing programmes including Strike Back, Mad Dogs and Terry 
Pratchett’s Going Postal and Moonfleet.

He has also worked as commissioning executive for Sky 1, production on Dream 
Team and Holby City, and, like O’Connor, in a production role on EastEnders.

Kennair-Jones said: “Having started listening to The Archers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-archers> on Sunday mornings as a 
child while my mother did the ironing, I’m beyond thrilled to be joining the 
team in Birmingham at such an exciting time in the show’s history and building 
on the brilliant work Sean O’Connor has done during his tenure.

“The Archers occupies a unique place in the nation’s heart and I’m honoured to 
have the opportunity to be part of this iconic programme’s future.”

Radio 4 controller Gwyneth Williams said: “As ever The Archers is part of our 
national conversation. And we can be sure that with our talented and 
experienced new editor, Huw Kennair-Jones, Ambridge will continue to be in safe 
hands. I am delighted to welcome Huw toRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 4 and I very much look forward to 
working with him.”
 