
Silence is golden – or at least it should be. But according to the Noise 
Abatement Society <http://noiseabatementsociety.com/> (NAS), it’s increasingly 
rare. “Peace is a precious commodity,” says Poppy Szkiler, ofQuiet Mark 
<http://www.quietmark.com/>, part of the NAS.

Anti-noise campaigners suggest we have a “sliding baseline” in terms of our 
expectation of quiet time. This ecological term refers to an incremental 
lowering of standards as each generation progresses.

Meanwhile the World Health Organisation has reported that 40% of Europe’s 
population is exposed to noise levels in excess of 55dB at night and ranks 
noise pollution second to air pollution in terms of affecting many aspects of 
our health and wellbeing, including diabetes, tinnitus and risk of heart 
disease.

This all screams major environmental emergency, and also suggests that we need 
to re-assert quiet time.

The Quiet Mark awards its logo to products that aren’t necessarily silent, but 
do make substantially less noise. They range from a silent computer mouse to 
the Shard, and a Boeing 787 (which has reduced sonic pollution) to a bathroom 
fan that’s 75% less noisy.

The bulk of products with the Quiet Mark logo are quieter electronics and this 
is helpful for the user, too. After all, noise remains a failure of design. 
Smart design should engineer excessive noise out.

But it’s not an ecological emergency up there with climate change. In fact, 
sometimes an obsession with noise hampers green progress. Noise objections to 
turning blades have frozen out plenty of wind turbine applications.

Find out more about noise by watching the documentary, In Pursuit of Silence 
<http://pursuitofsilence.com/home>, released in the UK next month. A reflection 
of the benefits and beauty of silence, it’s also, essentially, a diatribe – 
just not a very shouty one.

The big picture: still fighting for the rainforest
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-noise-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a660510fffbdb7b75998447f7d33d08345963fc%2F0_159_3456_4320%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20noise%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-noise-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20noise%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-noise-pollution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a660510fffbdb7b75998447f7d33d08345963fc%2F0_159_3456_4320%2F3456.jpg>
 Liquid assets: a still from When Two Worlds Collide. Photograph: Yachaywasi 
Films 
When Two Worlds C ollide, a new Sundance-winning documentary now showing at UK 
cinemas, is a polemic that demands world attention. Peru is on the frontline of 
the ideological struggle between free-market capitalism and socialism. In this 
film, indigenous leader Alberto Pizango fights against the aggressive 
extraction of oil, minerals and gas from untouched Amazonian land, and the 
forced evictions of local communities.

Well dressed: Bonaveri’s green mannequins
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-noise-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Face19d729b7284bf798fd9620f5e2f578580c389%2F939_0_6299_3780%2F6299.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20noise%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-noise-pollution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20noise%20pollution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-noise-pollution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Face19d729b7284bf798fd9620f5e2f578580c389%2F939_0_6299_3780%2F6299.jpg>
 New model army: Bonaveri eco mannequins. Photograph: Eco-Age 
For something that is so often in the public eye, the mannequin has long been 
overdue an eco makeover. Conventionally made by blow-molding high-impact 
polystyrene, “It should be possible to recycle mannequins like any other 
plastic,” says a spokesperson for Bonaveri. But, the Italian company famous for 
making mannequins and busts for the fashion industry, has gone one step 
further. Working with Eco-Age, it has tackled the raw materials that are 
traditionally used in mannequin production. Hail the world’s first 
bio-mannequins, made from a patented sugarcane-derived polymer and 100% 
plant-based paints. These will make their world premiere at London Fashion 
Week, dressed in pre-loved red-carpet gowns by William Vintage for the Green 
Carpet Challenge’s “A Night to Remember”.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 