
It is now nearly nine years since the problems of three hedge funds heralded 
the arrival of global financial and economic chaos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/aug/07/global-financial-crisis-key-stages>
. Britain’s EU referendum this week is the latest manifestation of that crisis.

That is not the way the debate in the UK has been framed. For one side, the 
decision is all about taking back control, especially over immigration. For the 
other, it is about the potential consequences for the economy in general and 
individuals in particular.

This narrow focus reflects the fact that the referendum has been a contest 
between two wings of the Conservative party, neither of which has any great 
love for the EU. Few of the bigger themes have been drawn out by this 
blue-on-blue affair.

We Nobel prize-winning economists believe the UK is better off in the EU | 
Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/19/we-nobel-prize-winning-economists-believe-the-uk-is-better-off-in-the-eu>
There is, however, an obvious reason why immigration has proved an effective 
weapon for the leave side. Life is tougher for millions of Britons on modest 
incomes than it was a decade ago.

Contrast the state of the UK when the accession to the EU of Poland and other 
former Soviet bloc countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/feb/23/eu.poland> led to strong net 
migration in 2004. At that time, average earnings were growing by 4-5% a year, 
the Labour government was investing heavily in schools and hospitals and the 
eurozone appeared to be over its initial problems.

A second big increase in net migration has occurred since the great recession 
of 2008 and 2009, but the economic and political environment has changed. Real 
earnings have been squeezed, the expansion of the public sector has been halted 
and the eurozone has been in a state of permanent crisis.

The British economy has become increasingly dominated by the fortunes of the 
financial sector, with the bankers responsible for the worst slump since the 
1930s escaping pretty much scot free. London and the rest of the UK have become 
two countries, which explains why hostility to the EU increases with distance 
from the capital.

Nor is this phenomenon confined to the UK. It has become commonplace to 
bracket growing support for leave in poorer parts of Britain with Donald 
Trump’s emergence as the Republican candidate in this year’s US presidential 
election, but populist and anti EU sentiment is on the rise acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

The US research company Pew conducted a survey earlier this year to test 
sentiment towards the EU 
<http://www.pewglobal.org/2016/06/07/euroskepticism-beyond-brexit/>. In 
Britain, 48% said they had an unfavourable view of the EU and 44% said they had 
a favourable view. In France, the anti-EU sentiment was much more pronounced at 
61% and 38% in favour, while in Germany there had been an eight-point drop in 
support for the EU in the past year, leaving those in favour only narrowly 
ahead at 50% against 48% .

The impact of the great recession in Europe has been exacerbated by monetary 
union, a policy blunder of catastrophic proportions. The euro has been 
responsible for the slow growth and high unemployment that has angered the 
French, and the high debts and that have alarmed the Germans. Stir in the 
unexpectedly large flows of refugees from the Middle East and North Africa, and 
you have a toxic mix.

Brussels isn’t the bad guy. Tory cuts cause Britain’s troubles
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/19/brussels-isnt-bad-guy-tory-cuts-cause-britains-troubles-eu-referendum>
Last summer, when the Greek debt crisis  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/04/greeces-economic-crisis-goes-on-odyssey-without-end>
was at its most intense, Europe’s leaders came up with a plan. The “five 
presidents’ report 
<https://ec.europa.eu/priorities/publications/five-presidents-report-completing-europes-economic-and-monetary-union_en>
” laid down a step-by-step approach to a United States of Europe, with banking 
union followed by a common budget and finally political union. Getting even the 
least controversial part of this agenda – banking union – past sceptical 
European electorates has proved impossible. Yet the alternative approach, 
breaking up the euro and giving countries more control over their own economic 
destiny, is seen as not just potentially dangerous but also a betrayal of the 
idea of ever-closer union.

When Britain first sought to join the Common Market in the 1960s it did so for 
pragmatic, not ideological reasons. There was no great desire to pool 
sovereignty in pursuit of wider political goals, merely a feeling that Germany, 
France and the Netherlands were growing faster and had more modern economies. 
After Britain finally became a member of the European club in 1973, there was 
admiration for Germany’s control of inflation. In the 1980s, the UK left wing 
changed sides because it saw Europe as a bulwark against Margaret Thatcher. 
European solidarity was advocated in the 1990s as the best defence against the 
forces of global capitalism unleashed by the end of the cold war, which is why 
many on the left wanted Britain to join the single currency.


Times have changed. Even with a welcome pickup in activity in the past year, 
Europe’s growth performance since the launch of the euro has been pitiful. Talk 
of protecting workers’ rights is meaningless unless you have a job, and 
millions of Europe’s citizens do not. The structural adjustment programmes 
forced on those countries that have required financial bailouts have involved 
savage attacks on workers’ rights, including collective bargaining. The EU has 
not taken the fight to multinational capital. Rather, Brussels has become a 
honeypot for corporate lobbyists demanding deregulation and the transatlantic 
trade and investment partnership(TTIP) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ttip>.

One of the great ironies of the UK’s referendum debate is that Europe, with 
its austerity programmes and its drift towards neoliberalism, has been moving 
in a direction that rightwing Conservatives would tend to support. Just as in 
the UK in the 1980s, unemployment has weakened the power of organised labour 
and the trend is for more competition and for free markets.


There is a modern and progressive argument for leaving the EU, but it has 
struggled to be heard during this dispiriting campaign. It is that Europe is 
unable to deliver because it is wedded to backward-looking ideas. Or to adapt 
the words thatDavid Cameron used on his first outing as Conservative leader to 
taunt Tony Blair <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YFIJ6vvABrI>, it was the 
future once.

The humiliation of Greece is an act of economic war by the EU | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/19/the-humiliation-of-greece-is-an-act-of-economic-war-by-the-eu>
There is a leftwing case for staying in too. This accepts that the EU is far 
from perfect and must change, but says the answer is to work for a kinder, 
gentler, greener and more equal Europe from within. Exit, by contrast, would be 
the catalyst for a breakup of the EU that would give rise to aggressive 
nationalism and leave Britain at the mercy of rightwing Conservatives who would 
have the wherewithal to cause immense damage before there was a chance to get 
rid of them at an election.

Yet, it is stretching a point to argue that the treatment of Greece has much 
to do with the theories of Maynard Keynes or that TTIP would sit comfortably 
with Fritz Schumacher’s “small is beautiful” vision. Europe has been going in 
an entirely different direction, which is why aggressive nationalism will 
continue to be a problem even if Britain votes to remain. That’s because 
Europe’s economic model isn’t working and hasn’t been working for a long time. 
Bad economics leads to bad politics. Always has, always will.
 