
Hands up who’s going to watch the second episode of The Singer Takes It All 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-singer-takes-it-all> on Friday. No? 
Well, who can really blame you – if last week’s mangled anxiety dream of an 
episode was anything to go by, The Singer Takes It All is already the very 
worst televised singing competition ever to be broadcast. And remember, this is 
a world that already containsThe Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/mar/24/how-save-the-voice-kylie-minogue>
. I don’t make this sort of claim lightly.

If you haven’t seen it, here’s what you’re missing: The Singer Takes It All is 
a live, ostensibly interactive talent competition where contestants enter by 
singing at a downloaded app, and viewers decide who wins by voting on the same 
app. Ostensibly it’s a cutting-edge piece of entertainment. Ostensibly it’s the 
future of talent shows. In real life, however, it’s like sitting through a 
neverending episode of Teletubbies that’s been filmed inside a gas explosion in 
slow motion by David Lynch after a migraine. And not in a good way.

For instance, the theme tune sounds like a newborn baby that has been trapped 
at a Skrillex concert against its will. The co-host is a disembodied set of 
lips that, for all anyone knows, were hacked off in a monstrous Ed Gein-style 
experiment. The singers come and go without any meaningful introduction. The 
whole thing – the links, the performances, even the format – seems like it’s 
being improvised on the fly by an especially dimwitted hen party backstage. 
It’s almost indescribably bad.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV5klrDIlQR8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV5klrDIlQR8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DV5klrDIlQR8&media=>
Alan Carr <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alan-carr> is almost certainly 
aware of what a diabolical show he’s landed himself with. I’ve found the best 
way to get through the show is to imagine that he’s starring in a warped 
light-entertainment version of Speed, where Dennis Hopper has rigged his torso 
with explosives and triggered it to explode the instant he stops gurning and 
yelping and jigging about. That certainly explains his underlying facial 
expressions, which all uniformly fall in the sweet spot between “abject 
mortification” and “dutybound acceptance”.

The biggest problem with the show, though, is the app element. And not just 
because, for a huge chunk of last week’s show, it didn’t even work. The Singer 
Takes It All app is supposed to put the viewer in the position of the judge. 
Submit your approval and the contestant gets to keep singing. Register 
disapproval and they’re hurtled backwards down a conveyor belt where they 
presumably topple backwards onto a pile of other rejected singers.

Last week, I tried to vote everyone out as quickly as I could – mainly because 
I was labouring under the tragic misapprehension that the show would end 
earlier if it ran out of singers. Get rid of everyone after a couple of 
seconds, I thought, and the whole thing would only last for a maximum of about 
10 minutes. How wrong I was. It turns out that, if a singer is prematurely 
ejected, the remaining time has to be filled up with Alan Carr making 
excruciating smalltalk with Pixie Lott. In fact, smalltalk seems like an 
exaggeration. It was mainly just grunts and yips.

Also, the app isn’t nearly responsive enough. I, like many of the other 
weak-willed fools that comprise The Singer Takes It All’s target audience, was 
brought up on video games. You press a button and something happens. Not here, 
though. If you’re lucky – if all the stars align and God smiles down upon you – 
you might see the vote change by one per cent within about 45 seconds of you 
pressing it. That’s nowhere near quick enough for my liking. When I press that 
button, I want to see results. I want to see the singer drop through a hole in 
the floor. Or get a tin tray dropped on their head. Or be set upon by dogs.

But no, there’s nothing of the sort there. If you’re watching The Singer Takes 
It All and you really want to do something interactive and responsive, your 
only real option is the off button.
 