
• Spoiler alert: this blog is published after The Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead> airs in the US on 
Sundays. Do not read unless you have watched season seven episode seven, which 
airs in the UK on Fox on Mondays at 9pm.

“You know what’s going to happen,” said Negan. “It’s going to be hard to 
watch.” He was addressing the assembled Saviors in their former factory 
compound as he prepared to apply a red-hot iron from the furnace to Mark’s face 
as punishment for some infraction. But he could have been talking to us.


We know bad stuff is going to go down – Michonne will behead that walker, 
Negan will brand someone’s face – but however hard it is to look, it’s harder 
still to look away. Indeed, the paradoxical and even degrading fact for us 
about this season is that its most captivating episodes (the brutal premiere in 
particular) have been the hardest to watch.

What made this episode so compelling, though, was that so often we didn’t know 
what was going to happen. What was Jesus going to do when he came down off the 
roof of Negan’s truck? What was Spencer plotting against Rick in the woods? 
What did Rick and Aaron hope to seize from the tooled-up hermit? Was the single 
bullet Eugene has made for Rosita going to be enough to kill Negan? What was 
Michonne planning to do when she arrived at the Savior’s compound? What might 
Negan do to baby Judith? Answers on a postcard please.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff97af7e03f30640cffdf418d5d683c9178d8a1d0%2F0_31_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Sing%20Me%20a%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Sing%20Me%20a%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff97af7e03f30640cffdf418d5d683c9178d8a1d0%2F0_31_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
 What is Spencer plotting? Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
Mostly, though, we were in suspense over what Negan would do to Carl for 
machine-gunning two of his men. “You’re smart, kid,” he told Carl. “What do you 
think I should do with you. Kill you? Iron your face? Chop off your arm?” Carl, 
who had removed his patch to show the hole where his eye once was, stared Negan 
down with his other eye and said, coolly: “I think you should jump out of the 
window to stop giving me the trouble of killing you.” Negan retorted with his 
best grin – he loved the kid’s moxy.

It’s nice to have Negan back. He makes this season pop, even when he says 
things that should make us cringe. Or – worse –because he says them. “I am not 
going to have time to screw any of my wives today,” he said near the start of 
this episode, realising he had a busy day ahead. A beat. “I mean, maybe one.” 
Then he showed off his harem. “You’re going to want to look at their titties,” 
he said in one of many slimy asides to Carl. “It’s cool. I don’t mind. They 
don’t mind. Knock yourself out.”

Whatever you need to tell yourself, you misogynistic nutjob. Among the captive 
wives was Amber, in tears over the face-ironing her boyfriend Mark was about to 
endure for sleeping with her. “I love you,” she told Negan unconvincingly, 
hoping he might decide not to maim her boyfriend and, ideally, not harm her 
either.

Negan, at least, decided not to do the latter. “You see?” Negan said to 
another of his wives, Sherry. “I wasn’t hard on her, though” – he added with a 
priapic leer that united sexual and violent boasting in one dirty double 
entendre – “I’m very hard in general.” “You’re an asshole,” Sherry, with good 
reason, told him. Negan grinned and replied: “I know. And the messed up thing 
is you like me anyway.” This sort of exchange gets to the heart of how Jeffrey 
Dean Morgan as Negan has captured the wandering hearts of certain women with 
his sleazy allure, if not to what Sherry really feels about him.

Carl had got into the Savior’s compound in the back of the truck carrying 
bounty from vassal compounds like Hilltop and Alexandria. Jesus, who like Carl 
nurtures a wish to terminate Negan, had jumped out of the truck moments before 
– but not before he cut the bottom out of a box containing the best of the haul 
(a case of whisky) so it shattered when one of the henchmen tried to pick it up.

Once the truck pulled up, Carl started shooting. Two of Negan’s goons died, 
then he threatened to off their leader. “Drop your weapons. I only want Negan. 
He killed my friend. Nobody else needs to die.” Negan deflated Carl’s threat 
with banter: “You are adorable!” he patronised. “Did you pick that gun because 
it makes you look cool? You totally did!” And then Negan’s lackey, Dwight, 
sideswiped Carl, disarmed and subdued him.

What now for Carl? Negan repeatedly insisted he must be punished. But how? 
After Negan invited Carl back to his quarters and demanded the boy remove his 
eye patch, he piled on the humiliation.

He asked after the boy’s mother and Carl was obliged to relate how he had 
killed her before she became a walker. Negan then insisted he sing a song. As 
Carl weedily sang You Are My Sunshine, Negan tried a few practice strokes with 
Lucille, his barbed-wire wrapped baseball bat. Is this how Carl would be 
punished? Perhaps. But not for now.

The episode cut from Negan and Carl to other intriguing subplots. “Hating 
somebody – is that a sin?” Spencer asked Father Gabriel on a scavenging trip 
from Alexandria. “No. Well, not necessarily,” said the priest. “Thoughts are 
just thoughts – it’s actions that matter in the end.” Really? I’d like a second 
opinion, but no matter: Spencer was clearly planning to put his hateful 
thoughts for Rick into action, probably by attempting to kill the new leader of 
Alexandria, in part to honour the memory of its old leader, his mother.

The episode also cut to Michonne who had set up a roadblock of walker corpses 
to ambush one of Negan’s lickspittles and force her to drive her to the Savior 
compound where, fingers crossed, she will put her katana to work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2de27eee903e0265bdd434737404ec262e7d8a5%2F0_0_707_424%2F707.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Sing%20Me%20a%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Sing%20Me%20a%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2de27eee903e0265bdd434737404ec262e7d8a5%2F0_0_707_424%2F707.jpg>
 Will Michonne put her katana to work? Photograph: AMC 
 We also cut to Rosita and Eugene. The former, at least, was still bent on 
avenging her dead ex, Abraham. Only one problem: Eugene isn’t sure he should 
make her a bullet fit for purpose even though he promised he would. “You said 
yes!” complained Rosita. “You’re right. I said yes,” replied Eugene before 
getting, as is his wont, verbose. “It was peachy for the moment. In the 
intervening hours I have been taking a deep dive into other options and 
contingencies trying out any iteration in which charging into this enterprise 
makes any sense.” He had a point – one bullet, all those Saviors loyal to 
Negan. What are the odds of that plan working? And yet, towards the end, Rosita 
loaded her gun with the bullet he had made for her.

 We also cut to Rick and Aaron. I’m not quite sure what they’re up to, but the 
safe money says their aim is to take Negan down and destroy the Saviors. The 
noose, you might think, is tightening for Negan what with Michonne, Rosita, 
Rick, Aaron, Jesus and Carl all seemingly plotting to murder him.

But then Negan wrongfooted everybody (with the possible exception of Jesus, 
who is a mystery wrapped in a riddle wrapped in a full-length leather coat). He 
left the Savior’s compound. He insisted that Carl drive him back to Alexandria. 
With Jesus, unseen, on the roof.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc663a9727496dbefa9a23269c043495d2db61a48%2F0_49_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Sing%20Me%20a%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Sing%20Me%20a%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc663a9727496dbefa9a23269c043495d2db61a48%2F0_49_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
 ‘If you do anything to the kid…’ Daryl finds his voice, and uses it to 
threaten Negan. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
Before they headed off, Daryl found his voice and used it to threaten Negan. 
“If you do anything to the kid…” It sounded like an empty threat, given how 
seemingly enfeebled Daryl has become during his incarceration with the Saviors. 
But maybe I’m wrong: near the end, someone slipped a note under his cell door. 
“Go now” said the note, probably written by Sherry. Perhaps, I like to imagine, 
Daryl will escape the Saviors, come across that crossbow Spencer found with the 
walker in the woods, and take out the Savior trash, starting with Negan. I 
wouldn’t bank on that happening though.

 Once at Alexandria, Negan found lots of his vassals – Rick, Aaron, Michonne, 
Rosita, Eugene – were no longer there. So he made himself comfortable to await 
their return. Since he had plenty of time on his hands, he made an indecent 
proposal to Olivia. “I think it would be enjoyable to screw your brains out. I 
mean, if you’re agreeable to it.” Olivia, understandably if dangerously, 
slapped him. Negan, as ever responding to an attack with spirit, replied: “I’m 
50% more into you now.”

At the end, Negan settled on Rick’s porch in the lovely evening, dandling 
Judith, the daughter of Rick’s dead wife and Carl’s half sister. Olivia had 
placed some fresh lemonade in a jug with some glasses on the table. It was a 
parody of domestic bliss. And then Negan, as he does, shifted the mood from 
suburban idyll to ring of hell: “Maybe it’s stupid of me to keep your dad 
alive,” he told Carl. “Maybe I should bury you both in the flowerbeds. And I 
could just settle in the suburbs.”

Maybe that’s what’ll happen. Or maybe Carl is going to do him in before any of 
the other Alexandrians sharpening their knives get to act on their wishes. 
Despite what Negan says, we don’t really know what’s going to happen.

Negan’s wit and wisdom 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39002c4115be3e90260afb9d6e0cbceaf52a975c%2F0_12_717_430%2F717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Sing%20Me%20a%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20Sing%20Me%20a%20Song&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-seven-sing-me-a-song%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F39002c4115be3e90260afb9d6e0cbceaf52a975c%2F0_12_717_430%2F717.jpg>
 ‘You gotta take that crap off your face. I gotta see what grandma got me’ … 
Negan forces Carl to remove his eye patch. Photograph: AMC 
“It’s like talking to a birthday present. You gotta take that crap off your 
face. I gotta see what grandma got me.” Negan asking Carl to remove his eye 
patch.

“Christ! That is disgusting. No wonder you cover that up. Have you looked in 
the mirror? That is gross as hell. I can see your socket … I wanna touch it. 
Can I touch it?” Negan after Carl removes the eye patch.

“Lucille loves being sung to. It’s about the only thing she loves more than 
bashing in brains. Weird huh?” Negan explaining to Carl his baseball bat’s 
favourite things.

“We bring civilisation back to this world. We are the Saviors, but we can’t do 
that without rules. Rules are what make it all work.” Negan explaining to the 
Saviors why he is going to iron Mark’s face.

“Some crazy shit, huh? You probably think I’m a lunatic.” Negan’s aside to 
Carl after ironing Mark’s face.
 