
If George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has an 
identifying attribute – what a cigar was to Churchill or a pint of beer to Zac 
Goldsmith – it is the pairing of hard hat and hi-vis jacket. One suspects he 
would struggle to wield a screwdriver to much effect but he loves to have 
himself photographed, again and again, on construction sites and industrial 
premises, dressed like a man who knows how to make things.

The message is clear enough. Here is someone to get Britain building. Britain 
has an economy where construction has a particular status and where a favoured 
way to nudge the economy forward is to get more concrete mixers whirring and 
bricks laid. “Industry” can be almost synonymous with “construction industry”, 
due to the shrinkage of other types. The country also needs more homes. What 
then could be more appropriate than for the chancellor to remind people of his 
role in stimulating such things?

What is the sum of the parts, what future country is being constructed, what 
vision underlies it all?

He has a corresponding interest in putting his stamp on policies and projects 
that involve building, even when they are the concern of other ministries than 
the Treasury. He likes to promote housebuilders and then demonstrate that his 
plans are working. He declares agarden city in Ebbsfleet, Kent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/04/ebbsfleet-garden-city-richard-rogers-critics>
. He backs nuclear power stations and high-speed rail and promises to get them 
paid for with Chinese investment. Most surprisingly, from time to time he 
loosens the belt of the budgetary disciplinarian to reveal a closet minstrel, a 
profligate lover of the arts and of follies: development funding for a£278m 
concert hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/16/278m-concert-hall-musuem-of-london-site>
 that promises the outstanding acoustics currently lacking in large London 
venues,£30m to a garden bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/30/londons-garden-bridge-call-for-full-inquiry-into-projects-finances>
, lavish support to a large but vague arts complex in Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/05/guardian-view-manchester-cultural-space-one-kind-factory-another>
. He throws money at institutions of futuristic science.

This Conservative politician begins to look like the French socialist builder 
ofgrands projets François Mitterrand or the English socialist Tony Benn, backer 
of Concorde. He has something too of the Dome-building Blair. He promises to 
leave a legacy of brick, concrete, steel and glass matched by few of his 
predecessors, which would alter the landscape of Britain, both city and 
countryside, to palpable effect. It is therefore reasonable to ask what is the 
sum of the parts, what future country is being constructed, what vision or at 
least assumptions underlie it all.

There is certainly ambition to achieve benefits to which no one could object. 
If every initiative does what it is supposed to do, it would give the country 
better and greener transport, a secure supply of energy, an enhanced cultural 
life and prosperity based on advanced scientific research. The economy would be 
better balanced between north and south. More people would own their homes, 
some of them in well-planned new communities. In the case of the cultural 
projects, Osborne’s support arises from genuine interest. “He does like the 
arts,” says a formal special adviser to Osborne, Rohan Silva. “He’s a rare 
non-philistine in government."

At the same time, there can be a phantasmagoric quality to Osborne’s 
monuments. With some, there can be reasonable doubt whether they will happen at 
all or exist more to enable the media announcement of the chancellor’s good 
intention. Others may not be the best way to achieve their stated aims but also 
serve as symbols of public benefits, devices for achieving maximum publicity 
and political advantage.

As well as calculation there might also be an element of vanity, a recurrence 
of the not-uncommon weakness of politicians to glorify themselves with 
building, to build buildings that look as if they are addressing a need rather 
than addressing the need itself. The Great Wall of China, for example, 
impressive as it is to look at, was not all that good at keeping out Mongol 
hordes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3220b7cf64fc67f6a2a2c84d8d448b0f997d0cf3%2F0_85_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hard-hat%20chancellor%3A%20what%20kind%20of%20Britain%20is%20George%20Osborne%20building%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hard-hat%20chancellor%3A%20what%20kind%20of%20Britain%20is%20George%20Osborne%20building%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3220b7cf64fc67f6a2a2c84d8d448b0f997d0cf3%2F0_85_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 The £61m Osborne-backed National Graphene Institute in Manchester. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Some of Osborne’s constructional largesse is inspired by graphene, the 
miraculous substance discovered by two Russian-émigré physicists at the 
University of Manchester, for which theywon the Nobel prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/oct/05/nobel-prize-physics>. It is 
called the world’s first 2D material, being carbon one atom thick. It is 
transparent, extraordinarily light, flexible and 200 times as strong as steel. 
For now, many of its possible uses are in the nice-to-have rather than 
essential category – clothes embedded with electronics, flaccid mobile phones, 
low-energy and low-cost light bulbs – but it also has potential medical and 
other applications. It could conceivably be what steam power was to the 
Industrial Revolution and silicon was to the information age.

For these reasons, and for the hopes it offered for an advanced industrial 
renaissance in the city most associated with a previous age of manufacturing 
supremacy, Osborne backed a £61m National Graphene Institute in Manchester and
opened it last year <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-manchester-31996018>. 
It would “put the UK in pole position to lead the world in graphene 
technology,” he said. The building looks crystalline and futuristic in an 
old-fashioned sort of way. It boasts dust-free PVC blackboards, a wildflower 
garden on the roof terrace and the only lab in the world with clean rooms on 
two different floors that are connected by a lift.

A still bigger graphene-inspired organisation is being backed by the 
chancellor, the £235mSir Henry Royce Institute for Advanced Materials Research 
<http://www.manchester.ac.uk/discover/news/osborne-announces-major-new-research-and-innovation-institute/>
, which will have a “hub” in Manchester and “spokes” in Leeds, Liverpool, 
Sheffield and other cities. The idea is that it will “encompass 14 key areas of 
materials research including graphene”. The Royce and the NGI, said the 
chancellor, will “help cement the north, and Manchester in particular, as a 
world leader in science and innovation.”

Not all scientists were convinced that graphene merited such a splurge of 
investment. A “very senior British professor” told the BBC that it is a “waste 
of money”, that it “will never be revolutionary: the technology is too limited 
– it is interesting but not a game-changer”. There was also a report in the
Sunday Times, albeit one firmly slapped down by the university, of a revolt 
among researchers. It was said they refused to work in the building on the 
basis that their intellectual property was going to end up in the hands of 
foreign companies that had been invited into the institute as partners.

Sir Andre Geim, one of the two Nobel-winning heroes of the graphene 
revolution, was quoted as saying that the new building was “money put in the 
British building industry rather than science”. Geimresponded 
<http://www.manchester.ac.uk/discover/news/sir-andre-geim-response-to-sunday-times>
 by calling the allegations “ridiculous” and “twisted” and said that his 
remarks had been taken out of context. “I see the relationship between the 
university and collaborating companies,” he said, “as a way to stimulate 
graphene developments for the good of UK plc.”

In his telling, the institute is an admirable plan to do what business will 
not do unaided, which is to take a long-term view on investing in “disruptive 
technologies”.

Osborne’s backing for Mancunian science is matched by his support for the 
city’s arts.Factory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/rem-koolhaas-wins-factory-design-project-as-manchester-goes-dutch>
, a “world-beating arts space” designed by the celebrated architects OMA, is 
receiving £78m of its £110m capital cost from the Treasury, plus £9m in revenue 
funding from 2018 to 2020. This is a largesse for which most arts organisations 
would give both arms and all their dentistry. Factory is described as “large 
scale”, “ultra flexible” and as combining the qualities of the London Coliseum 
and Tate Modern’s Turbine Hall. “This won’t only be unlike any other arts 
facility in the UK,” said Manchester city council leader, Sir Richard Leese, at 
a launch, “Factory will be unlike anywhere else in the world.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ef1cde6166da3f745ba9221bf9b0ac21da4ca55%2F0_77_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hard-hat%20chancellor%3A%20what%20kind%20of%20Britain%20is%20George%20Osborne%20building%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hard-hat%20chancellor%3A%20what%20kind%20of%20Britain%20is%20George%20Osborne%20building%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ef1cde6166da3f745ba9221bf9b0ac21da4ca55%2F0_77_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘Ultra-flexible’: a model of the proposed St John’s quarter in Manchester, 
displayed last year at the launch of the planned £78m Factory arts centre. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
It risks being a re-run of the box-ticking, all-things-to-all-people flops of 
the early years of lottery funding

It will provide a single large hall, capable of performances to audiences of 
up to 5,000, but also capable of being subdivided for major exhibitions and 
smaller events. Maria Balshaw, director of the Whitworth Art Gallery and 
strategic lead for culture at Manchester city council, says it will be an 
“immersive”, “multi art-form” space that could house “a new kind of Ring 
Cycle”, “large-scale gallery-type shows” such as the Victoria and Albert’s 
David Bowie and Alexander McQueen exhibitions, and “challenging things like 
Massive Attack”. Ultimately, she says, the aim is “to get things to happen in 
the north that couldn’t happen anywhere else”. It will expand on the success of 
theManchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> International 
festival, which currently takes place in multiple venues but will make Factory 
its base.

Factory could indeed be extraordinary but there are reasons to be sceptical. 
Great arts buildings are usually good at being one thing or another, an opera 
house or an art gallery, not both. For a project that was supposed to start 
construction this year and to which so much money has already been promised, 
Factory is light on specifics of artistic direction and, on published evidence, 
on audience research and business planning. Balshaw insists the work is being 
done, however “We’ve been going with our gut instinct,” she says, “but now 
we’re getting the business plan to prove it.” The senior BBC executiveJenny 
Baxter 
<http://www.manchester.gov.uk/news/article/7459/jenny_baxter_announced_as_project_director_for_factory_manchester>
 has just been announced as Factory’s project director.

At worst, Factory risks being a rerun of the box-ticking, 
all-things-to-all-people, let’s-spend-the-money-somehow flops of the early 
years of lottery funding, a Millennium Dome of the north orthe Public in West 
Bromwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/aug/14/public-inevitable-end-arts-centre-architecture>
 writ larger. This suspicion might be enhanced by the fact that the idea arose 
in part from conversations between Osborne and Manchester’s chief executive, 
Sir Howard Bernstein, and a decision to go with what Balshaw calls “a very 
headline idea”. But Peter Saville, until recently creative director of the city 
of Manchester, believes that “the success and momentum of the festival does 
warrant a home”. He believes Factory could be the sort of talent-attracting 
institution that could help “make Manchester the most important city in the UK, 
because London is not in the UK anymore”.

The venue’s name is a homage to Factory Records, the celebrated label of Joy 
Division, New Order, Happy Mondays and other bands whose works may or may not 
have reverberated round Osborne’s undergraduate rooms at Magdalen College, 
Oxford, and in the 1980s brought rejuvenating cultural energy to a city 
battered by industrial decline. Factory Records was an entrepreneurial and 
improvisational outfit, driven by content over form or brand. Factory will be 
more top-down, driven by politics and publicity as well as culture. Saville, 
who helped create Factory Records and gave it its visual identity, is uneasy 
with the use of the old name for the new project. “This the festival’s 
building,” he says, adding that “the civic mindset doesn’t fully appreciate 
what Factory Records did.”

As with other Osborne projects, the property business is not far away. It is 
meant to be part of “a new neighbourhood for enterprise, culture and living, 
calledSt John’s Quarter <http://stjohnsmanchester.com>, worth an estimated 
£1.35bn when complete, proposed by the developers Allied London on the site of 
the former Granada TV studios. There will be a “small tight-knit urban grain, 
familiar to the old street pattern”, which will nonetheless be capable of 
accommodating towers rising up to 60 storeys. Factory, or even the mere promise 
of it, is plainly a boost to the marketing of St John’s. Something similar can 
be expected with theLondon concert hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/16/278m-concert-hall-musuem-of-london-site>
. It is promised for a site in the City currently occupied by the Museum of 
London and, as the project develops, no one should be surprised to see a large 
commercial development, perhaps with a tower, riding on the back of it.

Osborne’s tributes to art and science are, of course, part of his idea of a 
northern powerhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/16/osborne-budget-chancellor-northern-powerhouse-manchester>
, whereby the band of cities across Lancashire and Yorkshire are to become a 
nexus of commerce and culture to rival or complement London. As in the Randstad 
in the Netherlands or the Rhine-Ruhr region in Germany, a constellation of 
urban settlements is to become more than the sum of its parts, with the help of 
improved transport connections and restructured city governments.

The principle is beyond reproach, promising as it does both to rebalance 
England in favour of northern locations that still haven’t recovered from the 
loss of manufacturing and away from overheating London. The doubts arise in the 
substance. Ed Cox, of the thinktank IPPR North, has said that “it’s a concept, 
rather than any actual, physical thing at the moment”. Lord Kerslake, former 
head of the civil service, says: “There is huge potential here but there is 
still something of a gap between rhetoric and reality. Rebalancing is going in 
the opposite direction: there is a continuing shift towards the south.”

He cites the findings of the University of Sheffield’s Political Economy 
Research Institute that “chaos reigns” and the “agenda remains a rather hollow 
one”.

The northern powerhouse 'is a brand, a diversion tactic designed to placate 
the people and politicians of the north'

Nick Johnson, formerly of the sparky property company Urban Splash, says the 
northern powerhouse “is a brand, not driven by content, a diversion tactic 
designed to placate the people and the politicians of the north”. It also 
suffers from an “obsession with big-ticket projects” requiring large-scale 
corporate development. “We have to engage at a more granular level. We could be 
getting on with it right now with projects that would make a real difference. 
It should be about encouragement of local enterprise and its effect on 
attractiveness of a place.”

He gives as an example his own current work helping revive Altrincham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/18/ofm-awards-2015-best-market-altrincham>
, a town that was “in intensive care”, through transforming its market into a 
haven of craft and good food.

In this context, the grand projects look like marketing tools, conspicuous 
gestures that something is being done, and that co-operative city leaders will 
be rewarded with works on their territory. They may not all need to happen, or 
not soon, in order to achieve their boosting effect. Some, such asHS2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2>, will be far in the future. This could be 
a rare example of political long-sightedness, or a neat trick, or a bit of 
both. “It’s genius,” says Johnson. “You hit it into long grass. You make 
something sound good and, hey presto, you’ve achieved the political chimera of 
achieving nothing while looking good.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3ac24b276f8128ef6332fcfd40397ea802579cc%2F0_56_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hard-hat%20chancellor%3A%20what%20kind%20of%20Britain%20is%20George%20Osborne%20building%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hard-hat%20chancellor%3A%20what%20kind%20of%20Britain%20is%20George%20Osborne%20building%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3ac24b276f8128ef6332fcfd40397ea802579cc%2F0_56_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 ‘Standard product’: a Taylor Wimpey home at Milby Hall, Nuneaton Photograph: 
Taylor Wimpey 
The new housing prompted by Osborne’s help-to-buy scheme is palpable. You can 
see it all over the country in places such asMilby Hall at the Farm 
<https://www.taylorwimpey.co.uk/find-your-home/england/warwickshire/nuneaton/milby-hall-at-the-farm>
, outside Nuneaton, in one of the best known of marginal constituencies. These 
are at the opposite end of the scale of architectural ambition from the world 
of OMA, being the standard product of housebuilders such as Taylor Wimpey. They 
are gawky, could-be-anywhere brick boxes with minimal frills dictated by the 
(sometimes) tight margins of the business. At the same time, they have odd 
extravagances: they are obsessively detached rather than terraced, for example, 
which means two external gable walls have to be built on the sides of houses on 
either side of a narrow passageway. They can be awkwardly laid out, with a 
tendency to build homes fronting on to traffic roundabouts.

Help to buy is the scheme whereby, as the official website 
<https://www.helptobuy.gov.uk> says, government “helps hard-working people like 
you take steps to buy your own home” by lending up to 20% of its value on easy 
terms. Most beneficiaries are almost certainly happy with it and it achieved 
its aim of stimulating the housebuilding industry at a time when it was 
sluggish. Much of its purpose was to speed up developments that would have 
happened eventually in any case, which is why a help-to-buy-assisted house 
looks like any other.

The scheme’s opponents have accused it of being “economically illiterate” and 
say it will ultimately push up prices, which would be self-defeating. Even 
those who see merit in its original introduction question the government’s 
decision to extend it to 2020. However, the direction of Treasury policy is to 
augment it with other plans, such as thestarter homes initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/18/starter-homes-target-ambitious-lenders-housing-market-cml>
 and the extension of right to buy to housing associations, which have the same 
objective of encouraging home ownership with short-lived boosts to 
affordability. These also attract doubts. “I don’t know anyone who thinks it’s 
a good idea,” says one in the business about starter homes, whereby public 
subsidy enables homes to be sold at 80% of market value. “Who says what market 
value is? The potential for cutting corners and gaming the system is enormous.”

These schemes deliver the opportunities for politicians to be photographed in 
hard hats, laying bricks and with lucky residents but, despite their tangible 
reality, they also have an illusionary aspect. They conceal the realities that 
the country is not achieving anything like its house-building targets, for 
example, and that promoting home-ownership is coming at the cost of dealing 
with housing need more widely. “There will be no more subsidy for rented homes 
– all the money is going into supporting ownership,” says David Orr, chief 
executive of the NationalHousing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> 
Federation. “Ownership is important but not the only issue.” The result is that 
“poor people are not being well served and there is a much enhanced potential 
for unrest and for homelessness”.

It’s easier to see the winners, in other words, than the losers, at least for 
now. It’s easier to see the new homes for sale that are being built than the 
new homes for rent that are not. And by now it is becoming clear what are 
consistent characteristics of the apparently disparate portfolio of 
Osborne-backed construction projects.

They contain kernels of usefulness, some more than others, and address or 
purport to address real issues. They combine inflated claims with a 
diversionary quality and electoral calculation. They involve big business. They 
sometimes overestimate the power of construction alone to create the future and 
make the modern British assumptions that “industry” is almost coterminous with 
“building industry” and “business” with “property business”. Some of them may 
never happen. They ignore what Nick Johnson calls “granularity” – the 
small-scale enterprise and initiatives that make places distinctive and 
prosperous.

The architecture of Osborne’s Britain is hybrid: iconic monuments by iconic 
designers such as OMA andThomas Heatherwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/thomas-heatherwick> in centres of 
cities, the ruthless viaducts of high-speed railways running between them, 
scatterings of standard housing around them. The creative energy that goes into 
the icons is unmatched by much idea of improving the planning or design of 
everyday space in which people spend their lives.

Perhaps the soul, if it can be called that, of Osborne’s Britain, will be 
found in Ebbsfleet, north Kent, where he has declared that a“garden city” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/04/ebbsfleet-garden-city-richard-rogers-critics>
 will be built. It would be the first, he said, for over a century, a statement 
that flagrantly overlooks the many new towns built on garden city principles 
after the second world war. “Britain has to up its ambition,” said the 
chancellor grandiosely. “Britain has to up its game, Britain has to earn its 
way in the world.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ffd75a6b7a8eea7687abb79b1b1e2c5bc8b29d7%2F0_0_1125_675%2F1125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20hard-hat%20chancellor%3A%20what%20kind%20of%20Britain%20is%20George%20Osborne%20building%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20hard-hat%20chancellor%3A%20what%20kind%20of%20Britain%20is%20George%20Osborne%20building%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fgeorge-osborne-england-planning-arts-science-housing-transport%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ffd75a6b7a8eea7687abb79b1b1e2c5bc8b29d7%2F0_0_1125_675%2F1125.jpg>
 ‘Ambition’: the site of the Ebbsfleet garden city, championed by the 
chancellor. 
The idea of a garden city, developed by and under the influence of Ebenezer 
Howard in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, includes the co-ordination of 
built and green spaces, the integration of transport, the combination of places 
to live and work and the development of new and better types of housing. To 
achieve these aims requires, as happened with the new towns, the leverage that 
comes from public or communal ownership of land. As it currently stands, 
Ebbsfleet has few of these qualities, being rather an ill-connected scattering 
of housing estates sluggishly developed over many years. The question is 
whether the chancellor’s support will enable its inner garden city to blossom.

The site is blessed by proximity to the high-speed rail link, which gets to St 
Pancras station in central London in 19 minutes, to the Bluewater shopping 
centre and to a Thames frontage. Its disadvantages include a poor 
infrastructure of drainage, broadband and power supplies and an absence of 
planning, which means that, for all the speed of the rail link, it takes a 
half-hour walk along hostile roads from the station to the nearest house. It 
stands in the workings of extensive former chalk quarries that leave lakes and 
sheer sides that resemble inward-looking White Cliffs of Dover. These are both 
assets and problems – they create the potential for a unique landscape but they 
also require money to convert the terrain into land for building.

The Treasury has promised £310m to Ebbsfleet, of which it expects to get 70% 
back at some point, with a view to creating “up to” 15,000 homes and a 
commercial district. A development corporation has been set up. In the 
combination of work and home it will therefore have something of a true garden 
city, and a masterplan is imminent, from the consultancy AECOM, which promises 
to bring sense and connection to its disjointed fragments. Sir Rod Aldridge, 
formerly of Capita, is hoping to back an academy school where 20-30% of the 
curriculum will be dedicated to training in entrepreneurship.

It will not, promises the chairman of development corporation, Michael 
Cassidy, have that “emptyStepford Wives feel” of dormitory suburbs outside 
working hours. Where it will differ from real garden cities is that the land 
will not be publicly owned, which means that the development corporation can 
only nudge and chasten developers into raising their game. It means not 
creating models of new neighbourhoods to be followed around the country, but 
getting the housebuilders, Persimmon, contrary to its practice on some 
developments elsewhere, to provide a door into the garden as well as a front 
door.

The site is further complicated by the decision of Osborne’s ex-cabinet 
colleague, the former communities secretary Eric Pickles, to assign part of it 
to a gigantic newLondon Paramount Entertainment Resort 
<http://www.londonparamount.info/the-project/>, an employment generator at such 
time as it opens, but before that a monster whose demands for road access make 
a cohesive town centre hard to realise. It doesn’t sound likely that Ebbsfleet 
will be much like a garden city that Ebenezer Howard would recognise or be 
proud of.

As developers don’t like to build too much too quickly, the pace of growth is 
unlikely to be much above 1,000 a year, or about 0.4% of estimated national 
need. None of which is the fault or responsibility of Cassidy and his team, who 
will no doubt deliver good and useful things within the limitations set. “I’ve 
got to work in the realms of the possible,” he says. It’s just that this will 
not be the world-beating exemplar promised by Osborne. “I’m not sure he’s 
interested. It’s just a game,” says an informed observer, who speculates that 
Osborne’s main motive in backing Ebbsfleet was to “stymie” the ambitions of his 
coalition partners, the Lib Dems, to promote garden cities elsewhere.

A country with better trains, a re-energised north, an acoustically perfect 
concert hall and other cultural marvels, with new homes provided in 
well-planned garden cities, with increased home ownership alongside better 
housing for everyone, with prosperity led by brilliant scientific innovation, 
perhaps even with nuclear power stations reducing dependency on fossil fuels, 
would be a wonderful place. It might even benefit from agarden bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/30/londons-garden-bridge-call-for-full-inquiry-into-projects-finances>
, if it were well designed, well sited and reasonably priced. Even the greatest 
Osborne-sceptic must concede that at least some of his initiatives will bring 
some benefits some of the time.

It might also be accepted that to achieve change requires a bit of talking up 
and a bit of political cunning. But the ratio of rhetoric and opportunism to 
achievement in Osborne’s Britain is high. The more you look, the less there is 
to see.
 