
Television had the perfect visual metaphor for 2016: Planet Earth II’s plucky 
iguana <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B3OjfK0t1XM> running past a cavalcade 
of vicious snakes. Well, we made it. What did the box distract us with on the 
way?

Perhaps it wasn’t chance that TV looked to draw a line under past injustices. 
January began with a buzz about true crime-docMaking A Murderer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qxgbdYaR_KQ>; and poring over every strand of 
a real case brought dramatic rewards inThe People v OJ Simpson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nAyn1gDBc7s>. A couple of documentaries 
directly atoned for shameful wrongs: the definitiveHillsborough 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0yIAGkOpzSk> coincided with justice for the 
96, while Louis Theroux’s Savile examined our dark past and his. When future 
documentarists ask why we didn’t care about those fleeing war in Syria, the 
makers ofExodus <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EEZTzgY0oeo> and Children On 
The Frontline <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tb5sq02mJGY> will say some of us 
did.

Those who cried when BBC3 left normal TV were proved right. Moving online 
meant it almost vanished. But it had pearls: meta-comedy fromMurder In 
Successville <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Eds0NwuSs94>; a timely fly on a 
distant wall inAmerican High School 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b8ySzRwYyoc>; and, in Thirteen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1oYf2n-acIA>, a millennial answer to The 
Missing. BBC3’s jewel wasFleabag <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mgHVoeo5K0s>, 
which fitted the US trend for comedies that were semi-autobiographical and more 
than half sad:Insecure <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G1qYxOF7TUs>, Atlanta 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MpEdJ-mmTlY> and One Mississippi 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2EAFfLUe3uo>. Britain’s best new sitcoms were 
twisted dramedies such asCamping <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=To0k90ijbxo> 
orFlowers <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zHp6HwgOX4U>. Elsewhere, instead of 
trying to betterAre You Being Served? 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Slh_oc182Pc> and Porridge, the BBC just made 
new versions.

The retro lull of period drama was also comforting. Poldark was hotter to trot 
than ever; War & Peace was compressed into a vintage diamond; Netflix bet the 
house onThe Crown <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JWtnJjn6ng0>; and even 
monster mashStranger Things <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XWxyRG_tckY&t=2s> 
sent us back to the safe, Spielbergian 1980s. That was a shared experience in 
an online era that is sorting us into boxes, the most extreme example being 
Louis CK hiding spectacular comedyHorace And Pete 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XZDGqAfCFcM> on a pay-per-episode website. 
Meanwhile, inThe Grand Tour <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kLtpcxtk4HI&t=8s>, 
Jeremy Clarkson followers have a soft-walled playground where nobody else can 
chastise them. The BBC couldn’t replace Jez on Top Gear; will Channel 4 fix 
that problem with its new Bake Off?

In an era that a vital BBC1 doc proclaimed The Age Of Loneliness 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QbyJOVa0EHU>, when streaming’s little silos 
might break the connections that our love for First Dates suggests we still 
yearn for, we still came together for cracking drama. With Game Of Thrones in 
its death throes, HBO birthed a potential new great inWestworld 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JctIuZfSsa4&t=67s>; Happy Valley made up with 
tension what it lost in storytelling focus; the absurdly gripping Line Of Duty 
mastered both. ThenThe Night Manager 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g-ZcaKdvML8> elegantly soared even higher. It 
was – lizards and snakes aside – the ultimate escape.
 