
Comparing The People v OJ Simpson: American Crime Story 
<http://www.fxnetworks.com/shows/american-crime-story/episodes> to American 
Horror Story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/07/american-horror-story-fifth-season-hotel-review-lady-gaga>
 is sort of like comparing Beethoven’s fifth symphony to thoseBeethoven movies 
about an affectionate St Bernard <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0103786/reference>
. American Crime Story, which debuts on FX on Tuesday 2 February at 10pm EST on 
FX(and comes to BBC2 later this month) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/15/bbc-true-crime-the-people-v-oj-simpson>
, is a wonderfully acted, 10-episode treatise on race, celebrity and justice 
that is based in fact. American Horror Story is a paean to the supernatural 
whose greatest purpose is letting washed-up actors and pop starschew the 
scenery on the way to winning awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/10/lada-gaga-new-album-golden-globes-2016-win>
. Really, the only two things the shows have in common are having the words 
“American” and “Story” in their titles.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUTXovOaVQqE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUTXovOaVQqE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DUTXovOaVQqE&media=>
Well, that and Ryan Murphy 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/11/26/queer-eyes-full-heart>, the 
uber-producer who is responsible for some of the biggest hits on the small 
screen, including both of these shows,Glee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/glee> and Nip/Tuck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/jan/12/nip-tuck>. His newest 
offering is, just as the title suggests, a semi-fictionalised account ofthe 
events surrounding OJ Simpson’s arrest for the murder of his wife Nicole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/01/oj-simpson-american-crime-story-fx-espn-tv-shows>
 and her friend, Ronald Goldman, and his subsequent acquittal 21 years ago. It 
is a departure for Murphy in many ways and the show, sure to be a hit both 
commercially and critically, is the finest thing he has produced to date.

The action starts in traditional Law & Order <http://www.nbc.com/law-order> 
fashion, with an innocent bystander discovering a bloody body while he’s out 
walking his dog. However this is actually how Brown and Goldman’s bodies were 
discovered, and Simpson (played by Cuba Gooding Jr) became a suspect shortly 
thereafter. Anyone who was out of diapers in the mid-90s knows what happened 
next:the white Bronco chase down the freeway 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-20-years-ago-oj-simpson-chase-20140617-story.html>
, the months-long trial that captivated the media and was aired in its entirety 
on television, the jury voting him not guilty and the subsequent relief or 
disbelief divided starkly down racial lines.

OJ Simpson and the unshakable demons that continue to haunt America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/01/oj-simpson-american-crime-story-fx-espn-tv-shows>
All of the public parts of the story – the news conferences, the opening 
statements, the press coverage – are just as we remember them, played by 
actors. The private moments – Simpson in the back seat of the Bronco, Robert 
Kardashian (David Schwimmer) talking to his kids about the crime, the 
relationship between prosecutors Marcia Clark (Sarah Paulson) and Chris Darden 
(Sterling K Brown) – are fictionalised. But it’s that insight that the trial 
really needs.We all know what happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/17/oj-simpson-trial-cameras-court-justice-culture>
, but individual motivations have never been adequately answered and the 
imagined interactions between lawyers, reporters and even the victim’s families 
may well get us a little bit closer to the truth.

Especially intriguing is the behind-the-scenes backbiting and jockeying for 
position among Simpson’s “dream team” of lawyers: Robert Shapiro (John 
Travolta), F Lee Bailey (Nathan Lane), Johnny Cochran (Courtney B Vance) and 
Alan Dershowitz (Evan Handler). They presented a united front for the cameras, 
but we’ve never seen quite how they came up with the successful defense that 
played into the hatred and fear of the LAPD by members of the black community.

While this team is portrayed mostly as a bunch of opportunists using Simpson 
to help themselves, both Clark and Darden are portrayed very sympathetically as 
a working mother dealing with pervasive sexism and a black man who is not only 
isolated in the DA’s office but also in his own community for taking on an 
African American hero like Simpson. After two decades we have enough distance 
from the events to put them into perspective, but still close enough to the 
#BlackLivesMatter era to see that much hasn’t really changed.

Adapted for television by Scott Alexander and Larry Karaszewski (Ed Wood, The 
People v Larry Flynt) from the bookThe Run of His Life by Jeffrey Toobin 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/97/04/20/nnp/20079.html>, there aren’t the 
surprising plot twists you see from your typical Murphy show. His usual camp 
and outrageousness is also absent. This might be because Murphy is producer and 
director rather than also working as a writer here. Having to work with real 
life events keeps him from the shark-jumping flights of whimsy he employs 
elsewhere in his oeuvre.Scream Queens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/22/scream-queens-ryan-murphy-horror-show>
 it’s not.

There is still some humor in American Crime Story, particularly when dealing 
with the ancillary characters like Nicole Simpson’s best friend Faye Resnick 
(Connie Britton),who wrote a much-loathed tell-all 
<http://www.bravotv.com/the-real-housewives-of-beverly-hills/season-6/blogs/a-deep-dive-into-the-kathryn-vs-faye-feud>
 shortly after the murders were committed. There is also a scene where the Kids 
Kardashian chant their last name when they hear it mispronounced (for the last 
time ever) on national television. The posit that this is where they learned 
how to play the fame game seems a bit far-fetched, but considering their 
current circumstances they’re given much more screen time than they probably 
deserve.

Paulson, a frequent collaborator of Murphy’s, certainly does the best with her 
generous amounts of screen time, bringing both guts and pathos to Clark, 
heretofore known mostly for her wardrobe and bad haircuts. Vance is also 
spectacular as Cochran. His“if it doesn’t fit, you must acquit” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NH-VuP_5cA4> is sure to be a highlight of the 
series. Travolta, that master of the career revival, paints Shapiro as vain and 
slimy and loses himself in the role (and the requisite makeup).

The weak link here is the lead role. Cuba Gooding Jr, perhaps the person with 
the singularly worst post-Oscar career in history, is neither as attractive, as 
charismatic or as good of an actor asOJ Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/simpson> himself. That creates a void at 
the center of the drama, one that leaves viewers wondering just how this man 
could have become a superstar in the first place. He certainly doesn’t capture 
the dual nature of Simpson, a man who could turn on the charm one moment and 
snap into a fit of murderous rage the next.

Speaking of which, I’m curious how those under 30 (about half of the under-50 
demographic that advertisers crave) will react to the material. The millennials 
probably weren’t as acutely aware of the ins and outs of the trial since they 
were all watching Doug on Nickelodeon instead of Court TV. It’s impossible to 
erase all the extraneous Simpson information from my brain, so I’m curious to 
see if those unfamiliar with the players will know exactly what is going on 
with only this show to rely on.

But this isn’t really a story about OJ Simpson. In the title, the “People” 
come before him, and this is really our story. It is about how all the 
problematic parts of the American dream converged in a great miscarriage of 
justice. It is about every one of us, who contributed by watching the trial on 
television or harboring racial resentments that we might not even be aware of, 
is culpable in some way of creating this culture that has gone unchanged. That 
is the real American horror, finally laid bare.
 