
Former Sun editor Kelvin MacKenzie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/kelvin-mackenzie> has defended as 
“reasonable” his criticism of Channel 4 News for fronting a report on the Nice 
truck attack with a journalist wearing a hijab.


MacKenzie prompted more than 2,000 complaints to the press regulator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/19/the-sun-kelvin-mackenzie-complaints-channel-4-news-fatima-manji>
 after heused his Sun column on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/18/sun-tweet-channel-4-news-nice-truck-attack-kelvin-mackenzie-fatima-manji>
 to question whether it was “appropriate” for journalist Fatima Manji to be on 
camera “when there had been yet another shocking slaughter by a Muslim”.

Channel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> News said on Friday 
that Manji and the programme’s producer, ITN, had made an official complaint to 
press regulator Ipso.

The Sun's Kelvin MacKenzie is trying to smear Muslims, says C4 News presenter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/19/the-sun-kelvin-mackenzie-muslims-c4-news-fatima-manji>
The programme’s editor, Ben de Pear, said MacKenzie’s column breached rules on 
intimidation, harassment and inaccuracy. He said he “cannot accept ... an 
employee being singled out on the basis of her religion [and] subject to act of 
religious discrimination”.

Writing in the Sun on Monday, MacKenzie said: “With all the major terrorist 
outrages in the world currently being carried out by Muslims, I think the rest 
of us are reasonably entitled to have concerns about what is beating in their 
religious hearts. Who is in the studio representing our fears? Nobody.”


Manji accused MacKenzie of trying to “intimidate Muslims out of public life” 
and Channel 4 News described his comments as “offensive, completely 
unacceptable, and arguably tantamount to inciting religious and even racial 
hatred”.

But returning to the issue in his latest column in the Sun on Friday, 
MacKenzie blamed the “Twerperati” for “accusing me of Islamaphobia (yawn! 
yawn!)”.

“All I did was ask a simple question,” he wrote. “Was it appropriate for a 
hijab-wearing presenter to front the Channel 4 News on the night they were 
covering the Nice massacre by a Muslim?

“A reasonable inquiry you would have thought with the sensitivities that 
currently exist in this nation and the rest of Europe. Then the Twerperati got 
involved and it became a national debate with record number of complaints to 
the press regulator Ipso.”

He said he was “not hostile” to Manji but said editor Ben de Pear had “made an 
error by putting her on air”.

“So I have another simple question, this time for the TV regulator Ofcom,” 
added MacKenzie.

“Should presenters be allowed to wear artefacts which advertise their 
religion? If, for instance, one of the regular presenters was a Christian (I’m 
joking since at C4 you wouldn’t get an interview) would they be allowed to wear 
a huge cross outside of their shirt or blouse to the same prominence as a 
hijab?”

Channel 4 News editor Ben de Pear, in a statement issued on Friday, said the 
article breached a number of provisions in Ipso’s editor’s code, “in particular 
discrimination, harassment by intimidation and inaccuracy”.

ITN chief executive John Hardie has also complained to Ipso about the article.

“A further complaint was also made by ITN chief executive John Hardie which 
fully supports and endorses the grounds and reasoning of Fatima’s complaint,” 
said de Pear.

“ITN accepts and understands that our reporters and presenters are in the 
public eye and can expect criticism and comment from many quarters, including 
newspaper columnists.

“What it cannot accept is an employee being singled out on the basis of her 
religion. We are not going to simply stand by when an employee is subject to 
act of religious discrimination.”
 