
It’s been two months since DC’s Rebirth – an audacious overhaul of the veteran 
publisher’s entire superhero comics line – and while the rollout of new comics 
has been staggered, sales have been supercharged.In July, DC achieved more 
market share than its bitter rival Marvel for the first time in years 
<http://www.previewsworld.com/Article/182670-Top-100-Comics-July-2016>.

The month in comics: Marvel returns to Civil War
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/03/the-month-in-comics-civil-war-2-faith-and-snotgirl>
It feels like proof that DC’s course correction is resonating with readers 
turned off by the publisher’s previous New 52 reboot, which wiped away decades 
of continuity to focus on younger versions of iconic characters such as 
Superman and Wonder Woman. But DC hit a roadbump earlier this month with its 
all newSuperwoman. This hero was trailed as Lois Lane with Superman’s powers 
(or at least, one incarnation of Lois – there are a couple of them knocking 
about DC’s current multiverse). After showing the street-smart journo getting a 
handle on her new abilities and cleverly saving Metropolis from a Lex 
Luthor-derived threat, writer-artist Phil Jimenez wrapped up his densely 
packed, often beautiful-looking first issue by – and here is the necessary 
SPOILER WARNING – killing her off. Some fans felt cheated, angry or simply 
confused.Marvel <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/marvel> faced a similar 
backlash earlier this year when Captain America was unexpectedly revealed to be 
a sleeper agent for the nefarious Hydra organisation in a shocking final-page 
twist.

Yet even in comics, it’s rare for the title character to die in their first 
issue. So what happens next? Jimenez, who previously worked on an admired run 
of Wonder Woman in the early 2000s, has hinted at an overarching plan involving 
his ensemble cast (which includes, in a sneaky bait-and-switch, a second 
Superwoman) and the social media hoo-ha should at least juice up sales of issue 
two, due mid-September.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fsuperwoman-kingsway-west-torchwood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb63029ea9cd5994e7843ef4b621e0edff519d2d%2F0_25_800_951%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20month%20in%20comics%3A%20have%20DC%20made%20a%20Superwoman-sized%20mistake%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fsuperwoman-kingsway-west-torchwood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20month%20in%20comics%3A%20have%20DC%20made%20a%20Superwoman-sized%20mistake%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fsuperwoman-kingsway-west-torchwood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb63029ea9cd5994e7843ef4b621e0edff519d2d%2F0_25_800_951%2F800.jpg>
 Photograph: Darkhorse comics 
There have been countless westerns about grizzled gunslingers seeking the 
quiet life only to be inexorably pulled back toward violence. InKingsway West 
<http://gregpak.com/category/comics/kingsway-west>, a new four-part miniseries 
from Dark Horse, the taciturn hero is Kingsway Law, a preternaturally 
handy-with-the-steel regulator in a 19th-century north California shaped by a 
very different sort of goldrush. It’s a vivid landscape where 
valuable-but-volatile “red gold” has caused mutations and magical phenomena, so 
as well as the standard wild west staples of six-guns and cool leather dusters, 
there are also bloodhound dragons and enchanted swords.

This inventive mix of Game Of Thrones and Unforgiven is notable for featuring 
a Chinese protagonist in a genre in which Asian characters have long been 
sidelined as voiceless railroad labour or simply ignored completely. While 
writer Greg Pak has invested a lot of effort into his alternate-history 
worldbuilding – this is the sort of comic that begins with a parchment map – 
the story is driven by emotion. Law has something very valuable taken from him, 
and will do anything to get it back, even in the face of overwhelming odds. 
With heavily lined art by Mirko Colak and vibrant colour treatments by Wil 
Quintana, it’s a handsome-looking book that feels as if it could go anywhere.
 Photograph: Titan Comics 
The beauty of being a Time Lord is that you can have adventures in parallel 
with your younger selves. To that end, UK-based publisher Titan Comics has been 
steadily growing its line ofDoctor Who titles. There are now four separate 
monthly series, spotlighting Eccleston’s brooding Ninth, Tennant’s ferrety 
Tenth, Smith’s fez-loving Eleventh and Capaldi’s guitar-shredding Twelfth, 
respectively.

Perhaps looking to complete the post-2005 nu-Who set, Titan has also just 
launched a new officialTorchwood series, written by star John Barrowman with 
his sister Carole. The sci-fi siblings previously collaborated on a Torchwood 
novel called Exodus Code and the new comic picks up some threads from that 
story. Captain Jack Harkness is policing time and space in a research boat 
called the Ice Maiden, complete with a crew of trigger-happy hotties and a wry 
AI. But when the historical birthplace ofTorchwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/torchwood> is attacked, it gives the 
pansexual rascal an excuse to rescue his old partner Gwen from a Welsh 
caravanning holiday. With saucy repartee, smart-aleck captions and a bunch of 
ninjas on flying jet-skis, the Barrowmans seem to be having a whale of a time 
jump-starting the franchise, and that enthusiasm is infectious
 