
When I saw the casting call for the new Will Young video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DsPT7m9SmUw>, Brave Man, I walked into my 
bathroom and stripped to my waist and wondered if I could reasonably apply for 
it. A slightly portly tummy born of two and a half cookbooks and the soft but 
loathed curves of my Mediterranean heritage laughed back at me. I joked on the 
casting call that if it was a year away, the other side ofcoming out as 
transgender <https://twitter.com/drjackmonroe/status/653190794023706625>, 
running a marathon and potential top surgery, I would definitely apply myself. 
I watched with interest from a distance, reassured that transgender friends 
were involved in the casting, filming and consultation. My friend Juliet, a 
vicar and founder of Urban Expression, once said: “About us, without us, is not 
for us.” It’s a value I hold dear – you can’t tell someone’s stories without 
first asking them what those stories are. (Rightwing press, I’m looking at you.)

It's time to stop misgendering trans murder victims | Zach Stafford
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/01/stop-misgendering-transgender-victims>
And so, on Monday, the video was released. The press predictably exploded with 
headlines focusing on the public nakedness of the 19-year-old trans male lead, 
and I rolled my eyes at the subeditors’ shock-jock clickbait habits. I watched 
it and tweeted about it, relieved that a transgender person was being 
represented in the mainstream media with full permission, consultation and 
disclosure – unlike Channel 4’sTrans Lovers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/13/sex-diaries-trans-lovers-review>
, or theGirls To Men 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/channel-4-documentary-girls-to-men-criticised-by-genderqueer-person-who-featured-in-episode-a6693866.html>
 documentary, which participants claim included chunks out of YouTube videos 
without permission; and without the obsession with genitalia and surgery that 
the mainstream press seems to have when it comes to transgender and non-binary 
individuals. Here was a project with integrity, I thought.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDsPT7m9SmUw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDsPT7m9SmUw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDsPT7m9SmUw&media=>
I logged back onto Twitter in the evening to see friends, activists and 
campaigners raging, furious. Furious that the lead “character” was white, as 
though the colour of his skin would have made him more or less transgender. 
Outrage at the abuse depicted in the film, as though we live in a world of 
cotton candy and universal acceptance. Many transgender people are abused every 
single day – by strangers, by colleagues, by their partners – and this is why 
films like Brave Man are made. The shoving and name-calling and physical 
violence and objectification is sadly an accurate portrayal of the day-to-day 
abuse suffered by trans men and women everywhere.

No, we haven’t all had ketchup thrown in our faces. For some of us it was 
punches, pint glasses, deadnames

A season of “transgender-themed programmes” on television does not erase that 
reality. Witnessing that abuse, from the position of helpless bystander as you 
watch that video, would make most decent people uncomfortable. It made me 
uncomfortable because it triggered memories of assault and sexual violence. If 
you have ever been abusive to a transgender person, it probably made you 
uncomfortable. If you were unaware that transgender people face horrific 
physical, mental and sexual assaults, it probably made you uncomfortable. Guess 
what? The depiction of trans people as novelty sex objects in Grand Theft Auto 
makes me uncomfortable. The headline Girls To Men to describe one of my friends 
who has never identified as a “girl” or a “man” makes me uncomfortable. The 
misgendering ofLeelah Alcorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/apr/29/trangender-teenager-leelah-alcorn-ohio-suicide>
 on her gravestone by her religion-blinded parents, makes me uncomfortable. The 
National Enquirer disrespectfully referring to Bruce “Caitlyn” Jenner, makes me 
uncomfortable. The fact we only have seven clinics in the UK specialising in 
gender dysphoria makes me uncomfortable. The Daily Star referring to “ladyboys” 
in its headlines makes me uncomfortable. A transgender man walking naked 
through the streets of Brighton for a music video, tossing a few Polaroids into 
the sea, does not make me uncomfortable.

The video was never meant to represent the entire transgender community. It 
couldn’t. In the same way that Caitlyn Jenner is not representative of every 
transgender woman, or that I, on the front cover of Diva magazine, do not 
represent all lesbian-identifying women. We can’t. Not on our own. We are a 
diverse and beautiful community, and one that has been battered and bruised by 
recent salacious media intrusions disguised as friends. I understand why people 
are suspicious of yet another “trans thing”; a formerly very good friend called 
me a “transbore” the other day – the irony being that she works in “diversity” 
herself. We have been so gawked at and misrepresented by the mainstream media 
for so long that some of us are seizing the opportunity to finally tell our own 
stories.

Greater transgender visibility hasn't helped nonbinary people – like me | Alok 
Vaid-Menon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/13/greater-transgender-visibility-hasnt-helped-nonbinary-people-like-me>
Joe, the character in the video, is not every trans man. But his experiences 
are sadly similar to many of ours. No, we haven’t all had ketchup thrown in our 
faces. For some of us it was punches, pint glasses, deadnames, being shoved off 
bicycles into rivers. The “what even ARE you?” loudly, at a US airport from a 
customs official. Being followed into toilets by thickset men determined to 
start a fight. My five-year-old coming home from a taekwondo class crying 
because an older boy was teasing him because his “mum is a transgender” and 
asking me what it meant.

About us, without us, is not for us. The Brave Man video was made by the 
people who launched Trans Pride. Cameos from people who told their own stories 
onMy Transsexual Summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/07/my-transsexual-summer-channel-4> 
in 2011. The lead was a trans man who put himself forward for the role– not 
coerced or exploited as some commentators suggested, and the end result was a 
tapestry of the stories and experiences of all of the contributors. This is 
just the start of the conversation.

If you have a platform, whether that’s a social media space that you feel safe 
and comfortable in, or a conversation with trusted friends, please use it to 
tell your story. We have come so far, but there is so much left to do. And in 
the eye of the storm of all the chattering rage is a 19-year-old trans guy, 
just about to start at university, who bared his vulnerability to tell his 
story and to force a discussion about abuse of transgender people into the eye 
of the worlds media, and for that I thank him. And Will Young, and Wiz, and Fox 
Fisher, and everyone behind that film. We have come so far, but we have so much 
more to do.
 