
Two days after the assassination of the Russian ambassador to Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/russian-ambassador-to-turkey-wounded-in-ankara-shooting-attack>
, a piece inNew York magazine 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/12/those-harrowing-ankara-assassination-photos.html>
 made a point that occasionally attends the aftermath of shocking events: that 
photos of the killing took on the quality of art. “In the stark white, pristine 
setting of an upscale art gallery ... with patrons, assassin, and victim all 
dressed in elegant black, the photographs themselves look strikingly surreal – 
uncanny, even – and, in some very painful ways, beautiful.”

The writer went on to compare the composition and tone of the photos to 
something by Caravaggio and to suggest that the experience of looking at the 
most striking among them, that of the gunman pointing in the air, brought on an 
“unreal internal visual dance”.

This is a type of writing one either goes for or not, and the exercise itself 
– of deconstructing what may become an iconic image – is, of course, legitimate 
and implies no admiration for the killing.

Still, there is something infantile about this kind of commentary, 
particularly when it is turned out so close to the event. Five days after 9/11, 
the German composer Karlheinz Stockhausen got into a great deal of bother for 
describing the attacks as “the greatest work of art ever 
<http://nymag.com/news/9-11/10th-anniversary/karlheinz-stockhausen/>”, a remark 
that looked worse out of context than imbedded in his rambling thoughts about 
Lucifer, but that was nonetheless grotesque in the circumstances.

Damian Hirst’s thoughts, shared with the BBC, ran along similar lines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/sep/11/arts.september11>: “The thing about 
9/11 is that it’s kind of an artwork in its own right. It was wicked, but it 
was devised in this way for this kind of impact. It was devised visually.”

This was more sensible, identifying in the terrorists a desire to create 
something unimaginable, but it also struck me as unnecessary, a use of language 
designed to flatter the artist’s self-image as a provocateur and the kind of 
faux-intellectualism that mistakes bad taste for meaning.

In the piece about Ankara, this desire to provoke was vested entirely in use 
of the word “beautiful”, which seemed to me not only wrong in the context – if 
anything, the photos looked banal, almost kitsch – but as if the only 
satisfactory way to measure the resonance of an image is to call it either 
“beautiful” or “art”. Ironwork at the entrance to Auschwitz is iconic, but it 
is not a work of art. And neither was this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fassassination-russian-ambassador-turkey-9-11-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F964a0d5ca7676b168c64aa75bd1f82e5a5ba223f%2F0_279_4048_2429%2F4048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Russian%20ambassador%E2%80%99s%20assassination%20was%20no%20work%20of%20art%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fassassination-russian-ambassador-turkey-9-11-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Russian%20ambassador%E2%80%99s%20assassination%20was%20no%20work%20of%20art%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fassassination-russian-ambassador-turkey-9-11-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F964a0d5ca7676b168c64aa75bd1f82e5a5ba223f%2F0_279_4048_2429%2F4048.jpg>
 ‘Outside, it was -14C but, inside, my kids ran around in their nappies.’ 
Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
Heating is cheating

The winter solstice this week brought the first really cold weather to New 
York, which meant the advent of T-shirt weather in New York apartments. Of all 
the guilty pleasures I get from living in the US, the heating arrangement is 
the best and the guiltiest.

At college, in the house I shared with two housemates, there was no central 
heating, but a single electric radiator in each room that scalded one side of 
your body while leaving the other to freeze. In my flat in London, gales blew 
through the single-glazed windows. For the first 30 years of my life, I lived 
in accordance with the British winter philosophy of “put another jumper on”.

I approve of this morally but, in practicality, it stinks. In New York, I have 
no control over my heating; it is operated from the maintenance room off the 
lobby and at the first sign of frost it automatically cranks up to tropical. 
Outside, it was -14C but, inside, my kids ran around in their nappies. 
Neighbours opened their windows; some even put on their air-conditioners. This 
is obscene, given the state of the environment. But I can’t help it; after a 
lifetime of shivering, it still thrills me to my core.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fassassination-russian-ambassador-turkey-9-11-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50d93824dfa9994b33783b5d48419b4becf4f0b%2F0_0_3000_2112%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Russian%20ambassador%E2%80%99s%20assassination%20was%20no%20work%20of%20art%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fassassination-russian-ambassador-turkey-9-11-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Russian%20ambassador%E2%80%99s%20assassination%20was%20no%20work%20of%20art%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fassassination-russian-ambassador-turkey-9-11-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc50d93824dfa9994b33783b5d48419b4becf4f0b%2F0_0_3000_2112%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘Workers downed tools and started throwing snowballs at each other.’ 
Photograph: Alex Wong/Getty Images 
That snowballed quickly

At the weekend it snowed. I put my kids in the stroller and pushed them to the 
library and, as we passed the construction site on the corner of 66th Street, 
workers downed tools and started throwing snowballs at each other. It was like 
a scene from It’s a Wonderful Life, completely spontaneous and improbable – a 
charming tableau of city life. Then the foreman saw us watching and waved his 
arms to shut them down. “Snowball hits a kid in the face, that’s a lawsuit 
right there,” he said. Happy Christmas.
 