
Nicholas Soames' verdict - then let's remember what Diana said about the 
Establishment for which he spoke - she is their enemy. We believed her because 
what she revealed was how they made her mad, and how they represent her mutiny 
as madness.

Never before on British television has an aristocratic woman been so eloquent 
about pain as protest.

The reason we believed her was that behind her are thousands of women sent to 
the tower, to the asylum, to the attic, to solitary confinement. The drama of 
self-destruction unmasks the impossibility of protest. The Establishment has 
been locking up women for centuries. It's what they do.

The confidence that they'll go quietly is confirmed by the bumbling 
megalomania of Charles' marriage. He thought he could get away with it. He 
thought he could love another while scouring the shires of England for a seemly 
virgin, a girl who would give him sons and secure his mission as a man who 
wanted to be king.

He found an uneducated young woman who, these days, could only come from 
either the poor or the rich - the only classes for whom gender is destiny.

The monarchy, lest we forget, is the most atavistic monument to patriarchy. 
The aristocracy disinherit their girls and demand that they deliver boys. Diana 
and Charles and the Royal Family must be the only people in Britain these days 
who care whether their babies are boys or girls. Diana's interview did, at 
least, protect her pride and his reputation when she allowed her own version of 
his liaison dangereuse with Camilla Parker-Bowles to synchronise with his. We 
think we know better, however. There were always three of them in that 
marriage. He always deceived her.

But unbeknown to her, his life was her destiny. When her disappointment about 
something so simple - lack of love - demanded sympathy, not to mention some 
strategic imagination, she was rewarded with 'treatment'. If not the tower, 
then the isolation ward.

Her description of bulimia as a survival mechanism was arresting. It became 
her only means of protest - a survival strategy to which the Palace reacted not 
with care but with contempt. A spokesperson for the Northern Initiative onWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> and Eating heard an echo in 
Diana's unprecedented - for a Royal - description: she said what other women 
have said, 'seeing it almost as a friend in the middle of traumatic isolation. 
She said what lots of women in our groups say. And it is so different from the 
way psychiatrists describe it, as a symptom of a personality disorder.'

She was hurt. Her survival has depended upon calling attention to her pain and 
to the perpetrators. Some saw it as soap. Some saw it as a woman scorned. Many 
feminists saw her suffering as a symptom of her exile.

The Establishment saw it as an attack on the Establishment. They were right. 
To tell your story is the most dangerous thing you can do. Modern movements of 
survivors, from Siberia to Sloane Square, have redeemed their pain from the 
psychiatric wards, via the fridge and the phone, the samizdat and the secret 
services, and transformed it into public, political discourse. Her triumph was 
her testimony: by bearing witness, she broke the vow of silence that is the 
perpetrator's secret weapon. We were all witnesses. But to speak does not make 
you safe.

Princess Diana has been seen as a weak woman. Now she is describing herself as 
a survivor, and locating herself among a long line of women, ill-treated and 
even ill, whose rebellions have, until now, been quelled. She has used her 
power - not her beauty, but her stamina and strength - to call her class to 
account, and has revealed how the Establishment fears that power like an 
exocet. Diana is no revolutionary, she is no Rosa Luxemburg. But never before 
has a woman in her position articulated mass pain. The result is that she has 
mobilised an army of supporters, and the Palace has been forced to show some 
respect for the impact of her words. Remarkably, there is still no republican 
movement in Britain with the wit to re-unite public and private. The political 
system has not made the link between sex and power. It has failed to register 
one of the great themes of our time: the behaviour of men within marriages. The 
greatest danger Princess Diana's speech poses to the Establishment is the 
impact on ordinary people of this future king being called to account as a man.

Â· This article was republished as part of a special edition marking 50 Years 
of the Guardian women's page <https://www.theguardian.com/women/50years>.
 