
The European commission has ordered Apple to pay back the Irish state up to 
€13bn in taxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
 in a landmark ruling. Apple paid a tax rate on European profits of between 
0.005% and 1%, according to the EU’s executive arm. The US technology group, 
and Ireland, have said they will appeal against the decision but it will have 
ramifications for countries and companies across Europe.

Why has the European commission ordered Ireland to claw back up to €13bn in 
tax from Apple?

The commission has found that Apple benefited from a sweetheart tax ruling 
granted by Ireland decades ago, saving the iPhone-maker huge sums in taxes over 
many years. The ruling was not only generous but gave Apple special tax 
treatment unavailable to competitors.As such, competition officials in Brussels 
have found it amounted to unlawful state aid under EU rules. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
 The sweetheart deal allowed Apple to shift up to two-thirds of its global 
profits through a handful of Irish-registered companies that routinely paid 
less than 1% tax.

Are other companies in the line of fire?

Over the past four years the commission has been looking at similar generous 
tax deals handed out to multinationals, questioning whether they too amount to 
unlawful state aid. Tax rulings from Luxembourg and the Netherlands –granted to 
Fiat and Starbucks respectively 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/21/starbucks-and-fiat-tax-deals-with-eu-nations-ruled-unlawful>
 – have already been found unlawful. In both cases the companies are appealing 
against the commission’s findings. Meanwhile, competition regulators are also 
investigating a tax deal from Luxembourg awarded to both McDonald’s and Amazon.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fwhy-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Apple%20is%20facing%20a%20%E2%82%AC13bn%20tax%20bill%20in%20Ireland%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fwhy-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Apple%20is%20facing%20a%20%E2%82%AC13bn%20tax%20bill%20in%20Ireland%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fwhy-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer&media=>
Why Apple is facing a €13bn tax bill in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/aug/30/why-apple-is-facing-13bn-tax-bill-in-ireland-video-explainer>
Will EU taxpayers benefit and will multinationals become more transparent with 
tax?

If the commission’s decision is not overturned on appeal, then Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> will have to recalculate years of 
back taxes and send Apple a large bill. That will boost Ireland’s public purse, 
but in the longer term it may damage its reputation as one of the most 
attractive places for multinational companies such as Facebook and Google to 
locate their operations.


Will Ireland cease to be a tax haven for multinationals?

Ireland has been under pressure to ditch its most aggressive tax deals for 
multinationals for many years. Pressure comes not just from other European 
countries, but also from the US, where Ireland has been heavily criticised for 
helping big businesses hoard profits offshore, beyond the reach of the US tax 
authorities. The so-called “double Irish” tax structure, which has been used by 
Google, Facebook, Microsoft and Apple,is being phased out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/14/ireland-abolish-double-irish-tax-scheme-apple>
. However, Ireland has made sure it has other replacement tax breaks to keep 
multinationals from moving elsewhere.

EU orders Apple to pay up to €13bn in Irish taxes - business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/aug/30/reports-to-offer-latest-clues-on-brex--business-live>
Will this make US multinationals bring their cash piles home?

The last place American multinationals want to move profits is back home to 
the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/us-corporations-14-trillion-hidden-tax-havens-oxfam>
, where the 35% headline tax rate is one of the highest in the world. While 
many big firms worry that Brussels may try to chase these huge cash reserves, 
they would prefer to be taxed in Europe than America so are unlikely to 
repatriate funds.

Can Apple afford to pay back €13bn?

Yes it can.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/02/apple-cash-mountain-grows>The 
technology group – valued at $570bn on the stock market – has a cash stockpile 
of more than $230bn, of which more than 90% is kept outside the US so that it 
does not attract US tax. Therefore the ruling should not have a material impact 
on the group’s finances or its considerable research and development spending.

The €13bn represents more than a quarter of its last full year profits, which 
were $53.4bn and is equal to sales of 20m iPhone6 Plus handsets, at a current 
UK cost price of £539.

What does €13bn mean to Ireland?

It is a huge sum – more than the €12.9bn annual government spending on the 
Irish health service and nearly one-third of Ireland’s total government tax 
revenue in 2015, which was €45.6bn.

It is also the equivalent of €2,830 for every one of Ireland’s 4.6 million 
population.

Could a post-Brexit UK now offer such generous tax deals?

Brussels has no power over corporation tax rates, which member states have 
always been able to set themselves.The former chancellor, George Osborne, had 
pledged to make Britain the most competitive G20 country in terms of 
corporation tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/03/george-osborne-looks-at-corporation-tax-cut-to-attract-overseas-investors>
. That has seen him set a roadmap that, unless it is adjusted by his successor, 
Philip Hammond, will soon take the UK corporate tax rate down to 17%. Once it 
is outside the EU, Britain would have even more leeway to offer special deals 
to multinationals in the hope they would invest in the UK. That said, such 
moves could leave Britain looking more and more like a tax haven, and could 
hamper the willingness of other countries to trade openly with the UK.

 