
Until 23 June, Britain will be enjoying, or enduring, a debate about its 
relationship with Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. 
If the early days of the campaign are anything to go by, the debate will be 
bounded by rival predictions about the future of Britain’s economy. But as I 
walk through the National Gallery withits new director, Gabriele Finaldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/19/welcome-national-gallery-dr-gabriele-finaldi-outsource-jobs>
, it strikes me that this institution is, if not an argument for, then 
certainly an eloquent narrative about European connectedness.

Indeed, the sole purpose of the National Gallery is to spin a European 
cultural tale: one that starts in 13th-century Italy withCimabue 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Cimabue> and ends in France around 1900 
with modernist masterpieces such asCézanne’s Bathers 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/paul-cezanne-bathers-les-grandes-baigneuses>
. Between these points, this “perfect short story” (asformer director Neil 
MacGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/27/the-guardian-view-on-neil-macgregor-he-carried-on-britains-national-epic>
 has called the gallery) weaves around the Low Countries, Spain, Britain and 
Germany. The silent works of art on the walls are in endless conversation with 
each other, across centuries and borders: Rubens with Titian; Turner with 
Claude; Cézanne with Poussin.


Finaldi, who has been in his post since last August but is only now giving 
interviews, is himself something of a European short story. An immensely tall 
man with a warm grin and saturnine looks, he was born in Barnet, north London, 
in 1965, and raised in Catford, the son of a Neapolitan father and a 
half-Polish, half-English mother. “I was brought up in what was essentially an 
Italian home,” he says. “We spoke Italian, ate Italian, supported Italy in the 
World Cup. We lived in Britain and we felt part of both worlds.”

He keeps a baby grand in his office – because it won't fit in his house

It was a musical family: his father had a “very good operatic voice”, and his 
children are good singers too, he says. In his office there’s a baby grand – 
largely because it won’t fit into his house (he keeps an upright there). On the 
stand at the moment are Bach’s Goldberg Variations, “though I can only play a 
handful of them”. He went off to Italy for a couple of years of his schooling, 
to Naples and Piacenza. The rest of the time he was at a south London 
comprehensive, until he switched to Dulwich College, a public school, for his 
sixth form.


He had a choice between ancient history and history of art A-level; he chose 
the latter because he’d heard some of the teaching was done in a museum. That 
was the Dulwich Picture Gallery, which boasts an exquisite collection of old 
masters. The first lesson was in front ofRembrandt’s Girl at a Window 
<http://www.dulwichpicturegallery.org.uk/explore-the-collection/151-200/girl-at-a-window/>
 and it was, he says, acoup de foudre. “I thought, ‘Wouldn’t it be wonderful to 
be able to do this full-time?’” The Courtauld followed, then a stint at the 
National Gallery, then a dozen years at the Prado in Madrid, where he was 
deputy director.

I wonder how he will be voting on 23 June, but he politely declines to say. 
Does he think that Brexit would have an impact, negative or otherwise, on the 
gallery? “We are very bound up with Europe because of the shows we do and the 
way we work. We work very closely with our counterparts in France, Spain, 
Italy, Germany. That will continue I am sure, whatever happens.” It’s a 
diplomat’s answer. But, he adds, “I can’t deny that I am strongly European. 
It’s in my genes and I feel very passionate about Europe and what we share 
together. The gallery is exactly about that. We are looking for connections, 
not highlighting differences. There is a lot that is common to all of us.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fnational-gallery-gabriele-finaldi-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3867d63f526c15edca0ba4135510c801685dce10%2F0_0_1300_921%2F1300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20National%20Gallery's%20new%20boss%3A%20'I%20can't%20deny%20I%20am%20strongly%20European'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fnational-gallery-gabriele-finaldi-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20National%20Gallery%27s%20new%20boss%3A%20%27I%20can%27t%20deny%20I%20am%20strongly%20European%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fnational-gallery-gabriele-finaldi-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3867d63f526c15edca0ba4135510c801685dce10%2F0_0_1300_921%2F1300.jpg>
 ‘These are the things the gallery has to explain’ … A Cup of Water and a Rose 
by Zurbarán Photograph: The National Gallery London 
It’s early morning, before opening time, and we head into the empty galleries: 
Finaldi brings me into the Spain room (his PhD was on theItaly-based, 
Spanish-born Jusepe de Ribera 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/artists/jusepe-de-ribera> and he’s working 
on a catalogue of his drawings). We park in front of some early works by 
Velázquez. As we talk, a woman dabs at the marble skirting with a pink feather 
duster. How the National Gallery deals with its staff has been a subject of 
recent anguish: under the previous director, Nicholas Penny, the gallery moved 
to outsource the work of its attendants, which led tostrikes last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/20/national-gallery-portrait-inequality-museum-privatise-staff-wages-squeezed>
.

The dispute has now ended, and the attendants are now employed, under the same 
terms and conditions, by Securitas. Even so, can he see how fundamental the 
move seemed – not only to the staff, who quite naturally feared being employed 
by a large security firm rather than the gallery, and to visitors, who regard 
the institution as a precious public space? “The important thing is to 
understand that we have brought our staff with us. They are committed to the 
gallery, they love the gallery, and many have been working here for decades. It 
was a bumpy period, but we have moved on. The outsourcing began in early 
November and is working rather well.” Visitors wanted more flexible opening 
times – evenings, for example – and the outsourced arrangement was, he insists, 
the only way to achieve it.


Come on, wouldn't he like to get his hands on the Royal Collection?

I wonder about the differences between the Prado in Madrid 
<https://www.museodelprado.es/en> and the National Gallery. “The sense of 
responsibility to the public is very similar,” he says, “but they are very 
different collections. The National Gallery is one that from the very start was 
intended for the people of Great Britain and was put together by art-historical 
professionals in the 19th century, whereas the Prado is the treasure house of 
the SpanishHabsburgs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2009/sep/17/habsburg-art-titian-moctezuma>
 and Bourbons.”

The Prado is also much bigger: 8,000 pictures, plus sculpture, decorative art 
and works on paper; the National Gallery contains fewer than 2,500 paintings. 
Does he not think then that the Queen’s own stupendous collection might 
usefully be nationalised and placed in the care of the National Gallery in 
public ownership, as in Spain? Finaldi makes diplomatic noises: “It’s 
astonishing how over the last generationthe Royal Collection 
<https://www.royalcollection.org.uk/collection/about> has become extremely 
public: public shows at the Queen’s Gallery; works here on long-term loan. So, 
while continuing to be a private collection, it’s open for study, for viewing 
by the public. It’s become a much more public collection.”

Come on, wouldn’t it be nice to get your hands on the Royal Collection? I 
think it would be good if it were made a public possession, I say. “Yeah, OK. 
Good,” he replies, humouring me. You don’t get to be director of the most 
establishment cultural institution in the land by voicing disobliging 
republican views – particularly when Prince Charles has just agreed to become 
the royal patron.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fnational-gallery-gabriele-finaldi-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf3851cf5b8d530634c98a63ba3ca0af49cb3d29%2F0_0_956_1100%2F956.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20National%20Gallery's%20new%20boss%3A%20'I%20can't%20deny%20I%20am%20strongly%20European'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fnational-gallery-gabriele-finaldi-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20National%20Gallery%27s%20new%20boss%3A%20%27I%20can%27t%20deny%20I%20am%20strongly%20European%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fnational-gallery-gabriele-finaldi-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf3851cf5b8d530634c98a63ba3ca0af49cb3d29%2F0_0_956_1100%2F956.jpg>
 Jacob with the Flock of Laban by Jusepe de Ribera. Photograph: The National 
Gallery London 
Not that he’s against expansion. His long-term plan is to redevelop the site 
of St Vincent’s House, an office building behind the gallery, into a bigger 
exhibition space, which will be a relief to anyone who has been prodded by a 
thousand umbrellas while trying to look at a Goya or Titian in the current, 
cramped, exhibition rooms. Expanding the collection itself is more challenging. 
“The kind of works in this gallery are generally beyond our [financial] reach,” 
he says. “Either we rely on people being incredibly public spirited or generous 
– and there are some of those people, though fewer than in the past – or we 
have to find some way to make it very attractive to owners to sell to public 
museums.”

Why does he think people have become less generous? “I think one of the 
significant things is that the value of art has shot to stratospheric heights, 
so the way you think about your works of art, if you are an owner, is perhaps 
different from the way you would have done a couple of generations ago. People 
don’t immediately think that the best place for their work of art is in a 
gallery for the public benefit.” He thinks tax breaks should be extended to 
make donating or selling art “an attractive proposition” for collectors.

We rely on people being incredibly generous – and there are fewer of them than 
in the past

An easier expansion to achieve is, perhaps, the gallery’s relationship with 
living artists. The artist-in-association programme will continue (at the 
moment, painterGeorge Shaw 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/whats-on/exhibitions/george-shaw-my-back-to-nature-11-may-2016-1000>
 is completing his two-year stint with an exhibition opening in May). And 
artists may be invited to curate displays of work in the collection. “The rise 
in interest in contemporary art is a good thing,” he says, “and it’s very 
interesting to talk to artists who think of the National Gallery as their 
gallery, finding sources of stimulation and inspiration here. This is their 
reference collection.”

After we spoke, the Guardian reported that the Victoria and Albert museum was 
banning sketching in crowded shows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/22/va-museum-no-sketching-signs-draconian>
, so I contacted the National Gallery to find out Finaldi’s view. A spokeswoman 
told me: “We have a strict policy [that] we do not comment on what other 
galleries and museums get up to. It’s just not cricket.” The National Gallery 
does havea policy on sketching 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/visiting/sketching-in-the-gallery> – it is 
welcomed in exhibitions, but permission is granted at the gallery’s discretion 
if things get busy.

The key for Finaldi is the power of the real-time encounter between a visitor 
and a work of art: the spark of intelligence between two minds that can fly 
across centuries. I ask Finaldi to help me look at a work and he chooses the 
smallest in the room – a still life ofa cup on a silver plate with a rose 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/francisco-de-zurbaran-a-cup-of-water-and-a-rose>
, by Francisco de Zurburán. He talks about how inviting it is, how one wants to 
reach into it and grasp the cup and the plate and the rose, all painted 
lifesize. And about how the objects also seem to have a kind of mystery, 
seeming to glow out of their dark background. Then he tells me how the water 
might stand for the purity of the Virgin, and the rose too: that the picture 
vibrates, for him, with a depth and a spirituality.

“These are the things the gallery has to try to explain,” he says. “Even if 
you don’t know the works, they still have a hold – that’s do to with the 
communicative power of great painting The first thing that’s important about 
here is that people can walk in through the door and stand in front of the 
pictures. That’s very simple to say but it’s quite extraordinary.” Which, it 
being opening time, they do. And, as Room 30 fills up with the day’s first 
visitors, Finaldi slips away.

 