
Warning: contains spoilers. 

The increasing occurrence of Difficult Second Season Syndrome – with True 
Detective <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-detective> and 
Broadchurch <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch> major 
offenders andTransparent <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/transparent> 
a minor one – means that our pleasure at the return of a recent success is 
always shadowed with worry.

A particular fear in the case of The Man in the High Castle, which streams its 
second run on Amazon from today, is that this drama is a prime example of a TV 
show that, in the past, would have been shot as a whole in one.

The main business of the 1963 Philip K Dick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philipkdick> source novel – imagining a 
world in which Germany and Japan won the second world war and divided the 
coasts of the US between them – was dealt with in the 10 episodes released in 
2015.

The dizzying visual shocks of the reversed world – such as seeing the eagle of 
the Third Reich atop New York skyscrapers – can merely be repeated in the 
second series, with further examples of how Hitler’s empire-builder,Albert Speer
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/mar/13/secondworldwar.kateconnolly>, 
might have retooled the US and Japan. Although there are still tremendous 
chills in the details of the alternative reality – such as the American 
schoolchild reciting the morning “pledge of allegiance” to the Nazis in the 
first of the new episodes – the basic shapes of the alternative 20th century 
are now familiar.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-man-in-the-high-castle-trump-amazon-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f933e384a33df76d50843e0a3dc66d32e10a238%2F0_0_3816_2549%2F3816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Man%20in%20the%20High%20Castle%3A%20how%20will%20Nazi%20drama%20fare%20in%20age%20of%20Trump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-man-in-the-high-castle-trump-amazon-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Man%20in%20the%20High%20Castle%3A%20how%20will%20Nazi%20drama%20fare%20in%20age%20of%20Trump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-man-in-the-high-castle-trump-amazon-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f933e384a33df76d50843e0a3dc66d32e10a238%2F0_0_3816_2549%2F3816.jpg>
 Tremendous chills in the details … The Man in the High Castle. Photograph: 
Liane Hentscher 
Ominously, disagreements about where the show should go next were the reason 
given by series creator Frank Spotnitz for his unexpected departure from the 
franchise. Certainly, 10 hours would have been enough to satisfyingly conclude 
the storylines of the main figures: Juliana (Alexa Davalos), a San Franciscan 
woman entrusted by her now-dead sister with footage depicting a world that we 
recognise but the characters don’t; Joe (Luke Kleintank), a double-agent posing 
as a member of the American Resistance; Gruppenführer John Smith (Rufus 
Sewell), a US Nazi officer; and Tagomi (Cary-Hiroyuki Tagawa), a Japanese 
official who experiences visions he interprets as nightmares or prophecies but 
which we have seen in documentaries such as The World at War.

The first episode of season two sometimes feels slow, especially in the Tagomi 
strands. But it recovers by perfectly executing two moves from the playbook of 
TV long-runners: Complicating the Situation (the Japanese start plotting to 
nuke New York) and, crucially, Introducing a New Character: Stephen Root 
portrays the title figure, the obsessive and mysterious Abendsen, a sort of 
parallel-archivist who collects the films of events that have happened to us 
but not to them.

One reason for the present appeal of alternate reality stories – including the 
Stephen King-derived JFK drama11.22.63 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/112263-review-hulu-stephen-king-books-jfk-assassination>
 – must be that we live in a time when real-life storylines considered 
fanciful, such as the Trump presidency and Brexit, have become reality, turning 
on its head what seemed to be the historical narrative. With itsfirst season 
screened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/nov/20/the-man-in-the-high-castle-amazon-prime-nazis-philip-k-dick>
 in the late Obama period and the second going out post-election but pre-Trump, 
The Man in the High Castle straddles a cusp of uncertainty.

Drawing direct parallels with current events, though, is thwarted by the 
complex politics on show here. If a leftwing viewer might see it as a prophecy 
of the US’s susceptibility to fascism, supporters of Trump’s protectionist 
economics might draw a lesson of US vulnerability to Japanese imperialism. 
There must be a particular poignancy for actors of Asian heritage in the cast, 
who are granted unusually large screen-time but in return for playing second 
world war-era Japanese stereotypes. Similarly, Brexiteers might be reminded of 
Germany’s dark past, while Remainers could, as the German-Japanese axis 
conquered an isolationist US, spot a moral of the importance of international 
alliances to national defence.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-man-in-the-high-castle-trump-amazon-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8da1da68b988696f92bca4455552dc6cb10b4f6b%2F0_0_8688_5792%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Man%20in%20the%20High%20Castle%3A%20how%20will%20Nazi%20drama%20fare%20in%20age%20of%20Trump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-man-in-the-high-castle-trump-amazon-drama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Man%20in%20the%20High%20Castle%3A%20how%20will%20Nazi%20drama%20fare%20in%20age%20of%20Trump%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fthe-man-in-the-high-castle-trump-amazon-drama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8da1da68b988696f92bca4455552dc6cb10b4f6b%2F0_0_8688_5792%2F8688.jpg>
 Straddles a cusp of uncertainty … The Man in the High Castle. Photograph: 
Liane Hentscher 
An area that might be expanded is the nature of popular culture in Nazi-run 
America. The rise of alt-reality fiction is influenced – and even 
scientifically justified – by the work ofProfessor Stephen Hawking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/stephen-hawking-dangerous-time-planet-inequality>
, whose “multiverse” theory, which suggests there may be numerous different 
versions of our world, uses examples from mass entertainment. Hawking recently 
consoled teen pop fans with: “It would not be beyond the realms of possibility 
that somewhere outside of our own universe lies another different universe. And 
in that universe, Zayn is still inOne Direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction>.”

The haunting German-inflected recording by Jeanette Olsson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vb5XD0U7oGU> of the song Edelweiss that is the 
theme tune to The Man in the High Castle plausibly indicates that there may 
have been a Third Reich influence on the Billboard charts in this other US. 
However, the soundtrack also includes hits from the American 60s we know, 
including Neil Sedaka’s Calendar Girl and Paul Anka’s My Home Town, although 
Sedaka’s Jewish background would surely have troubled the Nazi minister for 
popular enlightenment and propaganda – and Anka’s Greek Orthodox roots might 
inflame Hitlerite purists as well.

Using familiar tunes could be seen as an ironic commentary from our world on 
the one we are watching: the home town invoked by Anka now includes 
brown-shirted students getting off a yellow school bus with the Third Reich 
eagle on its fender. But US popular culture would likely have been very 
different if the ideas of Goebbels had prevailed. What, for example, might the 
Nazis in TMITHC make ofthe Beatles <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A_MjCqQoLLA>
, who are due, at least by our timetable, to reach the US soon?
 