
Related: The Last Guardian review – a joyous meditation on companionship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/05/the-last-guardian-review-fumito-ueda-playstation>

In an industry fuelled by carefully managed waves of hype, developers can 
easily get carried away in the promotion of software that isn’t quite ready 
yet. Sometimes that means being loose-lipped about features that don’t make it 
into the final product, a crime for which the internet will punish you in the 
same way as if you’d been caught drowning puppies. Other times, games are 
talked about for so long that they start to seem less like forms of 
entertainment and more like musty urban myths. But, for some reason, the last 
few weeks have seen the emergence of a clutch of games that had themselves in 
video game lore as forever “coming soon”.

Starting life as a PlayStation 3 game, The Last Guardian (PS4) began its long, 
painful march through development hell in 2007.Created by game-making visionary 
Fumito Ueda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/19/the-last-guardian-fumito-ueda-sony>
, it follows in the near-legendary footsteps of Ueda’s past works Ico, a 
wordless story of a boy and a girl escaping a giant, ethereal-looking castle, 
and Shadow Of The Colossus, in which you slaughtered a succession of office 
block-sized titans while gradually coming to the realisation that you were 
doing something unconscionably dreadful. In The Last Guardian you once again 
play a little boy escaping from a giant fortress, this time accompanied by 
Trico, an animal the size of a double-decker bus that looks like a cross 
between an alsatian puppy, a kitten and a baby bird. The fact that Trico is 
adorable despite being so huge is a testament to the talent at work. The game 
isn’t perfect, and graphically it can’t escape its PlayStation 3 roots, but the 
pairing of a small boy and his huge companion in environments that dwarf them 
both is hugely compelling, providing an experience unlike anything else in 
games or film. It shows that even nine years in development can’t keep a good 
idea down.
 Final Fantasy XV. Photograph: Square Enix 
Related: Final Fantasy XV review: enthralling and slick, but problems lie 
beneath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/final-fantasy-xv-review> 

This is lightweight compared with Final Fantasy XV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/final-fantasy-xv-review> 
(PS4, Xbox One) though, which Square Enix has been working on for over a 
decade. In some cases, devotees of the role-playing franchise have been keenly 
anticipating its arrival since they were children. Perhaps inevitably after 
that length of tormented gestation, it’s a bit of an antique, the voice acting 
and script conspiring to make its characters seem simultaneously artificial and 
slightly peculiar. The strange thing is that as you get to know them, you 
actually start to care about this band of freaky-looking muppets, with their 
stupid haircuts and phoned-in dialogue. Still, unless they started work on it 
in the 90s, it may be best not to hold your breath for Final Fantasy XVI.
 No Man’s Sky. Photograph: PR 
Related: No Man's Sky: Foundation update – a solid base to build on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/02/no-mans-sky-foundation-play-update>

Pan-galactic explore-’em-up No Man’s Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/12/no-mans-sky-review-hello-games>
 (PS4, PC) was already in shops when it was written off for dead by factions of 
the gaming community. The weeks following release saw fans’ anticipation turn 
to rage when they found out a number of things shown in pre-promotion hadn’t 
made it into the finished game. No ringed planets! You can’t see other players 
even if you end up in the same star system! All its space ships feel the same 
to fly! After weeks of silence punctuated by the occasional bug fix, the No 
Man’s Sky: Foundation Update appeared last month, adding all sorts of new toys 
to play with. It also adds a survival mode, in which living long enough to get 
your spaceship off the ground is an act of luck and determination. As its name 
implies, the Foundation Update lays the groundwork for more complexity, giving 
your job as space explorer more purpose. No Man’s Sky’s universe is already a 
more fun and interesting place to hang out.
 Super Mario Run. Photograph: PR 
Which leaves Super Mario Run (iOS), a title whose paramount importance to 
loss-making Nintendo is underlined by the fact that its production was overseen 
by no less than game-design guru and inventor of Mario himself, Shigeru 
Miyamoto. It’s also the very first time a Mario title has appeared on 
non-Nintendo hardware. Interacting using just one thumb, you jump your way 
across a series of increasingly involved levels, collecting coins and hopping 
on enemies’ heads. Although apparently simple, its 24 stages conceal 
astonishing volumes of secrets and extras to discover, and its competitive Toad 
Rally mode is already establishing itself as a minor classic. The downside? You 
can’t play without an internet or perfect 3G connection so, like a sulky child, 
Mario stubbornly refuses to leave the house with you; a pity given how 
perfectly sized his levels are for use at bus stops and on train journeys.
 