
The 1973 film Westworld, directed and written by Michael Crichton, was a crude 
movie about crude machines staffing a depraved theme park. Crichton’s pleasure 
robots were either sexy toasters or bad toasters. When they malfunctioned, the 
machines simply played out their protocols and killed all but one guest. 
Remember how infected web cams and smart fridges brought down a chunk of the 
Internet last week? That, but with bullets. HBO’s serial television expansion 
of Westworld’s Cowboy-Guignol is staffed with robots beyond the toaster stage, 
androids flirting with consciousness. Considering the violence in play, this 
isn’t necessarily an improvement. IfWestworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> doesn’t hit an unexpected 
fork in the plot soon, it could go down as a mild update of the bloodbath from 
Game of Thrones’s first season.

Westworld recap: episode five – hold on to your hats! It's Dolores the lawless
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/31/westworld-recap-episode-five-hold-on-to-your-hats-its-dolores-the-lawless>
Unlike Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, Westworld can’t 
make up its mind up about torture – never mind evil and good – and the show 
hasn’t presented a villain as easily loathed as King Joffrey or a hero as 
obvious as Daenerys Targaryen. Robots becoming sentient is only interesting if 
those robots are worth saving, and Westworld will only gain our trust if the 
abuse of robots is dramatically and philosophically distinct from the suffering 
of actual humans.


The twin suns of Westworld are in the logo. At base, the image is Da Vinci’s 
Vitruvian Man, rebooted as the musculature of a half-finished android stretched 
on a circular frame. In the show’s intro, these figures sink into vats of 
scientifically advanced milk, which turns them, somehow, into the lifelike 
hosts of the 21stcentury Westworld park. This protean figure is also a few 
fibers shy of the flayed red man on the House Bolton sigil from Game of 
Thrones. These are the forces holding Westworld in place: philosophical queries 
into selfhood and the bloody spectacle that underpins HBO’s most popular 
product.

The only compelling characters, so far, are robot hosts: Evan Rachel Wood as 
Dolores Abernathy, a rancher’s daughter, and Thandie Newton as Maeve Millay, an 
olde tyme madame in a local saloon. Newton manages to seem more alive than the 
living, and Wood pulls off silent shifts in reflex that suggest a machine under 
the skin. To date, Dolores and Maeve have been raped, scalped and abused in 
unknown ways. (Only some violent bits are shown on-screen.) Here is where 
philosophy overlaps with crowd-pleasing. Game of Thrones built an audience on 
the bodies behind the Bolton sigil, characters raped, bisected, disemboweled, 
flayed, despined and castrated in the name of prestige television. But the 
disproportionate violence against women backfired, leading to a protest against 
the rape of Sansa Stark in season five. Westworld flirts with these levels of 
sadism, while giving itself a possible out. As Ford himself explains, as he 
casually slices an offline host with a scalpel: “It doesn’t get cold, doesn’t 
feel ashamed. Doesn’t feel a solitary thing that we haven’t told it to.” Can’t 
get upset about hurting robots – right?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-hbo-villains-ai-robots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13cd8d1e35ddf8a130e293dd8f0c9f1fd29aa30b%2F0_103_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Good%2C%20the%20Meh%20and%20the%20Ugly%3A%20are%20Westworld's%20villains%20firing%20blanks%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-hbo-villains-ai-robots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Good%2C%20the%20Meh%20and%20the%20Ugly%3A%20are%20Westworld%27s%20villains%20firing%20blanks%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-hbo-villains-ai-robots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13cd8d1e35ddf8a130e293dd8f0c9f1fd29aa30b%2F0_103_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Evil Dead: Iwan Rheon as Ramsay Bolton Photograph: 2016 Home Box Office, Inc. 
Al 
The hosts are in a category scientists call “Weak AI,” where machines play out 
binary decisions to sophisticated levels of action without ever achieving the 
consciousness that allows for intentionality. On Westworld, the hosts are 
approaching “Smart AI,” where coding leads to consciousness. The Weak/Strong AI 
distinction is not minor. As Westworld begins, new lines of programming are 
causing host memories to multiply, even though the hosts go through a nightly 
memory erasure. This glitch is creating traumatic feedback loops for Maeve and 
Dolores – except, hang on, there is no trauma without consciousness. As Dr Ford 
– the park’s creator and mastermind – has explicitly told us, his hosts are 
Weak AI. This squares with what is now possible, and what keeps Westworld in 
the realm of speculative fiction rather than fantasy. In place of the giants of 
rug and ice in Game of Thrones, Westworld presents a make-believe charnel for 
the 1% and derives frisson by not being inconceivable.


The ‘truth’ about Westworld: seven fan theories to blow your mind
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/30/westworld-wild-fan-theories-about-sci-fi-tv-series>
Which is where we go off the rails. What happens if your heroes aren’t real 
and your villains aren’t that villainous? The men and women creating or abusing 
the hosts haven’t sunk any lower than bureaucratic creeps and black card frat 
boys. If Westworld asks for suspension of disbelief and allows hosts to be 
sentient, two potholes yawn wide open. First, the hosts will be, categorically, 
victims of ritual abuse, which is as sickening as anything on Game of Thrones. 
Second, if the hosts mount up and override the built-in safeguards that prevent 
them from hurting humans, will we care? Aside from the emo head of programming, 
Bernard Lowe (Jeffrey Wright), the staff are either ruthlessly ambitious or 
ambitiously narcissistic. Our god mode God, Dr Ford, is more detached than 
Bolton-level evil. We would miss approximately none of these people. This means 
that we are at least a season away from developing strong feelings about the 
actual humans, which is a long time in the age of generous binge-watching 
options.

Wishing for violent retribution is an odd square to land on. Game of Thrones 
played fast and loose with sexual violence to bring in the gawkers, just to 
pull it back in season six and let the Stark women have their moment. In 
Westeros, the depraved eventually get their depravity back, at least. Westworld 
can’t make up its mind about what should and shouldn’t happen to bodies, or 
karma. Last night’s episode featured a dogleg into an orgy with no narrative 
significance, and a repairman calling Maeve a “fuck puppet”. If Westworld wants 
us to ride the brighter side of the seam between exploitation and 
entertainment, that signal is not coming through.
 