
I love Great Britain. I’ve always loved it: the mysteries by PD James, the pop 
songs by Oasis and Pulp, the comedy of Monty Python’s Flying Circus. But the 
Great Britain I love seems to have fallen apart. Much like Monty Python’s 
Norwegian Blue, it has ceased to be.


The founding nation of the Commonwealth with its multinational population has 
closed its gates to immigrants and will be the first country to leave the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

But before it does, I have come to the UK – thanks to the George Weidenfeld 
Bursary, an international journalists’ exchange scheme – to watch the British 
stumble their way out of the EU from close up, and to witness this big 
experiment.


My idyllic view of the UK might be shared by many Germans – how else do you 
explain the disappointment with which leading German politicians, as well as 
citizens, reacted to the outcome of the referendum?


The day after the result was announced, the European parliament president, 
Martin Schulz, sounding like a betrayed husband, said that London should put 
the vote to leave into practice as soon as possible.

The national newspaper I work for, Die Tageszeitung <http://www.taz.de/>, 
published spontaneous readers’ reactions such as: “Fuck you very much!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fthe-great-britain-i-love-is-falling-apart-its-an-ex-parrot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa42dd99790d647824c74a01f8bca7612ffa43315%2F0_196_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20great%20Britain%20I%20love%20has%20fallen%20apart%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20an%20ex-parrot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fthe-great-britain-i-love-is-falling-apart-its-an-ex-parrot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20great%20Britain%20I%20love%20has%20fallen%20apart%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20an%20ex-parrot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fthe-great-britain-i-love-is-falling-apart-its-an-ex-parrot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa42dd99790d647824c74a01f8bca7612ffa43315%2F0_196_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Theresa May and Angela Merkel in Berlin in July. Photograph: Xinhua/Barcroft 
Images 
In the aftermath of the vote, some predicted that Great Britain would become 
Little Britain, with Scotland and Northern Ireland declaring independence as 
soon as No 10 triggered article 50 of the EU constitution and formally applied 
to leave. But it’s not that clear cut. Scotland won’t hold a referendum 
immediately and acourt ruling in Belfast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/28/belfast-court-rejects-legal-challenges-brexit>
 rejected a bid to challenge the legality of Brexit.


So it would seem the process of leaving the EU is more complicated than 
imagined and that there is more than one way out. And although the prime 
minister, Theresa May, said Brexit means Brexit, we’re beginning to see that 
Brexit might be a movable feast.

It’s not only in Great Britain that rightwing and Eurosceptic forces have 
become substantially stronger. There is a possibility that they might take 
control in other countries as well: the Front National in France, with Marine 
Le Pen running for president, has always praised the nation state and 
complained about mass immigration, as well as the Dutch Party for Freedom of
Geert Wilders <https://www.theguardian.com/world/geert-wilders>, who said this 
week on Breitbart News: “Britain is the Brexit pioneer and others will follow.”


Polls show that Le Pen will make it into the final round of the presidential 
election in May. Wilders’s party is the second biggest , according to October 
polls (released by the research agency Kantar TNS). The Netherlands will elect 
a new government in March.

Tony Blair's call to mobilise against Brexit sparks mixed response
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/28/tony-blair-remain-voters-to-mobilise-against-brexit>
In Germany, the party Alternative for Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> (AfD), which was founded initially 
as a Eurosceptic party, now turns out to be a nationalist and anti-muslim 
party. It has made it into every federal parliament elected since 2013, with 
well over 20% in two recent eastern German state elections and 14% in Berlin.

Great Britain could set a precedent with Brexit: the beginning of the end of 
the European Union. During my seven weeks here to study the UK, I am hoping it 
will help me to understand what’s going on in other European countries and what 
they might face. What are the concerns of UK citizens, and how do they assess 
the future?

And as a German I’m interested in how the German community in the UK – there 
are around 300,000 German-born residents living and working here – feels about 
its situation. Is there a new “German angst” arising about becoming aliens in 
the UK?

There are Germans living in Britain who told me they were seriously thinking 
about going back to Germany and starting to look for jobs there.


“The atmosphere has changed,” they say. “We are now more often reminded of the 
fact that we are foreigners.” They are worried about the future of their 
children, who maybe won’t feel free to speak their mother tongue in public any 
more.

Alan Partridge: UK united by warm beer and healthy suspicion of human rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/27/alan-partridge-uk-united-by-warm-beer-and-healthy-suspicion-of-human-rights>
Germans in the UK are one of the biggest minorities. Among the teaching staff 
in British universities are 5,250 academics from Germany – the largest group of 
foreigners teaching and researching in the UK. Every tenth student enrolled in 
British universities has a German passport.

German manufacturers contribute substantially to the UK economy, says the 
German-British Chamber of Commerce. Will companies like Siemens, BMW and 
Deutsche Bahn Schenker, who have large subsidiaries all over the UK, pull back 
if the country is no longer a member of the European single market? Or will 
they stay whatever it costs?

What do the British think about all this? Are some of those who voted to leave 
getting cold feet? And who are the British? The result of the referendum showed 
that the country is heavily polarised.


What kind of Brexit do people want? Does it differ for those in Birmingham to 
those in Edinburgh? Or Liverpool and Belfast?

There is a lot for me to look at, and much I want to explore. Feel free to 
send me your thoughts on what might be interesting aspects to look at from an 
outsider’s viewpoint atanna.lehmann@guardian.co.uk 
<mailto:anna.lehmann@guardian.co.uk>. 


The UK I marvelled at with my continental view might never have existed 
outside those pop songs and literature, but there is another one to explore, 
and who knows? I might yet fall in love with it again.
 