
Name: The mannequin challenge.

Age: 11 days.

Appearance: Stationary.

Is this like the ice bucket challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/26/ice-bucket-challenge-als-charity-gene-discovery>
? In a way.

In what way? Do people drop mannequins on their heads? No. People have to hold 
completely still,like mannequins.

Ah, I see. And why do they have to do that? They’re young. Who knows why young 
people do the crazy things they do?

Because they are still optimistic about their lives? Probably. Anyway, this 
seems to have started at Edward H White high school in Jacksonville, Florida. 
On 26 October, a Twitter user called@pvrity___ <https://twitter.com/pvrity___> 
uploaded a video of six kids holding a series of motionless poses on a table 
with the hashtag #manequinchallenge.

That’s not how you spell “mannequin”. Oh, shush. Days later, it had been 
viewed and imitated hundreds of thousands of times, often with the songBlack 
Beatles by hip-hop duo Rae Sremmurd 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b8m9zhNAgKs> playing in the background.

It’s so obvious when you think about it. I guess. Anyway, we seem to be 
approaching the peak of this new meme, which has now been performed by members 
of theMilwaukee Bucks basketball team 
<https://twitter.com/Bucks/status/795128499988152320> and Germany’s Borussia 
Dortmund <https://www.instagram.com/p/BMeox2RgTIv/?taken-by=sk23.10> football 
team, among many others, and byRae Sremmurd 
<https://twitter.com/iHipsterLee/status/794538451844681728> themselves.

Wait a minute. This is just a revival of the tableau vivant 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tableau_vivant>! Um, maybe by accident. It is 
really a revival of theHarlem Shake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/harlem-shake>.

Remind me what that was again? The Harlem Shake was another video meme, in 
whichone person danced <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4hpEnLtqUDg> in a room 
full of others acting normally while the song Harlem Shake built to the drop. 
After the drop, the video cut to the entire room dancing wildly in fancy dress.

What’s a drop? You’re hard work today. The drop is when the volume and 
bassline suddenly and satisfyingly return to a piece of music. Like the climax 
of Beethoven’s Ninth.

Ah. And do they raise money for charity as a result? Nah, they don’t bother 
with that. But at least it’s an improvement on thecinnamon challenge 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KZ6bzrqjo4M> or the fire challenge 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aOd7r01m_2A>.

Which were? To swallow a spoonful of cinnamon in a minute, and to set fire to 
yourself, respectively. They were both quite dangerous.

Setting fire to yourself is dangerous? Who knew?

Do say: “I barely move for hours most evenings, and I spell things correctly. 
When am I going to be internet famous?”

Don’t say: “I am so bored by that song now.”
 