
I have seen The Rocky Horror Picture Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/04/how-we-made-rocky-horror>, the 
1975 cult classic that still plays weekly in movie houses across the world, 
more than I have seen any other movie. I know the lyrics to all the songs, most 
of the dialogue by heart, and have immersed myself in theculture of the live 
performances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/19/rocky-horror-picture-show-fan-rituals-fox-remake>
. When Fox announced it was remaking the film for television (under the clunky 
titleThe Rocky Horror Picture Show: Let’s Do the Time Warp Again 
<http://www.fox.com/the-rocky-horror-picture-show>) I was excited that new fans 
would find this treasure I’ve loved for decades, but also petrified that 
directorKenny Ortega  
<https://twitter.com/KennyOrtegaBlog?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
(High School Musical) might destroy it. He certainly hasn’t done that, but he 
hasn’t done much to amplify or re-evaluate the campy sci-fi-tinged musical 
either.


As always, this is the story of young square lovers Brad (Ryan McCartan) and 
Janet (Victoria Justice) who want to celebrate their recent engagement with 
their mentor turned friend Dr Scott (Ben Vereen). On the way to his house they 
get a flat tire and wander into the castle of Dr Frank-N-Furter (Laverne Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/14/laverne-cox-orange-new-black-transgender>
). Along with her butler Riff Raff (Reeve Carney), maid Magenta (Christina 
Milian), and entertainer Columbia (Annaleigh Ashford), the self-described sweet 
transvestite is having a party to celebrate the birth of Rocky (Staz Nair), a 
musclebound mute she created for her sexual gratification.

The fan rituals that made Rocky Horror Picture Show a cult classic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/19/rocky-horror-picture-show-fan-rituals-fox-remake>
Trapped in a world of fluid sexuality and total excess, Brad and Janet begin 
to question their devotion not only to each other but also to adhering to the 
social norms they previously felt were so important.

It’s that excess integral to the show’s deeper meaning that is the biggest 
problem here. There is something about the entire production that seems a bit 
slight. When Brad and Janet first show up at Frank-N-Furter’s castle, they’re 
ushered not into a grand entryway, but a tiny antechamber with ceilings no 
higher than the average Manhattan apartment and decor that is just as 
cluttered. When they go into the next room to perform the signature dance, the 
Time Warp, it seems like they’re in a high school gymnasium rather than a grand 
ballroom. It’s hard to make a case for the intoxicating effects of decadence 
when it has all the transgressive charge of an extra scoop of vanilla ice cream.

The biggest change that Ortega makes is to turn Frank’s castle into a movie 
theater. The show opens with the song Science Fiction Double Feature, sung not 
by a pair of disembodied lips but by the usher (Ivy Levan) at a movie house, 
which is later the same cinema Brad and Janet stumble into. It seems like he 
wants to conflate the film and the audience watching it (which allows for some 
ofthe show’s famous audience participation to be included in the action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/19/rocky-horror-picture-show-fan-rituals-fox-remake>
). Ortega wants us to feel like we’re all part of a collective audience 
watching this film but also as if we’re an audience watching another audience 
watching a film … or maybe we’re in the audience watching the film being 
performed in the theater. I’m not sure, it’s muddled and not entirely thought 
through.

How we made: The Rocky Horror Picture Show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/04/how-we-made-rocky-horror> 
While this postmodern approach is an intellectually interesting endeavor, 
Ortega never really does anything with it. In fact, because the sets look a bit 
shabby, the costumes a bit slapdash, and the wigs (sweet Judy Garland’s ghost, 
the wigs!) are a fright, it seems like this remake is actually created by one 
of those shadow casts. However, the idea isn’t fully explored and the sets and 
costumes exist in a weird netherworld where they’re not ornate enough to be as 
fabulous as the originals but also not quite bad enough to be campy.

Since it’s being shown on broadcast television, the show also had to be 
sanitized. Gone is a fair amount of the overt sexuality, the allusions to 
cannibalism, a sexual relationship between Riff Raff and his sister Magenta, 
and, saddest of all,Rocky’s glorious gold Speedo 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/564x/a7/b9/00/a7b900f8326315073fab20169680abd0.jpg>
 that’s so skimpy even Tom Daley would think twice about wearing it in public. 
Instead Rocky is wearing what appears to be lamé basketball shorts. For shame!

There are some other, er, rocky transitions to television, particularly 
cutting up scenes to allow commercial breaks. This is especially true in the 
finale when the floor-show set piece is robbed of its momentum. However, I was 
impressed that Ortega managed to shave 10 minutes off the running time (though 
it runs two hours with commercials) without seeming to sacrifice any of the 
material. All the songs and most of the major incidents are present and 
correct. Some tightening has been achieved by slightly upping the tempo of some 
of the numbers, most notably There’s a Light, but this actually improves them.

It’s not as if this recreation is a total disaster. It’s still a great script 
with great music and some of the performances are just as good, if not better 
than, the original. Carney and Milian as Riff Raff and Magenta (their costumes 
in the finale are a vast improvement over the silly originals) and McCartan and 
Justice as Brad and Janet are all good. Adam Lambert plays the small but key 
role of Eddie originated by Meatloaf and manages to deliver what should be 
considered the definitive version ofHot Patootie Bless My Soul 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pMRl55U0eDw>.

I was nervous that Cox wouldn’t have the voice to pull off Frank, but her 
singing is the highlight of the role. As originated by the geniusTim Curry 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000347/reference> (who plays the narrating 
criminologist here) Frank is a delicate blend of zaniness, menace, desire, 
vulnerability and sarcasm. Unfortunately Cox can’t manage to get the alchemy 
right. She never quite gets a handle on whom she wants the character to be, and 
her readings of some iconic lines falter without intention. It’s not that she 
needs to play them just like Curry, but the characterization has no consistency.

Faithful, fast-paced, and largely entertaining, this new Rocky Horror Picture 
Show is neither the calamity fans like myself were fearing nor the triumph that 
we were all hoping for. While some of its interpretations don’t quite hit the 
mark, it is still good enough to get first-time viewers pumped to see the 
original movie. They’ll be doing the Time Warp again, but it will feel like the 
very first time.
 