
To find the true centre of power in today’s politics, ignore the sweaty press 
releases from select committees, look past the upcoming party conferences – 
and, for all our sakes, pay no mind to the seat allocationson the 11am Virgin 
train to Newcastle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/24/the-guardian-view-on-traingate-jeremy-corbyns-search-for-standing>
. Look instead to the mountains of Wyoming, and the fly-fishers’ paradise of
Jackson Hole 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/b/c90f5c44-3eed-46ca-a555-d7b31c99f257>.

Over the next couple of days, the people who set interest rates for the 
world’s major economies will meet here to discuss the global outlook – but it’s 
no mere talking shop.What’s said here matters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/25/jackson-hole-2016-five-big-problems-facing-central-bankers>
: when the head of the US Federal Reserve, Janet Yellen,speaks on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/aug/22/what-central-bankers-really-want-read-janet-yellens-mind>
, the folk who manage our pension funds will take a break from the beach reads 
to check their smartphones for instant takes.

This year the scrutiny will be more widespread and particularly intense. Since 
the 2008 crash, what central bankers say and do has moved from the City pages 
to the front page. That is logical, given that the Bank of England created 
£375bn of new money through quantitative easing in the four years after 2009 and
has just begun buying £70bn of IOUs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-15198789> from the government and big 
business. But the power and prominence of central banks today is also deeply 
worrying. For one, their multibillion-pound interventions have had only limited 
success – and it is doubtful that throwing more billions around will work much 
better. For another, politicians are compelling them to play a central role in 
our politics, even though they are far less accountable to voters. This is 
politics in the garb of technocracy.

Next month is the eighth anniversary of the collapse of Lehman Brothers. Since 
then the US central bank has bought $3.7tn (£2.8tn) of bonds. All the major 
central banks have cut rates;according to the Bank of England’s chief economist 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2015/828.aspx>, 
Andy Haldane, global interest rates are at their lowest in 5,000 years. Despite 
this, the world economy is, in his description, “stuck”. This government boasts 
of the UK’s recovery, but workers have seen a 10% drop in real wages since the 
end of 2007 –matched among developed economies only by Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/27/uk-joins-greece-at-bottom-of-wage-growth-league-tuc-oecd>
. Fuelling the popularity of Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders is the fact that 
the US is suffering one of theslowest and weakest recoveries 
<http://www.epi.org/publication/why-is-recovery-taking-so-long-and-who-is-to-blame/>
 in recent history. In April, the IMF described the state of the global economy 
as “Too Slow for Too Long <http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2016/01/>”.

Having thrown everything they had at the world economy, all central bankers 
have to show is the most mediocre of score sheets. When it comes to monetary 
policy, the old cliche almost fits: you can lead a horse to water, but you 
cannot make it avail itself of super-low interest rates to kickstart a 
sustainable recovery. Two forces appear to be at work. First, monetary policy 
has been used by politicians as a replacement for fiscal policy on spending and 
taxes, when it should really be complementary. Second, major economies – such 
as Britain after Thatcher’s revolution – have become so unequal and lopsided 
that vast wealth is concentrated in the hands of a few who use it for 
speculation rather than productive investment. QE has pushed up the price of 
Mayfair flats and art by Damien Hirst. It has done next to nothing for graphene 
in Manchester.

All this was foreseen by Keynes in his General Theory: “I am now somewhat 
sceptical of the success of a merely monetary policy directed towards 
influencing the rate of interest. I expect to see the State, which is in a 
position to calculate the marginal efficiency of capital-goods on long views 
and on the basis of the general social advantage, taking an ever greater 
responsibility for directly organising investment.”

Eighty years on, it is time those words were heeded by policymakers. In 
Britain, that means using state-owned banks such as RBS and Lloyds to direct 
loans to those industries and parts of the country that elected and accountable 
politicians see as being in need. Couple that with a tax system that rewards 
companies on how much value they add to the British economy, and the UK might 
finally be back in business.
 