
To the uninitiated, the argy-bargy world of roller derby can look too fast, 
too furious: a contact sport conducted at the velocity and volume of a Mad Max 
convoy. But that larger-than-life quality makes it a natural fit for comics, 
and not just because every participant is required to come up with a 
mock-heroic code name like Kate Wreckinsale or Emily Bluntforce-Trauma. The 
first issue of Slam! takes an immersive dive into the sport, as seen through 
the wide eyes of two newbies. Jen Chu is a smart but lonely overachiever whose 
impressively Zumba-boosted thighs catch the eye of a roller derby recruiter. 
Chu then meets Maise Huff, a young woman emerging from the wreckage of a 
long-term relationship, as they both attend a trial. Bonding over a shared love 
of cats and rare Lost In Translation posters, Jen and Maise survive and even 
thrive during their crash-course in pop squats and crotch-blocks. But are they 
good enough to be drafted into an elite squad like the Pushy Riots? Created by 
writer Pamela Ribon (who recently worked on Disney’s Moana) and artist Veronica 
Fish, Slam! is as brash as that exclamation mark suggests, with heart-on-sleeve 
narration and a doodle/scrapbook design that evokes roller derby’s DIY 
warpaint-and-masking-tape aesthetic. Every page is also crammed with the sort 
of detail that suggests Ribon and Fish know this world inside out, making it a 
hot neon safari into a fascinating subculture.
 A.D.: After Death Book 1 - ‘Triumph of mood and mystery’ Photograph: Image 
Comics 
Batman: Death of the Family #17 by Scott Snyder and Greg Capullo – review
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/14/comics-fiction> 
If a scientific cure for death was ever to be invented, you’d presume 
everywhere would get a lot more crowded. That does not seem to be the case in 
the sparsely populated environs of A.D.: After Death, a collaboration by two US 
comics talents currently at the top of their game. Scott Snyder is the writer 
who has had the keys to the Batmobile for the past five years, overseeing the 
main Batman comic series and shaping the fate of DC’s most important character. 
Writer-artist Jeff Lemire is similarly in demand, having recently been tasked 
with defining the biggest villain in the Marvel universe as writer of a new 
series focusing on Thanos, everyone’s favourite bumpy-chinned cosmic conqueror.

A.D.: After Death represents a distinct change of pace for both creators, 
toggling from comic panels to stylistically laid-out prose pieces, the format 
transitions smoothed by Lemire’s atmospheric watercolour art. If some comics 
revel in detailed world-building, A.D.: After Death is more interested in 
mapping emotional landscapes. By the end of issue one, readers have more of an 
insight into the psychology of Jonah Cooke – a cowherd who has apparently spent 
much of the last 800 years thinking about how to disrupt this nominal utopia – 
than the world in which he toils, a place of wide-open prairies and craggy 
mountains where citizens apparently commit to decades-long menial jobs in 
seeming isolation. Despite being rather miserly with narrative breadcrumbs in 
the first issue (of three), A.D.: After Death still feels like a quiet triumph 
of mood and mystery, and the delicate art gives this story of immortals a 
rather unexpected fragility.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-month-in-comics-slam-ad-after-death-hook-jaw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8bad21db7468981c49799cc86bf4bf23733dfcf%2F0_38_693_416%2F693.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20month%20in%20comics%3A%20a%20hot%20neon%20safari%20into%20the%20world%20of%20roller%20derby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-month-in-comics-slam-ad-after-death-hook-jaw%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20month%20in%20comics%3A%20a%20hot%20neon%20safari%20into%20the%20world%20of%20roller%20derby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fthe-month-in-comics-slam-ad-after-death-hook-jaw%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb8bad21db7468981c49799cc86bf4bf23733dfcf%2F0_38_693_416%2F693.jpg>
 Hook Jaw: ‘If Tarantino rebooted Blue Planet’ Photograph: Titan Comics 
Too much action: how kids' comic Action drowned in its own ultraviolence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/21/action-70s-kids-comics-violence-magazine-publishing>
If 1976 was the year punk broke in the UK, perhaps some of that anarchic 
spirit also bled into comics. It was certainly the year Action, a boisterous 
weekly anthology, was targeted by the popular press for corrupting young minds. 
Exhibit A for the prosecution was Hook Jaw, a gory cash-in based on a simple 
idea: what if Jaws were actually the hero of the story? A great white with a 
distinctive harpoon mouth piercing, Hook Jaw chomped through every human he 
encountered. The Action weekly was cancelled in 1977 but the legend of Hook Jaw 
proved remarkably durable, the comics equivalent of a video nasty. Now the 
sharksploitation classic has been resurrected by UK publisher Titan for a new 
series with art by Conor Boyle. The grisly first issue – to be published 14 
December – pays tribute to both the OTT gore and nihilistic wit of the original 
as a scientific survey mission in Somali waters is raided by pirates. Writer Si 
Spurrier clearly has even stranger fins on his mind, offering insights into the 
psyche of an apex predator, surrounding Hook Jaw with a lethal female harem and 
sprinkling some hard science amid the sardonic one-liners. If Tarantino 
rebooted Blue Planet, it might come out something like this.
 