
According to one long-standing philosophical tradition, life totally sucks. 
The Thracians of ancient Europe were said to weep with sadness when babies were 
born, because of all the suffering they had ahead of them. (A modern book in 
the same vein has the splendidly grumpy titleBetter Never To Have Been: The 
Harm Of Coming Into Existence 
<https://www.amazon.com/Better-Never-Have-Been-Existence/dp/0199549265>.) Most 
people know that old-school Buddhists believe in reincarnation, but it’s often 
forgotten that they see it as a bad thing: the point of all that meditation is 
to “step off the wheel of karma”, so that one day you’ll be spared the hassle 
of being reborn. And the Christian mystics known as the Gnostics, arguably the 
biggest downers of all time, held that “the world came about through a mistake” 
<http://gnosis.org/naghamm/gop.html>. Existence itself, they believed, was just 
a crappy, degraded version of nonexistence, which was perfect – and what made 
God so divine was precisely his pure nonexistence. Try that one on your local
Richard Dawkins <https://www.theguardian.com/science/dawkins> acolyte and wait 
for smoke to seep from their ears.

These misanthropic reflections might seem irrelevant to daily life, but as the 
philosopherCostica Bradatan <http://www.webpages.ttu.edu/cbradata/> argued in 
an excellent New York Times essay 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/18/opinion/why-do-anything.html?_r=0> (with the 
curmudgeonly title Why Do Anything?) you may be more Gnostic than you realise. 
Consider the puzzle of procrastination: if you’re anything like me, part of the 
reason you procrastinate is perfectionism. You’ve some hazy outline of the end 
result in your mind, and it’s flawless. “The procrastinator is smitten by the 
perfect picture of that which is yet to be born,” Bradatan writes. “He falls 
under the spell of all that purity and splendour.” Then it dawns that you’re 
condemned to ruin that perfection: the actual real-world novel, PhD 
dissertation, house renovation or wedding can only be a depressingly messy 
approximation of that fantasy.

Need a break? Don’t fall into the too-tired-to-rest trap
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/16/too-tired-to-rest-oliver-burkeman>
“It pains us unbearably to realise that, for all our good intentions, we are 
agents of degradation,” Bradatan says. Which sounds a bit overwrought, until 
you think back to the last time you truly struggled with procrastination: it 
reallycan feel like an existential struggle, out of all proportion with the 
matter at hand. I can’t wait to try out my new excuse for missing deadlines, 
replacing the usual dog-ate-my-homework cliches: “I’m sorry, I was smitten by 
the purity of nonexistence!”

There’s nothing new in the observation that perfectionism leads to 
procrastination, but too often we perfectionists are secretly proud of our 
affliction: we’re convinced that this time, finally, if we pulled out all the 
stops, we might get things exactly right. The bracing Gnostic response is: 
forget it. Creation is imperfect by definition; to bring something into being 
is unavoidably to screw it up. It’s not a question of “embracing failure”, but 
of seeing there’s no optionbut to embrace failure. I’m pretty sure the Gnostics 
didn’t intend it as motivational advice, but that’s the effect it has on me: 
it’s far easier to get things done, and to take interesting risks, if you’ve 
already failed. There’s no point worrying things might go wrong when they 
already have.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 