
Ever since the public meeting held on the 27th of June, to consider of the 
proceedings to be adopted inManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>, for celebrating the Coronation of 
his Majesty George the Fourth, the Committee have been indefatigable in their 
exertions to complete the arrangements necessary for giving to the day a high 
degree of interest and importance.

On Monday the oxen and sheep designed for distribution amongst the populace, 
having been decorated with ribbons, were paraded through the principal streets 
of the town. They appeared to be very fine cattle; but this exhibition of them 
seemed to be regarded with considerable distaste. It was not possible to avoid 
thinking how soon the poor animals were to be slaughtered; and the seeing of 
them decorated for death like the victims of old for the altar, presented to 
many minds the carnivorous propensities of our race, under circumstances of 
more than ordinary repulsiveness.


On Wednesday morning, preparations for the approaching gala day commenced in 
every quarter. On the outskirts of the town, in fact, whatever opportunity 
presented itself, from the Crescent in Salford to Ardwick Green, stands and 
stages were erecting for the accommodation of spectators. We were quite 
surprised to see the number of these, and looked with considerable dread at the 
slight construction of many of them. It appeared, however, that they had 
excited the attention of our municipal officers, and that proper persons were 
appointed to take care that they were effectually secured.


At the New Market, in Shudehill, at Camp Field, and at the Salford Cross, men 
were busily engaged in putting up the grates where the oxen and sheep were to 
be roasted, whilst others were busily employed in spitting the animals, and 
disposing the ale for distribution. In various quarters of the town, the 
innkeepers and publicans were exhibiting sheep, which they purposed roasting on 
the following day, whether for their own benefit, or that of their customers, 
it is not for us to decide. Some of these exhibitions were worth notice, for 
the ludicrous incongruity of the devices by which they were accompanied. One 
publican hung out, at a three story window, a black-faced sheep, with its horns 
gilded – a tobacco pipe, and a silver tankard in its mouth.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fking-george-iv-coronation-manchester-1821%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7514027e8eabfdeeedfd0c389a5e6e56ec03a565%2F0_0_1022_611%2F1022.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20coronation%20of%20King%20George%20IV%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2021%20July%201821&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fking-george-iv-coronation-manchester-1821%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20coronation%20of%20King%20George%20IV%20%E2%80%93%20archive%2C%2021%20July%201821&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fthe-northerner%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Fking-george-iv-coronation-manchester-1821%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7514027e8eabfdeeedfd0c389a5e6e56ec03a565%2F0_0_1022_611%2F1022.jpg>
Schools procession for George IV coronation 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/06/01/Schools_procession_George_IV_coronation_21_July_1821.jpeg>
, Manchester Guardian 21 July 1821. Photograph: The Guardian 
It was at midnight, for the clock had but just struck twelve, when the 
celebration of the day commenced by the firing of cannon; and the cheers of 
some nocturnal revellers were echoed far amid the silence of the hour. The 
bells presently struck up a merry peal, and, with the cannon, which were 
continually discharged, served as larums to rouse our immense population to 
prepare for the enjoyments of the day. At a very few minutes past six, the 
children of the different charity schools, attended by their teachers and 
friends of the institution, and those of the Established church by a number of 
the clergy, began to assemble in St. Ann’s Square. Precisely at half past seven 
they set out for Ardwick.

The children entered the Green and were arranged within the rails, on the 
margin of the canal, in the order which they had held in the procession. The 
girls of the different schools, or interests, preceded the boys throughout. 
When they had all taken their stations, the children gave several cheers, the 
effect produced by which was novel and interesting. They then sang in very good 
style and with great effect, the song of “God save the King;” after which, they 
returned to their respective School Rooms, where refreshments were given to 
them.


We have seldom witnessed a scene which gave us so much pleasure, as that which 
we have now been faintly attempting to describe. The immense number of the more 
humble class of our fellow subjects in this vicinity, who are receiving from 
the care and charity of their wealthy and benevolent neighbours, a valuable and 
well grounded education – the important moral advantages which this education 
involves – the cleanly appearance of the dress, both of boys and girls, but 
particularly of the latter – and their quiet and orderly demeanour – all these 
together gave birth to a train of reflections, and hopes of a most gratifying 
and animating character. He, indeed, who could look upon such a scene without 
emotion, must have been more or less than man.


The Guardian – founded two months previously and running to only four pages – 
coveredGeorge IV’s coronation in London 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/06/01/George_IV_coronation_day,_Manchester,_21_July_1821.jpeg>
 and Manchester’s grand procession, and bemoaned the‘disgraceful scenes’ that 
followed 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/06/01/George_IV_coronation_Manchester_celebrations_21_July_1821.jpeg>
 the distribution of meat and beer.

 