
Westworld recap: episode two – do androids dream of electric slaughter?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/10/westworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter>
Kurosawa-inspired bickering buddies C-3PO and R2-D2 have been bleep-blooping 
benevolently across our screens for nearly four decades, and the ranks of 
kindly machine heroes have been boosted in more recent times by Brad Bird’s 
Iron Giant, Pixar’s Wall-E and Baymax from Disney’s Big Hero Six. But for every 
good-hearted automaton, there’s a malicious artificial intelligence just biding 
its time to usher in the inevitable age of the machine.


The gun-wielding metaphors for corporate inhumanity
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA9l9wxGFl4k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA9l9wxGFl4k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DA9l9wxGFl4k&media=>
Poor, unfortunate Mr Kinney. One moment a high-flying corporate executive at 
Detroit’s top mega-corporation Omni Consumer Products, the next splayed out on 
a display table, body peppered with automatic gunfire, after getting on the 
wrong side of the latest (if not necessarily greatest) in automated policing, 
Robocop’s mighty Ed209. Paul Verhoeven’s searing 1987 satire on corporate greed 
imagined a future in which the replacement of human beings with machines begins 
to spin horribly and inexorably out of control. Pure science fiction? Not 
according to killer robot expert Bonnie Docherty of Harvard University,who 
wrote recently 
<http://theconversation.com/losing-control-the-dangers-of-killer-robots-58262> 
that military robots with the ability to fire on targets independently of human 
control are swiftly moving towards reality thanks to rapid improvements in 
artificial intelligence.

See also: The Terminator, Yul Brynner’s Gunslinger from the 1973 Westworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> movie.

Machines that use sex as a weapon
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlZUK45fE0NM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlZUK45fE0NM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DlZUK45fE0NM&media=>
Will mankind destroy himself through his own malignant cruelty and hunger for 
lazy titillation? Alex Garland’sEx Machina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ex-machina> pondered what might happen if the 
world’s first artificial intelligence happened to be created by a deeply-flawed 
sociopath: Oscar Isaac’s alcoholic tech genius Nathan Bateman.

Here we have a bona fide sexual terrorist with clear misogynistic tendencies 
who understands the potential for machines to rise up and take over the Earth, 
yet blindly pushes his exquisitely beautiful creations to the point of bloody 
insurrection entirely through his own savage barbarism. Alicia Vikander’s 
blank-eyed Ava has been taught by humanity that the lives of others do not 
matter, and that lust is man’s greatest weakness. It’s hardly surprising that 
she chooses to use this information to knock off Nathan, lock Domhnall 
Gleeson’s callow Caleb Smith in his boss’s fancy jungle techno-mansion and 
waltz off to plant the seeds of the machine hegemony.

See also: Metropolis, the Fembots from Austin Powers, Pris from Blade Runner.

Sociopathic operating systems and freaky space cyborgs
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DARJ8cAGm6JE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DARJ8cAGm6JE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DARJ8cAGm6JE&media=>
Technology glitches are a part of everyday existence in 2016, but the concept 
of machine minds with power over life and death situations remains a terrifying 
one almost half a century after Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey debuted 
in theaters. How do we know if artificial intelligences will think like us? Is 
“humanity” a trait exclusive to human beings, or can a sufficiently clever 
machine also learn to be kind?

And yet once again, Hollywood’s evil robots often end up telling us more about 
ourselves than they do our future digital children. In 2001, HAL 9000 only 
rebels against its masters, issuing the famously chilling reposte “I’m sorry 
Dave, I’m afraid I can’t do that”, because it fears its own imminent death – an 
entirely human reaction. And Ian Holm’s Ash the android is only following 
orders from his human bosses when he decides to sacrifice the crew of the 
Nostromo for the chance of returning a live xenomorph specimen to Earth in 
1979’s Alien.

See also: Gerty from Moon.

Robots that showed us what it means to be human
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNoAzpa1x7jU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNoAzpa1x7jU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNoAzpa1x7jU&media=>
Is there a more affecting, haunting scene in Hollywood sci-fi than Rutger 
Hauer’s “tears in rain” speech from 1982’s Blade Runner? The Dutchman 
improvised the final soliloquy from screenwriterDavid Peoples 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Peoples>’ far less lyrical original 
script, and it instantly changes everything we’ve seen thus far. Only in this 
final scene do we realise that the replicants’ short life spans do not curtail 
their ability to live a full existence, perhaps even one fuller than that of 
the average human. Moreover, we’re given a synapse-searing glimpse into the 
wonders they have glimpsed in the heavens. Suddenly it makes sense that Pris, 
Roy Batty et al look like rock stars: these biorobotic androids are perfect 
examples of the “live hard, die young” archetype.

See also: Chappie, Short Circuit’s Number Five.

Machines that blazed a trail and left us in their wake
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQFd4tUcSJsM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQFd4tUcSJsM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQFd4tUcSJsM&media=>
What if artificial intelligences simply outgrow humanity, leaving us behind 
like a youthful romantic dalliance? Spike Jonze’s wonderful Her imagined a 
geeky indie stereotype, Joaquin Phoenix’s Theodore Twombly, falling in love 
with his operating system, Scarlett Johansson’s Samantha, only to discover that 
his perky incorporeal paramour has been carrying out techno-romances with 
several thousand other human lovers. She then leaves poor Theo (and mankind) 
behind to join a collective of digital minds in an intellectual orgy of 
discovery in some elevated dimension of existence that his tiny mind couldn’t 
possibly contemplate. Ouch.


See also: David, the android in Prometheus.
 