
More than 800 people have now complained to the press regulator over a Sun 
column in which the paper’s former editor Kelvin MacKenzie criticised Channel 4 
News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/18/sun-article-against-muslim-channel-4-news-host-triggers-300-complaints>
 for using a Muslim presenter to report news of last week’smass killings in Nice
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/lorry-rams-bastille-day-crowd-in-nice-killing-at-least-70>
.

Kelvin MacKenzie said award-winning journalist Fatima Manji should not have 
been allowed to front theChannel 4 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> 
report because she is a Muslim and wears a hijab.

Mackenzie said in in his column on Monday: “I could hardly believe my eyes” 
when Manji appeared onscreen during theChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> News programme on Friday.


“Was it appropriate for her to be on camera when there had been yet another 
shocking slaughter by a Muslim?” he wrote.


The Independent Press Standards Organisation (Ipso) said by Tuesday morning it 
had 800 complaints about the article. The complaints were related to the 
accuracy of the article, discrimination and harassment.


Channel 4 News, which is expected to make a complaint, said MacKenzie’s 
comments were “offensive” and “completely unacceptable”.
Hayley Barlow (@Hayley_Barlow) 
Statement from Channel 4 News following Kelvin MacKenzie’s comments in today's 
Sun on our correspondent@fatimamanji <https://twitter.com/fatimamanji> 
pic.twitter.com/oXKjE8MPkx <https://t.co/oXKjE8MPkx>
 <https://twitter.com/Hayley_Barlow/status/755081185320136704> July 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Hayley_Barlow/status/755081185320136704> 
The National Union of Journalists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/nationalunionofjournalists> also criticised 
Mackenzie and the Sun.


“To suggest that a journalist is incapable of reporting on a terrorist outrage 
because of the colour of her skin, her religion or the clothes that she wears 
says all you need to know about the contemptible views of Kelvin MacKenzie,” 
said the NUJ’s general secretary Michelle Stanistreet.

In the column, Mackenzie also falsely claimed that “all the major terrorist 
outrages in the world [are] currently being carried out by Muslims”.


Kelvin MacKenzie, we’re sick of your toxic propaganda. Fatima Manji is 
admirable | Remona Aly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/20/fatima-manji-kelvin-mackenzie-toxic-propaganda-sun-anti-muslim>
By the early evening on Monday, the Sun published a second article, which was 
not in the print edition that appeared that morning, in which one of its 
feature writers – also a Muslim – wrote that the “fact that Fatima can present 
a news bulletin and also wears a headscarf shows how great Britain is”.

Anila Baig wrote that Manji was a “professional ... not someone dragged in off 
the street just because she’s wearing a scarf on her head”.

“Presenting a live news broadcast is not easy and not something an ‘enslaved 
Muslim woman’ terrorised by men would be able to do.”

The Sun tweeted a link to the story on Monday but later deleted it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/18/sun-tweet-channel-4-news-nice-truck-attack-kelvin-mackenzie-fatima-manji>
. A spokesperson for the paper declined to comment.
 