
The Premier League is back after the international break and, following a 
breathless start to the season, we assess the top seven sides in the league in 
search for clues as to which side will lift the trophy come May. Manchester 
City are the early pacesetters but their defeat at Tottenham Hotspur have given 
the rest of the clubs hope. It is also worth remembering that seven games into 
last season, Louis van Gaal’sManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> were top, West Ham 
United third and eventual winners Leicester City eighth …

What have they done right so far?

Manchester City 

They won their opening six games and so lead the race by a point from 
Tottenham Hotspur. The manager may be new but his passing game has been quick 
to bed in and bewitch opponents. The sight of Pep Guardiola’s full-backs moving 
into central midfield is a further poser. The 45-year-old has done all of the 
above while alsobombing out Joe Hart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/joe-hart-torino-excited-test-serie-a-transfer-window-manchester-city>
,discarding Yaya Touré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/02/manchester-city-yaya-toure-left-out-champions-league-squad-pep-guardiola>
,blocking Wi-Fi at the training base 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/04/pep-guardiola-blocks-wifi-manchester-city>
 andbanning pizza from players’ diets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/26/gael-clichy-manchester-city-pep-guardiola-pizza-wenger>
. It is as close to a revolution as has been witnessed in the division since 
Arsène Wenger strode into Arsenal in 1996.Jamie Jackson

Leicester’s loss of N’Golo Kanté is indisputably Chelsea’s gain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/leicester-loss-30m-ngolo-kante-chelsea-premier-league-champions-france>
Tottenham 

The 2-0 home win over Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/tottenham-hotspur-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 before the international break was a celebration of the qualities that 
Mauricio Pochettino has instilled and an illustration of what can happen when 
everything clicks. Tottenham are benefiting from continuity under the 
Argentinian and the clarity of his high-octane physical approach. The manager 
worked his players harder than ever in pre-season (mindful of the additional 
stress of a Champions League campaign) and it is clear that their conditioning 
is a major plus. Even when they have not been at their best thus far, they have 
dug out a result and their defensive miserliness bodes well. Thesummer signing 
Victor Wanyama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/23/tottenham-complete-signing-victor-wanyama-southampton>
 has been excellent and Son Heung-min’s resurgence has been a boon.David Hytner 

Arsenal 

Once they got over the ill-prepared opening day shocker against Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/14/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
, what Arsenal have found is greater efficiency. That happens to be one of 
Wenger’s favourite words. It was the source of his greatest frustration last 
season that the ratio between decent chances created and actual goals to change 
games was not efficient enough. The deployment of Alexis Sánchez at 
centre-forward has encouraged a far pacier and mobile attacking tempo. Arsenal 
have scored three goals or more in half of their games in all competitions. The 
blueprint of how they can be at their best –as shown when they blew Chelsea away
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/24/arsenal-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
 – is there.Amy Lawrence
Possession 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-14T10:12:15/embed.html>
 Possession 
Liverpool 

Jürgen Klopp improved Liverpool as an attacking force by the turn of the year 
but their threat has improved again this season with 18 goals making them the 
joint highest scorers in the Premier League. Liverpool have looked extremely 
impressive on the front foot while the players’ willingness to buy into the 
manager’s methods is reflected in them leading the way in terms of chances 
created, shots, passes, sprints and distance covered. They have also 
successfully navigated what appeared a tricky start to the season on the road 
because of redevelopment work at Anfield – collecting seven points from visits 
to Arsenal,Tottenham Hotspur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> and Chelsea. Andy 
Hunter

Everton

Ronald Koeman has started his Everton reign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/14/ronald-koeman-everton-manager-confirmed-southampton>
 by focusing on the glaring weakness that his predecessor, Roberto Martínez, 
could not correct and contributed significantly to his downfall – defending as 
a team. Everton conceded an average of 1.45 goals per game last season and 
leaked goals from set pieces but have so far shipped only five in seven league 
games under the Dutch coach. Only Tottenham Hotspur have conceded fewer. The 
team are more solid, more disciplined and, thanks to Idrissa Gueye’s impact, 
better protected than in recent seasons. When Yannick Bolasie influences a 
game, they also have a better supply line to Romelu Lukaku.Andy Hunter

Manchester United 

This is an interesting question as the quest for a 21st championship has so 
far been uneven and unconvincing. The best thing – probably – is that United 
remain “only” five points from the top, despite two defeats from seven matches. 
Another plus is that three of José Mourinho’s summer acquisitions –Zlatan 
Ibrahimovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/manchester-united-confirm-signing-of-zlatan-ibrahimovic-one-year-contract>
,Paul Pogba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-united-sign-paul-pogba-93-million-juventus>
 andEric Bailly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/08/eric-bailly-signs-manchester-united-jose-mourinho-defender>
 – are all integrated into the side, and prospects will be further boosted if 
the fourth – the Bundesliga player of the year,Henrikh Mkhitaryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/manchester-united-henrikh-mkhitaryan-signs>
 – can join them. The way in which Marcus Rashford has forced his way into the 
first XI is also good news for title ambitions.Jamie Jackson

Chelsea 

They have taken points from all the teams they have confronted outside the top 
bracket and have quickly established that Antonio Conte, for all his undoubted 
qualities as a motivator and tactician, is unlikely to be able to work wonders 
with a squad that remains rather imbalanced. Ensuring that the owner and 
hierarchy have acknowledged as much is half the battle towards providing some 
long-term thinking, with heavy investment in the market anticipated over the 
next two transfer windows. They have integrated N’Golo Kanté,their key summer 
arrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/16/chelsea-confirm-signing-ngolo-kante-leicester-city>
, into the side and are clearly not going to endure the same traumatic campaign 
as last time round. An improvement on mid-table is guaranteed.Dominic Fifield
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fpremier-league-title-contenders-manchester-city-tottenham-arsenal-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36c530239b7ffc6ebf6a85aec52b9941fe9317a0%2F21_26_2411_1446%2F2411.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Premier%20League%20returns%3A%20how%20are%20the%20title%20contenders%20shaping%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fpremier-league-title-contenders-manchester-city-tottenham-arsenal-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Premier%20League%20returns%3A%20how%20are%20the%20title%20contenders%20shaping%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fpremier-league-title-contenders-manchester-city-tottenham-arsenal-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36c530239b7ffc6ebf6a85aec52b9941fe9317a0%2F21_26_2411_1446%2F2411.jpg>
 Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Paul Pogba have slotted into the Manchester United side 
after signing in the summer. Photograph: Oldham/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
What’s their main weakness?

Manchester City

Their sole league defeat came last time out when Tottenham outpressed them. 
This is intriguing as being the ascendant chase-and-hasslers is a founding 
plank of Guardiola’s ethos. Celtic also scored a moral victory by, if not 
beating, then at least matching City at their own pressing game in the3-3 draw 
in the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/celtic-manchester-city-champions-league-match-report>
 group meeting. Here, then, is a ploy that will be studied by rivals to see if 
City can be disrupted continually this way.JJ

Tottenham

Their implosion towards the end of last season reminded everybody that this 
remains a young squad and there can be legitimate questions about their ability 
to handle the pressure when it is at its most extreme. On the other hand, they 
will surely be better for the experience and the lessons learned. The Champions 
League represents a new frontier for many of the players, too. Will they be 
able to cope with its demands?DH

Arsenal 

Four consecutive clean sheets leading up to the international break suggests 
that defensivelyArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> have 
found an encouraging solid platform, based upon the growing rapport between the 
excellent Laurent Koscielny and the determined newcomer Shkodran Mustafi, with 
Héctor Bellerín and Nacho Monreal so reliable on either side. But in the spirit 
of old habits dying hard it is not difficult to imagine fragility at the back 
haunting them in a pressurised game. An injury in a now settled back four could 
bring complications.AL

Jürgen Klopp, José Mourinho and the cultivation of liderazgo | Jonathan Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/13/jurgen-klopp-jose-mourinho-manchester-united-liverpool-premier-league>
Liverpool

Just as scoring goals has been a welcome feature of Klopp’s first year in 
charge at Liverpool, failing to prevent them has also been a persistent issue. 
Liverpool have not kept a clean sheet in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> this season and, with 16 
of the 50 league goals conceded under Klopp coming from free-kicks or corners, 
their problems with set pieces are glaring. A struggling Swansea City side 
found space between Liverpool’s central defenders frequently last time out but 
lacked the quality to take full advantage.AH

Everton 

By contrast to the work on Everton’s defence, the new manager is yet to have 
the same impact on the team’s frontline. Three games without a win – including
elimination from the EFL Cup by Norwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/20/everton-norwich-city-efl-cup-third-round-match-report>
 – have served as an uncomfortable reminder that a change to an intense 
pressing style will not occur overnight. Everton’s attacking options – Lukaku, 
Bolasie and Ross Barkley – impress sporadically and demonstrate why Koeman was 
so keen to strengthen that department in the summer. He will try again in 
January.AH 

Manchester United 

Their two losses – to City and Watford – derived from the kind of sluggish, 
disjointed play that is reminiscent of the football under Louis van Gaal. There 
are fault-lines in defence – especially along the flanks where full-backs Luke 
Shaw and Antonio Valencia have been sloppy – and United still lack a midfielder 
with bite and aggression. As City showed in the first half oftheir derby win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/manchester-united-manchester-city-premier-league-match-report>
, this means the quick tempo that can punch holes in Mourinho’s men can be 
established with ease.JJ

Chelsea 

Their defence remains ponderous, error-prone and, against the better teams, 
obliging. Conte had targeted recruits from Serie A over the summer but, in the 
frantic trolley dash on deadline day, ended up sanctioningDavid Luiz’s return 
from Paris Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/david-luiz-shock-return-chelsea-34m-transfer-psg>
. He has very different qualities to those initially required. Cesc Fàbregas, 
too, has fallen out of favour and will not enjoy life on the fringes.DF 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fpremier-league-title-contenders-manchester-city-tottenham-arsenal-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcf0a6b1a296dcb3aa7935af8b66fe9909c2c22e%2F52_452_4682_2810%2F4682.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Premier%20League%20returns%3A%20how%20are%20the%20title%20contenders%20shaping%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fpremier-league-title-contenders-manchester-city-tottenham-arsenal-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Premier%20League%20returns%3A%20how%20are%20the%20title%20contenders%20shaping%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fpremier-league-title-contenders-manchester-city-tottenham-arsenal-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcf0a6b1a296dcb3aa7935af8b66fe9909c2c22e%2F52_452_4682_2810%2F4682.jpg>
 Chelsea’s Cesc Fàbregas has fallen out of favour this season. Photograph: Matt 
West/BPI/Rex/Shutterstock 
What’s the strength of the substitutes’ bench?

Pochettino has greater depth than last season
David Hytner 
Manchester City

Guardiola’s bench features the club captain in Vincent Kompany (fitness 
permitting) and Pablo Zabaleta, Leroy Sané, Kelechi Iheanacho, Gaël Clichy, 
Fabian Delph and Jesús Navas are all equally able as deputies. But given John 
Stones’ import to the Guardiola project, if he goes down could Kompany or Tosin 
Adarabioyo really slot into the ball-playing Gerard Piqué-esque role the 
Barnsley-born defender provides?JJ 

Tottenham

Pochettino has greater depth than last season. Few people thought that he 
needed Moussa Sissoko but he went and signed him anyway –for a club 
record-equalling £30m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/31/tottenham-moussa-sissoko-everton-newcastle>
. Sissoko and Wanyama have bulked up his options while the manager has faith in 
young players such as Cameron Carter-Vickers, Josh Onomah and Harry Winks. 
Another new signing, Georges-Kévin Nkoudou, looks like a potential gamechanger. 
Pochettino was without five key players for the Champions League tie at CSKA 
Moscow. His team made a statement withthe 1-0 win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/27/tottenham-hotspur-cska-moscow-champions-league-match-report>
.DH
Shot conversion 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-14T10:13:07/embed.html>
Arsenal 

It spoke volumes that in their last match before the break 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/02/burnley-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 Arsenal tried to break down Burnley – goalless going into stoppage time – and 
did not have a single striker on their bench. There was only one attacking 
player of any description in the substitutes’ group (Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain). 
That strength in depth is a question only seven games in is revealing.AL

Liverpool 

In terms of goalkeeper and attacking options, better than it has been for 
several seasons. Loris Karius knows he must make a confident start, with Simon 
Mignolet pushing to reclaim his place, while Daniel Sturridge, Divock Origi and 
the fit-again Danny Ings – who has scored nine goals in five appearances for 
the under-23s this season – are all having to bide their time for inclusion. 
Defence could be stretched by injuries, however.AH

Everton 

The bench is arguably a fair reflection of where Everton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> stand in the Premier League 
overall – better than most, with promising youngsters such as Tom Davies and 
Mason Holgate given an opportunity, but weak in comparison to the leading 
lights.AH 

Manchester United

Wayne Rooney (currently) heads a reasonable number of replacements who also 
include Anthony Martial, Mkhitaryan, Michael Carrick, Marouane Fellaini, Morgan 
Schneiderlin, Matteo Darmian, Phil Jones, Marcos Rojo, Tim Fosu-Mensah, Ashley 
Young and Memphis Depay. It is not perfect: if Pogba is unavailable who can 
impressively deputise for the midfielder? The same question might also apply to 
Valencia/Chris Smalling in defence.JJ

Chelsea 

There is a certain depth if one considers Fàbregas and Pedro Rodríguez, both 
World Cup winners, tend to frequent the bench, while Michy Batshuayi, feeling 
his way into English football, is clearly a talent. Kurt Zouma will also return 
from injury soon.DF
Liverpool have run 80km more than Manchester United 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-14T10:12:26/embed.html>
 Liverpool have run 80km more than Manchester United 
Which player can they not afford to lose to injury?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fpremier-league-title-contenders-manchester-city-tottenham-arsenal-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4fadf836215840c76b958b95bd8ea82beea3060%2F13_76_3784_2270%2F3784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Premier%20League%20returns%3A%20how%20are%20the%20title%20contenders%20shaping%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fpremier-league-title-contenders-manchester-city-tottenham-arsenal-liverpool%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Premier%20League%20returns%3A%20how%20are%20the%20title%20contenders%20shaping%20up%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fpremier-league-title-contenders-manchester-city-tottenham-arsenal-liverpool%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4fadf836215840c76b958b95bd8ea82beea3060%2F13_76_3784_2270%2F3784.jpg>
 Manchester City’s John Stones clears from just near his goalline against 
Manchester United. Photograph: Tom Jenkins for the Guardian 
Manchester City 

Stones. Guardiola bought him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-city-complete-signing-of-john-stones-from-everton>
 to be the pivotal man in his pinball pass-and-move play. A way to illustrate 
how important Stones’ ability to find space and time to ignite attacks is if he 
were to be injured Guardiola’s first thought would be which midfielder could 
replace him – Fernandinho (probably), David Silva (if he could tackle, 
definitely) – just as the coach deployed career schemer Javier Mascherano in 
the centre-back position at Barcelona.JJ

Tottenham

Mousa Dembélé has felt indispensable but the team has coped without him this 
season, when he has been unavailable – ditto, Harry Kane – and so, perhaps, it 
is Toby Alderweireld who can be described as the rock. Since the centre-half 
joined in the summer of last year, Tottenham have had the best defensive record 
in the division. Comfortable on the ball or defending one versus one, his 
reading of the game is superb.

Arsenal 

Koscielny. Tempting to say Sánchez just because his movement makes Arsenal 
stretch teams in a way they don’t so easily when geared around Olivier Giroud. 
But Koscielny is a defender in outstanding form who leads by example. A vital 
presence.AL

Liverpool 

Sadio Mané. Unlike previous years and other confident starts, Liverpool’s 
strength this season has been their collectiveness. Klopp’s team is not reliant 
on an individual but Mané’s pace, plus his intelligence with and without the 
ball, has improved their attacking play. He was also absent from Liverpool’s 
only defeat so far at Burnley.

Everton 

Lukaku. An obvious answer but Koeman’s only alternatives up front, having 
given the £13.5m Oumar Niasse the cold shoulder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/11/everton-oumar-niasse-ronald-koeman-roberto-martinez>
, are the deadline-day loan signing Enner Valencia and Arouna Koné.AH 

Manchester United 

Last season it was Martial, this year the vote goes to Rashford as his blend 
of searing pace, directness and goalscoring ability is unique within Mourinho’s 
ranks.JJ

Chelsea Diego Costa. The forward is back to his bullying best from the 
title-winning campaign of 2014-15 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/03/premier-league-chelsea-crystal-palace-match-report>
, enraging markers and leading the line selflessly and aggressively. He has 
already scored six times in the Premier League. Even if Batshuayi has his own 
qualities, this team revolves around Costa.DF 

Which month is likely to be key in their title pursuit?

For Arsenal, the traditional November nightmare looms
Amy Lawrence 
Manchester City

December. City have to face not one but two title rivals – in Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> and Arsenal – and may have to 
beat Celtic in their final Champions League group game to progress. This makes 
it an even more crucial month for them.JJ

Tottenham

November looks fruity. On top of potentially sapping Champions League ties 
against Bayer Leverkusen and Monaco, there are derbies with Arsenal (away), 
West Ham United (home) and Chelsea (away).DH

Arsenal 

The traditional nightmare November looms. After five straight wins in the 
Premier League, Swansea, Middlesbrough and Sunderland are up next. But what a 
change of pace come November. Tottenham, Manchester United and Paris-Saint 
Germain in successive matches will tell us a lot about whether a challenge can 
be sustained.AL

Liverpool

April. March brings more glamorous games – Arsenal and Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> – but six league 
encounters in April could demonstrate the benefits of a season without European 
football for Liverpool. A month that may result in potential title rivals being 
distracted by Champions League quarter-finals begins with a Merseyside derby 
and includes games against West Bromwich Albion, Crystal Palace and Watford, 
all of whom took points from Klopp’s team last season.AH

Everton 

December, although it is stretching it to say Everton are pursuing the title. 
A hectic schedule that includes home games against Manchester United, Arsenal 
andLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool>, plus a trip to 
the champions, Leicester City, on Boxing Day could shape Koeman’s first season 
in charge.AH 

Manchester United 

December. Six league outings, including one against Spurs, plus a trip to 
Odessa in the Europa League, make this the slog-fest of all months for United. 
Last year Van Gaal emerged from a torrid December that featured zero wins for 
the first time in the club’s history as a dead man limping.JJ

Chelsea

It is tempting to say the seven-week period from Saturday, when Chelsea 
confront the champions Leicester, Manchester United, high-flying Everton, 
Tottenham Hotspur and visit Southampton and Manchester City. But, in reality, 
it will be January when the club will attempt to make a splash in the market.DF
Chances created 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-14T10:38:20/embed.html>
 Chances created 
Finally, can they win the title?

Manchester City 

Certainly: but we will know more by 1 January. (A cop-out of an answer? Could 
be …)JJ 

Tottenham

The league’s only unbeaten team have to be considered, at the very least, as 
authentic contenders. Strong defences win championships.DH

Ronald Koeman laments Republic of Ireland duty ‘killing’ James McCarthy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/13/ronald-koeman-republic-of-ireland-james-mccarthy-everton-martin-oneill>
Arsenal 

Possibly but don’t go betting any houses yet. AL 

Liverpool 

That question has preoccupied Liverpool for 27 years and has always produced 
the same answer but, given their start, their manager’s title-winning pedigree 
and their fixture schedule compared to rivals in the Champions League, their 
hopes have foundation.AH

Everton 

Koeman said it himself: “If I tell you we will fight for the title I think 
most people will tell you that man is crazy.” That’s a no then.AH 

Manchester United 

Having tipped United at the start of the season the response here has to be, 
yes, but it seems a less than 50/50 shot, currently. JJ

Chelsea 

Highly unlikely. That title challenge may come next season after Conte has 
made this squad more his own.DF
 