
The British economy’s post-Brexit vote bounce is losing momentum as the weak 
pound and higher inflation herald a squeeze in living standards, according to a 
Guardian analysis.



Although official growth figures to be published on Thursday are likely to 
show the economy will avoid recession in the second half of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/23/uk-avoid-recession-2016-despite-growth-slump-ons-figures-show>
, the latest Guardian analysis of the post-referendum economy shows a more 
mixed picture.

The most notable shift over the last month was a further sharp fall in the 
value of the pound. Against the dollar, the pound is lingering around the $1.22 
mark – about 18% lower than on 23 June, the day of the referendum.

At one point a “flash crash” in the currency markets pushed the pound  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/confusion-as-pound-falls-10-in-insane-asian-trading-and-no-one-knows-why>
briefly to about $1.15. It quickly recovered, but the underlying pressure on 
the currency has remained followingTheresa May’s declaration that she will 
trigger article 50 before the end of March 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
.

The Guardian has chosen eight economic indicators, as well as the value of the 
pound and the performance of the FTSE, to track the economy on a monthly basis.

The dashboard for October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/ng-interactive/2016/oct/24/how-has-the-brexit-vote-affected-the-uk-economy-october-verdict>
 shows that four of the eight categories have performed worse than expected, 
two were as expected, and two were better. Inflation jumped more sharply than 
expected to 1%, the highest level in almost two years, Britain’s trade deficit 
with the rest of the world widened, as growth in imports rose faster than 
exports, and retail sales were flat as shoppers were put off by higher clothing 
prices and exceptionally warm September.

Four months on from the Brexit vote, there are warning signs that consumers 
should prepare for a renewed squeeze in living standards, as the weak pound 
drives inflation higher and cautious businesses rein in wage growth.


How has the Brexit vote affected the UK economy? October verdict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/ng-interactive/2016/oct/24/how-has-the-brexit-vote-affected-the-uk-economy-october-verdict>
The drop in the pound is starting to be felt by companies. This month Ryanair 
warned full-year profits would be lower than previously expected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/ryanair-warns-fall-in-pound-will-hit-profits>
 andTesco stocks of Marmite and other household brands were temporarily depleted
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>
 when the supermarket chain became embroiled in a row over price with the 
supplier, Unilever.


While the Office for National Statistics has cautioned that the 
post-referendum picture is still emerging, the Guardian’s dashboard shows 
pressure is building in some parts of the economy.


Writing in the Guardian, a former member of the Bank of England’s Monetary 
Policy Committee (MPC),David Blanchflower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidblanchflower>, says Britain is 
heading for a “Brexit tsunami”. Blanchflower, professor of economics at 
Dartmouth College in the US, says Britain is already being hit by higher 
prices, slowing wage growth and - despite official data showing a stable 
unemployment rate of 4.9% -signs of rising joblessness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/the-lull-before-the-tsunami-economists-on-the-brexit-watch-data>
 in underlying ONS figures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fbrexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F961e277e96383cde2268545b0d69555e56b6a507%2F0_194_4296_2579%2F4296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brexit%20economy%3A%20falling%20pound%20and%20rising%20inflation%20fuel%20fears%20of%20slowdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fbrexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brexit%20economy%3A%20falling%20pound%20and%20rising%20inflation%20fuel%20fears%20of%20slowdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fbrexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F961e277e96383cde2268545b0d69555e56b6a507%2F0_194_4296_2579%2F4296.jpg>
 Former MPC member David Blanchflower. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
Andrew Goodwin, lead UK economist at the forecast group Oxford Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>, also points to looming upward 
pressure on prices. He says: “Both the retail sales and inflation releases 
suggested that price pressures are on the turn. We expect consumer price 
inflation to accelerate sharply from this point onwards, averaging 2.7% in 
2017. This will severely squeeze household spending power and cause spending 
growth to slow sharply.”

Andrew Sentance, another former MPC member, told the Guardian that a 1% 
inflation rate “is the tip of the inflationary iceberg created by the recent 
fall in the pound”.

Meanwhile the public finances worsened. The government had to borrow £2bn more 
than expected in September to balance the books, partly because of weaker tax 
receipts. As the outlook for the public coffers deteriorates even before the 
full impact of any Brexit effects takes hold, the UK chancellor, Philip 
Hammond, faces a major challenge next month when he delivershis maiden autumn 
statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/08/philip-hammond-announces-autumn-budget-statement-for-23-november>
. However, although the scope for giveaways appears to be diminishing, the 
chancellor is expected to ease the pace of austerity to support the economy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fbrexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddd7b65703c3e1f47c9b166976500e1292921d2c%2F0_321_4810_2886%2F4810.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brexit%20economy%3A%20falling%20pound%20and%20rising%20inflation%20fuel%20fears%20of%20slowdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fbrexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brexit%20economy%3A%20falling%20pound%20and%20rising%20inflation%20fuel%20fears%20of%20slowdown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fbrexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fddd7b65703c3e1f47c9b166976500e1292921d2c%2F0_321_4810_2886%2F4810.jpg>
 The sterling-euro exchange rate in Paris on 20 October. Photograph: Lionel 
Bonaventure/AFP/Getty Images 
Unemployment held steady at an 11-year low of 4.9%, while the pace of wage 
growth slowed slightly to 2.3% from 2.4%, as expected. However, fears are 
building that firms will put hiring decisions on hold and limit wage rises as 
they seek to rein in costs in an uncertain business environment.


On a more positive note, the dashboard indicates the Bank of England’s 
decision to cut interest rates to a new all-time low of 0.25% in August 
continues to support confidence in the housing market.

'The lull before the tsunami': economists on the Brexit watch data
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/the-lull-before-the-tsunami-economists-on-the-brexit-watch-data>
The first official estimate of economic growth in the period between between 
July and September will be published on Thursday and is expected to show growth 
more than halved to 0.3% from 0.7% in the second quarter. That would be better 
than many feared in the immediate aftermath of the vote, and better than the 
0.1% growth predicted by the Bank of England in August.

Sentance, a senior economic adviser at the consultancy PwC, writes in the 
Guardian: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/the-lull-before-the-tsunami-economists-on-the-brexit-watch-data>
 “Our economy will be taking a hit over the next year or two in the form of 
lower growth, but an outright recession should still be avoided.”

The International Monetary Fund is predicting the UK will be the fastest 
growing of the G7 leading industrial countries this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/britain-fastest-growing-g7-economy-imf-international-monetary-fund-brexit-vote>
, with growth of 1.8%. The Washington-based Fund accepted that its prediction 
of apost-Brexit vote financial crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/18/imf-says-brexit-would-trigger-uk-recession-eu-referendum>
 has proved overly pessimistic.

But UK growth is expected to slow considerably in 2017, as the consequences of 
the Brexit vote place increasing pressure on the UK economy.

The dashboard analyses economic performance since April, comparing key 
indicators with the predictions of those indicators, based on the consensus 
forecasts in polls of economists by Reuters.


• To find out more about supporting the Guardian’s journalism, please click 
here 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_brexitdashboardstoryfooter_footer>
 