
Britain’s chief financial watchdog this week named and shamed the banks paying 
their savers a pittance. In some cases customers are being paid 0% interest.

The institutions include big names such as HSBC, First Direct and the Post 
Office, all of which have easy access accounts that in some circumstances pay 
no interest at all. Others, such as Ulster Bank, have accounts which pay as 
little as 0.01%, which means that if you had £1,000 saved you would receive the 
princely sum of 10p gross interest after a year. After 26 years you’d have 
amassed enough to buy a Starbucks grande cappuccino … assuming it still costs 
£2.60 in the year 2042.

Meanwhile, some might wonder how Halifax can be allowed to have accounts with 
names such as Extra Income Saver, Saver Reward, Liquid Gold and Bonus Gold when 
all of these currently only pay 0.1% interest.

We all know savings rates are at rock-bottom levels, but hidden out of sight 
are some real shockers. The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) is looking to 
encourage savers to switch to products offering better rates, so is “shining a 
light on interest rates that are not prominently displayed but that may be 
earned by some customers”.

The regulator is also clearly trying to shame providers into upping some of 
these pitiful rates. It has asked the 39 biggest banks and building societies 
to disclose the lowest possible rate customers could earn across all of their 
easy access savings accounts and easy access cash Isas. It says it is 
publishing this information partly to “encourage firms to offer better-value 
products to existing customers”.

Here are some of its findings, while later we look at where you can go to get 
even a half-decent interest rate.

• The “0%” accounts This week’s report highlights three providers that pay 
some savers no interest: HSBC and its First Direct subsidiary, and the Post 
Office. However, these three all appeared to feel somewhat aggrieved at being 
included in the FCA’s list of shame.

HSBC’s Online Saver account, which is closed to new customers, is included in 
the list because of the way it works. The account pays either 0.25% or 0.5% 
interest, depending on when it was opened – but it arguably penalises people 
who need to take money out, with no interest paid in any month that a 
withdrawal is made.

The bank says: “This savings account was designed to encourage a savings habit 
and discourage withdrawals, so a condition was included where interest would 
not be paid in a month where money is withdrawn. Very few customers receive no 
interest in any one month, and the vast majority of customers receive interest 
every month.”

Similarly, First Direct’s e-Savings account, which is also no longer on sale, 
has an interest rate of 0.4%, but no interest is paid in any month when one or 
more withdrawals have been made. “Each month over two-thirds of our customers 
with this account receive the interest rate of 0.4%,” a spokesman says.

Meanwhile, the Post Office was included on the list because it offers several 
accounts, including Instant Saver Issue 8, where the minimum balance is £500, 
and you don’t get any interest if the amount in the account falls below this. A 
Post Office spokesman says: “All our savings accounts are offered with an 
interest rate of at least 0.1%. The FCA report gives the impression that we 
have had a 0.0% rate, but it is important to emphasise that this is not the 
case.”

He adds: “While some of our customers are on a rate of 0.1%, they will have 
benefited from a guaranteed bonus for at least 12 months.”

• The 0.01% accounts These include the aforementioned Easy Access savings 
account from Ulster Bank (part of the Royal Bank of Scotland group), which pays 
this rate whether you have £1 in the account or £1m.

• The 0.05% accounts These include HSBC’s Flexible Saver account. “Watch your 
money grow,” says the bank’s website, adding that you can open as many as you 
like – “perhaps one for a wedding and another for a holiday”. But as the 
Flexible Saver’s standard interest rate is just 0.05% you’ll be waiting a long 
time for that growth: a £1,000 lump sum would, after 10 years, have grown by 
£5.01p, assuming that interest rate stays the same and no additions or 
withdrawals are made. HSBC Advance customers, meanwhile, get a “preferential 
rate” of 0.1%.

First Direct’s Savings <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> Account 
also pays 0.05%, no matter how much you have in the account, while Northern 
Ireland-based First Trust Bank’s Select Account pays that rate on balances up 
to £99,999.

• The 0.1% accounts Several providers have accounts (either open or closed) 
that pay just 0.1% interest. They include Santander’s Instant Saver and several 
Halifax accounts.

Where to park your cash

It’s pretty thin pickings when it comes to easy-access accounts. Virgin Money’s
Saving to Buy 
<http://uk.virginmoney.com/savings/find/saving_to_buy_issue_2/overview/> online 
account pays 1.2%, and you can add or withdraw whenever you like. The minimum 
balance is £1, the maximum £30,000. Virgin also offers the Defined Access 
Saver, which pays 1.26% if there are three or fewer withdrawals per calendar 
year.

Sainsbury’s Bank has an online account called eSaver Special 
<https://www.sainsburysbank.co.uk/savings/sav_esaverspecial_skip> which pays 
0.5% on balances from £1-£999; 0.9% on £1,000-£14,999; 1.05% on 
£15,000-£29,999; and 1.2% on £30,000-£500,000. This offers unlimited 
withdrawals with no notice period.

Fixed-rate savings bonds tend to offer the best rates, particularly if you can 
tie your money up. The top payers tend to be smaller and less well-known. 
Vanquis Bank and Ikano Bank have five-year fixed-rate bonds paying 2.31% and 
2.25% respectively.

Some of the best rates are offered by current accounts. Nationwide’s FlexDirect
 
<http://www.nationwide.co.uk/products/current-accounts/flexdirect/features-and-benefits?intcmp=nord>
, which has no monthly fee, will pay you a fixed 5% interest on balances up to 
£2,500 for 12 months, provided you pay in £1,000 each month. After 12 months 
the rate reverts to 1% on balances up to £2,500.TSB’s Classic Plus 
<http://www.tsb.co.uk/plusness/> account, again with no monthly fee, pays 5% on 
balances up to £2,000, provided you pay in a minimum of £500 a month and 
register for internet banking, paperless statements and paperless 
correspondence.

M&S Bank has just launched a promotion whereby those who fully switch to one 
of its current accounts will get a £100 M&S giftcard, plus an extra £10 per 
month loaded on to the card for the first year, provided they pay £1,000 a 
month into their account – meaning the total “free cash” to spend at M&S is 
£220. A spokeswoman says those switching to M&S will also have exclusive access 
to a monthly savings account with a rate of 6% fixed for 12 months. Customers 
can deposit between £25 and £250 a month into this linked account, and someone 
paying in £250 for 12 months would earn gross interest of around £96.
 