
A “huge kick in the teeth” … “leaves a bad taste in the mouth” … “Venus 
flytrap” tactics. It’s fair to say Santander copped a lot of flak this week 
after announcing it ispushing up the fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/14/santander-increase-123-account-fees>
 on its hugely popular 123 current account by 150%.

Around 3.6 million people have signed up for the account since it was launched 
in March 2012, and it has been the number one deal for those switching from one 
bank to another. So it is perhaps inevitable that the decision to increase the 
annual cost of the account from £24 to £60 has prompted a backlash.

In a quirk of timing, Santander’s move coincided with the two-year anniversary 
of an initiative to make moving your bank account easier. The free-to-use “
current account switch service 
<http://www.paymentsuk.org.uk/project-delivery/past-projects/current-account-switch-service>
” went live on 16 September 2013, and will now receive a fresh boost courtesy 
of a new multimillion-pound ad campaign. Santander’s fee rise, which comes into 
effect in January, probably isn’t the best advert for switching, though it may 
well prompt some people to do exactly that.

Comparison website uSwitch.com <http://www.uswitch.com/> claims many people 
who signed up for the 123 account will feel “cheated”, saying they should check 
to see how much they are earning in interest and cashback and “vote with their 
feet” if they are not receiving good value. For some, a £5 a month fee will 
cancel out a lot of the gains, but for others – particularly those with large 
account balances – the account will still represent a good deal.

Here we look at the options for those thinking about switching, including 
Santander account holders that are considering bailing out.

Best accounts for in-credit interest

TSB’s Classic Plus and Nationwide’s FlexDirect pay 5% on balances up to £2,000 
and £2,500 respectively, though the Nationwide rate is an introductory offer 
fixed for 12 months, after which it drops to 1%. In both cases there is no 
monthly fee but you must pay in at least £500 and £1,000 respectively. With the 
TSB account you can pocket up to £97.80 interest a year.

Lloyds Bank has an account called Club Lloyds that pays up to 4%, but you only 
get that rate if your balance is between £4,000 and £5,000. If your balance is 
£2,000 to £3,999 you earn 2%, while on £1 to £1,999 you only get 1%.

Tesco Bank pays a flat 3% on balances up to £3,000. This week the supermarket 
giant made its current account more attractive by scrapping the £5 monthly fee 
that applied if customers paid in less than £750 a month.

Arguably, the stand-out option for the better-off is still Santander’s 123 
account. That’s because it pays 3% on your total balance, provided more than 
£3,000 is held in the account, all the way up to £20,000. Over a year the 123 
account will pay interest of £592 gross on £20,000 – but, of course, very few 
people will have 20 grand sitting idle in their account. Santander says the 
average balance across all 123 current accounts is an impressive £12,500, which 
would give you £370 gross interest a year, or £296 after basic-rate tax is 
deducted – though you also have to subtract £24 from that (or £60 from January) 
to take account of the fees. By contrast, someone who usually has £1,500 or 
£2,500 in their 123 account is getting just £15 or £50 gross interest 
respectively. To qualify for a Santander 123 account you have to fund it with a 
minimum of £500 each month and have two active direct debits.

Halifax’s Reward account will give you a £5 payment each month that you pay 
£750 or more into your account, pay out two different direct debits and stay in 
credit. This payment is net of income tax – the gross amount is £6.25. This 
makes it a good deal for people who don’t have much money to leave in their 
account but have a monthly salary in excess of £750 and don’t go overdrawn.

Best accounts for cashback

TSB is giving its Classic Plus account holders 5% cashback on the first £100 
of contactless purchases made each month using their debit card (ie, up to £60 
a year), but the offer will expire on 31 December 2016.

Santander 123 customers, meanwhile, get 1% cashback on water and council tax 
bills and the first £1,000 they pay towards their Santander mortgage each 
month; 2% cashback on energy bills; and 3% on mobile and home phone bills, 
broadband and paid-for TV packages.

That could amount to a pretty tidy sum if you have a Santander mortgage, as 
that alone will give you up to £120 cashback a year. But if you haven’t, the 
cashback on its own may not be enough to make up for the higher fees. Someone 
spending £100 a month on council tax, £30 a month for water, £100 a month for 
gas and electricity and £60 a month on their phone/mobile/broadband/TV, but who 
has their mortgage with another bank, would receive around £59 cashback a year.

Best accounts for switching freebies

First Direct will give people £125 if they switch to its current account, 
though if you apply through MoneySuperMarket you will receive £150. 
MoneySuperMarket also has a deal where you can get £100 when you open a
Nationwide FlexDirect account. Halifax will now pay you £125 (up from £100) if 
you move to its Reward account, provided you start your switch by 18 October, 
whileYorkshire Bank and Clydesdale Bank are both offering £150 if you switch 
over to them.M&S Bank will give new recruits a £100 M&S giftcard.

In most, if not all, cases you need to complete a full transfer using the 
current account switch service, which involves the closure of your old account.

Best accounts for customer service 

Santander’s achilles heel used to be its customer service, but things look a 
lot better on that front. This week, Which?published its annual survey 
<http://www.which.co.uk/news/2015/09/uks-worst-firm-for-customer-service-revealed-by-which-poll-414947/#?intcmp=HP.hero.large.2.wcunews.customerservicebrandlist.sept16>
 of the UK’s 100 biggest brands and how they fare on customer service. 
Santander has leapt from a lowly 70th place last year to joint 14th. Meanwhile,
Barclays and Yorkshire Bank both rose from joint 60th to joint 19th. But First 
Direct is still the customer service king: it came in second place, behind 
cosmetics firm Lush.

Best accounts if you go overdrawn

Some banks give you a small buffer overdraft for free, while others are more 
generous – for example,First Direct’s 1st Account gives customers an automatic 
£500 overdraft, the first £250 of which is interest-free. Similarly,M&S Bank’s 
no-fee current account comes with an automatic £500 overdraft, the first £100 
of which is interest-free. In both cases the interest rate above these amounts 
is 15.9% EAR.

Tesco Bank is offering scores quite well because of its simplicity. There are 
no daily or monthly overdraft usage fees, though the interest rate is higher at 
18.9% EAR.

Be aware that Santander’s 123 account imposes an authorised overdraft usage 
fee of £1 a day, whileTSB’s Classic Plus has a £6 monthly overdraft usage fee, 
though it offers an optional £25 interest and fee-free overdraft.
 