
Here’s something unthinkable. Imagine if Rick and the gang don’t rise up and 
waste Negan and the Saviours. According to TV drama’s narrative algorithms, 
pride comes before a fall, evil gets its comeuppance, vengeance is virtue’s 
reward and, before we’re done with season seven, Negan should get his head 
spliced by Michonne’s katana shortly after Rick insists that he, 
crypto-sexually, eats Lucille, his barbed wire-wrapped baseball bat.


How refreshing it would be if The Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead> broke the rules 
rather than its most captivating villain’s cranium. My money says the show 
won’t dare.

Rather, us viewers want – don’t we? – Rick and his crew to get their violent 
mojo back. We want a Hollywood ending that redeems our pain at witnessing this 
parade of diminishment – Rick’s hangdog look, broken Eugene’s unwillingness to 
leave Alexandria, the unacceptably, un-American stink of defeat. We want there 
to be sense to this dramatic tension. We want blood.

Why? Because the drama of enfeeblement is unbearable. At the start Rick and 
Michonne woke in a sunny bed, the apparent image of conjugal bliss. Near the 
end, they were making up a bed without a mattress. In the intervening period, 
Negan and the Saviours had paid a visit. Humming Wagner’s Ride of the Valkyries 
(that aural index of the American nut job since Robert Duvall used it as the 
soundtrack to the napalming of a Vietnamese village in Apocalypse Now), Negan 
arrived to get his share of Alexandria’s bounty – guns, a deer for dinner, even 
the mattresses. “Hot diggity dog!” he exclaimed, leering at Rick and twitching 
his leather-clad torso like a mashup of James Dean and Elvis. “An embarrassment 
of riches, as they say. Yes, I do believe you are going to have plenty to offer 
up.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F194d2e1242b868eb5a6c16c8b3c6b8516b5b054f%2F0_0_2140_1284%2F2140.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F194d2e1242b868eb5a6c16c8b3c6b8516b5b054f%2F0_0_2140_1284%2F2140.jpg>
 We want blood … will Rick and his crew get payback down the line? Photograph: 
Gene Page/AMC 
Along with his gang of goons, Negan had brought the apparently hobbled Daryl 
along to rub Rick deeper in his humiliation. We hope that, like the seemingly 
mad Edgar in King Lear, Daryl is just shamming – and that he will, like the 
Shakespearean dissembler, cast off his mask and take out the evil trash. But at 
the moment, it seems unlikely.

“Mercy for the lost. Vengeance for the plunderers.” So said the sign at 
Alexandria, the once proud boast of a civilisation amid post-apocalyptic 
barbarism. This episode undermined the latter commandment, as Rick handed over 
all the guns he could find for Negan. But there was a problem. Olivia’s 
inventory disclosed that two handguns were missing. And so, Negan ruled that 
Olivia must die unless the weapons were found, then revealed his compunctions: 
“I don’t enjoy killing women. Men? I can waste them all the livelong day.” But 
he would do it.

And so Rick searched for the last guns in Alexandria to save Olivia. He found 
them under Spencer’s floorboards and handed them over. He even convinced 
Michonne to turn in her rifle. Michonne complied, then handed over a deer 
carcass to sweeten the deal. “Man,” drooled Negan into Rick’s ear, “I love a 
gal that buys you dinner and doesn’t ask you to put out.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3966533763b94dd2271aaf3d9357b322ea30c207%2F0_113_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3966533763b94dd2271aaf3d9357b322ea30c207%2F0_113_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
 ‘You see this? This is the kind of thing that just tickles my balls’ … Negan, 
one of TV’s most cruel and compelling villains. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
How could Rick bend the knee so low? “We play by their rules and we get some 
kind of a life,” he told Michonne afterwards. “What kind of life?” she asked. 
Rick explained that, in the aftermath of the zombie apocalypse, his wife Lori 
thought he was dead and so had an affair with his police partner Shane. 
Together they conceived a daughter, Judith. Then Rick showed up and, after a 
little – ahem! – awkwardness, Shane stepped aside and Lori and Rick renewed 
their nuptial arrangements. Then Judith was born and passed off as his 
daughter, even though he knew she wasn’t. Now both Lori and Shane are dead and 
Rick has to raise Judith as his own. He told Michonne: “I will die before her 
and I hope that’s a long time so I can raise her and protect her and teach her 
to survive. That’s how we live now.” Pragmatic survival instead of martial 
heroism. As Rick told a meeting of Alexandrians, he wasn’t their leader now, 
Negan was.

As for Michonne, she told Rick she would try to live the way he suggested, a 
life of mere survival under Negan’s eviscerating rule.

But, we suspect, not so very hard. At the beginning of the episode, she was 
using a walker as target practice, trying to shoot him with that rifle. But her 
aim proved hopeless and she was compelled to dispatch him with her sword. Now, 
she has no rifle – perhaps, then, the moral is that the Alexandrians don’t need 
guns to overcome the Saviours (and the shot of the zombie’s sliced head in the 
grass was reprised at the end as if to clinch the point).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadb5e754135a20938cb31faf7f42a611fbbec24a%2F0_0_2126_1417%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadb5e754135a20938cb31faf7f42a611fbbec24a%2F0_0_2126_1417%2F2126.jpg>
 There are hopeful signs for the future … Rosita, who found a gun then asked 
Eugene to make a bullet. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
There are other hopeful signs for those who yearn for payback down the line. 
The look Rosita gave Dwight when he – pettily, cruelly – emptied her water 
bottle. The gun she found near Daryl’s motorbike in the woods. The bullet she 
asked Eugene to make. Carl’s coltish reaction to one of Negan’s goons taking 
more than his share. The way Rick chewed out Spencer: “Say anything like that 
to me again and I’ll break your jaw and knock your teeth out.” We haven’t heard 
Rick so angry for a while, and it was good to hear. To be fair, Spencer had 
said the unthinkable, namely that Glenn and Abraham – slain by Negan in the 
season premiere – were lucky. Lucky, presumably, to be dead and so not witness 
Alexandria’s abjection.

Most of all, there was the freshly dug but empty grave in Alexandria. It was 
dug to trick Negan into believing that Maggie, presumably along with her unborn 
child, had died. Nice dissembling on the part of Seth Gilliam’s superbly slimy 
Father Gabriel. The Alexandrians aren’t playing quite by Negan’s rules, and may 
yet outwit him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff104e481f74af90249fd195ecdd938cbd51bd20b%2F0_143_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Walking%20Dead%3A%20season%20seven%2C%20episode%20four%20%E2%80%93%20Service&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fthe-walking-dead-season-seven-episode-four-service%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff104e481f74af90249fd195ecdd938cbd51bd20b%2F0_143_2124_1274%2F2124.jpg>
 Superbly slimy … Father Gabriel. Photograph: Gene Page/AMC 
At Maggie’s grave, Negan delivered his lubricous lament: “Damn tragedy. That’s 
what this is. This must really suck for you guys … Damn I was going to ask her 
to come back with me. Oh I know what you’re thinking – how could I have a shot? 
Guy that just bashed her husband’s head in? You’d be surprised.” His aim, you 
see, was to capitalise sexually on a widow’s grief and add her to his 
polygamous collection. One of TV’s most compelling villains is thoughtful like 
that.

But where is Maggie? And if she’s really alive, is she still pregnant? The 
biggest mystery of all in this episode, though, was what made Michonne cry. 
Smoke was rising beyond the trees and she went to investigate. If this blog had 
a bigger budget, I’d have enlisted air crash investigators or CSI Georgia to 
explain what the rubble she found was. Why was there no sound of a crash or 
detonation? Why did the sight upset Michonne? Most likely that rubble is not a 
downed plane, nor the smouldering wreck of Alexandria’s hopes, but Walking Dead 
McGuffin, designed to keep us watching next week.

Unpleasantness, Negan style

“You see this? This is the kind of thing that just tickles my balls.” Negan 
salivating over the booty he planned to haul from Alexandria.


“Widows, especially ones who look like that, they are special. I love ‘em. 
Right after their husbands go, they are just empty inside. But usually not for 
long! Hur, hur, hur.” Negan, explaining what he planned to do with Maggie and 
why he likes to put his moves on the recently bereaved.

“Excuse the shit out of my goddamned French, but did you just try to threaten 
me?” Negan to Carl.

“In case you didn’t know what was going on, I just slipped my dick down your 
throat and you thanked me for it.” Negan’s parting shot to Rick, explaining the 
significance of his visit to Alexandria.
 