
The road on which Theresa May currently finds herself is well travelled. Most 
successful politicians rely on a kind of necessary deception, projecting 
authenticity and credibility while conducting business in the only way that 
political business can be conducted: by negotiation. On balance, but never 
enthusiastically, May thought Britain would prosper more as part of an 
imperfect EU than out of it.In an informal session 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/25/exclusive-leaked-recording-shows-what-theresa-may-really-thinks-about-brexit>
 with the global bankers Goldman Sachs, a month before the referendum, she 
stressed the financial value of membership and warned of the consequences of 
leaving the single market. Crucially, she admitted she thought companies that 
were in the UK to take advantage of the European market would relocate, 
something that would have a major impact on jobs as well as financial services.

Leaked recording shows Theresa May is 'ignoring her own warnings' on Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/leaked-recording-shows-theresa-may-is-ignoring-her-own-warnings-on-brexit>
In a speech to a more sceptical audience in April, a month earlier, she had 
been more nuanced. But at neither event did she suggest, as she did in her
conference speech earlier this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-speech-tory-conference-panel-verdict>
, that curtailing free movement must take priority over membership of the 
single market, nor advocate, as her home secretary did, that employerscount 
their foreign workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
, or that thefate of EU citizens in Britain  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/13/zero-chance-eu-citizens-keep-same-rights-post-brexit-expert>
might be a matter for negotiation. Quite the opposite in fact: in her 
on-the-record speech in April, she actually said that while free movement rules 
make it harder to control European immigration“they do not mean we cannot 
control the border” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/home-secretarys-speech-on-the-uk-eu-and-our-place-in-the-world>
.

Since 23 June, Mrs May has said scarcely a kind word about the EU. This is not 
necessarily dishonourable: her rhetoric has been aimed at persuading the 52% 
who voted leave that she feels what they feel. She is marching to their tune. A 
consequence of the binary choice of a referendum as opposed to the choice 
between programmes offered by a general election is that it appears to deliver 
a single message that politicians are obliged to honour. We are all learning 
how to manage the consequences.

That is more or less the official line from No 10 this morning, in the wake of 
the Guardian’s story about her private speech: “We are working to make a 
success of this new opportunity.”

But this is no way to rebuild the confidence of voters in the good intentions 
of politicians. May is overinterpreting the result, using it to construct 
headlines and justify policies that are not borne out by the subsequent 
analysis of the no vote – which shows that it was neither exclusively among 
poorer people, nor mainly motivated by anti-migration sentiment – and then 
using it to promote division. This is not leading, it is following.

May is establishing herself as one of the most evasive of modern prime 
ministers. This is a lethal electoral strategy

Healing the divisions that the referendum exposed does not mean acting as if 
all the right was on one side. That is democracy as the tyranny of the 
majority. Often, it is clear that May does really understand that. On the steps 
of Downing Street as the new prime minister in July, she began by acknowledging 
the kind of institutional injustice that makes people feel powerless, and she 
talked persuasively of an economy that works for all. That is the tone of voice 
that the post-referendum country needs.

May is already establishing herself as one of the most evasive of modern prime 
ministers. The psychologist Peter Bulldescribes her as a sphinx-like equivocator
 
<http://theconversation.com/theresa-may-has-a-very-special-technique-for-avoiding-questions-67424>
, author of a new technique of never giving a specific answer to a direct 
question. This is a lethal electoral strategy.

The Theresa May who talked to the smart kids at Goldman Sachs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/goldmansachs> a couple of months earlier 
might have allowed her audience to influence her tone of voice. She might have 
thought that her words would remain unreported. But I think that was the 
authentic Theresa May. She should remember that authenticity is the quality 
voters most value. And she should reframe her message about Brexit to reflect 
her real concerns before she leads a car-crash departure with all the miserable 
consequences that she foresaw when she was talking the truth to the city 
slickers.
 