
The NHS winter crisis may be growing but at least Jeremy Hunt can console 
himself with a reported £14.5 payout. The health secretary helped set up the
online education listings business Hotcourses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/jeremy-hunt-in-line-for-145m-windfall-over-hotcourses-sale>
 in 1996, and it is reported to have been sold for more than £30m. It will make 
him the richest member of the cabinet, although Britain’s pales in comparison
with the cabinet Donald Trump is amassing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/donald-trump-senate-backlash-cabinet-of-billionaires>
, so far worth a collective $4.5bn (£3.7bn). Here are some of the cabinet’s 
relative paupers.

Philip Hammond

The former Guardian-reading teenage goth 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/politics/2013/05/philip-hammond-rise-quiet-man>
, now chancellor, is thought to be worth upwards of £8m, thanks toCastlemead 
<http://www.castlemead-ltd.co.uk/>, a property-development company he helped 
set up. It started in housing before moving into building for the healthcare 
sector and consultancy work. He was paid £1.8m in dividends in 2007.

Sajid Javid

Reports have suggested the communities and local government secretary, and son 
of an immigrant bus driver, was making up to £3m a year in hisprevious job as a 
banker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/15/sajid-javid-what-thatcherite-union-buster-learned-from-wall-street>
 (never confirmed by Javid). He has properties in London reported to be worth 
upwards of £6m.

Amber Rudd

Not much about the home secretary’s finances are known (“I think we have to 
think very carefully about the balance between transparency and privacy,” she 
said last yearwhen MPs were coming under pressure to publish their tax returns 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/labour-unveils-10-point-tax-7728449>), 
but before entering parliament and her steep rise through the ranks, Rudd was 
an investment banker and venture capitalist. In September last year,it was 
revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/22/amber-rudd-facing-calls-to-clarify-involvement-in-tax-havens>
 Rudd had been a director of two offshore companies based in the Bahamas 
between 1998 and 2000, although there isno suggestion of any wrongdoing on her 
part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/bahamas-leaks-reveal-amber-rudd-involvement-offshore-firms>
.

Boris Johnson

The man who memorably said the £250,000 he got a year for his Telegraph column 
was “chicken feed” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jul/13/boris-johnson-second-salary-chickenfeed>
. In the tax year 2014-15,Johnson’s accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/11/cameron-tax-commons-statement-offshore-tax-osborne-likely-to-publish-tax-return-details-treasury-hints-politics-live>
 revealed the newspaper paid him £266,000, and he received nearly £225,000 from 
book royalties. His income will have taken a hit since then – he no longer has 
his £143,000-a-year London mayor salary and stopped his column upon becoming 
foreign secretary. However, his wife, Marina Wheeler, was made a QC last year 
and probably earns just as much as her husband, if not more.

Theresa May

Who knows? She set up a blind trust when she became prime minister. Run by 
independent trustees, it is designed to avoid any conflicts of interest – but 
it also means a lack of transparency. It seems unlikely – despite Philip May’s 
wealth from decades working in finance – that she is in her future US 
counterpart’s league. Or maybe even her health secretary’s.
 