
This week, the Guardian published a remarkable feature by Andy Beckett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/25/corbyn-trident-military-revolt-unfriendly-fire>
 discussing the possibility of an army revolt should British Labour leader 
Jeremy Corbyn form a government.

Beckett takes the prospect of a military rebellion seriously, recalling the 
military opposition to the Wilson government and the coup rumours that 
circulated when Thatcher seemed likely to lose to Labour in 1980.

His article follows an extraordinary intervention from a senior serving general
 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/british-army-could-stage-mutiny-under-corbyn-says-senior-serving-general-10509742.html>
, who, last September, told the Sunday Times that Corbyn would face “a mutiny” 
if he sought to scrap Trident or cut the size of the armed forces.

Australian support for monarchy has grown as debate for republic revived
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/27/australian-support-for-monarchy-has-grown-as-debate-for-republic-revived>
“The army just wouldn’t stand for it,” the unnamed officer said. “The general 
staff would not allow a prime minister to jeopardise the security of this 
country and I think people would use whatever means possible, fair or foul to 
prevent that. You can’t put a maverick in charge of a country’s security.”

Beckett’s piece makes particularly interesting reading for Australians because 
it outlines the role the Queen might play in any anti-Corbyn revolt. The 
article quotes Michael Clarke from the Royal United Services Institute, a 
leading military think tank:

The armed forces don’t belong to the government, they belong to the monarch. 
And they take this very seriously. When [the Conservative] Liam Fox was defence 
secretary a few years ago, for his first couple of weeks he referred to ‘my 
forces’ rather than Her Majesty’s forces – as a joke, I think. It really 
ruffled the military behind the scenes. I heard it from senior people in the 
army. They told me, ‘We don’t work for him. We work for the Queen.’

“If Corbyn makes it into office,” Beckett says, “his republicanism may 
challenge this mindset rather more fundamentally.”

It’s a good illustration of how it’s quite wrong to understand the Queen as a 
harmless anachronism maintained merely to amuse tourists. The royal family 
possesses real power, particularly in times of crisis. That’s the point of the 
sovereign: the parliament changes but the monarchy doesn’t, with its permanence 
intended as a sort of mystical embodiment of national sentiment.

Some years back in a piece for Crikey, I penned a want ad 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2009/04/30/the-republic-overcoming-apathy-to-b-grade-celebrity-royals/?wpmp_switcher=mobile>
 to represent the succession protocols by which the monarch was chosen. It went 
like this:

Position vacant. Generous remuneration. No skills or qualifications required. 
Male applicants preferred. Definitely no Catholics. Atheists, Jews and Muslims 
need not apply.

As I said then, any reputable newspaper would refuse to publish that 
advertisement, since it violates so many anti-discrimination laws.

Since then, new legislation has amended the rules by which the throne is 
inherited, ending the old system of male primogeniture (in which a younger son 
took precedence over an older daughter) as well as the, um, traditional ban on 
Catholics. But the new tolerance only extends so far. The monarch must, for 
instance, be “in communion” with the Church of England, a stipulation which 
rules out not only Catholics (one hand giveth, the other taketh away) but also 
atheists and adherents of any other faith (sorry Jews, sorry Buddhists).

In any case, in the end, the whole caper rests on inheritance. If you’re 
descended from Princess Sophia the Electress of Hanover, you’ve a shot at the 
top job. If you don’t, then you haven’t.

The pitch has run like this: 'Help us replace the Queen with a president – it 
will make no difference at all!'

Mostly, the royal family spends its days engaged in lavish, taxpayer-funded 
pageantry designed to reinforce old-fashioned social hierarchies. But, in the 
context of political turmoil – or even the election of a reforming social 
democrat – the monarchy becomes a rallying point for all the most reactionary 
elements of society. We saw what that meant in Australia in 1975, when an 
unelected governor general (the Queen’s representative) removed a democratic 
government in a soft coup – a gentler manifestation of the kind of intervention 
Beckett found the British military to be contemplating.

Which is all by way of pointing out that there’s an obvious democratic case 
for republicanism.

Unfortunately, that’s not the debate we’re having. Since the defeat of the 
1999 referendum, republicans have tended to downplay attacks on the monarchy 
and minimise the changes they’re proposing. In recent years, the pitch has run, 
almost literally, like this: “Help us replace the Queen with a president – it 
will make no difference at all!”

It’s not exactly inspiring – and, not surprisingly, the more the argument has 
shifted from democratic reform to national feels, the more support has tanked.

A ReachTel poll in 2014 found backing for a republic at a 20 year low 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/republican-cause-takes-heavy-knock-in-poll-20140201-31u1a.html#ixzz3yOkhMogO>
, with less than 40% of respondents supporting the change. Crucially, 
enthusiasm for Republicanism among 18 to 35 year olds had plummeted, down to 
just 35.6%.

An ANU study into Australian Attitudes Towards National Identity recorded a 
similar trend, with the numbers backinga republic dropping consistently since 
the last failed referendum 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/republican-cause-takes-heavy-knock-in-poll-20140201-31u1a.html#ixzz3yOkhMogO>
, and an article published this week in the Australian Journal of Political 
Science found thatsupport for the monarchy has grown steadily 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/27/australian-support-for-monarchy-has-grown-as-debate-for-republic-revived>
 since 1999.

The defeat in 1999 has been taken as proof that a successful campaign must be 
apolitical, that Australians will only support minimal reform, and that 
republicanism must be couched in a way that offends no one at all. Hence the 
logic of enlisting all thestate and territory leaders behind the proposition  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/25/state-and-territory-leaders-unite-to-call-for-republic>
that “Australia should have an Australian head of state”: to establish 
unanimity in the political class so change disrupts no one.

It’s a plan that might have worked back in the mid-80s when Bob Hawke used 
“consensus” as a winning slogan. But times are different now. Ours is an age of 
polarisation. It’s entirely utopian to imagine conservatives won’t fight tooth 
and nail against any republic, no matter how it’s worded. It’s even more 
utopian to think ordinary voters will embrace a referendum on the say-so of 
politicians.

Indeed, all the signs point to a quite different logic: the support of the 
political elite generally translates into either indifference or outright 
hostility on the part of the public.

Malcolm Turnbull says republic doomed to 'heroic defeat' unless driven by 
public
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/26/malcolm-turnbull-says-republic-doomed-to-heroic-defeat-unless-driven-by-public>
A campaign highlighting the reactionary role of the monarchy and arguing for 
an extension of democratic participation would, of course, be more 
confrontational than touting the so-called minimal model, largely because many 
of the arguments for the status quo depend, explicitly or implicitly, on the 
importance of an unelected head of state to check the aspirations of voters. In 
response, republicans would need to articulate a new system and then convince 
people of its merits.

But that’s by no means impossible. Most voters like democracy and they dislike 
who try to check it. Every survey shows, for instance, thatpeople 
overwhelmingly want an elected head of state 
<https://www.aph.gov.au/binaries/senate/pubs/pops/pop51/warhurst.pdf> – it’s 
the politicians and pundits who quail at what that might mean.

There’s no Jeremy Corbyn on the Australian horizon and one doubts that anyone 
in the military frets overtly about the increasingly unlikely prospect that 
Bill Shorten will one day sit in the Lodge. Nevertheless, we now know that, in 
1975, John Kerr engagedin protracted conversations with Prince Charles and the 
palace before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/26/prince-charles-knew-of-idea-to-dismiss-whitlam-before-1975-crisis-book-claims>
dismissing an elected prime minister from office. If it happened once, it can 
happen again.

That’s the real reason to get rid of the whole damn family. 
 