
Troubled blood-testing startup Theranos could be banned from practicing for 
two years for failing to resolve major problems at its main laboratory in
California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, federal health 
regulators have warned.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS), which monitors clinical 
lab standards among other things, wrote toTheranos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/theranos> management on 18 March 
notifying the company that it had 10 days to respond or would have its license 
revoked and its owners banned from running any lab.

Theranos has responded to the letter, and the agency is considering its 
submission, the Wall Street Journal reported.

A regulator’s inspection in January highlighted “immediate jeopardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/27/theranos-blood-testing-technology-lab-risk-to-public-health>
 to patient health and safety”, but Theranos has not resolved the issues 
raised, the letter claims. It addresses Theranos owners Elizabeth Holmes and 
Ramesh Balwani, and director Sunil Dhawan.

“We find that the statements made in the allegation of compliance and evidence 
of correction: 1) failed to adequately address the deficient practice cited; 2) 
are incomplete and failed to meet the criteria of acceptable evidence of 
correction; 3) do not ensure sustained compliance; and 4) show a lack of the 
CLIA requirements.”

It also said the laboratory’s allegation of compliance “is not acceptable”.

A spokeswoman confirmed that Theranos did receive a letter from CMS on 18 
March and that the company is in ongoing communication with the regulator. “We 
did respond within the 10 day timeframe. We have been working with regulators 
for two weeks and hope that they will not impose sanctions. If CMS decides to 
impose sanctions it will be made public almost immediately.”


In October 2015, a detailed WSJ report 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/theranos-has-struggled-with-blood-tests-1444881901>
 claimed Theranos employees doubted the accuracy of its own tests, and the 
accuracy of its results have also been questions. Its technology claims to be 
able to perform blood tests but with a pinprick of blood, rather than a 
traditional blood draw.

Theranos was previously one of Silicon Valley’s most highly prized startups, 
raising $800m in investment that valued the firm at $9bn and with a board of 
directors that includes Henry Kissinger.
 