
Anyone with more than a passing interest in psychology has surely heard, by 
now, ofthe Dunning-Kruger effect <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10626367> 
– the cognitive bias whereby incompetent people are so incompetent they don’t 
realise how incompetent they are. (The classic case involved a bank robber who 
was stunned to be caught; he’d assumed thatsmearing his face with lemon juice 
<http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/06/20/the-anosognosics-dilemma-1/?_r=0>
 would render him invisible to security cameras.) This is overconfidence of an 
especially scary kind, because it’s not just a case of talented people 
exaggerating their talents, but of the untalented feeling disproportionately 
talented –because they’re untalented. The phenomenon is presumably as old as 
humanity, but recently, watching and reading the news on both sides of the 
Atlantic, it’s hard to shake the sense that we’re crossing some kind of 
threshold. Historians of the future may refer to ours as the Dunning-Kruger era.

The most obvious case, it goes without saying, is that of the proto-fascist 
misogynist who’s running (at the time of writing, anyway) for president of the 
United States. It’s not simply that he wouldn’t know how to govern, but that he 
doesn’t know he wouldn’t know. The British politicians so breezily confident 
they could handle the results of aBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/28/brexit-would-affect-lives-of-millions-official-uk-report-says>
 referendum – fromCameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> to
Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> and Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> to May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> – would also seem to fit the 
bill. But the greatest hazard, with Dunning-Kruger, is imagining it can’t apply 
to you. (That’s kind of the point of it, after all.) So all of us who thought 
Brexit orDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>’s 
nomination impossible must likewise ask ourselves: were we so ill-informed 
about the world outside our bubbles that this actually boosted our confidence 
in our judgments?

The pessimist’s cure for procrastination | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/07/the-pessimists-cure-for-procrastination-oliver-burkeman-philosophy>
One reason Dunning-Kruger seems to be everywhere these days, its co-creator 
David Dunning argued recently 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/05/donald-trump-supporters-dunning-kruger-effect-213904>
, is the echo-chamber effect of modern media: people aren’t merely uninformed, 
but actively misinformed, “their heads filled with false data, facts and 
theories that can lead to misguided conclusions held with tenacious confidence 
and extreme partisanship”. As for our bullish political leaders, a more 
alarming thought occurs. What if the modern world is so complex, so 
unpredictable, that the only politicians who can project the required 
confidence are, almost by definition, deluding themselves?The author Sam Harris 
recently said <https://www.samharris.org/podcast/item/ask-me-anything-5> he’d 
prefer that the presidency went to an American picked at random rather than 
Trump. It’s hard to disagree: at least the random American would likely be 
terrified by the realisation that he or she was hopelessly ill-equipped, and 
would therefore defer to the experts.

It can be liberating, as I’ve written before, to know that everyone is winging 
it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/oliver-burkeman-s-blog/2014/may/21/everyone-is-totally-just-winging-it>
, all the time; otherwise we assume we’re the only ones experiencing 
self-doubt. But there’s a vast difference between the people who realise 
they’re winging it and those who don’t. Politicians are frequently accused of 
acting like children. But let’s be more specific. The politicians of our 
Dunning-Kruger era act like that stereotype about teenagers (which is probably 
unfair to most teenagers): entirely certain they know everything, precisely 
because they don’t.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 