
Name: The shared society.

Appearance: Rose-tinted.

Age: Brand spanking new.

Hang on, didn’t David Cameron invent this years ago? Something about people 
starting charities to do the government’s work for them?You’re thinking of the 
Big Society 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/78979/building-big-society_0.pdf>
, a buzzphrase that quickly became Cameron’s big embarrassment, largely because 
no one knew what it was and it never happened.

How can you know it never happened if you don’t know what it was? Good point. 
Anyway, politicians like giving a catchy name to their vague plans for the 
country. It makes them sound as though they have vision and a sense of purpose.

I can think of a very catchy name for what Cameron did to this country last 
June.I’m sure you can. But let’s move on. This week’s vision is the “shared 
society” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-tories-party-social-justice-speech>
, which, as expected, Theresa May launchedin a speech to the Charity Commission 
on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/09/theresa-may-speech-mental-health-shared-society-cross-chief-says-his-humanitarian-crisis-label-for-nhs-fully-justified-politics-live>
.

What do you mean, “as expected”? I mean her spin doctors told everybody what 
she was going to say before she said it.

That’s a neat trick. Can they tell me the winner of the Grand National? No. 
Anyway, May said: “The shared society is one that doesn’t just value our 
individual rights but focuses rather more on the responsibilities we have to 
one another.”

That still sounds vague. “It’s a society that respects the bonds that we share 
as a union of people and nations … And it’s a society that recognises the 
obligations we have as citizens – obligations that make our society work.”

Getting vaguer. Can you just tell me what she actually means? Not really. The 
main point seems to be that she will stop focusing only on the very poorest, 
and start helping those who are“just about managing” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2016/nov/20/jam-the-new-government-acronym-just-about-managing-to-make-sense>
 as well.

I see. With extra money? I don’t think so. There isn’t much. We’re borrowing 
even more after the referendum.

OK. So it will be special magic policies again, will it? Ones she has just 
thought of, and which don’t need any money? That’s right. Magic policies a 
go-go. Basically, she just wants to talk about something that isn’t Brexit.

Don’t we all? More than I’ve ever wanted anything …

Do say: “Get ready for a unified Britain!”

Don’t say: “From the people who brought you the EU referendum.”
 