
Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> has been 
appointed chancellor of the exchequer and Boris Johnson foreign secretary as 
Theresa May allocated the top posts in her cabinet on her first evening as 
prime minister.

Hammond, who was foreign secretary, was the first to be appointed and replaces 
George Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, who was 
fired from the government, Downing Street announced.


The second major appointment – and a much more unexpected one – was Johnson as 
foreign secretary.


The former mayor of London played a major role in the leave camp during the EU 
referendum, and was the initial favourite to succeed Cameron, only for his 
leadership bid to end abruptly when his key Brexit ally, Michael Gove, stood 
against him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-prime-minister-how-days-events-unfolded-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20becomes%20prime%20minister%3A%20how%20the%20day%E2%80%99s%20events%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-prime-minister-how-days-events-unfolded-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20becomes%20prime%20minister%3A%20how%20the%20day%E2%80%99s%20events%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Ftheresa-may-prime-minister-how-days-events-unfolded-video&media=>
Theresa May becomes prime minister: how the day’s events unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/13/theresa-may-prime-minister-how-days-events-unfolded-video>
Another significant appointment was Amber Rudd, the former energy secretary, 
promoted to home secretary in place of May herself, having only entered 
parliament in 2010.

Johnson said nothing to reporters as he left Downing Street to head for the 
Foreign Office. After Hammond left, he made the short trip to the Treasury, to 
meet his new team. Downing Street said more jobs would be announced soon.

Having left Downing Street via a back entrance, Osborne later sent a tweet 
saying:
George Osborne (@George_Osborne) 
It's been a privilege to be Chancellor these last 6 yrs. Others will judge - I 
hope I've left the economy in a better state than I found it.
 <https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/status/753301644918530048> July 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/status/753301644918530048> 
In another tweet he paid tribute to his old boss:
George Osborne (@George_Osborne) 
A sad, moving day to see my great friend @David_Cameron 
<https://twitter.com/David_Cameron> leave Downing St. He can be very proud of 
the job he's done and service he's given
 <https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/status/753301019220664320> July 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/status/753301019220664320> 
Downing Street announced that Michael Fallon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michael-fallon> would remain in his job 
as defence secretary.

Two of May’s new ministers were MPs who have spent some years in the 
wilderness. David Davis was made minister for Brexit – officially known as 
secretary of state for exiting theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> – six years after he resigned as shadow 
home secretary to re-fight his parliamentary seat in a protest over civil 
liberties.

Liam Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox>, who left the post of 
defence secretary in 2011 following revelations that his close friend the 
lobbyist Adam Werritty had travelled with him on official business, was made 
secretary of a new ministry for international trade.



May's cabinet 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/07/new-cabinet/embed/embed.html?mode=full> 
Hammond is seen as the ultimate safe pair of hands in government: a 
hard-working, technocratic colleague who will happily and conscientiously take 
good care of tricky ministries.

But the MP for Runnymede and Weybridge since 1997 has also shown a slightly 
less loyal side, reportedly annoying David Cameron with warnings about military 
cuts as defence minister and with criticisms of gay marriage legislation.


Hammond, now 60, has worked his way up with efficient handling of some complex 
ministerial briefs. In opposition he shadowed as pensions secretary and chief 
secretary to the Treasury before beginning in government at the slightly more 
junior role of transport minister as the coalition deal gave the Lib Dems his 
old post.

Immediately in government he showed his populist side, declaring Labour’s 
mythical “war on motorists” to be over and proposing to increase the motorway 
speed limit to 80mph, until theextra death toll this would have caused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/dec/25/80mph-speed-limit-increase-deaths> 
prompted the plan to be scrapped.

As defence minister in 2013 Hammond attracted criticism by talking about “a 
real sense of anger among many people who are married” over the gay marriage 
law. Hammond was later alleged to have likened gay marriage to incest – 
something he denied.

Rudd rose rapidly under the patronage of Osborne in the last parliament, 
starting off as his parliamentary aide and ending up in the cabinet.

The 52-year-old is one of the few senior Tory MPs to have won a marginal seat 
from Labour, taking Hastings and Rye in 2010. After just two years on the 
backbenches she was promoted by the chancellor, before entering the whips’ 
office and then heading to the Department of Energy and Climate Change.

Her appointment as energy secretary in 2015 was greeted with optimism by green 
groups, as she is committed to tackling climate change, unlike many of her 
colleagues on the right of the party.

Rudd struggled to defend the government’s tax credit cuts when confronted by 
an angry member of the public on the BBC’s Question Time last year.

However, she is regarded by colleagues as a solid media performer, and she was 
unafraid to take on Johnson in the EU referendum debate.


 