
Theresa May has said Donald Trump’s comments about groping women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 were unacceptable, while insisting she is optimistic about Anglo-American 
relations when he becomes president.

In an interview with Sky News, the prime minister said her conversations with 
the president-elect had led her to conclude that the US will remain fully 
committed toNato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> under his leadership, 
contrary to the impression he gave during his election campaign.

She spoke only hours after Trump tweeted to say that he was looking forward to 
meeting May:
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
I look very much forward to meeting Prime Minister Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> in Washington in the Spring. 
Britain, a longtime U.S. ally, is very special!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817915516018892805> January 8, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817915516018892805> 
May was expressionless as Sophy Ridge read out a quote from a 2005 tape that 
featured Trump bragging about how “when you’re a star ... you can do anything, 
grab them by the pussy”.

When asked how that made her feel as a woman, May replied: “I think that’s 
unacceptable, but in factDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> himself has said that and has 
apologised for it.”

How Sophy Ridge got her money shot from the Maybot | John Crace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/how-sophy-ridge-got-her-money-shot-from-the-maybot>
She insisted there was more to relations between London and Washington than 
Trump’s character. “The relationship that the UK has with the United States is 
about something much bigger than just the relationship between the two 
individuals as president and prime minister,” she said.

Trump caused alarm in government circles in London by questioning the value of 
Nato during the presidential election campaign. He said that membership was 
costing the US too much money, other countries were not paying their fair share 
and that the alliance might be obsolete.


May said she was satisfied that the US would remain committed to it during 
Trump’s presidency. “From the conversations I have had, I think America remains 
as fully committed to Nato as we are,” she said.
 