
Thermomix is under investigation by the Australian Competition and Consumer 
Commission over safety complaints and reports it imposed confidentiality 
requirements on consumers seeking compensation for faulty products.

The ACCC began the investigation in March, two months before the consumer 
group Choicefiled a mass incident report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/12/thermomix-products-reponsible-for-45-injuries-says-consumer-group-choice>
 detailing 87 complaints about faulty products. But it did not confirm it 
publicly until Thursday.

In a statement, the watchdog said it was investigating safety concerns “in 
relation to both the TM31 and the TM5” Thermomix models.

The TM31 was discontinued in 2014, replaced by the newer TM5 model. A product 
recall was issued over a rubber sealing ring in the TM31 in late 2014 
<http://www.productsafety.gov.au/recall/vorwerk-elektowerke-gmbh-co-kg-thermomix-tm31-sealing-ring>
, which in some cases was unable to maintain a seal when pureeing hot liquids.

According to complaints compiled by Choice in May that meant hot liquid could 
burst out and, in 18 cases 
<https://www.choice.com.au/home-and-living/kitchen/all-in-one-kitchen-machines/articles/thermomix-safety-risks-and-customer-service-issues>
, cause injuries that were sufficiently severe for people to seek medical 
attention.

In a statement on Thursday, Thermomix in Australia said both it and Vorwerk, 
the product’s German manufacturer, were aware of the ACCC investigation.

“The safety, welfare and support of our customers is and always has been our 
highest priority,” it said.

“We have always fully cooperated with the relevant authorities and will 
continue to so. We do not wish to prejudice the outcome of the review by the 
ACCC by commenting further at this time.”

Thermomix products responsible for 45 injuries, says consumer group Choice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/12/thermomix-products-reponsible-for-45-injuries-says-consumer-group-choice>
Choice received 83 reports about the TM31 and four about the TM5 after calling 
for consumer complaints about the multi-purpose kitchen appliance in March. Of 
those, 45 people said they had been injured, including the 18 who said they had 
received medical treatment, and 53 had previously complained to Thermomix.

According to Choice, a number of those who complained to Thermomix were asked 
to sign a nondisclosure agreement 
<https://www.choice.com.au/home-and-living/kitchen/all-in-one-kitchen-machines/articles/thermomix-safety-risks-and-customer-service-issues>
 not to “disparage or otherwise comment negatively about” Thermomix or Vorwerk, 
and not to take any action which could “harm the reputation of Thermomix or 
Vorwerk, or lead to unwanted or unfavourable publicity”.

The ACCC said the complaints compiled by Choice had formed part of its 
investigation, but has so far refused to say whether Thermomix complied with 
its mandatory safety reporting requirements under Australian consumer law.

Companies operating in Australia are required to inform the watchdog of any 
incidents involving their products where a consumer had to seek medical 
attention.

A spokesman for Choice, Tom Godfrey, said Thermomix had been made aware of at 
least 10 such cases, but the ACCC could not release safety reports without the 
corporation’s consent.

Godfrey said Choice was lobbying the federal government to introduce greater 
transparency in the reporting process as part of the Australian consumer law 
review, that is due to deliver an interim report later this year.

“If your product has had a significant failure then the public has a right to 
know,” Godfrey told Guardian Australia. “We don’t think it should be under lock 
and key in Canberra.”

Godfrey said allowing corporations to determine whether a safety report would 
be kept confidential meant consumers were not able to make informed decisions.

“We think that anyone who uses a Thermomix should realise that these things 
can fail,” he said.
 