
The fear that robots will destroy jobs and leave a great mass of people 
languishing in unemployment is almost as old as automation itself. And yet, 
from the Luddites onwards, the fears have been eventually proved wrong, and the 
economy has ended up stronger than before.

Robots threaten low-paid jobs, says Bank of England's chief economist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/12/robots-threaten-low-paid-jobs-says-bank-of-england-chief-economist>
But more and more analysts worry that this may be about to change. And on 
Thursday the Bank of England’schief economist warned that this wave of 
automation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/12/robots-threaten-low-paid-jobs-says-bank-of-england-chief-economist>
 is threatening skilled roles. The jobs of the middle classes, with their 
expensive university educations, are now at risk. As a result, a huge number of 
jobs that were previously thought safe from machine-led disruption are firmly 
in the firing line.

Science

Even scientists are not safe from the march of the machines. Robots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/robots> have been used in laboratories 
for a couple of decades to perform onerous tasks. Now advancements in automated 
systems and artificial intelligence have created a machine that can not only 
perform experiments, but interpret the results, plan further experiments and 
make discoveries all on its own.

Adam, a scientist-robot, created in a partnership between Aberystwyth and 
Cambridge universities, became the first machine to independently discover new 
scientific knowledge in 2009. Now Eve, a newer version, continues the work for 
automatic drug discovery, identifying potential malaria drugs at Manchester 
University.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe607e09f2a0d83dbf0372e2bd56411a03624a5e%2F0_34_4468_2681%2F4468.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thinking%20machines%3A%20the%20skilled%20jobs%20that%20could%20be%20taken%20over%20by%20robots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thinking%20machines%3A%20the%20skilled%20jobs%20that%20could%20be%20taken%20over%20by%20robots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe607e09f2a0d83dbf0372e2bd56411a03624a5e%2F0_34_4468_2681%2F4468.jpg>
 A hologram of Tupac Shakur performs at the Coachella festival in California in 
2012 – 16 years after his death. Photograph: Christopher Polk/Getty Images 
Entertainment

Machines cannot disrupt the world of art and music, where creativity flows 
direct from the soul, right? But if that is the case, then how didTupac perform 
at the Coachella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2012/apr/16/tupac-coachella> 
festival in 2012 – 16 years after his murder in Las Vegas? By way of a 
hologram, of course.

The rapper’s hologram was one of the most prominent examples of technology 
undercutting artists and performers, but it was by no means the first. 
Generative art, for instance, pushes the work of creation back a step. No 
longer are artists creating a specific music or painting: instead, they make a 
bot that can endlessly create, outproducing any human artist.

And while films and television don’t yet have fully artificial actors 
performing in them, the ability to generate new performances from data 
harvested from old is slowly changing how the industry works. The most notable 
example is the cameo by Marlon Brando in Superman Returns, released two years 
after his death. Footage from Superman (1978) was mixed with computer generated 
effects to create a new scene.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617e89d47b251659228493e4adc046e3dbb96fd6%2F0_0_3669_2203%2F3669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thinking%20machines%3A%20the%20skilled%20jobs%20that%20could%20be%20taken%20over%20by%20robots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thinking%20machines%3A%20the%20skilled%20jobs%20that%20could%20be%20taken%20over%20by%20robots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617e89d47b251659228493e4adc046e3dbb96fd6%2F0_0_3669_2203%2F3669.jpg>
 A doctor with a surgical robot at the university hospital of Jena in Germany. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Medicine

For the author Martin Ford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/01/the-rise-of-robots-humans-need-not-apply-review>
, an expert on robots, medicine offers one of the few areas where a significant 
number of jobs will survive the rise of the robots. A career like nursing,he 
told the Guardian, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/06/will-robots-create-destroy-jobs>
 is the perfect mixture of almost everything a machine finds hard: fine motor 
skills, specialist knowledge, a wide variety of potential complications and the 
need to provide a friendly face, as well as just efficient service, all mean 
the profession is likely to stick around.

Will robots create more jobs than they destroy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/06/will-robots-create-destroy-jobs>
But that does not mean all of medicine is protected in the same way. Doctors 
are expensive to train and hire, which means they are ripe for replacement by 
machines. IBM’s Watson project, most famous forwinning an episode of the 
American game show Jeopardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/feb/17/ibm-computer-watson-wins-jeopardy>
, can understand spoken questions and seek the answer from a massive database 
of technical knowledge – perfect for aiding, or even replacing, a GP when it 
comes to diagnoses and simple prescriptions.

Meanwhile, the Da Vinci robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/may/08/hospital-robot-transforms-medical-operations>
 is already capable of performing surgeries no human surgeon would be able to 
handle. Currently it is remotely operated, letting a surgeon from one central 
hospital perform challenging operations across the world. But add a little bit 
of computer vision and Watson’s understanding of the human body, and who knows 
where we could end up?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bd545a592e56a7a43535258ad170cb0511a9be2%2F37_564_4851_2911%2F4851.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thinking%20machines%3A%20the%20skilled%20jobs%20that%20could%20be%20taken%20over%20by%20robots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thinking%20machines%3A%20the%20skilled%20jobs%20that%20could%20be%20taken%20over%20by%20robots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bd545a592e56a7a43535258ad170cb0511a9be2%2F37_564_4851_2911%2F4851.jpg>
 Robots in the skies? A pilot sets the autopilot on an Airbus A320 airliner. 
Photograph: Michael Phillips/Moment Editorial/Getty Images 
Pilots 

The notion of pilotless commercial airplanes would be horrific for most 
passengers and that is the main reason why we will not be seeing passenger-only 
excursions to Magaluf any time soon. But it is feasible. Any modern Airbus or 
Boeing aircraft can already be landed in thick fog without a pilot, while the 
advent of military drones underscores how pilotless flight has entered the 
geo-political mainstream. Will it enter the realm of commercial travel? 
Passengers, and of course regulators, are the main barrier.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72b841ea633c08984e6adbefb36747218a3709f7%2F15_23_1251_870%2F1251.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thinking%20machines%3A%20the%20skilled%20jobs%20that%20could%20be%20taken%20over%20by%20robots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thinking%20machines%3A%20the%20skilled%20jobs%20that%20could%20be%20taken%20over%20by%20robots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Fthinking-machines-skilled-job-robots-steal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72b841ea633c08984e6adbefb36747218a3709f7%2F15_23_1251_870%2F1251.jpg>
 An explanation of how Quill natural language generation software works. Could 
it soon be writing the news? Photograph: Screenshot/Narrative Science 
Journalism

Could you tell if the words you are reading were written by a machine? 
Chicago-basedtech firm Narrative Science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/28/computer-writing-journalism-artificial-intelligence>
 is betting big money that, if it gets its software right, you won’t know – and 
won’t care.

The journalists who never sleep
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/12/artificial-intelligence-data-journalism-media>
The company’s key product is Quill, a natural-language generation platform. 
Put in structured data, and it will spit out a convincingly written news story 
about what just happened. The software is already at work writing real news 
stories for a number of publications. It is particularly adept at breaking news 
from the worlds of finance and sport, where the information that comes in (on 
goals scored, or prices moving) is in a predictable format.

Law

Law should be the ultimate human-only field. Much of lawyers’ work focuses on 
thorny issues such as the precision of common language or the interplay between 
the theoretical world of text books and the real world, and that tends to be 
the sort of thing that computers are bad at.

But a lot of the day-to-day is actually surprisingly rote. When everything 
goes to plan, jobs such as conveyancing, drawing up employment contracts or 
preparing wills can be simple. Even today, the amount of labour saved by 
pre-prepared templates is substantial: but as artificial intelligence improves, 
the need for a human lawyer in the vast majority of cases will shrink 
substantially.
 