
Amazon Prime

UnREAL

The season two premiere of the meta US drama set behind the scenes of a 
fictional matchmaking show has landed on Prime, with new episodes due to be 
added soon after they air across the Atlantic. As things kick off, newly 
promoted series producer and all-round antiheroine Rachel decides to shake 
things up by casting Everlasting’s first black suitor. In the wake of this, 
boss Quinn decides that a racist contestant is an ideal addition to the show, 
with the producers once again relying on their tried-and-tested formula for 
manufacturing tears and tension. Soon things get crueller and more compelling 
than ever. All 10 episodes from season one are available to stream, too.

Available now

BBC3

Big Field

BBC3 has been poaching top talent from YouTube of late, with this new series 
of shorts following #HoodDocumentary in making the transition to full BBC 
online series. Its premise is engagingly daffy, with comics acting out scenes 
made from mash-ups of TV clips and old audio recordings in – you guessed it – a 
big field. Cue strange takes on Countdown and Antiques Roadshow in a series 
that feels Vic and Bob-esque in its manic energy and commitment to a thoroughly 
British strain of surrealism.

Available from Monday

Professor Green: Dangerous Dogs

Pro Green has shown himself to be a surprisingly adept and unwaveringly 
personal documentary maker, with his films on depression and homelessness 
offering a sobriety far detached from his cheeky rap persona. This looks at a 
recent spike in attacks on humans by dogs in the UK and challenges 
preconceptions over what constitutes a “dangerous” breed.

Available from Tuesday

Podcast

Revisionist History
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-unreal-to-dont-hug-me-im-scared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea8360a02aa91a4e93bf6ef7bf25d1bde78c0e03%2F0_0_720_432%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20streaming%3A%20from%20UnREAL%20to%20Don%E2%80%99t%20Hug%20Me%20I%E2%80%99m%20Scared&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-unreal-to-dont-hug-me-im-scared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20streaming%3A%20from%20UnREAL%20to%20Don%E2%80%99t%20Hug%20Me%20I%E2%80%99m%20Scared&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F20%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-unreal-to-dont-hug-me-im-scared%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea8360a02aa91a4e93bf6ef7bf25d1bde78c0e03%2F0_0_720_432%2F720.jpg>
 Make it work... Malcolm Gladwell 
This podcast from New York-based culture site Slate sees Malcolm Gladwell 
delve into events that were either missed or misunderstood at the time they 
occurred. The Tipping Point author has long tried to make sense of the way the 
world works – how we achieve success, whether obstacles can be helpful, how 
ideas gain traction – with big theories that have seen him branded a visionary 
by some and overly optimistic by others. No matter which camp you’re in, his 
penchant for exploring themes through accessible, culture-heavy narratives is 
one that resonates in print, and is likely to make this 10-episode series a 
compelling listen.

Available from Thursday

YouTube

Don’t Hug Me I’m Scared

Funded via Kickstarter, this faux-educational comedy series is brilliantly 
surreal. Vivid Sesame Street-style puppet trio Yellow Guy, Red Guy and Duck Guy 
explore everyday life via off-kilter musical numbers on themes such as 
creativity and healthy eating. However, said ditties end up being darker and 
more ridiculous than expected, from a time-explaining clock that makes the 
puppets’ ears bleed, to a song about love that almost lures Yellow Guy into a 
cult. Their sixth adventure is set to be released on Sunday; 19 June is a key 
date in the series’ mythology, and is set to be strange and hysterical in equal 
measure.

Available now
 