
All4

Son Of A B****
Timed to coincide with the start of Euro 2016, Walter Presents’ latest import 
is a Brazilian comedy tackling the less attractive side of the beautiful game. 
Son Of A B**** follows referee Juarez Gomes da Silva, who has designs on 
officiating the World Cup final, but whose sordid personal life threatens to 
spill on to the pitch. Enjoyably bawdy, it makes for a salacious double bill 
with Walter Presents’ other Brazilian acquisition, the excellent porn-industry 
drama Magnifica 70.

Available from Friday

BBC iPlayer

Extra Gear
Following in the esteemed foosteps of er, Take Me Out and Big Brother, the 
revamped Top Gear has been given it’s own spinoff show. Extra Gear is hosted by 
new Top Gear team member Rory Reid and features behind-the-scenes footage as 
well as additional challenges and reviews. Intriguingly it seems to have 
received a more positive reaction on social media than the main programme, 
suggesting that messrs Evans and LeBlanc should maybe watch their backs.

Available Sundays from 9pm

YouTube

Bad Internet
It’s a mark of the cultural reach of Black Mirror that Charlie Brooker’s 
dystopian anthology series has received its own parody, courtesy of those class 
clowns at US comedy site College Humor. The first episode of Bad Internet 
concerns a future in which society is sorted by a Buzzfeed “which Friends 
friend are you” quiz and is viewable for free, with later episodes released 
weekly and priced at £1.89.

Available now

Netflix

Voltron: Legacy Defender
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-son-of-a-b-to-bad-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9ac4dd0101935b43319a275180b3d366411046b%2F360_0_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20streaming%3A%20from%20Son%20Of%20A%20B****%20to%20Bad%20Internet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-son-of-a-b-to-bad-internet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20streaming%3A%20from%20Son%20Of%20A%20B%2A%2A%2A%2A%20to%20Bad%20Internet&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-son-of-a-b-to-bad-internet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc9ac4dd0101935b43319a275180b3d366411046b%2F360_0_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
The latest property to receive a jolt from the Netflix defibrillator is this 
kids’ sci-fi animation. Originally airing between 1984 and 1985, its adventures 
of astronauts piloting huge robots for interstellar dust-ups never found the 
same traction as Transformers. This re-imagining follows the same basic 
premise, and boasts Rhys Darby and The Walking Dead’s Steven Yeun among its 
vocal ranks. It’s also a Netflix partnership with DreamWorks, so superior 
quality animation can be assumed.

Available from Friday

BBC Store

Time Trumpet
Armando Iannucci’s spoof nostalgia show – which saw talking heads including 
Adam Buxton, Stewart Lee and Richard Ayoade reminisce about the early 21st 
century from the year 2031 onwards – only aired for one series in 2006, but 
managed to create an entire alternate universe in that time. Fork out £5.99 at 
the BBC Store to look back on such seminal events as the war between Tesco and 
Denmark, and Sebastian Coe murdering Justin Lee Collins after learning the 
London Olympics were a hoax by the Friday Night Project.

Available now

Podcast

Bowraville Murders
Described as Australia’s answer to Serial, this podcast, concerning the 
murders of three Aboriginal children 25 years ago, has had a similar impact to 
Sarah Koenig’s effort: as a result of public attention, the case has now been 
referred to court for a possible retrial. Exposing the racial fissures that run 
through Australian society, it makes for urgent, essential listening.

Available now
 