
We will never stop marvelling at the art of René Magritte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/magritte>. This Belgian surrealist 
who died in 1967 is forever contemporary; his paintings have never gone stale 
and never will. They are insidious conundrums that can never be solved, and the 
21st century just can’t resist puzzling over them.

A Magritte retrospective called The Treason of Images 
<https://www.centrepompidou.fr/cpv/ressource.action?param.id=FR_R-5eb6563d265bc29ee4435e693f322ec&param.idSource=FR_E-45018ba5-54f4-43be-81c6-dd37eb7844d8>
 is about to open at the Georges Pompidou Centre in Paris, following major 
showings of his art this decade inNew York 
<https://www.moma.org/calendar/exhibitions/1298?locale=en> and Chicago 
<http://www.artic.edu/exhibition/magritte-mystery-ordinary-1926-1938>, not to 
mentionTate Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jun/21/rene-magritte-tate-liverpool-surrealism>
. Why do museums keep putting on big Magritte shows and why do the crowds keep 
coming?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frene-magritte-pompidou-centre-surrealism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28eedb86dbe57c0c106fc51cab1f7bbb05abf88f%2F0_0_3934_4755%2F3934.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20is%20not%20an%20article%3A%20why%20Ren%C3%A9%20Magritte%20is%20a%20timeless%20genius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frene-magritte-pompidou-centre-surrealism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20is%20not%20an%20article%3A%20why%20Ren%C3%A9%20Magritte%20is%20a%20timeless%20genius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frene-magritte-pompidou-centre-surrealism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28eedb86dbe57c0c106fc51cab1f7bbb05abf88f%2F0_0_3934_4755%2F3934.jpg>
 René Magritte with Femme-Bouteille, his oil painting of a nude on a glass 
bottle, circa 1955. Photograph: Archive Photos/Getty Images 
It’s because he undermines our philosophical assumptions about the nature of 
reality more pithily than a truckload of conceptual artists. In the late 1960s, 
John Lennon fell in love with conceptual artist Yoko Ono and became her 
collaborator, but Paul McCartney had him beat: he owned (and still does) a 
Magritte painting of an apple with the words “Au Revoir” written across it. 
This enigmatic image inspired the Beatles to create Apple Corps (in a pun that 
would have pleased Magritte, it’s pronounced “apple core”) andindirectly gave 
Apple computers their name 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/craigsilver/2013/12/05/how-a-magritte-painting-lead-to-apple-computer/#439fa1e6d7f3>
 when Steve Jobs copied the Beatles.

While Ono’s art – or Martin Creed’s, or Ai Weiwei’s – is provocative and good 
fun, this kind of art (let’s call it conceptual as a shorthand) often stops at 
questions about art itself. “Is it art?” is not that deep a question – yet it’s 
the oneCreed’s room, with the lights going on and off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2013/sep/03/martin-creed-lights-on-off>
 keeps us asking. Magritte does not make anyone ask that question. We accept 
his paintings are art. They are paintings, aren’t they? They even have nice 
frames. Yup, that looks like art alright.

They are also nicely painted, in an almost pedantic way. Not for him the 
radical prising apart of appearances pioneered by cubism before the first world 
war or the strange techniques with which his fellow surrealistMax Ernst 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/ernst-dadaville-t03707> attempted to tap 
into the unconscious roots of art. Magritte paints with a sincere amateur’s 
pedantry and a belief in the perspective tradition that would please the most 
conservative connoisseur.

Except it all goes wrong, somehow. His 1928 painting Man with a Newspaper 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/magritte-man-with-a-newspaper-t00680>, 
which hangs in Tate Modern, depicts exactly what it says in the title. A man in 
a starched collar and businesslike clothes sits reading his paper next to an 
iron stove in a neat room looking out on a blue sky over green fields. It is 
all very normal – even banal. But this scene only fills the top left section of 
a picture divided into four. In the other three panels everything is identical 
– except for one absence: the man is not there. His chair is exactly where it 
was. The stove is the same, the table, the picture on the wall, the view out of 
the window – all utterly identical. But there is no man.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frene-magritte-pompidou-centre-surrealism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdbb3192ccc982bc5fdb0960c2d88d4493adb654%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20is%20not%20an%20article%3A%20why%20Ren%C3%A9%20Magritte%20is%20a%20timeless%20genius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frene-magritte-pompidou-centre-surrealism%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20is%20not%20an%20article%3A%20why%20Ren%C3%A9%20Magritte%20is%20a%20timeless%20genius&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Frene-magritte-pompidou-centre-surrealism%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbdbb3192ccc982bc5fdb0960c2d88d4493adb654%2F0_0_5976_3992%2F5976.jpg>
 The Pompidou museum’s Magritte exhibition, The Treason of Images. Photograph: 
Martin Bureau/AFP/Getty Images 
What does it mean? Magritte belonged to the surrealist movement, but its 
intellectual heroSigmund Freud 
<https://www.freud.org.uk/education/topic/76547/freud-and-surrealism/> is not 
much help understanding this (for it’s not about sex). Nor are the sentimental 
values we often bring to art of any use. A contemporary installation in which 
someone vanished might well be interpreted as a work of “mourning”, an image of 
loss and death: but we instinctively know this painting is not mournful or sad. 
That’s because the man is portrayed without a shred of empathy. He looks a 
nonentity. His disappearance is not that big a deal.

Missing piece of lost Magritte painting is discovered in Norwich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/missing-piece-lost-magritte-painting-discovered-norwich>
Perhaps that is part of Magritte’s point. We exist, and then we don’t. The 
world will be there when we are gone. The dull factuality of physical things 
does not need human perception to make it persist. Thinking about this through 
Magritte’s eyes becomes terrifying: that when you leave your home and lock the 
door all the objects in it still exist, unconcious as they are, without any 
need to be known, to be seen, by a conscious human.

That’s one eerie way of looking at it, but there is no easy way to “decode” a 
Magritte painting. His art placidly and calmly asks terrifying questions about 
the solid things we take for granted.

You know nothing, smiles the bowler-hatted magician 
<http://www.renemagritte.org/man-in-a-bowler-hat.jsp>, as he pulls away the rug 
from under your feet to reveal there’s no floor, either. And that’s not evena 
pipe <https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/b/b9/MagrittePipe.jpg> you’re 
holding in your hand.
 