
An inability to keep a closed mouth about a locked box has brought chancellors 
down in the past. Hugh Dalton, the man who raised the revenues for Attlee’s 
welfare state, had to go after tipping off a journalist just before his budget. 
WhetherGeorge Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has 
breached the purdah rule is a moot point, because the big story weeks ahead of 
Wednesday’s budget was not about anything in his red box, but something he had 
removed.

The most ear-catching moment of the supposed “pensions revolution” of the last 
parliament came in 2014 when the responsible minister, Lib Dem Steve Webb, said 
that it wasfor the individual to decide 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-26649162> whether they wanted to blow 
their whole savings pot on a Lamborghini. In theory, the new flexibility to do 
what you liked with pensions applied to everyone, although – as the flash car 
example suggests – this was a revolution of more interest to the haves than the 
have-nots. The next step Osborne had hoped to make in this year’s budget could 
have more fundamentally shaken things up, to benefit the saving poor.

In the face of stubborn statistics about the vast proportion of tax relief 
paid out to a small proportion of well-to-do savers, the chancellor had been 
playing with levelling out the subsidies between higher-rate taxpayers, who are 
currently handed 67p in relief from the revenue for every £1 they chip in, and 
the mere 25p that goes to basic-rate taxpayers when they do the same. Moving to 
a single rate would plainly have boosted smaller pension pots.

But what could have been is not to be: the chancellor has decided that three 
months before a tricky European referendum is not a time to tackle the tax 
perks of higher earners. Policy on pensions will thus be left half-reformed for 
a time to come. Half-reformed, however, still leaves it an awful lot more 
cogent than policy towards other forms of savings for low-earners, where the 
recent record is one of outright chaos.

Budget 2016: Labour attacks government's Help to Save scheme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/14/budget-2016-labour-attacks-governments-help-to-save-scheme>
New Labour briefly had a keen interest in what it called “asset-based 
welfare”. Thechild trust fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/may/24/child-trust-funds-scrapped>, 
launched in 2005, colloquially known as “baby bonds”, provided every child born 
after 2002 with a £250 nest egg, with twice as much for kids from poor homes, 
and plans for parents and the state to chip in more as the children grew up. 
The coalition governmentdid away with this largesse 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/speech-by-the-chief-secretary-to-the-treasury-rt-hon-david-laws-mp-announcing-62-billion-savings>
 during its very first month in power, and in month two it also ditched the 
separateSaving Gateway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2010/jun/24/budget-gateway-saving-scrapped> 
scheme to offer 8 million adults of modest meansa 50p bribe for every pound 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/www.direct.gov.uk/en/MoneyTaxAndBenefits/ManagingMoney/SavingsAndInvestments/DG_10010450>
 they put away for a rainy day.

Set against the savagery that the coalition displayed to social security 
benefits, I found this particular swing of the Osborne axe understandable 
enough. Sure, rainy day savings are a nice thing to have. But at a time when 
people were having to choose between heating and eating, building up a 
precautionary piggy bank was less important than making sure people had enough 
cash to get through the here and now. All the more so becauseindependent 
evaluation <http://www.ifs.org.uk/centres/cpp/impacts/446> from the Institute 
for Fiscal Studies suggested that the chief effect was not to encourage more 
saving overall, but to shift funds from other accounts into the subsidised 
Savings Gateway.

So even if you didn’t much like where the coalition had got to on savings, it 
was coherent. I was, therefore, mystified bypre-budget reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/14/budget-2016-labour-attacks-governments-help-to-save-scheme>
 of a new “Help to Save” scheme. After years of savaging the welfare state, 
David Cameron has now decided an all-out war on poverty will be his legacy, and 
he says that encouraging the poor to “build up a rainy day fund 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/prime-ministers-speech-on-life-chances>
” must be part of that. And thus – without any fresh evidence, and with more 
painful benefit cuts in the pipeline – the PM is now set to reinvent the Saving 
Gateway he previously abolished, complete with the same 50p match for a pound 
of saving, payable after the same two-year wait.

It is a weird pass to have reached, yet there may have been a certain 
presentational logic in announcing a carrot for low-income people without 
pensions to go alongside the big planned tax relief reforms, under the banner 
of a “budget for savers”. But now the full pension changes won’t happen, we’re 
left with the prime minister undoing one of his first acts in government and 
then claiming it as his legacy. There is one thing I’m confident in predicting 
will be in the red box: confusion.
 