
Amazon

Amazon pilot season

When, in 2013, Amazon announced plans to commission shows based on user 
feedback of pilot episodes, it felt like a revolutionary moment in TV. Three 
years later, Amazon’s pilot season hasn’t quite upturned the industry in the 
way many had hoped, but has still produced some decent output: Mozart In The 
Jungle and, most notably, Transparent were both graduates of the programme. 
This time, Amazon is launching a host of kids’ pilots, along with a pair of 
adult book adaptations: The Interestings is based on Meg Wolitzer’s 
coming-of-age tale; while The Last Tycoon brings to life F Scott Fitzgerald’s 
unfinished novel and stars Kelsey Grammer.

Available from Friday

BBC Store

Prejudice And Pride 

To mark London Pride the BBC has curated an LGBT-themed selection of 
programming from the past five decades. Among the shows prised from the vault 
are odd-couple sitcom Gimme Gimme Gimme, racy costume drama Tipping the Velvet, 
and 1993 miniseries The Buddha Of Suburbia, based on Hanif Kureishi’s 
coming-of-age novel of the same name. Also included is recent BBC2 hit Boy 
Meets Girl, an age-gap romance starring transgender actor Rebecca Root.

Available from Thursday

Netflix

Orange Is The New Black

As the prison drama returns for a fourth outing, questions abound over the 
fate of Litchfield’s inmates. Will Alex make it out of the greenhouse alive? 
Can Piper continue her underwear racket? And could the inimitable Nicky Nichols 
(Natasha Lyonne) – shipped off to max security early in season three – make a 
return? Criminally addictive fun.

Available from Friday

YouTube

Dave TALKS
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-amazon-pilot-season-to-modern-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79243939abc6ee73b7ee128c15f39cc9acf8f31b%2F93_156_1644_987%2F1644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20streaming%3A%20from%20Amazon%20pilot%20season%20to%20Modern%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-amazon-pilot-season-to-modern-love%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20streaming%3A%20from%20Amazon%20pilot%20season%20to%20Modern%20Love&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjun%2F13%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-amazon-pilot-season-to-modern-love%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79243939abc6ee73b7ee128c15f39cc9acf8f31b%2F93_156_1644_987%2F1644.jpg>
Lord knows there have been enough parodies of TED talks over the years, but 
this effort from Dave still manages to find some laughs in the format. It sees 
various standups waffle on about absurd topics, from John Kearns (arguing 
against winning the lottery) to Katie Wix (How To Turn Around, All The Way 
Around In A Circle). No “talk” is longer than 10 minutes, meaning the conceit 
avoids growing tired.

Available now

BBC3 

Sounds Random

Ever wondered where the buzziest bands and artists around get their 
inspiration? This music show sees comic James Acaster delve into pop and indie 
acts’ playlists in a series of short films – a Desert Island Discs for the 
Spotify generation. Artists featured so far include electropopper Shura – a fan 
of power ballads – and R&B-inspired popster Izzy Bizu, whose picks range from 
Ella Fitzgerald to Tame Impala.

Available now 

Podcast

Modern Love

This US pod was adapted from the New York Times series of the same name. The 
premise is simple but effective: celebs voice tales of relationships originally 
written for the paper’s Modern Love column, before the original authors are 
interviewed. From a Craigslist missed connection with an unexpected twist, to 
the story of a disabled man finding love after being paralysed (read 
beautifully by Colin Farrell), each episode is life-affirming without feeling 
cheesy.

Available now
 