
Amazon Prime


Preacher

This darkly funny and, at times, almost psychedelically odd drama is adapted 
from Garth Ennis and Steve Dillon’s comics. It starsDominic Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/dominic-cooper> (pictured) as a bad-boy 
preacher, just about keeping it together in bizarro small-town America. But 
that’s the very least of it. Preacher also features vampires, exploding holy 
men, a manic Joseph Gilgun and a kid called Arseface (you’ll understand when 
you see him). It’s hard to describe – but in a good way. We’d recommend just 
watching it.

Available now

Lucky Louie

Very much a portrait of the comedian as a young(er) man but, even so, this 
sitcom contains many of the embryonic elements that Louis CK would sharpen in 
his subsequent show Louie. Once again CK plays a lamer, less successful version 
of himself, but here he’s stuck in the testy domesticity he would escape in 
Louie. The laugh track gives it a surprisingly traditional feel, but it’s still 
full of sharply bleak wit.


Available now

Vice.com

Locked Off

Did the illegal rave scene die in the 90s? Maybe, but as traditional clubs 
close and youngsters get priced out of the kind of lairy fun that used to be 
their birthright, it’s undergoing a heartening rebirth. This hugely 
entertaining film goes in search of the new generation of nitrous 
oxide-huffing, bolt-cutter wielding hedonists and – from the heart of London to 
the wilds of Wales –finds that the kids (along with a few old ravers getting 
1988 flashbacks) are once again doing their righteously boggle-eyed thing.

Available now

Netflix

Hibana
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-preacher-to-hibana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1e4f820a4521b5fe55efeae461ee329e57cf389%2F0_253_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20streaming%3A%20from%20Preacher%20to%20Hibana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-preacher-to-hibana%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20streaming%3A%20from%20Preacher%20to%20Hibana&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F30%2Fthis-weeks-best-streaming-from-preacher-to-hibana%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1e4f820a4521b5fe55efeae461ee329e57cf389%2F0_253_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Hibana on Netflix. Photograph: YD Creation / Netflix 
Netflix’s first Japanese original is a comedy-drama following two manzai 
performers as they stumble around Tokyo attempting to make their name. Manzai 
is a genre of Japanese standup based on the “funny man, straight man” premise. 
That this seems to be an act with two straight men is, of course, part of the 
wider comedy and also prompts a certain melancholy – witness their endless 
polishing of a not particularly funny routine about a parrot for proof of 
hilarity drifting into longueurs.

Available from Thursday

BBC iPlayer

Hillsborough

This gruelling, brilliant documentary feels like the definitive TV take on the 
1989 tragedy that turned into a source of national shame, thanks to 27 years of 
political inaction, police cover- ups and media lies. The film hears from 
survivors, cops, bereaved families and Phil Scraton, whose book Hillsborough: 
The Truth is now accepted as the last word on the subject. Unflinching and 
extremely necessary television from the BBC.

Available now

All 4

Man vs Nature

Just in time for summer, All 4 have collected a series of films about extreme 
cold. There’s the story of Aron Ralston (127 Hours), who was forced to amputate 
his own arm to escape from a ravine. There’s the icy nightmare of Touching The 
Void. There’s The Beckoning Silence, in which Joe Simpson returns to 
mountaineering. And there’s Walking The Himalayas, in which – for once – 
nothing traumatic happens. Phew.


Available now
 