
About 3,500 Post Office <https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> 
workers are being forced to take a cut in pension benefits as the 
government-backed service tries to cut costs.

About half the Post Office’s 7,000-strong workforce is being forced to shift 
from a final salary pension scheme to a defined contribution scheme, a move 
that unions say could cut retirement benefits by 30% or even more in some cases.

Post office jobs under threat as 39 branches set for privatisation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/post-office-jobs-under-threat-as-39-branches-set-for-privatisation>
The planned pension cuts were announced just days after the Post Office said 
it would be looking toput 20 more Crown offices into private hands 
<http://corporate.postoffice.co.uk/our-media-centre#/pressreleases/update-on-post-office-plans-for-its-crown-branch-network-1467065>
, taking the total this year to 85 in a process opposed by unions who see it as 
a form of backdoor privatisation of the service.

The Post Office was already facing criticism after agreeing to hand over up to 
61 branches to WH Smith in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/post-office-to-move-up-to-61-branches-to-wh-smith>
 including some of the39 Crown offices flagged up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/post-office-jobs-under-threat-as-39-branches-set-for-privatisation>
 to be put into private hands in January. Before that, 50 Crown offices, which 
are run directly by the Post Office, had been franchised or otherwise offloaded 
since 2013.

Unite <http://www.unitetheunion.org/> and fellow Post Office union the CWU 
<http://www.cwu.org/> are to ballot members on protest action over the cuts to 
pensions. Unite is also calling onTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>’s new government to 
investigate the financial difficulties of the Post Office, which remained 
publicly owned after thepart-privatisation of the Royal Mail postal service in 
2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/11/royal-mail-share-price-buyers-profit>
.

Brian Scott, Unite officer for members in the Post Office, said: “This is a 
sad day for Unite members in the Post Office who are being let down by senior 
executives that failed to secure the necessary funding to ensure a long-term 
future for the scheme. The Post Office wants to close this scheme at a time 
when it is still in surplus to the tune of as much as £100m. There is no need 
to close the scheme and Unite members are furious.”

Andy Furey, a CWU official, said: “CWU is completely opposed to the closure of 
the Post Office defined benefits pension scheme. This is another cost-cutting 
exercise to prop up their balance sheet at the expense of staff. The scheme 
itself is in rude health, carrying a surplus. We will be balloting our members 
for strike action over this attack on their quality of life after retirement 
along with our opposition to the company’s dogged pursuit of closures, 
privatisation and up to 2,000 job losses.”

The Post Office’s final salary scheme was closed to new members in 2008 but 
long-serving staff have continued to accrue benefits since then.

The Post Office has now decided it wants to close the scheme to new accruals 
and from March next year members will only be able to build up benefits in a 
new defined contribution scheme. Unlike a final salary scheme, which promises a 
specific income, the income from a defined contribution scheme is dependent on 
the amount paid in and the performance of the fund’s investments.

The Post Office said it had made its recommendation to the pension fund’s 
trustees but no final decision had been taken. Natasha Wilson, the Post 
Office’s director of reward and pensions, said: “This is clearly an important 
decision and both we and the trustees take our stewardship responsibilities 
very seriously. It is only right that the trustees give due consideration to 
our recommendation in reaching a decision, and we are fully supportive.”
 