
Thousands of restaurant businesses in Britain could go bust because the fall 
in sterling since the Brexit vote has sharply raised the cost of imported food 
and wine, an accountancy firm has warned.

Moore Stephens says that 5,570 restaurant businesses have at least a 30% 
chance of insolvency in the next three years, due to inflationary pressures and 
stagnating disposable incomes.

The UK imports 48% of its food, according to government figures, and many 
restaurants rely heavily on imported food and wine. The cost of labour has also 
gone up, after the government raised the national minimum wage from £6.70 to 
£7.20 in April, with a further rise to £7.50 to take place next April.

The restaurant sector is fiercely competitive, with 200 new restaurants 
opening in London last year alone. This gives consumers a lot of choice and 
forces restaurants to cut prices or come up with special offers.

Many diners are also suffering from flatlining disposable incomes – the amount 
households have left to spend after tax and bills have been paid. The average 
gross disposable household income increased just 0.5% over the last year, from 
£17,872 to £17,965, Moore Stephens said, quoting official data.


Even some of the biggest restaurant companies are struggling. For example, The 
Restaurant Group is closing 33 outlets across the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/26/frankie-bennys-owner-closes-restaurants>
, including 14 Frankie & Benny’s and 11 Chiquito branches. It also plans to 
close its flagship Garfunkels restaurant on the Strand in London.

The company, which also owns Coast to Coast, has blamed its poor performance 
on unpopular new menus, higher prices and poor customer service, and vowed to 
listen more to its customers.

The business’s new chair Debbie Hewitt, who took over in March as part of a 
boardroom shake-out, has said the drop in the value of the pound following the 
referendum would push up the price of imported food next year but added that 
the company cannot afford to pass this on to customers.

There have been a growing number of warnings over dearer food prices, from 
Britain’s biggest supermarket, Tesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/uk-inflation-rises-near-two-year-high-consumer-price-index>
, and others, and the impact on poor families. The Bank of England, the 
International Monetary Fund and City economists all believe that inflation will 
rise to at least 3% by the end of next year, from 0.9% in October.

Mike Finch, restructuring partner at Moore Stephens, said: “It’s been a tough 
year for many restaurants in the face of rising costs and fierce competition. 
It is unrealistic to expect UK restaurant groups to avoid the impact of the 
fall in the pound by substituting for UK produce – they are going to face a big 
hit. Restaurants have to make tough decisions as to how much they try to pass 
on to consumers; too much and they risk losing business, too little and they 
lose margin.”

He said that sterling’s wild swings in the currency markets had hit small and 
medium-sized restaurant businesses particularly hard as they operate on tighter 
budgets and are less likely to negotiate long-term supply contracts. All this 
comes at a time when many consumers are likely to be very price conscious.

“The high number of potential insolvencies over the next year shows just how 
fragile finances can be in this sector and demonstrates the importance of 
careful financial management,” Finch added.

“There may be further challenges to come as the UK’s trading agreements with 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> remain uncertain. Many 
in the restaurant industry would consider the idea of additional import tariffs 
on foodstuffs with horror.”

A separate report showed the strain many UK consumers are under. The number of 
those who have taken on more debt over the last five years has risen to 37% 
from 27% a year ago. The findings come from a survey of 2,008 consumers with 
debt, including 804 defaulters who have fallen behind with payments, by FTSE 
250-listed Arrow Global, which buys and manages debt portfolios.

The most common form of personal debt is credit cards that are not paid off in 
full every month. The fact that credit cards have overtaken mortgages as the 
most frequent form of debt, alongside an increase in overdraft borrowing, 
suggests that the nation’s habits have changed to favour short-term borrowing. 
More people than ever are renting as they cannot afford to buy a home.

Almost half of borrowers (48%) have a credit card which is not cleared in full 
each month, compared with 39% a year ago. Almost a third have an overdraft, up 
from 23%, while the number of those with a mortgage has fallen to 42% from 46%.

One in 10 debt defaulters who fall behind on repayments never catch up.

The latest Bank of England figures showed credit-card borrowing reached an 
all-time high of £66.2bn in October.

Arrow Global has arranged an industry roundtable this Friday to discuss what 
the industry can do to support debt defaulters. Tom Drury, the firm’s chief 
executive, said: “Consumer credit is vital for the smooth-functioning of the 
economy, but it is clear that British consumers are taking on a heavy debt 
burden at the moment that is not going to be sustainable for some.

“The low interest rate environment means that debt is cheap, but that doesn’t 
help consumers who have struggled with their monthly budgeting or suffered from 
a shock event like losing their job. When borrowers do fall behind on 
repayments, it is vital that they get all the support they need to rehabilitate 
their debt.”
 