
The UN refugee agency and the EU’s aid department have been accused by other 
aid groups of mismanaging a multimillion-pound fund earmarked for the most 
vulnerable refugees inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, 
leaving thousands sleeping in freezing conditions in Greece.


The Greek government, which has ultimate jurisdiction over camp activities, 
has also been criticised for failing to use nearly €90m (£75m) ofseparate EU 
funding 
<https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/what-we-do/policies/european-agenda-migration/proposal-implementation-package/docs/20161208/factsheet_managing_refugee_crisis_eu_financial_support_greece_-_update_en.pdfhttps://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/what-we-do/policies/european-agenda-migration/proposal-implementation-package/docs/20161208/factsheet_managing_refugee_crisis_eu_financial_support_greece_-_update_en.pdf>
 to adequately improve conditions at the camps before the onset of winter. No 
single actor has overall control of all funding and management decisions in the 
camps, allowing most parties to distance themselves from blame.

Please help us help #childrefugees survive the winter - Guardian/Observer 2016 
Appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
The EU aid department, known as Echo, has given UNHCR more than €14m since 
April to help prepare roughly 50 refugee camps for the winter inGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, where an estimated 50,000 mainly 
Syrian refugees have been stranded since the adoption of new European migration 
policies in March. A further €24m has been given to UNHCR for other projects.

Both organisations stand accused by other aid groups of squandering this 
money, after failing to properly “winterise” or evacuate dozens of camps before 
snow fell in Greece earlier in December.

In addition to providing warmer bedding and clothes, UNHCR was expected to use 
this money to move people from tents to heated containers or formal housing; 
heat warehouses where other refugees are living; provide a consistent supply of 
hot water; and install insulated flooring for anyone still left in tents.

Months after the funds were dispersed, roughly half of those living in camps 
had yet to be transferred to formal housing by the onset of winter. Of the 45 
camps that were still active at the start of the month, the Guardian visited or 
was made aware of at least 15 camps that had yet to be properly adapted by the 
time snow fell in northern Greece at the start of December. UNHCR admitted it 
was itself aware of only eight camps where all the residents have been moved 
out of tents and into prefabricated containers.

In a recent UNHCR video, 
<https://www.facebook.com/ec.humanitarian.aid/videos/10154615194542906/?pnref=story>
 promoted by Echo, the two institutions hailed the success of their 
winterisation work. In early December, the EU also said that Greece was safe 
enough to return refugees there from other European countries.

But refugees and independent aid workers say Echo and UNHCR had initially 
ignored the gravity of the situation. The head of Medécins Sans Frontières in 
Greece, Loic Jaeger, described the situation as a failure.

'Prisoners of Europe': the everyday humiliation of refugees stuck in Greece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/06/prisoners-of-europe-the-everyday-humiliation-of-refugees-stuck-in-greece-migration>
“We are outraged about the positive communications [from UNHCR and the EU] 
that are completely disconnected with reality,” said Jaeger, speakingbefore 
UNHCR began to admit flaws <http://www.unhcr.org/584a77754.html> in the process 
on 9 December.

Jaeger said: “Our feeling is that there is a willingness now, led by the fact 
that there is a massive amount of money [allocated for winterisation], to try 
to present the situation as if it is OK. But it is not. On the islands we are 
still not even starting to winterise. In some places it’s working quite well, 
but in northern Greece you still have people sleeping in tents in the snow.”

Jaeger added: “What is being done with all this money? Who is checking? Where 
is the report from the EU or UNHCR assessing what is still to be done? Where is 
the transparency? There is a discrepancy between what is claimed and what is 
the reality.”

At three camps visited by the Guardian, three refugees with newborn babies 
condemned the freezing conditions their children had been left in. “It’s too 
cold here for a baby,” said Sonya, a 17-year-old Syrian Kurd, whose first child 
was born prematurely in the week that snow fell in Thessaloniki.

Asked by the Guardian, both UNHCR and the EU released a breakdown of their 
spending on winterisation and other areas. More than 21,000 people have been 
placed in formal housing, the data shows – but an estimated 20,000 remained in 
camps in early December. Officials from both institutions partly blamed the 
cash-strapped Greek government for the failure to properly accommodate the 
refugees, who were left stranded on Greek territory by other EU countries in 
March.
Refugee camp map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/archive-zip/giv-3902OhCtSgkYwR0x/>
In response, Greece’s migration ministry said that while it was ultimately 
responsible for the camps, it was hamstrung by a lack of independent funding. 
EU funds are dispersed to the Greek army and other Greek institutions – and to 
UNHCR and 13 other large international agencies and charities – rather than the 
migration ministry itself.

“We don’t have funds on our own,” said Nicholas Connolly Rangos, the 
ministry’s regional coordinator for northern Greece. “All we can do is push and 
push our Echo partners, UNHCR, and the big NGOs … [who] cannot overcome their 
internal processes to provide assistance sooner.”

A spokesman for Echo highlighted how other wings of the EU have provided 
nearly €800m directly to Greek institutions, to help them respond to the 
refugee crisis.A breakdown of that spending 
<https://ec.europa.eu/home-affairs/sites/homeaffairs/files/what-we-do/policies/european-agenda-migration/proposal-implementation-package/docs/20161208/factsheet_managing_refugee_crisis_eu_financial_support_greece_-_update_en.pdf>
 shows that the EU has sent nearly €90m to Greek institutions to improve the 
camps – though none of it was specifically allocated for winterisation, unlike 
the €14m allocated to UNHCR.

The ongoing blame game highlights the level of disorganisation across the 
entire response to the Greek refugee crisis. No single actor has overall 
control of all funding and management decisions in the camps.

Throughout months of research in several sites across Greece, the Guardian has 
found that the EU, UNHCR, major NGOs, the Greek government and the Greek army 
all use the the absence of a clear chain of command to absolve themselves of 
responsibility for the dysfunctional system.

Secret aid worker: Greece has exposed the aid community's failures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/13/secret-aid-worker-greece-has-exposed-the-aid-communitys-failures>
Additionally, the Guardian has found that Echo dispersed nearly €190m to a 
group of major UN agencies and charities working in Greek refugee camps – 
without ensuring that the the aid would be spread equally across the camps. 
Only a few camps have designated funding for the full range of services offered 
by the charities.

Guardian analysis of data provided by the EU shows that 19 camps receive no 
designated EU funding for water-related infrastructure such as toilets and 
showers; another 19 have no designated funding for healthcare; 10 receive no 
designated funding for psycho-social care; 26 receive no designated funding for 
child protection or child-friendly spaces; 25 receive no funding for female 
friendly spaces. Asked to comment on this analysis, the EU did not dispute the 
figures.

Finally, grassroots groups claim that the recipients of this EU funding are 
often slow to spend it,forcing smaller volunteer-led groups to use their weaker 
resources to fill in the gaps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/help-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them>
. The Guardian has found evidence that in at least nine camps, grassroots 
groups have spent hundreds of thousands of euros on projects that should have 
been paid for with the funding supplied by the EU to the major charities.

In the most telling example, a grassroots US-based charity claims it was left 
to pay more than €100,000 to winterise the camp of Oinofyta, in southern 
Greece. Lisa Campbell, the co-founder ofDo Your Part 
<http://www.dyp3.doyourpart.org/>, said: “Since no one else had any money, Do 
Your Part, a very small American organisation, is spending €115,000 so that 
refugees don’t have to stay outside during winter.”

In northern Greece, the small charity RefuAid <http://refuaid.org/> wants to 
set up long-term integration projects – but says it has been forced to spend 
most of its budget on short-term projects because larger NGOs have failed to 
use the EU funding that had been designated for that purpose.

Help Refugees: 'We will never abandon them'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/help-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them>
“Our organisation is about preparing for the long term, but instead we’re 
spending all our money on the short term because we’re having to step in for 
the larger NGOs,” said Anna Jones, RefuAid’s co-founder. “At least half our 
funding has been spent on short-term projects – around £20,000-25,000 – because 
larger organisations are not stepping up.”

The EU denies that its money is being badly spent, and says it is doing all it 
can to monitor where its money goes. A spokesman said its partners were subject 
to four layers of control and that its funding was “the most thoroughly 
monitored and controlled of all international aid donated for the refugee 
crisis in Greece”.

In response to questions about the winterisation process, UNHCR said: “As we 
are out there on the refugee sites every day, we understand and share your 
analysis that there are gaps. Just the other day, we brought 11 new-born babies 
out of tents into hotels because their tents had not been replaced by other 
accommodation. The [Greek migration] ministry had asked us to trouble-shoot and 
step in on that one. And we are seeing the consequences of the delays in other 
areas. Humanitarian actors, including us and the volunteers, are in facing 
serious challenges and trying to close the gaps.”
 