
This week came the news that once again a record low has been set for wages 
growth. Thewages price index 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/6345.0Main%20Features1Sep%202016?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=6345.0&issue=Sep%202016&num=&view=>
 in the past year rose by just 1.9% – a full percentage point below the level 
of growth that occurred when Australia was in the midst of the global financial 
crisis. It means that real wages have not grown at all for more than three 
years.

If you like records being broken, now is the most exciting time to look at 
economic data. The annual growth of wages in September of 1.9% was a new record 
low, breaking the old mark of 2.1% set only three months ago in June. It was 
the 16th consecutive fall in the growth of annual wages. The last time 
Australians wages grew faster than they had three months earlier was September 
2012:

 The new annual record low came off the back of another record low quarterly 
growth – just 0.4% in seasonally adjusted terms.

The private sector has now seen wages grow by less that 0.5% in seven 
consecutive quarters. Prior to this run, there had only been one quarter in the 
history of the wages price index below that level (during the GFC):

 But while as a general rule public sector wages grow faster than the private 
sector, the public sector is also experiencing record low wages growth – just 
2.3% in the past year:

 The narrative around public sector wages is often rather skewed – as though 
we’re talking about bureaucrats getting fat off the taxpayers. At the moment 
there is a fair bit of dispute – literally so in some cases – over the federal 
government’s public sector bargaining policy. The drive to keep annual pay 
rises below 2% has seen some pay disputes last over three years.

The lack of pay rises for commonwealth public servants can be seen in the weak 
growth of public sector wages in the ACT. Unlike other states, the public 
sector of the ACT is dominated by those working for the Australian public 
service, rather than teachers, healthcare workers and other non-bureaucratic 
workers as is the case elsewhere.

Australian wages growing at slowest rate on record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/australian-wages-growing-at-slowest-rate-on-record-statistics-show>
In the past year, the average wages of public sector workers in the ACT rose 
just 1.8% – lower than the rate of private sector workers across the nation. 
And this is not a recent phenomenon.

The last time ACT public sector wages grew faster than that of private sector 
workers was March 2013. Over the past five years, wages for the private sector 
have risen by 13.6% compared to 12.4% for ACT public sector workers. Even going 
back 10 years, ACT public sector workers have had lower pay rises than that of 
private sector workers across the country – 34.9% compared to 36.2%:

 The slowing growth of wages across the country is being driven by a couple of 
factors. Firstly, the mining industry is massively off the boil.

For just over 10 years from the middle of 2004, wages in the mining sector 
grew faster than everywhere else. But this situation reversed in the middle of 
last year:

 And it wasn’t just that workers in the mining sector during the boom years 
were on average getting better pay raises than everyone else, they were also 
the source of the biggest pay rises.

A review of 18,000 different jobs 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Latestproducts/6345.0Feature%20Article1Sep%202016?opendocument&tabname=Summary&prodno=6345.0&issue=Sep%202016&num=&view=>
 by the RBA and the ABS found that in 2012, over 60% of mining sector pay rises 
were greater than 4% per annum; now it is less than 10%.

Such falls in the proportion of above average wage rises has occurred across 
all industries, and so too has the size of those large wage rises. In 2012 the 
average of wage rises above 4% was 7.5%, now it is 5.75%.

The biggest wage rises over the past year have come in the education and 
healthcare industries, and also rather surprisingly, the accommodation and food 
industry.

This is a surprise because, as a general rule, that industry usually sees the 
worst wages growth. Over the past 10 years, wages in that industry have 
increased just 31.6%, well below the national average of 37.1%.

A main driver of the increase in that industry is the 2.4% increase in the 
minimum wage 
<https://www.fairwork.gov.au/about-us/news-and-media-releases/website-news/get-set-for-a-2-4-wage-increase-2016-annual-wage-review>
 handed down by the Fair Work Commission that came into effect on 1 July.

By contrast the mining sector is currently the worst performing industry for 
wage rises, and yet over the past 10 years it has been the best. But given in 
the past four years its workforce has shrunk by 20%, it is doubtful there are 
many workers who have been around for the full 10 years:

 All up, the poor wages growth means that real wages continue to be flat.

When comparing wage growth to the RBA’s underlying inflation measure, real 
wages haven’t grown by any appreciable level for three years. They have done 
better when compared to the employee cost of living index, but this is mostly 
due to the impact of interest rate cuts, and as result can be a rather erratic 
measure:

 Since 2002, real wages have gone through four stages – the mining-boom, the 
GFC-flatness, the post-GFC improvement, and then the now three year run of near 
stagnation:

 As the US political system has shown, when real incomes stay flat, voters get 
angry. We’re now three years into a run of stagnant real wages, don’t be 
surprised if people start looking for someone to blame.
 