
1 Gringolts Quartet

Violinist Ilya Gringolts’s quartet regularly include contemporary music 
alongside their standard repertory. The staples this week come from Beethoven 
(the sixth of his Op 18 set) and Brahms (his Op 67), while Jörg Widmann 
supplies the 21st-century work. Starting his Third String Quartet 
(Jagdquartett) is the nagging rhythm that pervades the opening movement of 
Beethoven’s Seventh Symphony, which turns into a hunt in which the prey is the 
quartet’s cellist.

Wigmore Hall, W1, Fri 
<https://wigmore-hall.org.uk/whats-on/beethoven-j-246-rg-widmann-and-brahms-201612301930>

2 Daniel Grimwood

Pianist Daniel Grimwood (pictured) has made his name with performances of 
high-Romantic 19th- and 20th-century works, often played on instruments from 
the era in which the music was written. His early-evening recital begins 
seasonally with Samuel Wesley’s Christmas Carol Rondo and also includes 
Beethoven’s Moonlight Sonata. Then Grimwood moves into more familiar territory 
with a Chopin nocturne, one of Liszt’s Transcendental Studies and finally 
Rachmaninov’s massive Second Piano Sonata.

St Martin-In-The-Fields, WC2, Tue 
<http://www.stmartin-in-the-fields.org/event/beethoven-moonlight-sonata-3/>


3 Ensemble Claudiana, Roberta Invernizzi & Sonia Prina

The Wigmore Hall always manages to come up with an outstanding baroque 
vocalist to bring some sparkle to the period between Christmas and new year, 
and this time it’s got two of the very best. Soprano Roberta Invernizzi and 
contralto Sonia Prina are no strangers to a Wigmore audience, and this time 
they share a recital with Ensemble Claudiana that they’ve called Amore e Morte 
dell’Amore. With works by Monteverdi, Frescobaldi and Lotti, as well as Handel 
and Forqueray, it’s a programme with strong Venetian connections.

Wigmore Hall, W1, Thu 
<https://wigmoredev.org.uk/whats-on/roberta-invernizzi-sonia-prina-ensemble-claudiana-luca-pianca-vittorio-ghielmi-margret-koell-201612291930>
 