
It is now five consecutive victories for Chelsea since Antonio Conte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-conte> switched to a 3-4-3 system 
– 16 goals scored, none conceded – and this was their most impressive attacking 
display for years, a wonderful demonstration of efficient turnovers, 
intelligent running and intricate interplay. If there was any doubt about the 
difficulty of switching from a four-man defence to a back three, you only 
needed to look at Everton.

Chelsea top the Premier League as Eden Hazard inspires Everton thrashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/05/chelsea-everton-premier-league-match-report>
Ronald Koeman surprisingly switched to a three-man defence, attempting to 
“match”Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> across the pitch. 
That makes sense when playing against a 3-5-2 system, as it provides a spare 
man at the back and equal numbers in midfield, but deploying a three-man 
defence against a front three is an extremely bold tactic – especially when 
facing quick, in-form attackers like Eden Hazard, Diego Costa and Pedro.

Everton looked comfortable in the opening stages when Chelsea had long spells 
of possession, with Seamus Coleman and Bryan Oviedo retreating into defensive 
positions, allowing the wide centre-backs to act as cover against Hazard and 
Pedro. But with Everton’s wing-backs pushing forward when they had possession, 
Everton simply couldn’t let Chelsea counterattack. The opener, scored by 
Hazard, was a perfect example – Gareth Barry was caught out by Nemanja Matic, 
and Chelsea immediately broke three-against-three. Everton’s defence hadn’t 
recovered as the ball was swept out to Hazard, who stereotypically cut inside 
and fired into the far corner. The second goal, almost made straight from 
kick-off, again found gaping holes in the Everton backline, and it was no 
surprise when Koeman introduced Kevin Mirallas for Oviedo and reverted to a 
four-man defence. By this stage, however, Chelsea were rampant andEverton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/everton> fared little better.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fhow-defensive-switch-transformed-chelseas-attack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50dbd967fdb772adb1a1c6b976f6e87678786784%2F7_5_847_1076%2F847.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20at%20the%20back%20is%20a%20dream%20for%20Chelsea%20but%20a%20nightmare%20for%20Everton%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fhow-defensive-switch-transformed-chelseas-attack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20at%20the%20back%20is%20a%20dream%20for%20Chelsea%20but%20a%20nightmare%20for%20Everton%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fhow-defensive-switch-transformed-chelseas-attack%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50dbd967fdb772adb1a1c6b976f6e87678786784%2F7_5_847_1076%2F847.jpg>
When Everton’s wing-backs pushed up, their centre-backs were exposed to the 
runs of Chelsea’s front three. Illustration: Stephen Flynn 
This system clearly suits Chelsea’s defenders nicely, particularly David Luiz, 
but has proved particularly crucial in revitalising Hazard and Pedro. The 
former is allowed freedom to play higher up the pitch than in the 4-1-4-1 
Chelsea used in the first few games, and has few defensive responsibilities, 
while Pedro has played almost his entire career in a three-pronged strike force 
and therefore offers tremendous movement in behind the defence.

A dramatic switch in formation often prompts a sudden improvement, before 
opposition managers gradually work out how to exploit weaknesses of the new 
system. On this evidence, however, matching Chelsea’s back three is clearly not 
the solution.
 