
Three men have been jailed for smuggling cocaine worth £2.5m into Britain and 
dropping it from a light aircraft on the day of the EU referendum.

Andrew Barrett, Michael Mealing and Jonathan Hart plotted possible landing and 
dropoff sites in Kent on a map, and carried out reconnaissance of a location, 
unaware they were under surveillance by the NationalCrime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> Agency (NCA).

On 23 June last year, investigators watched as the aircraft flew low over one 
of the sites, a secluded field a few miles from Faversham. Shortly afterwards, 
Mealing and Hart drove away from the area in a Land Rover, the Old Bailey heard.

They were followed to a builder’s yard in the Kent town, where officers 
arrested them.

In the boot of the vehicle were three large fuel containers packaged with 
heavy-duty tape capable of withstanding a drop from the air. A total of 31kg of 
high-purity cocaine was recovered from the containers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthree-men-jailed-for-25m-light-aircraft-cocaine-drop-in-kent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb90c3b19d93b7ec56baefbaf825e3293bb7b94d3%2F11_88_3388_2033%2F3388.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20men%20jailed%20over%20light%20aircraft%20drop%20of%20%C2%A32.5m%20of%20cocaine%20in%20Kent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthree-men-jailed-for-25m-light-aircraft-cocaine-drop-in-kent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20men%20jailed%20over%20light%20aircraft%20drop%20of%20%C2%A32.5m%20of%20cocaine%20in%20Kent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fthree-men-jailed-for-25m-light-aircraft-cocaine-drop-in-kent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb90c3b19d93b7ec56baefbaf825e3293bb7b94d3%2F11_88_3388_2033%2F3388.jpg>
 The fuel containers carrying £2.5m of cocaine that were found in a car driven 
by the trio to Faversham. Photograph: National Crime Agency/PA 
Barrett, said to have played a leading role in the operation, was later 
spotted at a house in Watford, Hertfordshire, in a white van and also arrested.

In the back of the van, officers found a holdall containing a further 18kg of 
cocaine, 1kg of MDMA and 15kg of cannabis. The stash had a combined wholesale 
value of about £650,000, but if sold on the streets, it could have been worth 
more than £1.5m.

Barrett, 41, of Cheddington, Buckinghamshire, Mealing, 41, of Corsham, 
Wiltshire, and Hart, 60, of no fixed abode, admitted importing cocaine.

Barrett pleaded guilty to possession of class A and class B drugs with intent 
to supply, and money laundering. Mealing also admitted possession of criminal 
property – £7,000 found in a wardrobe at his home.

Sentencing, Judge Stephen Kramer QC said the defendants played important roles 
in a “sophisticated and commercial operation”. He sentenced Barrett to 16 years 
in prison, and Mealing to 12 years and six months.

Hart, who had a record for drugs crimes and committed the offence while on 
licence, was sentenced for 10 years and nine months in prison.

Steve McIntyre from the NCA’s border policing command said: “We are actively 
targeting criminals who try to use general aviation and small airfields as a 
way into the UK. Our investigation into others who may have been involved 
continues.”

• This article was amended on 9 January 2017 to correct the location of 
Cheddington.
 