
Spy in the Wild 
8pm, BBC1

David Tennant narrates this series of themed nature films – this first one is 
“love” – in which animatronic creatures with hidden cameras gather dramatic 
closeup footage. A fun idea, and there’s cute stuff here of resourceful wild 
dogs giving a lioness the slip, maternal elephants and – in particular – a Nile 
crocodile in Uganda, scooping up her young in her mighty jaws. Monkeys in 
India, however, prove the most suspicious of their new robot chum.John Robinson

The Cruise: Sailing the Mediterranean 
8.30pm, ITV

If the premise of this new series shot aboard the Royal Princess liner seems 
familiar, it’s because it is: ITV has previously broadcast something similar on 
its sister ship, Regal Princess. The appeal is the same here: watching the crew 
deal with both the minor holiday dramas of the passengers and the immense 
logistical enterprise of feeding and amusing 1,400 people. Tonight starts at 
the start, with the ship preparing to weigh anchor in Athens. Andrew Mueller

Transgender Kids: Who Knows Best?
9pm, BBC2

There has, of late, been a surge in the number of children being referred to 
specialist clinics for gender dysphoria. Canada has led the way in defending 
transgender rights and adopting a “gender affirmative” approach to children. 
However, when Dr Kenneth Zucker challenged this approach, he lost his job. He 
speaks out in this documentary, as do transgender activists and the families of 
children looking to transition.David Stubbs

Unforgotten 
9pm, ITV

The Scandi-style opening credits here aren’t misleading. Writer Chris Lang’s 
thoroughly involving police procedural doles out its revelations with a care 
reminiscent of The Killing (series one vintage). This means that, while we now 
know the identity of the body in the suitcase – one David Walker – it is likely 
to be a while before we know whodunnit. Instead, it’s time to get to know the 
suspects, including Walker’s widow and a lawyer with “temper issues”.Jonathan 
Wright

Spies 
9pm, Channel 4


Week two of the series from the makers of SAS: Who Dares Wins, in which 
ordinary men and women are taught how to become spooks. They learn how to think 
on their feet, and face up to the moral ambiguities of espionage when the best 
course of action isn’t clear. It’s Tinker Tailor time this week, as some of the 
trainees are obliged to inform on their “weakest” colleagues, putting 
friendships at risk and stoking paranoia all round. Just your average reality 
show, then.Ali Catterall

Chewing Gum
10pm, E4
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthursdays-best-tv-unforgotten-spies-chewing-gum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9de1209b93af4a94239ecf7570e450b5fe72064%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thursday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%3A%20Unforgotten%3B%20Spies%3B%20Chewing%20Gum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthursdays-best-tv-unforgotten-spies-chewing-gum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thursday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%3A%20Unforgotten%3B%20Spies%3B%20Chewing%20Gum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fthursdays-best-tv-unforgotten-spies-chewing-gum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9de1209b93af4a94239ecf7570e450b5fe72064%2F0_0_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 A very welcome return … Chewing Gum. Photograph: Mark Johnson/C4 
A very welcome return for Michaela Coel’s warm and brilliantly funny comedy, 
full of outlandish yet relatable dramas, and helmed by a black, British, 
working-class hero, played by Coel herself. This opener is called WTF 
Happened?, a question viewers will surely ponder: lovebirds Tracey and Connor 
have broken up for reasons neither are entirely clear on, and Connor’s already 
moved on. Cue a characteristically ill-thought-out bit of scheming from Trace.
Hannah J Davies

Abandoned 
10pm, Viceland

This apocalyptic travel show is one of the best things on Vice’s TV outpost, 
tailing pro skateboarder Rick McCrank as he pokes around ravaged, people-free 
ruins across the US. Last week, he ollied into a flooded nuclear missile silo, 
but for his next trick, McCrank embarks on a 2,500-mile road trip along the 
remains of Route 66 with fellow skater Frank Gerwin. The laidback duo improvise 
half-pipe ramps in derelict water parks and long-dead tourist traps.Graeme 
Virtue

Film choice


Anari (Hrishikesh Mukherjee, 1959) 1am, Channel 4
From the golden age of Bollywood (though it’s enjoying something of a platinum 
age now) comes this three-hour classic featuring romantic icon and auteur Raj 
Kapoor. He plays the naive simpleton of the title, who finds it difficult to 
adhere to his stringent moral code, particularly when a beautiful young woman 
(Nutan) appears.

Live sport

Test cricket: South Africa v Sri Lanka, 7.55am, Sky Sports 2 The opening day 
of the third and final Test of the series

European Tour golf: South African Open, 8am, Sky Sports 4 The globe-trotting 
Euro tour reaches Africa, as the latest event gets under way in Gauteng.

Championship football: Reading v Queens Park Rangers, 7.30pm, Sky Sports 1 
Coverage of the league fixture from the Madejski Stadium.
 