
Who Do You Think You Are? 
8pm, BBC1


Science and nature presenter Liz Bonnin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/apr/16/liz-bonnin> visits Trinidad 
and Martinique to explore her Indian and French roots. Both halves of her 
family have histories involving slavery or indentured labour, and Bonnin is 
braced for the shame of learning that some of her antecedents treated humans as 
chattels. In fact, a happier story emerges, with a running theme of people 
strong-willed enough to discard the strictures of the times they were living 
through.Jack Seale

The Apprentice 
9pm, BBC1


This year’s bloviating business blunderers feel like an unusually hapless 
bunch, even allowing for the diminishing returns of this perceptibly creaking 
show. Tonight, the teams are branding and marketing gin. Which inevitably means 
tasting gin. In some cases, rather too much of it. Is nervously pitching a new 
product to a bunch of seasoned drinks industry insiders compatible with nursing 
a raging hangover? A brave gambit, at best.Phil Harrison

Close to the Enemy 
9pm, BBC2


Poliakoff’s perplexingly plotted and patchily performed postwar period piece 
continues. Captain Callum receives evidence from Victor that our helpful German 
scientist Dieter Koehler might actually have more blood on his hands than 
previously suspected. He also levers himself back into Kathy’s good books by 
helping her to get hold of Bergit Mentz, a useful German prisoner, and advises 
her to try his own intelligence methods to get Mentz to spill the bratwurst.Ali 
Catterall

Extraordinary Weddings 
9pm, ITV


The journey from engagement to marriage feels like a Sisyphean task for any 
soon-to-be-weds, but this new series follows couples whose route down the aisle 
contains especially overwhelming obstacles. Tonight’s opener highlights Nick 
and Sophie, whose search for a home was halted when Nick was diagnosed with a 
rare form of cancer, while Carly and Nelly found plans derailed after an 
accident left Carly paralysed.Mark Gibbings-Jones

Vienna: Empire, Dynasty and Dream 
9pm, BBC4


Historian Simon Sebag Montefiore presents a three‑part history of Vienna. We 
begin 900 years ago with plenty of stories about the Habsburgs, including 
“Albert One Eye” and “Fat Frederick”. Mesmerising stuff, with no shortage of 
bloodshed as well as much-needed diplomacy. Sebag Montefiore delivers 
everything with his trademark verve, proving just what a fascinating and 
pivotal (not to mention beautiful) place Vienna is.Hannah Verdier

True Supernatural 
9pm, Really


New series of a show for the spectacularly credulous, from the US of all 
places. This week, as well as looking into a demon wolf stalking the midwest, 
we revisit a 1961 story in which, the narrative assures us categorically, Betty 
and Barney Hill were “abducted by aliens”. Could this be anything more than a 
bunch of feverishly imagined hogwash? If you’ve 45 minutes to spare, stick 
around for the hilarious outcome of the scientific investigation.David Stubbs

Abandoned 
10pm, Viceland


Canadian pro skateboarder Rick McCrank is the chilled-out host of this new 
travelogue, which seeks to tap into the urban explorer craze for infiltrating 
derelict buildings. The first episode focuses on Ohio’s most forsaken malls, a 
series of dilapidated,Walking Dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-walking-dead>-ready ruins full of 
twisted metal, broken glass and crude graffiti. McCrank sombrely surveys these 
decaying symbols of US social and economic decline before pulling off some sick 
grinds amid the debris.Graeme Virtue 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaILx69WrRhQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaILx69WrRhQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaILx69WrRhQ&media=>
 Click here to watch a trailer for Blue Valentine. 
Film choice


Blue Valentine (Derek Cianfrance, 2010) 1am, Film4


Cianfrance’s portrait of a marriage in its death throes is delicately handled. 
Ryan Gosling is Dean, who has a six-year-old daughter (Faith Wladyka) with 
Michelle Williams’s Cindy. The narrative flits cleverly back and forth in time 
to contrast the gradual breakdown of their relationship with their happier 
past. Committed performances create a subtle, poignant drama.Paul Howlett

Live sport


Europa League Football: FC Zorya Luhansk v Manchester United Mourinho’s men 
face a trip to Ukraine. 5.30pm, BT Sport 3

Rugby Union European Challenge Cup: Gloucester v La Rochelle A Pool One clash 
from Kingsholm. 7pm, Sky Sports 1

Test Cricket: India v England The second day of the fourth Test from the 
Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai. 3.45am, Sky Sports 2
 