
Ultimate Strongman: The Next Generation 
5pm, Dave

Just after Christmas wouldn’t be just after Christmas without Strongman. Part 
athleticism, part Game Of Thrones, it’s the place where strength, grunting and 
self-cut hair meet to drag sleds piled with girders and powerlift the weight of 
a saloon car up stairs. In addition to the main competition, now a ticketed 
arena event (broadcast tomorrow), there’s also this – the under-25 competition, 
which took place in Canada earlier this year.John Robinson

The Ballroom Boys 
7pm, Channel 4

This excellent documentary highlights the shortage of future Brendan Coles. 
With girls outnumbering boys on the dancefloor, we follow four young male 
dancers from south Wales as they prepare for the UK championships in 
Bournemouth. Along the way, there are the obligatory pushy mums, the 
disapproval of rugby-obsessed schoolmates and raised eyebrows from the dads. 
Will they bail out once the competition is over?Hannah Verdier

To Walk Invisible 
9pm, BBC1

Between rain, alcoholism, consumption and death, Sally Wainwright’s 
feature-length portrayal of the Brontës asks a lot of viewers. The payoff is 
that Wainwright’s power as a writer lies in dramatising family dynamics, and 
here she has a genuinely extraordinary literary clan to show us: sharply 
ambitious Charlotte, galumphing Emily – who saves her elegance for the page – 
peacekeeper Anne and self-indulgent man-child brother Branwell. Terrific.
Jonathan Wright

Charlie Brooker’s 2016 Wipe
9pm, BBC2

Even as TV’s foremost black sky thinker, Charlie Brooker would probably have 
struggled to predict the turbulent, feverish and generally dispiriting events 
of 2016. Suffice to say that Brooker isn’t short of material for this year’s 
rewind. However, there’ll be some light relief as Philomena Cunk goes head to 
head with grinning pop-rave professor physicist Brian Cox, and Diane Morgan’s 
media caricature gets a spin-off show immediately afterwards in Cunk On 
Christmas (10pm).Phil Harrison

The Adele Story 
9pm, Channel 5

Music writers and veteran talking heads, including Pete Waterman, and Carrie 
and David Grant, survey Adele’s career to date, in what is a fairly perfunctory 
look at the Tottenham singer-songwriter-turned-global megastar. While it 
features no contributions from Adele herself – relying instead on archive 
footage and the gushing plaudits of those aforementioned contributors – it’s a 
gentle watch that naturally includes frequent bursts of her tearjerking pop 
hits.Hannah J Davies

The Two Ronnies Spectacle 
9.20pm, Yesterday

The Four Candles/Fork Handles sketch, ribald puns and lengthy armchair 
monologues – such was the stuff of all our Saturday nights. This three-part 
documentary, first aired in 2013, tells the story of the duo, with tonight’s 
opener recalling how they came to work together, having cut their teeth 
appearing alongside the likes of John Cleese. Contributors include Al Murray, 
Clive Anderson and the late Ronnie Corbett himself.David Stubbs

Bruce Springsteen: In His Own Words 
10pm, Channel 4

Confession is the basis of the Boss’s oeuvre, never more so than this year, 
which has seen the release of his well-regarded memoir Born To Run. This 
documentary reviews a hefty and still-evolving songbook with the aid of new 
interviews with Springsteen himself. These are always worth hearing: he is an 
unusually reflective and self-aware artist, which may be why he remains 
interesting after so many decades in the business.Andrew Mueller

Film choice
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthursdays-best-tv-to-walk-invisible-charlie-brooker-bruce-springsteen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd189a78425bc46c46e37476073a8667c658ee72%2F0_457_2800_1679%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thursday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%3A%20To%20Walk%20Invisible%2C%20Charlie%20Brooker%E2%80%99s%202016%20Wipe%2C%20Bruce%20Springsteen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthursdays-best-tv-to-walk-invisible-charlie-brooker-bruce-springsteen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thursday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%3A%20To%20Walk%20Invisible%2C%20Charlie%20Brooker%E2%80%99s%202016%20Wipe%2C%20Bruce%20Springsteen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fthursdays-best-tv-to-walk-invisible-charlie-brooker-bruce-springsteen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd189a78425bc46c46e37476073a8667c658ee72%2F0_457_2800_1679%2F2800.jpg>
 Star-crossed lovers ... Richard Beymer and Natalie Wood in West Side Story. 
Photograph: Allstar/United Artists 
Chicken Run (Peter Lord, Nick Park, 2000) 10.50am, BBC1

A hen-tastic animated spoof of The Great Escape by the Wallace & Gromit team. 
It’s set on Tweedys’ prison camp-cum-egg farm, where the chickens plot a 
soaring escape over the barbed wire. Mel Gibson voices Rocky the Rooster, but 
the rich tone – two parts hilarity to one pathos – is set by splendid Brit 
comics such as Jane Horrocks, Julia Sawalha and Timothy Spall.Paul Howlett

West Side Story (Robert Wise, 1961) 11.05am, Channel 5

Wise’s brilliant, buzzing, Oscar-laden musical updating of Shakespeare pitches 
the Romeo And Juliet story into the neighbourhood of 50s New York street gangs. 
Richard Beymer’s Tony and Natalie Wood’s Maria, meeting across the gulf between 
the Jets and the Sharks, make wonderful star-crossed lovers. And the 
Bernstein/Sondheim numbers are superb, with the joyous Maria, I Feel Pretty and 
Jet Song.PH

Indiana Jones And The Last Crusade (Steven Spielberg, 1989) 1.55pm, BBC1

The last of the original trilogy (before the Crystal Skull reared its head), 
with Harrison Ford’s weary hero again racing the Nazis to the buried treasure, 
in this case the Holy Grail. The action is still a sharp blend of comic-book 
and back-street violence, but pepped up no end by Sean Connery as Jones’s 
medievalist dad.PH

American Hustle (David O Russell, 2013) 11.10pm, Film4

Based loosely on a 70s FBI operation to inveigle a conman into helping them 
entrap a crowd of dodgy politicians, Russell’s zany, retro caper-comedy is a 
hilarious artifice hosting a bunch of extraordinary characters: Christian 
Bale’s combed-over conman Irv, his highly strung wife Rosalyn (Jennifer 
Lawrence), conwoman Sydney (Amy Adams) and the Fed “masterminding” proceedings, 
a super-smug Bradley Cooper as Richie.PH

Live sport

Cricket: Big Bash League Melbourne Renegades host Perth Scorchers at the 
Etihad. 8am, BT Sport 2

World Darts Championship Coverage of the afternoon session on day 12 at Ally 
Pally. 1pm, Sky Sports 1

Championship Football: Aston Villa v Leeds United This fixture at Villa Park 
is the first meeting between the sides since 2004 (kick-off 7.45pm). 7.30pm, 
Sky Sports 1
 