
My wife comes into the kitchen while I’m opening the post.

“What’s new?” she says.

“My rescheduled appointment at the clinic has itself been rescheduled,” I say. 
“It was meant to be two weeks ago, and now it’s in January.”

“Does that matter?” she says. “It’s not as if there’s anything actually wrong 
with you.”

“True,” I say. “And I suppose this gives me three months to come up with 
something.”

Late that night I wake to find the bedroom tumbling end over end like a 
hamster wheel. I spend a few minutes watching the bookcase fall away, and then 
I go back to sleep.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftim-dowling-bedroom-tumbles-horizon-seesaws-labyrinthitis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25b2ca31192ce9d0935117c28b4e3791b1ffd2e4%2F23_61_656_561%2F656.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tim%20Dowling%3A%20I%20feel%20queasy%20and%20decrepit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftim-dowling-bedroom-tumbles-horizon-seesaws-labyrinthitis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tim%20Dowling%3A%20I%20feel%20queasy%20and%20decrepit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftim-dowling-bedroom-tumbles-horizon-seesaws-labyrinthitis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25b2ca31192ce9d0935117c28b4e3791b1ffd2e4%2F23_61_656_561%2F656.jpg>
 Illustration: Benoit Jacques for the Guardian 
When I was first diagnosed with labyrinthitis back in March, I heard from a 
lot of people who’d suffered the same thing – my own GP, friends, 
acquaintances, strangers on social media. They all said the vertigo would go 
away by itself, gradually, over a number of weeks. They were right. They also 
said it would come back.

“My ear thing is back,” I tell my wife the next day. “Like they said.” She is 
a few steps above me on the stairs, and it feels as if I’m addressing someone 
in the next car of a moving ferris wheel.

“Oh no,” she says. “Well, I can chop back the front hedge and clear up the 
kitchen, but you’ll have to do the shopping.”

“Are you kidding?” I say. “I can’t drive!”

Tim Dowling: it’s the last lunch together before the middle one goes to 
university
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/01/tim-dowling-last-family-lunch-together>
“Fine,” she says, exhaling the word impatiently. “I’ll just do everything.”

“No, don’t worry, I’ll go,” I say, crawling backwards down the stairs.

“You just said you couldn’t drive,” she says.

“I’ll probably make it,” I say. “Just help me put my shoes on and get me to 
the front door.”

Only later, when I get impatient and go out for some milk, do I realise what a 
hollow challenge my threat to drive had been. The scenery lurches alarmingly 
with every step. Even the second time round, labyrinthitis remains impressively 
debilitating. On the walk home I feel queasy and decrepit. An old man with 
underlying complications; banned from ladders, foxed by packaging.

As I approach the corner I see Colin the painter coming toward me from across 
the street. I avoid turning to face him, so as not to set the whole 
intersection spinning. Instead I stop and wait for him to cross my path.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftim-dowling-bedroom-tumbles-horizon-seesaws-labyrinthitis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe0f5b7bbaa005b8f55a87d5b1e01c919dc5f496%2F0_41_698_1816%2F698.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tim%20Dowling%3A%20I%20feel%20queasy%20and%20decrepit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftim-dowling-bedroom-tumbles-horizon-seesaws-labyrinthitis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tim%20Dowling%3A%20I%20feel%20queasy%20and%20decrepit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Ftim-dowling-bedroom-tumbles-horizon-seesaws-labyrinthitis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe0f5b7bbaa005b8f55a87d5b1e01c919dc5f496%2F0_41_698_1816%2F698.jpg>
 Illustration: Benoit Jacques for the Guardian 
“How you been keeping, mate?” he says. Colin once took so long painting our 
house that by the time he finished the rear exterior the front windows needed 
doing again. He was in our lives daily for years, but I haven’t seen him in 
ages.

“Fine,” I say. “You?”

“Yeah, well enough, well enough,” he says. “I saw your oldest the other day, I 
think. Is he wearing the bins now?” I have to take a minute to process this: 
bins equals glasses; not sure why.

“Yes,” I say. “He is.”

“Similar design to yourself?” he says, pointing at the bridge of my nose.

“Pretty much,” I say.

“That’s right, I thought it was you at first,” Colin says. “How old is he now?”

“Twenty-one,” I say.

“Shit!” he says. “Where does it go, you know what I mean?”

“I don’t know,” I say.

“You don’t look like you’ve aged,” he says.

“I’m feeling pretty aged right now,” I say. Behind Colin’s head, the horizon 
seesaws gently.

“That don’t matter,” he says. “As long as you look good, that’s what’s 
important.”

“Well, I suppose that’s one way of...”

“Gotta shoot off, mate,” he says. “Be lucky.” Colin holds out a palm as he 
walks away, as if to stop me following him. I turn toward home, and the world 
turns with me.
 