
When I started writing this column, my oldest son was 12. Last week, he turned 
22. In a month, the middle one will be 19. The youngest, at 17, has just a few 
months left before he becomes society’s problem. Until recently, I’ve suffered 
from an embarrassment of teens, but suddenly I find myself facing a looming 
shortage.

As with any phase of parenting, one masters the art of raising teenagers – in 
my case, teenage boys – just in time for it to be of no use. But I have learned 
a few things over the past decade. A very few. These are all of them:

1) Every aspect of parenting a teenager stirs up memories of what it was like 
to be a teenager. This doesn’t happen with younger children – nothing about 
looking after a five-year-old reminds you of being five. But your adolescence 
clings to you like an old injury; you’ll be obliged to relive your shameful 
mistakes as your children repeat them. This sense of perspective is not as much 
help as it sounds; it just leaves you with feelings of sympathy that you must 
do your best to hide.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftim-dowling-the-things-i-have-learned-as-the-father-of-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd327131e7531b76308a66ca9efe0c49aef5ef706%2F1664_160_1194_717%2F1194.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tim%20Dowling%3A%20%E2%80%98One%20masters%20the%20art%20of%20raising%20teenagers%E2%80%A6%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftim-dowling-the-things-i-have-learned-as-the-father-of-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tim%20Dowling%3A%20%E2%80%98One%20masters%20the%20art%20of%20raising%20teenagers%E2%80%A6%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftim-dowling-the-things-i-have-learned-as-the-father-of-teenagers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd327131e7531b76308a66ca9efe0c49aef5ef706%2F1664_160_1194_717%2F1194.jpg>
 Illustration: Benoit Jacques for the Guardian 
2) Adolescent boys have an overwhelming need to reduce their father from a 
figure of authority to a figure of fun. In particular, they spend a lot of time 
repeating stupid things you’ve said in what they think is an amusing 
approximation of your voice. This can be dispiriting, to say the least. Life 
got much easier once I realised it was part of my role as a father to allow my 
sense of humour to fail me on these occasions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftim-dowling-the-things-i-have-learned-as-the-father-of-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01674f2d93137acd2095a5bb606e6de9000b8af3%2F0_0_728_1808%2F728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tim%20Dowling%3A%20%E2%80%98One%20masters%20the%20art%20of%20raising%20teenagers%E2%80%A6%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftim-dowling-the-things-i-have-learned-as-the-father-of-teenagers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tim%20Dowling%3A%20%E2%80%98One%20masters%20the%20art%20of%20raising%20teenagers%E2%80%A6%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Ftim-dowling-the-things-i-have-learned-as-the-father-of-teenagers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01674f2d93137acd2095a5bb606e6de9000b8af3%2F0_0_728_1808%2F728.jpg>
 Illustration: Benoit Jacques for the Guardian 
3) It is vital to create an atmosphere in which your teenagers feel they can 
be totally open and honest with you, because they are amazing liars. You may 
remember being a proficient liar at that age, but your children have grown up 
in a post-truth world you barely understand, and they know the value of 
persistent falsehood. If you think you can tell when your 16-year-old is lying 
to you, it’s only because that’s what he wants you to think.

4) As children progress through secondary school, your authority over them 
gradually diminishes, until you find yourself parenting on a consultancy basis. 
You may well recall this phase from your own relationship with your parents: 
the era of unsolicited advice. Now that I am the parent, I have come to realise 
that the tiresome lectures I keep feeling obliged to deliver are not simply a 
doomed attempt to reassert lost authority. They’re a punishment.

5) Even when your authority dries up completely, you still have money. A 
19-year-old will jump through a lot of hoops for a tenner.

6) On occasion, teenagers do seek out firm parental authority in a bid to 
counteract peer pressure: they long to be told they can’t do something, because 
they actually don’t want to do it. But, as a parent, you have to learn to parse 
the subtext of their words, as in the following conversation:

“OK, so I’m off to that illegal rave now,” the teen says.

“Have fun,” I say.

“Not sure of the address, but I guess I’ll just follow the police helicopter 
spotlight.”

“Good luck,” I say.

“Anyone seen my fake ID?”

“Just tell your little friends I said you weren’t allowed,” my wife says.

“Thank Christ,” he says, taking off his coat.

7) While there is no single secret to a happy life in a houseful of adolescent 
boys, I cannot overstate the importance of colour-coded underpants: white for 
one, grey for another, NY Jets-themed for the third. I somehow got stuck with 
horizontal stripes, but at least I know they’re mine.
 