
“When you’re accused of doing something that is so foreign to your values, it 
brings out an outrage in you, and that’s how we feel. Apple has always been 
about doing the right thing, never the easy thing.”So said its chief executive, 
Tim Cook, on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/01/political-crap-tim-cook-apple-tax-ruling>
, still hopping mad about the European commission’s ruling that the 
iPhone-maker should pay €13bn (£11bn) in back-taxes to Ireland.

The plea of wounded innocence – plus the accompanying folksy tale about the 
company’s 37-year “marriage” with the people of Ireland – would be more 
persuasive if Cook would explain how on earth paying a corporate tax rate of 
0.005% on European profits in 2014 fits with doing the right thing.

Cook says he disputes the commission’s numbers. Maybe so, but the EU 
competition chief,Margrethe Vestager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/margrethe-vestager>, had a sharp retort: 
allow the world to see the confidential calculations on which the commission 
reached its conclusion. “If it was up to me, the confidential version would 
have been published yesterday ... It is very good for everyone to see our 
reasoning,” said Vestager.

The non-confidential version, as explained by the commission on Tuesday, makes 
a strong case that Apple’s choice of corporate structure in Ireland went well 
beyond any commonsense understanding of legitimate tax planning.

MPs back plan to force global firms to publicly disclose income and tax
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/01/mps-back-for-plan-to-force-global-firms-to-publicly-disclose-income-and-tax>
The bulk of profits were channelled through “head offices” that were not based 
in any country and did not have employees or premises. Those profits ended up 
being untaxed anywhere, not even in the US, alleges the commission.Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>, we might agree, wasn’t doing 
the easy thing; it was engaged in something difficult, in the sense of 
convoluted and elaborate.

Cook – who knows? – may be right that the commission’s ruling will be 
overturned on appeal. Brussels’ power to interfere in a long-standing tax deal 
between a EU national government and a company is unclear. And, as a 
competition commissioner, Vestager may have gone beyond her brief in making 
judgments on what constitutes illegal state aid.

Yet Cook, before denouncing the affair as “political crap” should put himself 
in his customers’ shoes. Most aren’t free to exploit the difference between the 
tax residency rules of Ireland and the US. Many are sick of the over-aggessive 
tax tactics deployed by too many multinationals. Some will conclude that 
Apple’s use of head offices that existed only on paper was a prime example of 
“corporate crap” that requires a fuller explanation by the company.

CBI needs to focus on infrastructure not banks 

The CBI has always had a soft spot for banks (they’re some of its biggest 
members) but its director-general, Carolyn Fairbairn, is pushing her luck in 
calling for gentler treatment for the industry from regulators and government.


Specifically, she wants the mission statements of the Prudential Regulation 
Authority and the Financial Conduct Authority to be rewritten so that “growth 
and innovation” become part of regulators’ “raison d’être”. The call is framed 
as a need to ensure the financial services industry is competitive after 
Brexit, but it sounds suspiciously like a plea to return to the pre-crash era 
of light-touch regulation. No thanks.

For good measure, Fairbairn wants the government to set a date to end the 
corporation tax surcharge on banks’ profits,the successor to the bank levy 
introduced by the former chancellor George Osborne to help clean up after the 
crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/05/hsbc-to-decide-this-year-on-moving-its-hq-from-uk>
.

Good luck with that. The levy-cum-surcharge brings in decent money for the 
Treasury and one suspects it will be around for at least a decade yet. The CBI 
would be better advised to concentrate on calling for more (and smarter) 
infrastructure spending to benefit the economy as a whole. The chances of 
success are greater, and the issue is surely closer to the hearts of its 
rank-and-file members.

Stress to impress - the City’s unwritten dress code

Always be prepared for Lord Rothschild to ring and invite you to lunch today, 
advised an esteemed City editor early in your correspondent’s career. Lord R 
never called at short notice but the sartorial advice was sound. An unwritten 
dress code operates in the City, so best not to put yourself at a tactical 
disadvantage.


There is, though, a world of difference between such commonsense instruction 
to look smartand the practices of the recruitment departments of investment 
banks, as described by the Social Mobility Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/01/top-graduates-missing-out-on-banking-jobs-for-lacking-polish>
. A loud tie, brown shoes (unless you’re from continental Europe, apparently) 
or an ill-fitting suit can kill a graduate interviewee’s chances, says the 
report. All fail the test for “polish”.

Unbelievable? Sadly, it rings true. The City has always been obsessed by 
appearance. Remember Swiss bankUBS’ 40-page guide to staff 
<http://lp-economie-gestion.ac-montpellier.fr/2/images/phocadownload/english%202010-ubs-dress-code.pdf>
 in 2010 that included a ban on eating onions and garlic? The commission claims 
investment banks’ fussiness-cum-prejudice is really a way to “set up barriers 
for individuals from non-privileged backgrounds”. Hard to prove definitively. 
But it sounds intuitively correct.
 