
The Facebook updates from friends in America are a chilling instruction about 
the world we live in now. Black friends reporting racist street abuse. Trans 
friends stockpiling treatment medicine before Trump ends the Affordable Care 
Act. The young women seeking out 10-year IUDs, concerned about impending 
restrictions on birth control and desperate to head off more desperate, 
punishable future choices.

I spend a lot of time being harassed on the internet but I’ve never seen the 
volume of hateful garbage that’s appeared on my Twitter feed 
<https://twitter.com/vanbadham/status/796587496574332928> in the past two days. 
It’s humanity’s worst values, emboldened with thunder.

America has to face the immediate consequences of its electoral choices. In 
Australia, we still have the privilege of being able to face the cause. While 
Facebook discussions dissolve intofurious flurries of finger-pointing  
<http://www.dailykos.com/story/2016/11/09/1593866/-If-Bernie-would-have-won-then-why-didn-t-he>
symptomatic of feeling powerless, terrified and enraged, a calm reminder 
deserves heeding: “intersectionality” is a word that not only explains that 
there are complex factors that inform how people are oppressed, but also how 
others come to oppress them.

It was the Democrats' embrace of neoliberalism that won it for Trump | Naomi 
Klein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/rise-of-the-davos-class-sealed-americas-fate>
Australians appreciate the overt racism and sexism of Trump’s message that 
inspired the overwhelmingly white, male electorate who voted for him;the KKK 
isn’t marching the streets 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/ku-klux-klan-parade-north-carolina-donald-trump-celebration-president-elect-white-supremacists-alt-a7410671.html>
 of North Carolina because it’s excited about his tax plan. How bragging about 
sexual assault was forgiven by an electorate moved to explosive passion over 
fewer emails deleted by a candidatethan by George W Bush 
<http://www.newsweek.com/2016/09/23/george-w-bush-white-house-lost-22-million-emails-497373.html>
 is but one neat example of an ongoing sexist double standard.

But the significant number of white women, and the smaller but just as crucial 
number of Hispanic Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/white-women-donald-trump-victory>
 who voted Trump into office, contribute their numbers to the nuanced and 
difficult story of Trump’s appeal to an American middle and working class 
displaced and enraged by 35 years of market-first-people-last economic policy.

I wrote an article about the economic anxiety of working Americans  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/lets-learn-from-the-mistakes-that-created-us-poverty-not-copy-them>
when I was in the US earlier this year. Those stories of low pay, poor 
conditions and very few labour protections don’t affect every individual who 
voted for Trump, but they are depredations visible everywhere in America, an 
omnipresence that reminds any American without independent wealth how insecure 
their conditions are.

In Ken Burns’ extraordinary documentary series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/04/ken-burns-the-civil-war-americas-greatest-documentary-rides-again>
 about the American Civil War, the point is made that the majority of 
Confederate soldiers fighting to maintain slavery weren’t slave owners 
themselves, but gave their loyalty and their lives to the Southern Cause in a 
willingness to defend the meagre status advantage that another people’s 
legalised oppression provided them. It’s impossible to witness Trump voters 
scream hate at women, LGBTQIA+ people, black and Hispanic Americans, people 
with disabilities and other minorities without remembering this.

But Australians have greater means at our disposal to protect our community 
from the ravages of Trumpism than the experiences of our English-speaking, 
Brexit-voting British cousins and now our American ones suggest. The words “we 
need to speak to the working class!” are ringing out throughout theleft’s US 
election postmortem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/democrats-working-class-americans-us-election>
. Well, there’s one thing better than speaking to the working class, and that’s 
participating in it: join a union.

Australian unions are the difference that gives the nation’s workforce a 
comparative comfort that our counterparts in America and Britain don’t have. 
WhileAmerica’s Reagan 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/08/03/opinion/reagan-vs-patco-the-strike-that-busted-unions.html?smprod=nytcore-iphone&smid=nytcore-iphone-share>
 andBritain’s Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/aug/01/margaret-thatcher-trade-union-reform-national-archives>
 were smashing the organised working class in the 1980s, ours not only held on, 
but Bob Hawke, a former union leader no less, was installed as the prime 
minister of this country. While their wages were driven down with drivel about 
“competitiveness”, Australian unions demanded and delivered the award wage 
system which doesn’t exist in either of those other countries.

Collective bargaining through unions delivered the penalty rates, casual 
loading and higher minimum wages that Americans and the British have not had. 
And for all of this country’s struggles with racism, sexism and other forms of 
marginalisation, we have an opportunity to fight not only neoliberalism’s 
misery, but also its populist, fascist non-alternative. It should be obvious:
economic misery foments conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2014/jun/02/economic-insecurity-nationalism-on-the-rise-globalisation-nouriel-roubini>
 that agglomerate hate.

Australian unions campaign for and defend the Medicare system 
<http://www.actu.org.au/actu-media/media-releases/2016/actu-kicks-off-national-campaign-to-protect-medicare>
 America does not have. Australian unions fightbattles against privatisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/it-seems-like-a-good-time-to-ask-is-privatisation-of-electricity-networks-ever-a-good-idea>
 and keep the gates of quality public education open. They have fought for 
equal pay, for equal opportunity and for workplace equity, all of which 
underpin our country’s fundamental belief in its own egalitarianism.

Democrats once represented the working class. Not any more | Robert Reich
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/democrats-working-class-americans-us-election>
All of these things have, of course, been under attack from neoliberalism’s 
advocates – if you’re still scratching your head as to why the Coalition has 
been trying to smash the CFMEU with the ABCC legislation for four long bitter 
years, now is the time to make the link: when politicians are unconcerned by 
inequalities, strong unions provide the bulwark against exploitation and greed.

The reason the World Economic Forum reported only 17% of Australians would be 
tempted to vote for Trump is that the miserable economic conditions that 
fomented his electoral rage response have not yet – yet – materialised here. If 
you don’t want it to go any higher, if you want to avoid the American 
nightmare, there is an alternative to hate. It is solidarity.
 