
Fidel Castro, Vladimir Putin and Paul Kagame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paul-kagame> are postcolonial dictators. 
Their grave human rights abuses are often excused or overlooked by supporters 
who venerate their defiant opposition to western imperialism. Kagame is an 
exemplar of this breed, for he even wins broad admiration in the west 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/25/paul-kagame-rwanda-us-britain>. 
There is credible evidence of massacres by Kagame’s forces of tens or hundreds 
of thousands of people after Rwanda’s 1994 genocide, and his political 
opponents are almost all in exile, in prison or dead.

The Observer view on Rwanda and Paul Kagame’s lust for power | Observer 
editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/jan/03/paul-kagame-and-others-damage-africa-lust-to-rule-for-ever>
Yet Kagame heads several prestigious UN development initiatives. Harvard and 
Yale invite him to speak about democracy and human rights. It is even 
fashionable to celebrate Kagame’s leadership ofRwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda>. The extent of this hypocrisy is an 
indication not of Kagame’s dictatorial achievements or crimes, but rather of 
the world’s hunger for postcolonial leaders and narratives. Kagame is held up 
as a counter to western hegemony.

Kagame is expert in crafting postcolonial myths that resonate powerfully in a 
world still grappling with colonial legacies. He claims he ended Rwanda’s 
genocide, which killed nearly a million people in just 100 days, while a 
morally bankrupt west stood idle. There is merit in his argument that the world 
should be held accountable for not deploying peacekeepers during the genocide. 
However, genocide survivors are afraid to mention that Kagame had himself 
opposed the deployment of those UN peacekeepers. He was concerned they would 
interfere with his military takeover of the country.

Kagame claims to stand up to western imperialism, though he is himself a stark 
example of it. Elected in rigged polls applauded by the west, his government 
relies on western funding and military support to maintain power – the very 
definition of imperialism. Such ironies are lost in popular narratives of 
Kagame.

Bad News: Last Journalists in a Dictatorship review – Rwanda’s ‘Big Brother’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/11/bad-news-last-journalists-in-dictatorship-anjan-sundaram-review-rwanda-paul-kagame>
Those who support Rwanda’s leader are responding to a genuine need in our 
world for postcolonial leaders who will help the so-called “third world” break 
free of the debilitating imperial discourses so eloquently described by 
scholars such asEdward Said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/sep/26/guardianobituaries.highereducation>
, Homi Bhabha and Gayatri Spivak. And the crimes of these authoritarian regimes 
are no secret: Rwanda’s history textbooks also position Kagame in such terms, 
placing him among alleged good military leaders such as Castro and Muammar 
Gaddafi. However, in choosing as our postcolonial symbols oppressive leaders 
such as Kagame, we do ourselves and all colonised nations a disservice. We make 
a mockery of lives and families laid waste by these leaders, and we deepen the 
very inequalities that we seek to redress.

Anjan Sundaram is the author of Bad News: Last Journalists in a Dictatorship 
and a PhD candidate in postcolonial journalism at the University of East Anglia
 