
The makers of Toblerone have widened the gaps between the chocolate bar’s 
distinctive triangular chunks in an effort to avoid putting its prices up, in a 
move fans have described as “stupid”, “ridiculous” and “just plain dumb”.

A statement on the brand’s Facebook page said that higher costs for 
ingredients had meant it had decided to cut the weight of two bars from 
Toblerone’s UK range. It has reduced 400g bars to 360g and 170g bars to 150g in 
order to maintain retail prices.

The change means that the gaps between chunks are now wider than the chunks 
themselves. One customer described the new bar as looking “like a weird 
knock-off of itself”.

The Brexit Toblerone sums up 2016: more troughs than peaks | Rebecca Nicholson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/toblerone-gap-brexit-falling-pound-2016>
Explaining the change, the statement on Toblerone’s Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/Toblerone/posts/1308853319149448> said: “Like many 
other companies, we are experiencing higher costs for numerous ingredients.

“We carry these costs for as long as possible, but to ensure Toblerone remains 
… affordable and retains the triangular shape, we have had to reduce the weight 
of just two of our bars in the UK, from the wider range of available Toblerone 
products.”

Customers replying to the post have been scathing. Richard Cristiano Tamerighi 
wrote: “[It’s] just plain dumb changing the trademark shape of your flagship 
product. If you were really that concerned about Toblerone customers you would 
have consulted them.”

Michał Tat wrote: “This must be up there with the dumbest corporate decisions 
of all time. You have a somewhat premium chocolate bar which is very well known 
for its distinctive shape, and to save money you change the shape? Now you have 
a premium-priced product that looks like a weird knock-off of itself.”

Alistair Calder wrote: “Utterly ridiculous decision!! … I’ll never buy one of 
these.”

And Lee Yarker said: “Fair enough reducing the weight of the bar, but why the 
big gap in between segments? Looks stupid imo [in my opinion], could have just 
made the bar shorter and kept the original design.”

Former Labour deputy prime minister John Prescott suggested the change was 
related to the Brexit vote. He tweeted:
John Prescott (@johnprescott) 
Brexit just got real. 
Via @markcjgreenwood <https://twitter.com/markcjgreenwood> #toblerone 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/toblerone?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/VyFT7KGDvv 
<https://t.co/VyFT7KGDvv>
 <https://twitter.com/johnprescott/status/795918270071185408> November 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/johnprescott/status/795918270071185408> 
A spokeswoman for Mondelēz International, the US food and drink corporation 
that owns the Toblerone brand, said the price rise was not related to Brexit. 
However, it comes after a number of companies sought to raise prices to offset 
the effect of a plunging pound since the vote to leave the EU.

On Sunday, it emerged that Birds Eye fish fingers and Walkers crisps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/06/birds-eye-walkers-supermarkets-price-rise-brexit-vote-pound>
 had joined Typhoo andUnilever, the owner of Marmite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/price-of-20-unilever-products-up-by-average-of-57-since-brexit-vote>
, and a number of smaller suppliers in an industry-wide battle over price 
increases caused by the 14.5% drop in the value of the pound against the euro 
and 18% against the dollar since the referendum.

Toblerone was created in 1908 by Theodor Tobler, a second-generation 
chocolatier from Bern, Switzerland, in collaboration with his cousin Emil 
Baumann. Its name is a portmanteau of the creator’s surname and “torrone”, the 
Italian word for honey and almond nougat.

Toblerone’s own website proudly tells how the following year it became the 
first milk chocolate bar with almonds and honey to be protected by intellectual 
property laws after Tobler successfully applied for a patent to cover its 
manufacturing process.


While many believe that the bar’s shape is meant to evoke the Swiss Alps, a 
belief no doubt perpetuated by the image of the Matterhorn on its packaging, 
this is said to be a myth. Years later, Tobler’s sons claimed that their father 
got his inspiration from the dancers of Paris’s Folies Bergères, who formed a 
pyramid at the climax of their show.

 