
Toby Young <https://www.theguardian.com/media/toby-young>, the controversial 
journalist turned educationalist, has been appointed as the head of a 
government-funded charity to promote free schools in England.

Young will take over as director of the New Schools Network 
<http://www.newschoolsnetwork.org/what-are-free-schools/free-school-news/free-school-founder-to-be-director-of-new-schools-network>
 (NSN) in January, to run the charity backed by the Department for Education to 
lobby for more of the schools to be opened and assist with the application 
process.

The former Conservative parliamentary hopeful 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/2013/11/time-to-face-it-im-not-going-to-become-an-mp/>
 and associate editor of the Spectator quickly moved to reassure free school 
supporters that his role would not be politically motivated.

“My own political views are right-of-centre. But in my capacity as director of 
NSN, I will be non-partisan,” Young said inan email to the network’s members 
<http://www.newschoolsnetwork.org/what-are-free-schools/free-school-views/message-from-the-newly-appointed-director-of-nsn>
.

“That’s not just because I want NSN to continue working with a broad range of 
groups and organisation. It’s also because I want free schools to remain a 
central part of England’s public education system and that is most likely to 
happen if they command as much political support as possible.

The free market works, but not when it comes to schools | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/15/free-market-schools-education-councils>
“NSN has already done some fantastic work in this regard, winning over 
sceptics on all sides, and that is something I hope to continue,” he said.

Young’s appointment was attacked by the shadow education secretary, Angela 
Rayner, as a PR gimmick.

“Free schools are failing all over the country, at a soaring cost to the 
taxpayer. Mr Young’s appointment is a PR gimmick to try and put some much 
needed gloss over their abysmal performance,” she said.

“The government should focus on addressing the real problems facing education 
and junk this ideological obsession with free schools, which are no answer to 
the real problems facing education in our country.”

Toby Young: The education secretary’s ‘enormous powers’ could come back to 
haunt Tories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/17/toby-young-education-secretary-powers-free-school>
The NSN’s previous director was Nick Timothy, in a brief stint between his 
posts as special adviser to Theresa May at the Home Office and his current role 
as May’s joint chief of staff in Downing Street.

The NSN was founded by Rachel Wolf in 2009, who later became David Cameron’s 
adviser on education in the No 10 policy unit. Her successor, Natalie Evans, 
left after being appointed a Conservative peer in the House of Lords by Cameron.
Toby Young (@toadmeister) 
Delighted to announce that I'll be the new Director of @theNSN 
<https://twitter.com/theNSN> from 1st Jan. It's a fantastic charity that helps 
groups set up free schools.
 <https://twitter.com/toadmeister/status/792144078649556992> October 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/toadmeister/status/792144078649556992> 
The appointment of the high-profile media figure is designed to give a shot in 
the arm to the free school movement, which has been increasingly co-opted by 
large chains of schools rather than the local community groups originally 
envisaged by the former education secretary, Michael Gove, and Cameron.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffree-schools-middle-classes-video-debate&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F11%2F11%2F1384192656379%2FBoris-Johnson-Attends-The-016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Do%20free%20schools%20favour%20the%20middle%20classes%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffree-schools-middle-classes-video-debate>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Do%20free%20schools%20favour%20the%20middle%20classes%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fnov%2F12%2Ffree-schools-middle-classes-video-debate&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F11%2F11%2F1384192656379%2FBoris-Johnson-Attends-The-016.jpg>
Do free schools favour the middle classes? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2013/nov/12/free-schools-middle-classes-video-debate>
David Ross, the NSN’s chair of trustees, said: “We were most excited by 
[Young’s] ambitious ideas for building on NSN’s existing efforts to get 
schools, teachers, charities and community organisations involved in setting up 
schools where they can make a difference to their communities.”

There are about 500 free schools open or being planned. Recent waves of 
approvals by the DfE have seen free school openings dominated by existing 
academy chains – in September a single multi-academy trust, Reach2, was 
approved to open 21 new free schools.

Young was an early supporter of the free schools policy backed by Gove, and 
founded one of the first in the country to open: theWest London free school 
<http://www.wlfs.org/index.asp>, in 2011. It was followed by a primary school 
in 2013, which has been rated as outstanding by Ofsted.

Michael Gove's free schools to teach etiquette and fine dining
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/sep/06/new-free-schools-next-year> 
West London free school pupils performed well in the school’s first set of 
GCSE results this summer, with 76% of the first cohort to sit the exams getting 
at least five grades of C or better, including English and maths.


Young hit the headlines this summer 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/05/yesterday-was-one-of-the-worst-day-of-my-life/>
 when he stepped down as chief executive of the school’s trust, after 
admitting: “I was very critical of England’s public education system under the 
last Labour government, and I hadn’t grasped how difficult it is to do better, 
and to bring about system-wide improvement.”

He has also called for business leaders with no teaching experience to be 
appointed as school heads.

“Part of running a successful school involves being a good manager. People who 
have had a lot of managerial experience should be able to bring a lot of that 
to bear on leading a school,” Youngtold the Times 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/call-for-business-leaders-to-be-made-head-teachers-bsj900gng>
.
 