
Hiddleswift. It sounds like some arcane practice out of JK Rowling but it is, 
of course, the latest celebrity hybrid that takes its place alongside those 
other magnificent centaurs, Brangelina, Bennifer and Kimye. Names that are – in 
ways that would require a PhD in marketing to explain – so much more than the 
sum of their parts.

Ever since that fateful day, only last Thursday, when the Sun revealed its 
“world exclusive” with the deathless headline “Tinker Taylor Snogs a Spy 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/1290205/the-steamy-pictures-that-reveal-taylor-swift-and-tom-hiddlestons-secret-romance-to-the-world/>
”, the world has been coming to terms with the apparent merger of two leading 
glamour brands: the actor Tom Hiddleston and the singer-songwriter Taylor Swift

Photographs showed the alleged couple kissing and canoodling on some rocks on 
a beach in Rhode Island. Exactly how and why the photographs were taken remains 
the subject of fevered speculation. Some suggest that they are not authentic 
paparazzi work, insofar as they lack that hallmark sense of furtive intrusion. 
The word that has been used is “staged”.

That a fledgling romance between two such talented luminaries in distinct 
fields of the arts could be reduced to so crude an epithet is perhaps a 
reflection of the cynical times in which we live. That said, the images do 
indeed look as if a team of PR consultants and fashion stylists had just 
stepped out of the shot, rather than as though they were captured by lucky 
lurking snapper.

Which raises the question: why would a singer whose private life forms the 
basis of her songwriting and is the source of intense interest for her army of 
fans and a man widely judged to be waging an unprecedentedly aggressive 
campaign to become the next James Bond want to place themselves in a situation 
that gained global exposure?

Who knows? Forget the photos and enjoy the story, which comes with such a 
strong aroma of invention that it can only be true. It seems that they met last 
month at the Met Gala in New York, where Swift challenged Hiddleston to a dance.

Among his many gifts – a passable Robert De Niro impression and a winningly 
bashful smile – Hiddleston, as YouTube will confirm, is a seriouslygood dancer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7GaO0oMniMQ>. And if it should turn out that 
buried in the works of Ian Fleming is a scene in which Bond struts his funky 
stuff, then the job’s in the bag.

Anyway, they danced, chatted and he called her the moment he heard that Swift 
had broken up from her boyfriend, the Scottish DJ Calvin Harris 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/taylor-swift-and-calvin-harris-have-broken-up-after-15-months-together-a7060721.html>
. Anonymous sources – and this tale features more anonymous sources than a 
Seymour Hersh exposé – say that he sent her flowers and deployed that bashful 
smile – so lethal inThe Night Manager that it completely disarmed an arms 
dealer – to devastating effect.

Or perhaps not. No one official is saying. Even the PRs are withholding a 
clarifying statement. All that leaves for the watching world are the enigmatic 
clues left on social media. Harris has unfollowed Swift and composed a (since 
deleted) gnomic tweet: “Oh boy it’s about to go down”. That may have referred 
to his next gig, but the consensus of opinion is that it means they are never 
ever getting back together.

If love has always been cruel, in the age of 24-hour status updates it can be 
particularly unforgiving. But then Swift, still only 26, has never been one for 
keeping her emotions to herself. AsRolling Stone said, she overshares “louder 
than anyone else in the game”. Her deceptively catchy brand of country-pop is 
shot through with the bittersweet memories of her various relationships with, 
among others, Jake Gyllenhaal, One Direction’s Harry Styles and Robert F 
Kennedy’s grandson, Conor.

Hiddleston is going to come under the kind of scrutiny that will test his 
unflappability to the very limit

She is an uncannily gifted songwriter, able to infuse irresistible riffs with 
surprisingly poignant lyrics. Her album1989 – the year of her birth – has been 
hailed as a pop classic. She is hugely successful, rivalled only by Adele on 
the international stage, and said to be worth in the neighbourhood of $200m.

It says something about the elusive nature of sexual equality that a young, 
powerful, rich, attractive and extremely famous woman still represents a 
problematic equation. History, even more enlightened recent history, is not 
overendowed with men who are comfortable with taking a lesser position in the 
spotlight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftom-hiddlestone-taylor-swift-match-made-in-heaven-pr-stunt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8602db971792b80058cfdcbe46c20c8e964cc3d3%2F0_151_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Hiddleston%20and%20Taylor%20Swift%3A%20match%20made%20in%20heaven%20or%20a%20PR%20stunt%3F%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftom-hiddlestone-taylor-swift-match-made-in-heaven-pr-stunt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Hiddleston%20and%20Taylor%20Swift%3A%20match%20made%20in%20heaven%20or%20a%20PR%20stunt%3F%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftom-hiddlestone-taylor-swift-match-made-in-heaven-pr-stunt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8602db971792b80058cfdcbe46c20c8e964cc3d3%2F0_151_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Taylor Swift: ‘an uncannily gifted songwriter, able to infuse irresistible 
riffs with surprisingly poignant lyrics.’ Photograph: Richard 
Shotwell/Invision/AP 
But say what you will about old Etonians, they tend not to suffer from a 
shortfall in confidence. And one of Hiddleston’s strongest suits is his easy 
physical charm. “He has an exceptional sense of rhythm and moves like a dream,” 
the director Joanna Hogg has said. And he looks not only smart enough to 
recognise the great good fortune that life has brought him, but also to enjoy 
it.

As he told an interviewer a couple of years ago when his career was starting 
to take off, with major parts in Steven Spielberg’sWar Horse adaptation and the 
Marvel Comics’ Thor series: “It’s mad and bananas and amazing. But I can handle 
it for the simple reason that it genuinely feels like it’s not real. You know 
when you go to a fancy dress party and everyone looks incredible and there are 
crazy things hanging from the ceiling? For about five hours or so, you enter 
into another world and then, when you come out of it, you are sitting at home 
with a cup of tea and a biscuit and you’re thinking to yourself, ‘Well, that 
was weird. Fun, but weird.’ That’s exactly what it feels like.”

The suffering artist he is not. Having grown up in Oxford, attended the Dragon 
School, Eton and then Cambridge, where he gained a double first in classics, 
there is little argument that he has had a privileged start in life. His father 
was a self-made man from a working-class background in Glasgow who wanted to 
give his children a leg-up. His parents split up when he was 13 and had just 
started Eton, an experience of which he said: “I like to think it made me more 
compassionate in my understanding of human frailty.”

As a consequence, he has often been cast in film and television roles as a 
handsome young man condemned to accept a blessed existence. In this, he has 
never been better than in his very first film role in Joanna Hogg’s excellent
Unrelated, playing the object of a middle-aged woman’s thwarted desires.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftom-hiddlestone-taylor-swift-match-made-in-heaven-pr-stunt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28c5e575b0e856809f130911748ce8835adf8d19%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tom%20Hiddleston%20and%20Taylor%20Swift%3A%20match%20made%20in%20heaven%20or%20a%20PR%20stunt%3F%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftom-hiddlestone-taylor-swift-match-made-in-heaven-pr-stunt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tom%20Hiddleston%20and%20Taylor%20Swift%3A%20match%20made%20in%20heaven%20or%20a%20PR%20stunt%3F%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjun%2F19%2Ftom-hiddlestone-taylor-swift-match-made-in-heaven-pr-stunt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28c5e575b0e856809f130911748ce8835adf8d19%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Tom Hiddleston: ‘boyish, unruffled’. Photograph: The Guardian 
There is a boyish but unruffled quality about him that some critics have 
construed as complacency. AlthoughThe Night Manager – the most expensive 
audition for the Bond part ever filmed – was a success, it was said that 
Hiddleston didn’t do much. But it’s fair to say that his main responsibility 
was looking captivating to both the male and female characters alike and he 
managed this with aplomb.

However, if the photos, and the subsequent ones of the couple getting on 
Swift’s private jet, are true (even if staged), then Hiddleston is going to 
come under the kind of scrutiny that will test his refined unflappability to 
the very limit.

Swift, who likes to surround herself with a posse of famous friends (Lena 
Dunham, Cara Delevingne, Ellie Goulding), is used to the attention. She was 
declared a prodigy in theNew Yorker when she was just 16. Taught to play guitar 
by a computer repairman when she was 12, she showed such promise that her 
parents relocated the family to Nashville when she was 14. By the time she was 
18, her second album,Fearless, was a multimillion bestseller.

She is nine years younger than Hiddleston, but she has been in show-business 
as long as he has and she has within her a resilience that belies her tender 
years. The press has written in detail about all her relationships, but then so 
has she, the difference being that she doesn’t name names. As she has said: 
“The fact that I’ve never confirmed whom those songs are about makes me feel 
there is still one card I’m holding.”

She hates the idea that she has been “calculating” about her private life, 
using it to increase her public reach. “You can be accidentally successful for 
three or four years,” she told one interviewer who raised the issue. “Accidents 
happen. But careers take hard work.”

As do relationships, especially in the glare of carefully arranged paparazzi 
cameras. Perhaps Hiddleswift will handle it with the ironic understanding that 
it’s not real but mad and bananas and amazing and it’s all just weird fun. But 
if they don’t, well at least they make a pretty – if not entirely convincing – 
picture.

THE HIDDLESTON AND SWIFT FILE

Born Taylor Alison Swift, Reading, Pennsylvania, 13 December 1989; Thomas 
William Hiddleston, London, 9 February 1981.

Best of times Swift’s fifth album, 1989, released in 2014 sold more copies in 
its opening week than any album in the previous 12 years. It also won three 
Grammy awards. Hiddleston’s title role in BBC1’s hit spy thrillerThe Night 
Manager was a huge hit with critics and TV audiences. He’s favourite to be the 
new James Bond.

Worst of times When Kanye West ruined Taylor Swift’s acceptance speech at the 
2009 MTV VMA awards, telling the audience that Beyoncé should have won. 
Hiddleston starred in a 2014 Jaguar commercial criticised for encouraging 
irresponsible driving.

She says “I went out on a normal amount of dates in my early 20s and I got 
absolutely slaughtered for it. I didn’t date for two-and-a-half years. Should I 
have had to do that? No.”

He says “You can’t treat the woman you love as a piece of meat. You should 
treat your love like a princess. Give her love songs, something with real 
meaning.”
 