 The Tyneside playwright Tom Hadaway, who has died aged 81, was a man who wrote 
about the commonfolk (a word he much preferred to "the working class") with a 
true insider's knowledge, plus a uniquely personal and poetic voice.
Born on Waterville Road, North Shields, he was orphaned young and adopted by 
an aunt. Leaving school at 14, he started work on the fish quay. He was 
surrounded by strong and skilful men and, crucially, he listened to what they 
said and remembered it with total recall.

Of his pal "Muts", a fish filleter, he wrote: "He could boast it took six 
polis's to bang him up, and he had the bruises to show, but a machine arrived 
that could cut fish faster than 10 men, and this giant of a man was 
undermined." The giant of a man inspired an early play, The Filleting Machine 
(1981), which was later put on screen by Amber Films, the remarkable north-east 
cooperative.

A natural storyteller, Tom was a late starter as a professional writer. He was 
encouraged by CP Taylor, who apparently heard one of Tom's stories on the 
radio, and pushed a note through his door telling him to start writing plays. 
He became Tom's mentor and friend.

Tom first made an impact on the national scene with a jewel of a television 
play, God Bless Thee Jackie Maddison (1974), directed by Jack Gold, and went on 
to contribute memorable episodes to the wonderful first series of When The Boat 
Comes In (1976), along with Sid Chaplin and Alex Glasgow - one of the few 
occasions when all the writers on a popular network series lived and worked in 
the area where the show was set.

When he came to London, Tom would sometimes stay with a young script editor on 
the programme who told me: "I'd walked along our street hundreds of times, but 
when I walked along with Tom, he made me look at it properly. He seemed to know 
about everything. Chimney pots, doorways, gable ends. How they were made and 
the people who made them."

It is an all too familiar indictment of the television industry that the 
decline in original plays and drama over the last two decades deprived the 
audiences of the work of writers like Tom; but the clear beneficiary was the 
north-east.

He continued to work with Amber Films and became the key writer - arguably the 
father-figure - in the history of the Live Theatre Company in Newcastle. A 
young Tim Healy was in The Pigeon Man, first performed at a miners' social club 
in Shiremoor in 1974, and The Long Line, produced at Live's Quayside theatre in 
1986, had in its cast the teenage Robson Green.

It says something about the Tyneside theatre community that not so long ago, 
Robson's new year present to Tom and myself was a pair of tickets for a 
Newcastle United home game, where we managed to keep each other out of trouble.

Throughout his career, Tom clung fast to Cecil Taylor's ad vice to "write from 
your own backyard", but there was nothing parochial about his vision. In his 
play Seafarers (1993), there is a wonderful account (based on a true story) of 
Jim Slater, a South Shields man who later became a leading seamens' union 
official, being arrested in Florida because the authorities, hearing his 
Geordie accent, assumed he must be a Russian spy. What emerged from this piece, 
a sweet-and-sour analysis of hilarious misunderstanding, was Tom's acute ear 
for the poetry that lies in everyday speech, including American vernacular. He 
had the generous ears of a generous man, and the strength to be tender.

Above all, he loved his native land. Of the language of the north-east, he 
wrote: "... if our betters shame us out of our phrases and pronunciation, we 
shall be without resource. From a shared history, dialect is the enabling power 
of the commoner." Maybe so, but there was nothing common about Tom Hadaway.

He is survived by his wife Barbara, and his children Pauline, David and John. 

Â· Tom Hadaway, dramatist, born March 18 1923; died March 3 2005
 