
And so the journey – well, A Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/a-journey> – begins. Tony Blair's heavily 
embargoed, highly anticipated political memoir hits the shelves this morning, 
amid feverish predictions from booksellers.

The book, running to over 600 pages, leapfrogged into top position in 
Amazon.co.uk's bestseller chart this morning from 11th place last night, 
overtaking bestselling books by Stieg Larsson, Stephenie Meyer and Terry 
Pratchett. The online bookseller says it is on target to become its 
biggest-selling political memoir ever.

Amazon.co.uk said that Blair's A Journey had generated 36% more pre-orders 
than Peter Mandelson's The Third Man at the same stage. It added that the book 
"is on target to overtake that title to become the most successful political 
memoir of all time on Amazon.co.uk" – news that will be welcomed by the Royal 
British Legion, to which Blair is donating all proceeds from the memoir, 
including his estimated £4.6m advance.

"Both books have performed very well and, perhaps unsurprisingly in a year 
when there has been a general election, we are encountering a strong appetite 
for books from the world of politics," said Amy Worth, Amazon's head of 
bookbuying.

At Waterstone's – where Blair will sign copes of his autobiography on 8 
September amid heavy security – A Journey was hovering in eighth place in its 
online bestseller chart this morning, while Foyles was predicting that the book 
would be the independent chain's bestseller of the week.

"Most bookshops have revised their expectations for A Journey, after such 
impressive sales for Peter Mandelson's book. Initial sales will be very high 
indeed and we expect it to be our bestseller this week, even on just four days' 
sales," said Jonathan Ruppin at the independent bookseller.

But he was loath to go as far as Amazon in his predictions, saying that 
sustained interest would depend "very much on the content of the book". "Random 
House have been promoting it as 'frank' and 'honest' and there will undoubtedly 
be a great deal of debate as to whether it lives up to that billing," said 
Ruppin. "If it does, it should be one of the non-fiction bestsellers throughout 
autumn and Christmas; if it doesn't, interest is likely to tail off quite 
rapidly."

The book will have to do very well indeed, however, if it is to outsell 
Margaret Thatcher's The Path to Power, which shifted an estimated 
half-a-million copies to become the highest selling British political memoir 
ever.

A Journey is already the subject of some vitriol at Amazon.co.uk, where 
customer discussions 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/forum/cd/forum.html/ref=cm_cd_dp_ef_sap?ie=UTF8&cdForum=FxSUWQ2CTSHD85&cdAnchor=009192555X&asin=009192555X>
 entitled "Shameful", "Boycott this book" and "Tissue of lies" have all sprung 
up around it."Why haven't Amazon put this in the fiction section?" 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/forum/cd/discussion.html/ref=cm_cd_NOREF/ref=cm_cd_dp_ef_tft_tp?ie=UTF8&cdForum=FxSUWQ2CTSHD85&s=books&asin=009192555X&store=books&cdThread=Tx5ZCHJO73DSHA>
 wrote one reader.

As has become traditional with big book releases in the UK, A Journey is also 
being heavily discounted, selling for half price online at Amazon, Tesco and 
Waterstone's – although the price war has yet to reach the discount orgies that 
attended the release of the later Harry Potter books.

Follow the fallout from the launch of Blair's memoir as it happens on Andrew 
Sparrow's live blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2010/sep/01/tonyblair-past>
 