
When Jonathan Powell, the gatekeeper to the corporate empire of Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair>, sat down to lunch with the 
former Saudi intelligence chief Prince Faisal Al Turki in June 2010 he could 
not have known how lucrative it would turn out to be for the former British 
prime minister.

As the high-profile mediator of the stuttering peace process in the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/27/tony-blair-resigns-as-middle-east-peace-envoy-report>
, Blair had to be careful not to mix business with pleasure. However, one of 
those lunching with Powell at the annual “global mediator’s retreat”, organised 
by the Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, was looking to make a deal.

Nawaf Obaid, a security analyst who accompanied Prince Faisal, emailed Powell 
a week later, according to documents seen by the Guardian, with a suggestion to 
work with his brother Tarek’s company, PetroSaudi, which he “co-founded and 
co-owns with Prince Turki bin Abdullah, son of King Abdullah”.

“They have several projects that [they] are working [on] and I think it would 
[give] a very interesting perspective to see if we could establish a strategic 
partnership with former PM Tony Blair and yourself,” he wrote.
 Tarek Obaid 
Tarek Obaid was a former banker who styled himself as an adviser to members of 
the Saudi royal family and a director of a joint venture with Malaysia’s 
multibillion-dollar development fund, 1MDB. This fund had put $300m through 
PetroSaudi and as the latter’s chief executive, Obaid was on the lookout for 
deals.

On paper PetroSaudi looked impressive: its chief investment officer was a 
former Goldman Sachs banker, Patrick Mahony. The chief operating officer was 
listed as Rick Haythornthwaite, a City insider who was also chairman of Network 
Rail and MasterCard.

Blair’s team sold the former prime minister as someone who could help “unlock 
situations which might otherwise be blocked by political factors” in places 
such asChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and Africa. PetroSaudi 
was interested in Beijing’s appetite for oil and how Blair’s firm could help.
Blair's connections 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/blair_connections-zip/giv-125154gn4ExqHLpss/>
The role assumed by Blair shows his influence in one of the most important 
areas of global economic cooperation this century: between the oil sands of the 
Middle East and hydrocarbon-hungry China.

While in office, Blair oversaw the handover of Hong Kong to China, but visited 
the latter just five times. His sixth visit in 2007 – whenhe earned £200,000 
for a speech in the industrial city of Dongguan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/nov/08/china.tonyblair> – marked a 
turning point in how he viewed the rising power.

Since then Blair has been back two dozen times and has built a reputation for 
befriending the rising stars of Chinese politics. In March 2010 he secured a 
meeting with Li Keqiang, now China’s premier.

PetroSaudi signed up Blair’s team to lobby Beijing in the summer of 2010 and 
internal PetroSaudi correspondence reveals there were questions raised about 
the apparently opaque nature of Blair’s businesses and the role he could play.

Tony Blair courted Chinese leaders for Saudi prince's oil firm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/tony-blair-chinese-leaders-saudi-princes-oil-firm-middle-east-envoy>
PetroSaudi executives warned in early September 2010 that they had “no 
contractual nexus with TB” and were anxious about “the lack of apparent 
employment or other involvement of TB in the corporate structure”.

To convince PetroSaudi that if it paid it would get Blair, his executives 
revealed for the first time how his complex web of companies worked. Blair’s 
businesses are split into two wings: Firerush, which was governed by the then 
City regulator the Financial Services Authority, and Windrush, which was not.

What bothered PetroSaudi was that it was paying roughly $55,000 to Firerush 
and about $10,000 to Windrush. Both firms trade as Tony Blair Associates (TBA).
Blair's companies 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/blair_companies-zip/giv-12515kCyG1iHhr7YY/>
From early on in their relationship PetroSaudi executives admitted they knew 
“very little” about Blair’s firms. In an email in August 2010, the company’s 
executives said they “would like to understand more about the structure and the 
relationship between Firerush, TB Associates and TB. In particular, the 
engagement letter mentions the provision of services by employees of Firerush 
which seems, like a number of concepts in the engagement letter, inappropriate 
given we are only looking to engage with TB.”

To allay concerns in November 2010, Varun Chandra, a former Lehman Brothers 
banker and director of TBA, told PetroSaudi that Blair was the “ultimate owner 
of all this and owns all the share capital” of all the companies. He told 
PetroSaudi it was not relevant which company got paid “given where the cash 
ultimately ends up”.

Chandra explained that Firerush executives handled the day-to-day 
conversations about “specific opportunities and making the arrangements to 
drive negotiations forward. Tony, procured by Windrush, is involved at higher 
level but on an ongoing basis, meeting with senior political leadership and 
business heads in order to discuss PetroSaudi at a strategic level and to speak 
highly of your management.”

PetroSaudi, he said, had already seen the benefit as “the man in charge of 
China’s economic policy is now supportive of working with PetroSaudi, and … he 
has spoken with CNPC [China National Petroleum Corporation] to ensure a proper 
working dialogue”.

By November 2010 TBA was hired and, according to the documents, Blair had 
found time to put PetroSaudi’s case toLou Jiwei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/17/china-finance-minister-trump-trade-proposal-irrational>
, the then chairman of the China Investment Corporation and now the nation’s 
finance minister.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fpetrosaudi-tony-blair-emails-oil-company-chinese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60e2f0083c23c1c4ddcc8166df56924be3048c10%2F0_9_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Blair%3A%20the%20former%20PM%20for%20hire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fpetrosaudi-tony-blair-emails-oil-company-chinese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony%20Blair%3A%20the%20former%20PM%20for%20hire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fpetrosaudi-tony-blair-emails-oil-company-chinese%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F60e2f0083c23c1c4ddcc8166df56924be3048c10%2F0_9_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 Lou Jiwei, centre, arrives for a G20 finance ministers’ and central bank 
governors’ meeting at the IMF on 15 April. Photograph: Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Questions could be raised about why Blair was allowed to promote the interests 
of the son of the then ruler of Saudi Arabia in China while also working as the 
Middle East peace envoy for the Quartet – the US, UN, EU and Russia. Blair had 
also faced criticism forhalting a Serious Fraud Office inquiry in 2006, while 
prime minister, into alleged corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/dec/15/saudiarabia.armstrade> over a 
multibillion-pound arms deal with Saudi Arabia. He denies any conflict of 
interest.

PetroSaudi had made it clear it wanted to hire Blair. In an internal 2010 
document entitled “story for Blair”, PetroSaudi sold itself as a “vehicle of 
the Saudi royal family” that could count on the “full support from the 
kingdom’s diplomatic corps” and was set up by Prince Turki bin Abdullah and 
Obaid, who hailed from a “prominent business family”.

PetroSaudi’s pitch in the document was that it claimed “many countries will 
get a company in but then bully it around once it is there and has sunk 
billions of dollars in the ground. This will not happen with [PetroSaudi] 
because these nations do not want to get on the wrong side of the Saudi royal 
family.”

But access to the legendary Blair contacts book does not come cheap. In July 
TBA’s then chief operating officer, Mark Labovitch, emailed Mahony to say he 
had “discussed your strategy and objectives with Tony and believe strongly that 
we can add value to PetroSaudi’s business development … We would propose a 
retainer fee of $100,000 per month.”


There is no suggestion that either Blair or PetroSaudi acted improperly.

The documents reveal that even before Blair’s company was hired, he was 
already promoting the oil firm. In late July 2010 Blair was in Shanghai to 
celebrate the planting of 1m trees in north-west China to combat climate 
change. A few days later, Labovitch emailed the London-based oil firm to say: 
“Tony has just been in China and informally sounded out a number of people.”

Tarek Obaid and Blair did meet privately in early July 2010, and apparently 
discussed a working relationship. A month later Blair’s company was on a 
retainer fee of $65,000 and a “success fee equal to 2%” of any deal that TBA 
brought to the company – which PetroSaudi admitted could “potentially be a very 
large sum”.

In the following months a picture emerges of corporate bonhomie underwritten 
by spiky internal exchanges over the cost of hiring the former prime minister, 
his apparent obsession with privacy and a whirl of phone calls with global 
leaders.

By August 2010, according to documents, PetroSaudi raised concerns internally 
that TBA’s proposed contract was “more appropriate to an investment bank (eg 
they can record our phone calls)”. In an email, Mahony described the contract 
offered by Blair’s lieutenants as “a very aggressive first draft with almost 
total limitation of liability for TB”. He wrote: “I should note that the 
aggressive starting position of his engagement letter most probably is 
cynically reliant on counterparties taking a passive approach to secure his 
services.”

But at the end of the month Blair was in the Chinese capital for the signing 
of a partnership agreement between Peking University andhis Faith Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/24/tony-blair-faith-foundation-anything-but-mysterious>
, and managed to squeeze in some time with the Chinese oil giants CNPC and 
China National Offshore Oil Corporation, as well as China’s supreme economic 
council, the National Development and Reform Commission.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fpetrosaudi-tony-blair-emails-oil-company-chinese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F936a81e9f6206115e83f4fb06d123af4b3de7004%2F0_0_2584_1907%2F2584.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Blair%3A%20the%20former%20PM%20for%20hire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fpetrosaudi-tony-blair-emails-oil-company-chinese%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony%20Blair%3A%20the%20former%20PM%20for%20hire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fpetrosaudi-tony-blair-emails-oil-company-chinese%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F936a81e9f6206115e83f4fb06d123af4b3de7004%2F0_0_2584_1907%2F2584.jpg>
 Tony Blair gives a speech at Peking University in Beijing in 2012. Photograph: 
China Daily/Reuters 
“The latter effectively ‘blessed’ your engagement with Chinese companies, and 
the former were both very keen to meet you and work out how you might 
collaborate,” Blair’s then chief operating officer told PetroSaudi. “We clearly 
articulated the benefits of partnership with you to them, which they grasped 
immediately.”

In November, Blair was back in Beijing to give a speech for his Faith 
Foundation. He also had a meeting with China’s vice-premier, Wang Qishan, who 
Blair’s firm told PetroSaudi was “crucial – inter alia in order to highlight 
the wider benefits of a partnership with PetroSaudi in terms of putting Chinese 
companies in pole position for Saudi infrastructure tenders”. Wang is now a 
member of the Chinese Communist party’s politbureau, the country’s highest 
decision-making body.

Blair’s relationship with PetroSaudi appeared to give him access to the Saudi 
elite. In December 2010 an executive of PetroSaudi said the company could 
arrange a dinner for Blair with Prince Turki. Blair’s office say this never 
took place.

The next month Blair’s office emailed PetroSaudi because he was keen to meet 
the King ofSaudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> and 
Prince Bandar, the secretary general of the country’s national security 
council, before the February 2011 Quartet meeting to discuss Middle East peace 
after the Egyptian revolution.
 