
Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> obtained a 
“blessing” from Chinese leaders for a company owned by a Saudi prince to do 
business in China as part of an arrangement that paid the former UK prime 
minister’s firm £41,000 a month and a 2% commission on any multimillion-pound 
contracts he helped to secure.

A series of documents, seen by the Guardian, show how Blair courted some of 
the most influential Chinese political leaders in 2010 and then introduced them 
to the Saudi-owned company he worked with, PetroSaudi. The company was not 
allowed to divulge his role without permission, according to the contract.

The emails suggest PetroSaudi was told of fears that the City regulator was 
targeting Blair over concerns he was not just opening doors but arranging and 
advising on deals for investors – a regulated corporate function that he is not 
authorised to conduct.

Blair began lobbying for PetroSaudi, a London-based company co-owned by Prince 
Turki bin Abdullah – the son of Saudi Arabia’s then monarch – in the summer of 
2010. By the end of the year, the emails show, the former prime minister had 
arranged a meeting between the chair of the China National Petroleum 
Corporation, one of the largest companies in the world, and PetroSaudi inSaudi 
Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>.


During discussions over the proposed hiring of Blair in November 2010, 
PetroSaudi pressed for him to “help deliver transactions, not just make the 
intros”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ftony-blair-chinese-leaders-saudi-princes-oil-firm-middle-east-envoy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe621b4bb6aab9ba20a581f92e1f8f945458037f9%2F0_0_3000_2059%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tony%20Blair%20courted%20Chinese%20leaders%20for%20Saudi%20prince's%20oil%20firm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ftony-blair-chinese-leaders-saudi-princes-oil-firm-middle-east-envoy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tony%20Blair%20courted%20Chinese%20leaders%20for%20Saudi%20prince%27s%20oil%20firm&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Ftony-blair-chinese-leaders-saudi-princes-oil-firm-middle-east-envoy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe621b4bb6aab9ba20a581f92e1f8f945458037f9%2F0_0_3000_2059%2F3000.jpg>
 Tony Blair and Saudi Arabia’s King Abdullah at a meeting at Buckingham Palace 
in London in 2007. Photograph: Alessia Pierdomenico/Reuters 
However, this did not prove possible. In email correspondence, PetroSaudi 
explained that Blair’s team could not arrange deals “as this could deem TB to 
be carrying out regulated activities. Certain people at FSA [the Financial 
Services Authority] are out to get him. In summary, TBA [Tony Blair Associates] 
has said TB will assist in delivering transactions but cannot have it on paper 
that this might be the case (which no doubt still causes potential problems 
with the FSA).”


The Guardian has seen no evidence that Blair acted improperly and there is 
nothing to suggest that PetroSaudi acted inappropriately.


By law, Blair is not allowed to arrange, administer or advise on investments – 
roles that, under the City’s regulations, only “approved” persons are allowed 
to conduct. Such individuals have to be deemed “fit and proper”, a process 
which could require applicants to be interviewed.

A spokesman for the former prime minister said “his role was made known to the 
regulators … and he has never undertaken any activity other than making 
introductions. He does not do ‘deals’.”

Tony Blair: the former PM for hire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/petrosaudi-tony-blair-emails-oil-company-chinese>
The disclosures could fuel criticism of Blair’s private business interests and 
raise questions about potential conflicts of interests when he was theMiddle 
East peace envoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/27/tony-blair-resigns-as-middle-east-peace-envoy-report>
 for the Quartet of the US, UN, EU and Russia.

Concerns have been raised that, since leaving office, he has created an opaque 
network of financial interests that stretch from theUnited Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/09/uk-secret-group-of-top-officials-enable-uae-investment-united-arab-emirates>
 toKazakhstan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/aug/24/tony-blair-advice-kazakh-president-protesters>
 andAmerica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/15/tony-blair-us-republicans-middle-east>
. Blair has built up a substantial business empire and his family is estimated 
to be worth £60m, a fortune partly built on theownership of 10 houses and 27 
flats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/14/tony-cherie-blair-property-empire-worth-estimated-27m-pounds>
.

By November 2010, PetroSaudi had hired Tony Blair Associates (TBA), the 
trading name of his two groups of firms: Firerush and Windrush. According to 
PetroSaudi’s executives, the fact that neither company had a disclosed link to 
Blair was a sticking point; the oil firm was cautious of paying large sums for 
the former prime minister’s services but not being able to “engage directly” 
with him.


However such worries were assuaged by Blair’s team, who revealed that he had a 
secret consultancy deal, set up six months after he left Westminster, with his 
companies that ensured he would be personally available to lobby if his firms 
were hired. “No other company we work with has this document,” wrote the TBA 
director, Varun Chandra, in November.
Blair's companies 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/blair_companies-zip/giv-12515kCyG1iHhr7YY/>
According to the contract signed in November 2010 between TBA and PetroSaudi, 
Blair would arrange introductions to high-ranking officials inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>. The work was lucrative: Blair’s firm 
was to be paid $65,000 a month plus a “success fee equal to 2%” of any deal TBA 
introduced to PetroSaudi. In the period from September 2010 to February 2011 
Petrosaudi paid $382,000 for TBA’s services.
 Tarek Obaid 
Blair was also personally involved in landing the PetroSaudi account, holding 
a face-to-face meeting with the Saudi chief executive, Tarek Obaid, in the 
former prime minister’s Mayfair office in July 2010. After the meeting Blair’s 
executives wrote to the oil firm saying: “Tony has just been in China and 
informally sounded out a number of people” about possible deals.

In a series of emails in 2010, seen by the Guardian, directors from Blair’s 
office tout their influence with Beijing, noting they could “add value” by 
“identifying new relationships … in China with the senior political 
leadership”. In return, PetroSaudi said it could ultimately get any potential 
partners into “the Kingdom [of Saudi Arabia] and give them full access to our 
shareholders’ ability to win large government contracts”.

Among those lobbied by Blair were a Chinese vice-premier who now sits on the 
seven-man political cabinet that runs China, the heads of China’s giant oil 
companies and the country’s supreme economic council.

“The latter effectively ‘blessed’ your engagement with Chinese companies,” 
Chandra wrote in an email to PetroSaudi in September 2010.

The deal turned out to be mutually beneficial: PetroSaudi offered Blair access 
to Saudi royalty, including the king himself. At one point Blair’s company 
invited PetroSaudi to lunch with “Alan Duncan MP, currently UK international 
development minister but a former star crude trader … I think he’d have some 
interesting insights in respect of your near-term plans.”

In a statement, Blair’s spokesperson said: “As we have made clear many times 
before, there was no conflict between any commercial work and the work on the 
Palestinian economy and institutions which Tony Blair did in an unpaidex officio
 role for the Quartet. The work Tony Blair Associates did for PetroSaudi 
International Ltd, which is based in the UK, was undertaken five years ago for 
a limited period of a few months and was completely unrelated to the Middle 
East.


“It is ludicrous to suggest that we would use PetroSaudi for anything related 
to Quartet work, and our contract with them clearly stipulated that this could 
not occur. Also, as we have said on previous occasions, neither TBA nor Mr 
Blair has arranged any meetings with any British minister for PetroSaudi or for 
any other clients.”
 