
The careers of Tony Scott 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/aug/20/tony-scott-director-dies?newsfeed=true>
 and his brotherSir Ridley <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/ridley-scott> are 
exemplars of how the talent of the north of England will out, in their case 
from Grangefield grammar at Stockton (whose alumni also include the novelist 
and Booker PrizewinnerPat Barker <http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/pat-barker>) 
and West Hartlepool college of art.

Both places are still part of the local education system although in different 
forms, as might be expected after more than half a century, Grangefield as a
comprehensive technology college <http://www.grangefieldschool.co.uk/> and West 
Hartlepool as part ofCleveland college of art and design. 
<http://www.ccad.ac.uk/> They continue a grand tradition which played a major 
part in an area requiring artistic and design talent for its many industries; 
West Hartlepool was originally, in 1874, the Government School of Arts housed 
in the town's Athenaeum.

The stream of talent from such places, throughout the north and of course more 
widely in England's regions, is so broad and fast that the Scotts have many 
equals; but they have played a particularly interesting part in the vexed 
question of the image of the north, which much-fascinates theGuardian Northerner
. Famously, Sir Ridley made the 1973 Hovis bread advertBoy on a Bike, which 
tapped directly into the national sense at the time of 'the north', sent up the 
following year with equal brilliance by Monty Python'sFour Yorkshiremen (pause 
for a moment's respect toMichael Palin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/michael-palin> from Sheffield).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F6Mq59ykPnAE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F6Mq59ykPnAE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F6Mq59ykPnAE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Boy on a Bike's inspirations included Sir Ridley's first film Boy and Bicycle 
<http://www.screenonline.org.uk/film/id/496936/index.html>, a Â£65 job done 
while he was a student at the Royal College of Art which starred Tony as a 
truanting schoolboy in Hartlepool and showed the talents of both of them. Some 
of the advert's other ingredients were very different; it was shot on 
super-twee Golden Hill in Shaftesbury and the voiceover is Mummerset. But look 
and listen! It has cobbles, a flat(tish) cap and crucially a brass band playing 
the melancholy slow movement from Dvorak's New World symphony.

Northern, was the all-but-universal assumption; commentators spoke about the 
advert representing 'good, plain northern values' and the north is always cited 
when it wins Best TV Ad Ever competitions for the umpteenth time. Subsequent 
filmography recognised this. Tony Scott's own Hovis advert Runaway, screened in 
1979, abandoned the West Country for an entirely Bronte-esque moor, grim 
halflight included.Go On Lad in 2008, which follows a flatcapped boy through 
200 years of British and Hovis history, uses a range of locations but 
'northernerises' them all.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQUg_52B0pFI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQUg_52B0pFI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQUg_52B0pFI%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Another of the Scotts' brilliant contemporaries Alan Plater wrote perceptively 
about this in Geordies 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Geordies-Roots-Regionalism-Robert-Colls/dp/1904794122>
, an extremely good compilation edited by Robert Colls and Bill Lancaster, 
where he describes how a fictional Hovisian north was what London commissioners 
wanted and therefore what they got. He says:

The setting was an ill-defined, generalised lump of the good Earth called 'The 
North' and the writers were categorised as 'Northern writers'. Hull-born Tom 
Courtenay starred in Billy Liar despite its West Riding setting and 
Salford-born Albert Finney found his way to Nottingham in Saturday Night and 
Sunday Morning, all without comment in the posh newspapers, though there were 
comments a-plenty in the areas listed.

I cannot tell a lie. I played the game happily along with everyone else, in 
radio, theatre and television. I even invented my own geographical area for the 
purpose, enshrined in the stage direction: The play is set in an industrial 
town somewhere in the Mid-Pennines.

It was a simple mathematical equation. We could deliver audiences; therefore 
we got the job.

It is a tribute to the talent of people such as Plater, Sir Ridley and Tony 
Scott <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tony-scott> whose untimely death we 
mourn today, that this world took such a hold. They took generalised truth and 
the telescoping of many, many decades into a single, timeless moment, to 
overcome the obstacle that such a place never existed. The industrial 
revolution section of the Oympic Games' opening ceremony mixed more of the same 
undoubted magic to a similar joyous reception.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fs_suyZb5mDk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fs_suyZb5mDk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fs_suyZb5mDk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It is lovely. But do you think it's us? 

Myself, I'm glad that so many artists in our three northern regions - but far 
too often below (or above?) the metropolis' radar - now write, film and dance 
to our own, real-life tunes.

Do you agree?

You can watch Tony Scott in Ridley Scott's Boy and Bicycle here. 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TwO97pV_cSI>
 