
Graduates with first-class degrees from elite universities are being “locked 
out” from jobs in investment banking if they commit the crime of wearing brown 
shoes, look uncomfortable in a suit, or have the wrong “polish” or “aura”, 
according to a new study into social exclusion.


The exclusion process is even more brutal for non-privileged candidates from 
non-elite universities and schools, foundthe report by the Social Mobility 
Commission 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/socio-economic-diversity-in-life-sciences-and-investment-banking>
, which uncovers a world where, according to one interviewee: “There are some 
areas in the bank … where the concept of diversity is about taking a different 
year group from Eton or from Harrow; if some of the departments are really 
ambitious they might include St Paul’s and Westminster school.”

In its report, Socio-Economic Diversity in Life Sciences and Investment Banking
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking>, published on Thursday, the 
commission, chaired by former minister Alan Milburn, reveals that the 
mainstream recruitment and selection processes of investment banks has “set up 
barriers for individuals from non-privileged backgrounds”.

 By “non-privileged”, however, the report aims high, by defining “privilege” 
as having rich and important parents who could be useful to the banks, going to 
a select few private schools – and an even more select few universities – 
having completed three or four periods of unpaid work experience by the age of 
17, and social skills honed by attending drinks and dinner parties from an 
early age with their parents.

 “It is important to note again that these processes are becoming more 
pronounced within the sector,” noted the report. “Banks acting alone may be 
reluctant to reverse this trend for fear of their competitors capturing all the 
‘best’ candidates at an early stage.”

 Preparing for a successful career in banking starts early, the report found. 
Candidates for front-office roles in banks must have scored 520 points in the 
old A-level tariff, equivalent to two A* and two As.

 “Students who achieve strong grades at a target university but have performed 
less well at school, may be automatically eliminated during rigid 
pre-screening,” the report notes. Applications from these students will not 
even be read by banks, even if the student is on track for a first-class degree.

 While achieving these A-level results, students must also be able to show a 
variety and often extensive list of extracurricular activities on their CV, 
including leading societies and sporting clubs.

 From school, candidates must attend the very narrow group of universities in 
the UK from which investment banks prefer to select, including London School of 
Economics (LSE), University College London (UCL), Imperial College London, and 
Oxford, Cambridge and Warwick Universities.

 Just 7% of all UK children attend fee-paying schools but 34% of new entrants 
to the banking sector who were educated in the UK had attended a fee-paying 
school, rising to almost 70% of new entrants in private equity. More than 50% 
of current leaders within the banking sector who are from the UK were educated 
privately.

Fixing wealth inequality: future generations will think us mad, and they will 
be right | Wayne Swan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/26/fixing-wealth-inequality-future-generations-will-think-us-mad-and-they-will-be-right>
Oxbridge entrants to the City are more likely to be privately educated than 
Oxbridge graduates who go elsewhere: 42% of all Oxbridge graduates went to 
private schools but 65% of Oxbridge entrants to the banking sector went to 
private school.

During their time at the university, aspiring bankers are expected to continue 
expanding their CVs with extracurricular activities. These requirements have, 
the report says, “arguably contributed to a relative ‘arms race’ as, faced with 
increasing competition and an ever increasing need to stand out, aspirant 
bankers engage in increasingly focused efforts to build their CV”.

The report says that “in other careers, university might provide the 
environment in which students from non-privileged backgrounds can identify and 
refine their career aspirations, ready to apply to internships during their 
second year. Yet for investment banks, students from non-privileged backgrounds 
who apply at this point may be competing against others who have already added 
several internships, Spring Week programmes, and/or insight days to their CV.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Ftop-graduates-missing-out-on-banking-jobs-for-lacking-polish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb619d38cb45a7bf101f0aab9914d4e59228a306%2F0_186_3700_2221%2F3700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20graduates%20missing%20out%20on%20banking%20jobs%20for%20lacking%20'polish'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Ftop-graduates-missing-out-on-banking-jobs-for-lacking-polish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20graduates%20missing%20out%20on%20banking%20jobs%20for%20lacking%20%27polish%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Ftop-graduates-missing-out-on-banking-jobs-for-lacking-polish%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb619d38cb45a7bf101f0aab9914d4e59228a306%2F0_186_3700_2221%2F3700.jpg>
 Eton College pupils. About 34% of new entrants to the banking sector who were 
educated in the UK had attended a fee-paying school. Photograph: Andrew 
Michael/Alamy 
Furthermore, those who want to work in investment banks have often already 
been spotted by the time they have got to university after having attended 
several school programmes and unpaid work experience for one to six weeks, 
during which time they must be based in London.

According to one report, “top first-year [university] students often don’t 
just do one spring internship. They do two, or three, or four” This requirement 
is becoming more pronounced.

But these periods of work experience and internships, which may lead to 
permanent jobs, are frequently offered to individuals whose friends and family 
are of strategic importance to the bank, including in relation to the expansion 
of their business on a global basis.

One interviewee said: “It’s not nepotism the way we actually think about it. 
It’s actually very calculated, profit-motivated, rational thinking.”

Internships, however, are not for learning the ropes: they are for climbing 
into already formed networks. “It is possible to build networks during 
internships [but] existing social networks may also play a role as interns seek 
to build internal networks within the bank and secure all-important ‘face-time’ 
with influential senior bankers … [while] impress[ing] a sufficient number [of 
current traders] who would act as referees for a permanent position,” the 
report says.

Even for candidates who get this far, there is another hurdle to scale: that 
of “comportment”. This, the report notes, are opaque modes of speech, accent, 
dress and behaviour which are “actively sought by hiring managers during the 
selection process” and which, a senior member of the profession revealed, are 
best learned alongside one’s parents while at school, at dinner and drinks 
parties.

These attributes, the report adds, are undefinable – and therefore, 
unachieveable for the non-privileged – but can be described as a “polish” or 
“an aura”. Not having that “aura” can be exposed, said one interviewee, by a 
candidate simply “not saying much or if they do say it, they’re not quite 
saying it the right way”. Another interviewee added: “People without this 
polish will be just be crushed underfoot.”

 These opaque codes of conduct also extend to dress. For men, the report 
found, wearing brown shoes with a business suit is generally considered 
unacceptable. Unless you come from continental Europe.

“Interviewees suggested that [these issues] do play a material role in the 
selection process, once again, as a demonstration of [a candidate’s] ‘fit’ 
[inside the bank],” said the report.

One interviewee said it was easy to spot candidates from non-privileged 
backgrounds: “From my experience [they] … don’t have a haircut … their suit’s 
always too big … they don’t know which tie to wear,” they said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Ftop-graduates-missing-out-on-banking-jobs-for-lacking-polish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1b5301c37060d5394a3da709405692a9c105f2c%2F0_0_1152_691%2F1152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20graduates%20missing%20out%20on%20banking%20jobs%20for%20lacking%20'polish'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Ftop-graduates-missing-out-on-banking-jobs-for-lacking-polish%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20graduates%20missing%20out%20on%20banking%20jobs%20for%20lacking%20%27polish%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Ftop-graduates-missing-out-on-banking-jobs-for-lacking-polish%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1b5301c37060d5394a3da709405692a9c105f2c%2F0_0_1152_691%2F1152.jpg>
 The wrong tie could put off potential employers, according to one interviewee. 
Photograph: Roger Tooth for the Guardian 
Another interviewee, from a non-privileged background, described feedback he 
received from a mentor after an interview: “He said: ‘You interviewed really 
well.’ He said: ‘You’re clearly quite sharp, but … you’re not quite the fit for 
[this bank] … you’re not polished enough’ … he looked at me and said: ’See that 
tie you’re wearing? It’s too loud. Like you can’t wear that tie with the suit 
that you’re wearing’ … what kind of industry is this where I can be told that 
I’m a good candidate, I’m sharp, but I’m not polished enough?”

Another interviewee agreed: “[In corporate finance] if you’ve got the wrong 
cut of suit, if you are wearing the wrong shoes, or tie, or you look awkward in 
a suit, you’re done before you start. And unfortunately, if you’ve never worn a 
suit before in your life, how are you going to do it? … You go there, you stick 
out like a sore thumb.”
 