
Zapatista Burrito Bar

Zapatista may not be breaking new ground – San Francisco’s Mission 
District-style assembly line burrito bars are now commonplace in the UK – but 
it is a reminder of how welcome a development that is. A good burrito is about 
as much on-the-run, food fun as you can have for a fiver, and this is a very 
good burrito. The spicy shredded beef was long on flavour and left my lips 
tingling, thepico de gallo salsa was bright-eyed and spritzy, the lettuce and 
sour cream clean and fresh. As was the case across Newcastle as a whole, the 
service was also friendly and full of smiles.

On the subject of street food, Zapatista are veterans of the Boiler Shop 
Steamer <http://www.theboilershopsteamer.com/>, Newcastle’s monthly street-food 
and craft-beer shindig. The next event is Feb 6 and 7 (entry £4) and features 
many of the north’s hottest traders, such as Manjit’s Kitchen, the Hip Hop Chip 
Shop, Fu Schnickens and Riley’s Lobster.
• Burritos from £4.50. 28 Ridley Place, 0191-261 7769 zapatistaburrito.com 
<http://www.zapatistaburrito.com/>. Also at 9 Grainger Street, 0191-222 0800. 
Both branches open Mon-Sat 11am-7pm, Sun 11.30am-5.30pm

Quay Ingredient

Chef Simon Snowball’s cafe is pretty swish – Chesterfield sofas, clean white 
tiling, attractive counter-top cake displays – but it’s a place where there is 
no standing on ceremony. Tightly-packed tables give it a nice, cosy buzz; the 
welcome is warm and you can hear the radio competing with the sound of sizzling 
bacon in the open kitchen. Quay’s menu is founded on sound regional ingredients 
and comes complete with various cheffy flourishes (Craster kippers with lemon 
parsley, omelette Arnold Bennett, confit duck salad) which, judging from his 
well-executed eggs Benedict, Snowball has the skill to carry off. If that 
sounds too highfalutin’ or expensive for you, Snowball is still a man of the 
people: he also serves a breakfast boiled egg and soldiers, a chip butty at 
lunch and, from 8am-10am, sausage and bacon muffins for just £1.25. A flat 
white coffee (£2.60) lacked body, it was more generic milky coffee, but its 
flavour was true.
• Breakfast from £2.95, sandwiches from £1.95, lunches from £4.95. 4 Queen 
Street, Quayside, 0191-447 2327,quayingredient.co.uk 
<http://quayingredient.co.uk/>. Open daily 8am-5pm

Cook House
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422284782931%2Ff5d34bc4-ea9d-4174-8101-8cb3abffe3e5-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422284782931%2Ff5d34bc4-ea9d-4174-8101-8cb3abffe3e5-2060x1373.jpeg>
Gems don’t come much more hidden than Cook House, two converted shipping 
containers tucked behind Hotel du Vin in Ouseburn. There, Anna Hedworth,aka the 
Grazer <https://twitter.com/the_grazer>, hosts supperclubs and food-related 
events and, on weekdays, serves breakfast and lunch until 3.30pm. Prettily 
decked out with eggshell-blue patio furniture, a stainless-steel cooking range 
and a wood-burning chimney that keeps it toasty on even the coldest of days, 
eating here is like sitting in Hedworth’s own kitchen, as she busies herself 
assembling plates of, for example, potted chicken livers with pickled red 
grapes and toast, or a roast fennel, orange and dill salad with honey dressing. 
Stuffed with moist roast chicken and laced with a terrific aioli, a sourdough 
sandwich was A1 and arrived partnered with a similarly bright-eyed and crunchy, 
mustard-dressed beetroot and seed side-salad. Ingredients come from Cook 
House’s own kitchen garden and a network of trusted local suppliers, such as
Ouseburn Coffee <http://www.ouseburncoffee.co.uk/>, Charlotte’s Butchery in 
Gosforth <http://charlottesbutchery.blogspot.co.uk/> and the Great 
Northumberland Bread Company <http://www.greatnorthumberlandbread.co.uk/>. As 
for alcohol, it’s a BYO-affair. The Ouseburn valley, a former industrial zone 
of workshops and garages, which is slowly being colonised by design studios and 
tech start-ups, is approximately 15 minutes’ walk from the Tyne bridge.
• Dishes £4-£7.20. 20 Ouse Street, Ouseburn, no phone, cookhouse.org 
<http://cookhouse.org/>. Open Mon-Fri 8.30am-3.30pm

Ernest
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422284999150%2F8112c11d-8498-4b9d-be0d-dede3dc19d63-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422284999150%2F8112c11d-8498-4b9d-be0d-dede3dc19d63-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Photograph: Steven Aitchison 
This hip Ouseburn cafe-bar goes late with DJs and dancing, but during the day 
its focus is on proper, homemade snap. As the menu puts it: “Our food is real.” 
Up to a point, anyway. I am not sure that Ernest’s lamb flatbread, a take on 
the pizza-like Turkishlahmacun – topped with vibrant pulped tomatoes, ground, 
seasoned lamb, pine nuts and feta – would get top marks for authenticity in 
Istanbul or, for that matter on Harringay’s Green Lanes, but it was certainly 
tasty. Elsewhere, the menu ranges from a breakfast of chorizo hash topped with 
a poached egg and Hollandaise mayo, to more virtuous specials such as a roast 
celeriac and beetroot pearl barley risotto. Ernest offers a 10% discount on 
takeaways and also carries a compact range of craft beers, including brews from 
local outfitsTyne Bank <http://www.tynebankbrewery.co.uk/> and Anarchy 
<http://www.anarchybrewco.com/>. Expect to find arty types – the Biscuit Factory
 <http://www.thebiscuitfactory.com/> gallery is just next door – tapping away 
on laptops at the next table.
• All-day brunch dishes from £4.50, lunch mains around £7-£9.50. 1 Boyd 
Street, Ouseburn, 0191-260 5216,weareernest.com <http://weareernest.com/>. Open 
Mon-Sun 10am-midnight (kitchen Mon-Thurs 10am-2.30pm and 5.30pm-9pm, Fri-Sun 
10am-9pm)

Rasa

The northern outpost of a London-based restaurant group, the neat, quayside 
Rasa – a space as pink as Barbara Cartland’s boudoir – serves up remarkable 
south Indian food and, at lunchtimes, does it ridiculously cheaply, too. You 
can pick up a substantial lunchbox meal (served in a nifty, portable tray with
roti and a kheer rice pudding-like dessert) for £5.50 or less. My takeaway 
included a chicken curry with serious depth of flavour, a stir-fried cabbage
thoran of exemplary delicacy and a lentil and mixed-vegetable sambar, packed 
with curry leaves, mustard seeds and whole chillies, which was warm, comforting 
and deeply savoury – like a Keralan winter broth. Prices are higher at night 
but you can still pick up adosa or curry for around £7-£10. For cooking this 
vibrant and variegated in its flavours, that is a real steal.
• Lunch £4-£5.50, curry with shared rice, from £9. 27 Queen Street, 0191-232 
7799,rasarestaurants.com <http://www.rasarestaurants.com/>. Open Mon-Sat 
midday-3pm and 6pm-11pm, Sun 6pm-11pm

The Bridge Tavern
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422285566095%2F04d6acc6-8aae-4e67-88e2-ec7253c1ddc3-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422285566095%2F04d6acc6-8aae-4e67-88e2-ec7253c1ddc3-2060x1373.jpeg>
This smart brewpub, found beneath the stanchions of the iconic Tyne bridge, is 
best known for its beer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/feb/20/newcastle-top-10-craft-beer-pubs>
, but it is no slouch on the food front. You could describe what it does as 
gutsy pub grub, but that rather underplays the slickness and fastidiousness of 
what appears on the plate. On the menu, trendy nose-to-tail dishes (slow-cooked 
ox cheek with bone marrow, toast and pickled walnuts), rub shoulders with a 
haggis toastie and soft quail’s egg, a duck and green pepper corn hash, and a
kimchee slaw pulled pork bun. On this visit, a sample Welsh rarebit was 
fantastic, the silky topping a thick duvet of mustard, beer and mature cheddar, 
sat atop bread griddled so that it had a crisp edge and a smoky character. 
Beyond the beer (a half of Wylam Brewery’s acerbic, tropical Silver Ghost 
Redux, £2.10), a glowing log-burner and the plush, gentleman’s club furnishings 
will make it difficult to tear yourself away.
• Light dishes from £4.95, mains from £8.95. 7 Akenside Hill, 0191-261 9966, 
thebridgetavern.com <http://www.thebridgetavern.com/>. Open Mon-Thurs 
midday-midnight, Fri-Sat midday-1am, Sun midday-11pm

The Sausage Emporium
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422285858185%2F56f1831c-b250-4df1-81c6-c154ebecc94c-1020x683.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422285858185%2F56f1831c-b250-4df1-81c6-c154ebecc94c-1020x683.jpeg>
No prizes for guessing the main attraction at this lightly faux-rustic 
railway-arch restaurant (there is a lot of pine wood and decorative use of 
astroturf). In the open kitchen, you will find chef, co-owner and butcher’s son 
John Holliday making the superb bangers which go into rib-sticking dishes of, 
for example, Wylam ale sausages (juicy, rough-cut with an interesting herbal 
edge), served with roast potatoes, seasonal veg and gravy; or black pudding 
(perhaps a shade lacking in bloody, iron-rich tang, for me) with fried brown 
ale bread, confit tomato and a poached egg. The main course versions of these 
nudge £10 but they are offered in half portions, too. The Emporium also serves 
sausage sandwiches on gob-stopping seeded rolls with, among other sauces, a 
brilliant chipotle chilli ketchup.
• Sandwiches from £4.50, mains from £9.95. Arch 6, Westgate Road, 0191-340 
3082,thesausageemporium.com <http://www.thesausageemporium.com/>. Open Mon-Fri 
midday-2.30pm and 5pm-10pm, Sat midday-10.30pm

Fat Hippo Underground & Grainger Market
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422286044847%2F9ad6c86c-9583-4c22-aa84-f51bc46c523f-1020x706.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422286044847%2F9ad6c86c-9583-4c22-aa84-f51bc46c523f-1020x706.jpeg>
This brick-lined cellar space is Newcastle’s go-to for new-wave burgers and a 
solid selection of craft beers, from highly-rated London brewers Redchurch to 
North East favourites Allendale. With its thinner 4oz patty (great steak 
flavour, despite its size) and simple accompaniments of mustard, ketchup, 
cheese and pickle, my American was reminiscent of a revved-up, refreshed 
McDonald’s cheeseburger. And, yes, that is a compliment – for Fat Hippo, not 
Ronald McDonald. Like competitive body-builders, the triple-cooked chips were 
bronzed, gnarled and glistened with oil, yet perfectly soft and buttery within. 
At night, a burger meal hovers around the £9 mark, but at lunch Fat Hippo 
offers three single-patty burgers with chips for just £5. There is also a £10 
two-course weekday menu, served from 5pm to 6pm.

If a fiver is a stretch for lunch, you could always go around the corner to 
Grainger Market <http://www.graingermarket.org.uk/>, where you will find a 
number of stalls knocking-out serviceable grub for two or three quid. 
Annoyingly, the one I was most excited about trying, the pizza joint Slice 
(unit 146/147, alley 4), wasn’t open, butNan Bei’s 
<https://twitter.com/nanbeinewcastle> (unit 62, alley 2) cabbage and pork 
dumplings (get them pan-fried, £4 for six), were worth the detour.The French 
Oven <http://www.frenchoven.webs.com/> Bakery (unit 27, Grainger Arcade) is a 
good pasties and cakes alternative to Newcastle’s own, beloved Greggs; while
Sloppy Joe’s <http://www.sloppyjoes-streetfood.co.uk/> (unit 30, Alley 1) – at 
the time of writing, Newcastle’s No1 restaurant on TripAdvisor – doles out fat, 
New York-Italian style sandwiches and salads. The slow-cooked mince on its 
eponymous Sloppy Joe (think spag bol sandwich, £3) was tasty, though I was less 
impressed with the side of characterless, underseasoned coleslaw. Keep an eye 
out for Sloppy Joe’s exhaustive range of help-yourself sauces and condiments. 
Whatever you want to splash on your lunch, they’ve got it covered.
• Select burgers with chips £5, burger meals £8-£10.50. 2-6 Shakespeare 
Street, 0191-447 1161, fat-hippo.co.uk. Open Mon Thu midday-9.30pm, Fri 
midday-10pm, Sat 11am-10pm, Sun 11am-4pm

The Settle Down Cafe
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422286668076%2F0aae14fb-d78d-4bd5-a9e1-9d2a04592233-1020x680.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%2010%20budget%20restaurants%20and%20cafes%20in%20Newcastle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F27%2Ftop-10-budget-restaurants-cafes-newcastle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F26%2F1422286668076%2F0aae14fb-d78d-4bd5-a9e1-9d2a04592233-1020x680.jpeg>
If you are rushing for a train from Newcastle Central, your journey will be 
vastly improved if you first swing past the nearbySugar Down 
<https://twitter.com/settledown> artisan bakery for a slice of something sweet 
– its millionaire’s shortbread (from £1) is mega – and then pick up a 
superlative flat white (£2.50) fromPink Lane Coffee 
<http://www.pinklanecoffee.co.uk/>. Alternatively, should you have a little 
more time to kill, take a seat in Sugar Down’s Settle Down Café, an artsy, boho 
space – one too genuinely thrown-together to be calculatedly cool – where you 
can enjoy more of that baking, alongside soups, good-looking salads, sandwiches 
and mini pizzas. A sample pot of Thai sweet potato soup was well-judged in its 
heat and spicing, although the accompanying dense, seeded bread was seriously 
rustic. Had I tried to eat the whole slice I would still be chewing – one for 
the hardcore, that.
• Light meals from £3. 61-62 Thornton Street, 0191-222 0187, thesettledown.com 
<http://www.thesettledown.com/>. Open Mon-Fri 8am-6pm, Sat 9am-6pm

Tyneside Bar Café

A recent addition to the Tyneside Cinema, this street-level bar-restaurant has 
stolen the hearts of local foodies thanks to chef Tom Adlam’s attention to 
detail. It is an ultra-casual affair where you are welcome to drop-in for a 
pint (Wylam Brewery makes a beer, 35mm, for the Tyneside), or a three-course 
meal. Every dish, from a grilled cheese sandwich to a main course fish curry, 
is treated with equal reverence. Indeed, if anything, my salt beef bagel, 
chosen from a blackboard full of tempting items (white crab and basil frittata, 
chargrilled mackerel with a beetroot and walnut salad), was trying too hard to 
impress. The salt beef had been mixed with mild mustard and possibly mayo too, 
which gave it a rather curious mushy texture. But the flavours were all there 
and the other details – the crisp toasting of the high-quality bagel, the way 
even the cucumber had been cored in the unusually interesting and well-dressed 
side salad – confirmed the good things I had heard about this place.
• Light meals and sandwiches from £4.50, mains from £7.95. 10-12 Pilgrim 
Street, 0191-227 5522;tynesidecinema.co.uk 
<https://www.tynesidecinema.co.uk/food-drink/tyneside-bar-cafe>. Open Mon-Thur 
8am-11pm. Fri- Sat 8am-late, Sun 10am-11pm

Train travel between Manchester and Newcastle was provided by First 
TransPennine Express <http://www.tpexpress.co.uk/>
 