
Top Gear presenter Chris Harris has landed his own international show on the 
BBC just days afterhis co-presenter Chris Evans quit the BBC2 motoring series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/04/chris-evans-quits-bbc-top-gear-after-one-series>
.

Harris, a motoring journalist and presenter who was one of Evans’ first hires 
when he took overTop Gear <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/top-gear> 
from Jeremy Clarkson, will front a new show called Chris Harris on Cars, based 
on his popular YouTube series.

It will air on BBC America in the US and on the BBC Brit channel – launched on 
the back of the success of Top Gear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jan/27/bbc-brit-jeremy-clarkson-top-gear>
 – in Australia, south America, South Africa, Australia, Poland and Scandinavia.

Chris Evans quits BBC Top Gear after just one series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/04/chris-evans-quits-bbc-top-gear-after-one-series>
The seven-episode series debuts in the US on 11 July.

Harris was regarded as one of the successors of the rebooted Top Gear, which 
struggled in the ratings and suffered a mauling from critics.

The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> America show will see Harris 
get behind the wheel of the “newest, fastest and coolest cars on the road”, the 
broadcaster said.

There is no suggestion the new show will affect his role on Top Gear, other 
than potentially make him more valuable as it attempts to appeal to an overseas 
audience.

Top Gear is one of the BBC’s most valuable properties, and was last year worth 
£50m a year to its commercial arm, BBC Worldwide.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da_rIoUc-pYo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da_rIoUc-pYo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Da_rIoUc-pYo&media=>
 He’s called Chris and he’s very good at presenting shows about cars 
Harris will explore the “technical complexities” of cars such as the Porsche 
911 GT3 RS, McLaren 650S, Aston Martin GT12, Ferrari 458 GT and Ferrari 458 
Spider, among many others, and test them on the road and track.

His YouTube series, which launched in 2014, has around 360,000 subscribers, 
with the content being viewed more than 20 million times.

In addition, Topgear.com has commissioned an initial run of 30 films called 
Chris Harris Drives, the first of which is a test of the new Alfa Romeo Giulia 
Quadrifoglio.

“Chris Harris has proved extremely popular with viewers of Top Gear and Extra 
Gear – he can drive the wheels off any car and fans love him for his ability to 
explain what its really like to drive the world’s most exciting cars,” said 
Adam Waddell, Top Gear’s global brand director.


“He brings with him a fan base of millions from YouTube and we’re delighted to 
be working with him to create this incredible new content.”

He was one of the lesser-known hosts to join the new Top Gear presenting team, 
with Evans and Matt LeBlanc at the helm.

Evans announced he was stepping down from the show on Monday, saying he had 
given it his “best shot” but it wasn’t good enough.

The BBC said that there were currently no plans to air the new Chris Harris 
show in the UK.

 