
Sterling <https://www.theguardian.com/business/sterling> could fall by 30% and 
the stock market by 20% if the UK should leave the European Union, according to 
a stark assessment from an award-winning team of independent economic analysts.

The warning comes amid growing anxiety on the financial markets about a 
possible Brexit, and as chancellor George Osborne prepares to address the 
annual gathering of City leaders at the lord mayor’s banquet on Thursday about 
the potential havoc.

On Friday sterling dropped by 1.6% as opinion polls suggested that Brexit was 
increasingly likely. The pound was subject earlier in the week to volatility 
unmatched since 2008’s financial crash.

In an analysis on his company’s website, Ian Harnett, the chief investment 
strategist atAbsolute Strategy Research, 
<http://www.absolute-strategy.com/x/video.html?play=338> who is a former chief 
European strategist at UBS, warns that the dangers are even greater than many 
imagine and than movements on markets have so far reflected. “The downside risk 
is probably 30% to sterling and another 20% to equities,” Harnett states. His 
research team is headed by David Bowers, the former chief global strategist at 
Merrill Lynch.

Harnett says that, while uncertainty and an appreciation of risk exist, the 
equity and bond markets have not yet adjusted to reflect this because of what 
he describes as complacency. Leading economic organisations, including the 
International Monetary Fund, the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/01/oecd-warning-global-economy-factories-brexit-live>
and the Bank of England, have all warned of severe economic shock from Brexit.

Now, in the run-up to the vote on 23 June, the remain side wants to focus more 
on the impact it will have not only on government finances and the tax intake 
but also on people’s household budgets, mortgages and the public services they 
use.

Two weeks ago a unique poll by Ipsos MORI for the Observer found that nine out 
of 10 of more than 600 economists 
<https://www.google.co.uk/?gws_rd=cr&ei=LO_PUpXSJdP-yAOoj4CIDg#q=Observer+eight+of+ten+economists>
 working across academia, the City, industry, small businesses and the public 
sector believe that the economy will be harmed by Brexit.

A sharp fall in sterling would mean that imports would become more expensive, 
forcing up prices in the shops and leading to inflation. Economists believe 
that this could force the Bank to push up interest rates, resulting in higher 
mortgage payments for millions of householders.

Vote Leave has dismissed the warnings from experts as scare stories from 
EU-supporting organisations and claims that the economy will be stronger 
outside the union.
 