
The most popular Christmas songs – in data
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/datablog/2016/dec/17/the-most-popular-christmas-songs-in-data>
Imagine, for a moment, that the only football teams that ever existed were the 
national side of Bhutan, my five-a-side team DisOrient FC, and the famous Ajax 
team of 1971-73 that won three consecutive European Cups. You wouldn’t bother 
having a debate about which was the best team, would you? Not when the answer 
is so obvious (my five-a-side team, DisOrient FC).

That’s how I feel about Christmas albums. Why would anyone bother arguing 
about the greatest Christmas album of all time when Phil Spector clearly made 
it back in 1963? Nothing – not even the Beach Boys’ Christmas Album or James 
Brown’s Funky Christmas – has come close. A Christmas Gift For You From Phil 
Spector propels itself with the joie de vivre of the best 60s girl groups – the 
Ronettes, the Crystals – yet never considers itself too cool to incorporate 
snow, Santa and sleigh bells (even if they end up reverberating around 
Spector’s wall of sound).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj8mMmTKDoww&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj8mMmTKDoww>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj8mMmTKDoww&media=>
Don’t get me wrong: there are loads of great Christmas songs – your Fairytale 
Of New Yorks, your Last Christmases. But a Christmas album has to pull off the 
trick of repeating this kind of free-flowing joy without becoming sickly. It 
requires stamina and coherence: Low’s Just Like Christmas might be one of the 
sweetest festive tracks, but the mini-album on which it appears is so stuffed 
with slowcore takes on standards that it makes the Queen’s speech seem like a 
euphoric EDM meltdown. Then again, the Low record itself seems like a euphoric 
EDM meltdown compared to the Watersons’ A Yorkshire Christmas, which included 
not one but two spoken-word tracks about the 1910 Hawes junction rail disaster. 
As Oscar Wilde once said: to include one tale about an ancient Cumbrian train 
crash on your Christmas album is a misfortune, to include two is just plain 
weird.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fphil-spector-best-xmas-album-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a0c959ee5f93c7358675e794c6f8fe63de15265%2F0_211_1585_1217%2F1585.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20of%20the%20tree%3A%20why%20A%20Christmas%20Gift%20For%20You%20is%20the%20best%20festive%20album%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fphil-spector-best-xmas-album-ever%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20of%20the%20tree%3A%20why%20A%20Christmas%20Gift%20For%20You%20is%20the%20best%20festive%20album%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fphil-spector-best-xmas-album-ever%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a0c959ee5f93c7358675e794c6f8fe63de15265%2F0_211_1585_1217%2F1585.jpg>
 Not today, thanks, She & Him. Photograph: Autumn de Wilde 
Christmas songs: the best and the worst | Laura Barton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/23/christmas-songs-best-worst-fairytale-new-york-low>
Then again, trying to better Spector seems pointless when perfection has been 
so resolutely achieved. Pop albums are always going to fail in comparison (last 
year’s Kylie Christmas featured a duet with James Corden), but the modern trend 
for indie artists thinking they can outsmart the concept itself is even more 
awful. Remember to pull a social sickie for She & Him’s Christmas Party; the DJ 
appears to be spinning lifeless acoustic swing versions of festive standards.

Not every Christmas album is this terrible, of course, it’s just that the 
debate over whose is best is pointless. Sufjan Stevens’s five-disc compendium 
of 100 Christmas tunes may have been extremely clever, but you know what’s 
smarter? Writing a festive album nobody would better for half a century, which 
still won’t be beaten in 50 years’ time.

 * A Christmas Gift To You From Phil Spector will be played in full from 6pm, 
today, at Spiritland, N1  