
10. Thirty Two Short Films About Glenn Gould 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/88005/thirty-two-short-films-about-glenn-gould>

This is the most radical of all biopics. It does exactly what it promises, 
breaking theCanadian pianist <https://www.theguardian.com/music/glenn-gould>'s 
intense and troubled life into concentrated fragments. Reassembly is left to 
the viewer. When he began working on the screenplay with Don McKellar, the 
writer-director François Girard recognised the pitfalls of the genre. "There 
are many traps," he said. "The main temptation is to try to cram everything 
about a life into one film. What you need is a radical idea or angle; if you 
decide to show the whole journey and cover everything, you're condemning 
yourself to staying on the surface. Evocation, rather than being descriptive or 
exhaustive, is the key to unlocking a subject. Evoking a territory is easily 
preferable to trying to cover it all."

Girard's film, structured in homage to Bach's Goldberg Variations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/nov/07/bach-goldberg-variations-endless-misery>
, which has 32 sections and was featured on Gould's debut album, is a lesson in 
the majesty of understatement and suggestion. Vignettes of Gould's life, 
individually slight but with an enormous cumulative power, are presented to the 
viewer without immediate context; our understanding of how they lock together 
happens only gradually. If you want a measure of exactly how unorthodox the 
picture is, try this: it's a biopic of a pianist in which we never see the 
subject touch the keys. The camera goes inside Gould's piano, and even shows an 
X-ray image of him playing, but the physical satisfaction of seeing him in full 
flow is withheld. "That's part of the genius of the film," observed the actor 
Colm Feore, who is fiercely compelling as Gould. "You see me fondle pianos, 
talk about them, I'm around them, I even prepare to play them—but I never 
actually do. The problem is that I've occasionally been invited to drop by and 
play a little something at the induction of a new syllabus at the [Toronto] 
Royal Conservatory. I feel like saying, 'Have you even seen the film?'"

It was for practical rather than artistic reasons that Girard kept performance 
off-screen: "I didn't want Colm to imitate Gould's playing style, and I didn't 
know how to show it, so I decided not to show it at all. How would you get, 
say, an actor today to play tennis on film like Rafael Nadal? You couldn't. My 
advice for anyone planning to tell Nadal's life story would be: Stay away from 
the tennis court."Ryan Gilbey

9. American Splendor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/96545/american.splendor> 
 Paul Giamatti as Harvey Pekar and Hope Davis as Joyce Brabner in American 
Splendor. Photograph: Sportsphoto/Allstar/HBO 
Paul Giamatti <https://www.theguardian.com/film/paul-giamatti> didn't get to 
be king of the sad sacks overnight. That sort of title takes years of toil and 
dedication, not to mention performances as lovingly detailed as the one he 
gives as the underground comic-book author Harvey Pekar. This is a key work in 
the actor's repertoire of sullen grumps, as well as one of the more adventurous 
biopics of recent years. Pekar wrote about his life of drudgery and 
disappointment working as a file clerk at the federal Department of Veterans 
Affairs in Cleveland, Ohio. His friend, the legendary Robert Crumb, rendered 
Pekar's stories through a grubby crosshatch of black lines that exaggerated 
only slightly the author's seething discontent with the world.

It's significant that the movie should have been directed by a pair of 
documentary-makers, Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini, since it hovers 
knowingly between fact and fiction, incorporating documentary footage and 
animation alongside dramatised passages from Pekar's life. These show him 
falling in love with Joyce Brabner (Hope Davis wearing Harry Potter specs), a 
comic-book author who became Pekar's third wife and wrote Our Cancer Year about 
his struggle with lymphoma.

American Splendor is one of those movies that knows it's a movie: the 
real-life subjects are occasionally seen on screen with the actors playing 
them, and no attempt is made to disguise the artificiality of some of the sets. 
The schism between the real Pekar and his fictional incarnation is highlighted 
when the author, played by Giamatti, appears on David Letterman's talk show, 
while at home Joyce watches the real archive footage of him on TV. Far from 
feeling gimmicky, this reflects and enhances the autobiographical tensions of 
Pekar's own work, and introduces extra levels of cool, wry analysis into a 
world that might otherwise be oppressively bleak.RG

8. Ivan the Terrible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/78177/ivan-the-terrible>
 Silent-age aesthetic … Eisenstein's Ivan the Terrible. Photograph: Rex 
Features 
Sergei Eisenstein's last completed film still looks like an astonishing 
anomaly when compared with the films that were coming out of the US and the UK 
in the mid-1940s. Though made with sound, the aesthetic is that of the silent 
age, with Eisenstein shooting in extreme close-up and using actors caked with 
make-up. The sets, too, recall The Cabinet of Dr Caligari, with scenes in 
shadowy throne rooms and chambers that, at times, seem to be simply dug into 
the walls. Given Eisenstein's past mastery of montage, however, the most 
extraordinary thing is how much he relies on his performers: there's a 
theatricality that brings to mind Powell and Pressburger's Tales of Hoffmann.

Perhaps the most important point to make about Ivan the Terrible is that it 
was made during wartime to Joseph Stalin's specifications. Eisenstein was 
sequestered in Kazakhstan and "commissioned" to make the film. The Russian 
dictator was an admirer of the 16th-century ruler, a tsar given to violent 
outbursts and whose nickname was coined for his 24-year reign of terror. The 
circumstances in which the work was filmed are almost manifest on screen: 
Eisenstein's film feels cut off from the outside world, and the story – a 
Shakespearean narrative of triumph at a cruel price – is racked with paranoia 
and intrigue, a roundelay of conspirators foregrounded against pageantry.

The second half, in which the tsar becomes clearly unhinged – even though 
Eisenstein portrays his reign of terror being undertaken somewhat reluctantly – 
ruffled feathers in Russia. Party leaders saw unflattering parallels with 
Stalin, and the film was suppressed until 1958, five year's after his death. 
This is reason alone to rate Ivan the Terrible as a biopic. Although it was 
conceived as hagiography, the truth of the story – as seen by Eisenstein, a 
cerebral and literate man who didn't share Stalin's admiration of Ivan – is 
still clear through the propaganda trappings.Damon Wise

7. The Elephant Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79401/elephant-man>
 Between fact and fiction … John Hurt as Joseph Merrick in The Elephant Man 
Photograph: Allstar/Brooksfilm 
The deal for David Lynch's second film was done over a cheeseburger and malt 
at Bob's Big Boy diner in Burbank, California. Producer Mel Brooks had just 
seen Eraserhead and was intrigued by the young director, who walked in wearing 
a white, buttoned-up shirt and a leather jacket, looking, said Brooks, "just 
like Lindbergh when he flew over the Atlantic". It was to be a fruitful 
collaboration; Brooks put Lynch with screenwriters Christopher De Vore and Eric 
Bergren, and 18 months later they had a script for The Elephant Man, the story 
ofJoseph Merrick, the Victorian freakshow exhibit 
<http://virtualvictorian.blogspot.co.uk/2010/06/tragic-tale-of-elephant-man.html>
.

At the time, the film seemed an extraordinary move for Lynch, but in hindsight 
it prefigures some of his later concerns. Shooting in black and white – a 
decision sanctioned by Young Frankenstein director Brooks, who feared Merrick's 
deformities would be "too grotesque" in colour – Lynch made great play of the 
industrial breakthroughs of the late 19th century, and the film's atmospheric 
depiction of sparking electricity and gaslight adds an almost steampunk 
counterpoint to the cobbled streets. This would mean nothing without compelling 
performances, however, and John Hurt's title act truly centres the film, 
navigating the period's harshness with a poignant soulfulness, even under 
several pounds of latex and prosthetics.

Hurt's performance brought an Oscar nomination, and though some claimed the 
film was overly sentimental, The Elephant Man proved not so untypical for 
Lynch, who added unashamedly romantic flourishes to later films such as Wild at 
Heart and Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me. In many ways, though, The Elephant Man 
is the perfect companion piece to Eraserhead, with its nervousness about 
relationships and parenting. "It's [about] a great triumph of love – of love 
for one another, of humanity," said Brooks. "It's an amazing thing, to care for 
this unfortunate person and find the beauty in his soul."DW

6. The Diving Bell and the Butterfly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/122766/diving.bell.and.the.butterfly>
 Locked in … Mathieu Amalric and Marie-Josée Croze in The Diving Bell and the 
Butterfly. Photograph: Focus/Everett/Rex Features 
Jean-Dominique Bauby, known as "Jean-Do", was an editor of French Elle 
magazine who once mixed with the great, the glamorous and Lenny Kravitz. In 
1995, he suffered a massive stroke. His face was frozen in an outraged grimace, 
the lower lip jutting out of a lopsided mouth: his septic right eye had to be 
sewn shut by doctors. Julian Schnabel's The Diving Bell and the Butterfly, a 
portrait of life with locked-in syndrome, might have been called My Left Eye, 
as that was the only part of him that wasn't paralysed. And, like Christy 
Brown's left foot, Jean-Do's flickering eyelid becomes the tool of his artistic 
release. A therapist introduces a system of communication based on blinking — 
one blink for yes, two for no. An assistant reels off the alphabet repeatedly 
while Jean-Do painstakingly constructs words, whole sentences and eventually an 
entire memoir (from which the film was adapted by Ronald Harwood, who wrote The 
Pianist).

Mathieu Amalric is hypnotic as Jean-Do. The nature of the film, and the 
medical condition it describes, deny him the ostentatious acting challenges 
that usually come with playing a physically disabled character, but that only 
makes his clinched, internalised performance all the more remarkable. One 
memorably upsetting scene shows the grizzled Max von Sydow as Jean-Do's father, 
blubbing down the phone at a son who can only blink in reply.

Cinema has always struggled to depict the creative process, so it's novel to 
see a literary life that can't be quantified in overflowing wastepaper baskets. 
Jean-Do does not have that luxury — he edits in his head. It is there that the 
film's most expressionistic passages take place. The hospital is on the coast 
in the Pas de Calais, and the visual metaphors have an aquatic flavour tenderly 
realised by the cinematographer Janusz Kamiński: shelves of ice crumble into 
the sea, and Jean-Do imagines himself suspended inside a diving bell deep in 
the ocean, or trapped in his wheelchair on a pier isolated from land by the 
tide.RG

5. I'm Not There  <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/120865/i.m.not.there>
 Postmodern … Cate Blanchett as the 60s Bob Dylan and David Cross as the poet 
Allen Ginsberg in I'm Not There. Photograph: Weinstein/LMK 
Few contemporary directors do postmodern as well as Todd Haynes, who told the 
Karen Carpenter story with Barbie dolls (Superstar, 1987), made a film about 
70s glam rock in the style of 70s glam rock (Velvet Goldmine, 1998) and 
imagined what a 50s Douglas Sirk melodrama would look like if the subtext were 
the actual text (Far From Heaven, 2002). But his Bob Dylan biopic, I'm Not 
There, took the principle to new heights, casting six actors as the musician, 
including a young African-American actor as the young Dylan andCate Blanchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett> as his 60s speed-freak 
incarnation.

It sounds gimmicky on paper, but I'm Not There does perfectly distil the 
alacrity with which Dylan changed his image in the first 20 years of his fame. 
Marcus Carl Franklin plays him first, as the rootless heir to folk hero Woody 
Guthrie, thenChristian Bale <https://www.theguardian.com/film/christianbale> 
takes over as the singer of protest songs. Bale gives way to Blanchett, who, as 
"electric" Dylan, rejects his folk past with sarcasm and venom, before 
returning as the born-again Dylan of the late 70s. Richard Gere finally appears 
as the latter-day Dylan of the Never Ending Tour, a cowboy figure from 
Peckinpah's Pat Garrett and Billy The Kid, while in the meantime Heath Ledger 
and Ben Whishaw make appearances as manifestations of the rock star's artistic 
life.

Haynes's methodical attention to detail ensures that this biopic not only 
works as a truthful approximation of Dylan's real life, but also makes sense of 
the mass of contradictions Dylan embodies. It features a fantastic soundtrack, 
too, in which a wide variety of musicians illustrate the diversity of Dylan's 
back catalogue, from the urgent folk of When the Ship Comes In to the mournful 
lament of Goin' to Acapulco. That Dylan gave permission suggests he approved, 
but it's a measure of the film's accuracy that no one knows for sure whether 
the reclusive rocker has ever seen it.DW

4. Downfall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/105032/downfall>
 To humanise or not? ... Bruno Ganz as Hitler in Downfall. Photograph: Allstar 
Collection/EOS/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
Even 60 years after the second world war the idea of allowing a German actor 
to playAdolf Hitler <https://www.theguardian.com/world/adolf-hitler> in a 
German movie was almost a taboo notion in a country that had managed a 
spectacular moral transformation in the six decades since. Most previous 
iterations of the little corporal had been essayed by British actors of high 
standing (Alec Guinness in The Last Ten Days of Hitler being the standout), and 
one imagines that few German actors were ready to take on a part that they 
might be identified with to the grave.

The makers of Downfall <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/105032/downfall>
 split the difference and cast German-speaking Swiss citizen Bruno Ganz (whose 
nationality meant he hadn't grown up asking what did daddy do in the war?), 
perhaps the greatest European actor of his generation, as the great monster of 
the 20th century. To humanise or not to humanise, that was the sticking point: 
Hitler was kind to his secretaries, loved his dog, Blondi, and always 
complimented the cook, but y'know … there was all that other stuff. The 
film-makers evidently thought that cutting the monstrousness, the screaming 
fits, the tirades against treacherous generals and the final desire for the 
immolation of the whole German people ("they have not proven worthy …"), with 
something graspably, recognisably human would make for a more approachable 
moviegoing experience.

They weren't wrong, and they had the actor to make it work. Historians who 
know say, "That really is Hitler" (Joachim Fest), or "Ganz has Hitler's voice 
to near perfection. It is chillingly authentic" (Ian Kershaw). Set in the final 
fortnight of the Reich, as the Russians close in on the bunker, this epic 
account of the Nazis' Götterdämmerung is visceral and ultra-violent, as it 
should be (so many people blowing their brains out), but director Oliver 
Hirschbiegel's gaze has a steely, unsentimental clarity: no heroes here. 
Noteworthy cameo: Corinna Harfouch as Magda Goebbels, Reich Mother of the Year.
John Patterson

3. Malcolm X <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/80882/malcolm-x>
 Princely figure … Denzel Washington as Malcolm X in Spike Lee's regal epic. 
Photograph: Ronald Grant Archive 
With the lukewarm reception for Spike Lee's latest feature, Oldboy – in fact, 
for most of his work, barring documentaries, in the past 20 years – it's easy 
to forget how great he can be when he's on his game.Malcolm X 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/malcolm-x> is, arguably, Lee's finest 
three hours and 12 minutes – an appropriately regal epic about a princely 
figure in Black American history that demonstrates all Lee's virtues as a 
film-maker (dynamism, edginess, dramatic intensity) and none of his flaws 
(sloppiness, self-indulgence). One of his biggest budget efforts, it nearly 
didn't get made; on advice, allegedly from Francis Ford Coppola, Lee "got the 
movie company pregnant" – that is, extending production far enough to force an 
increase in budget. Even so, Lee only managed to complete thanks to loans from 
rich supporters, including Bill Cosby and Oprah Winfrey.

Structurally, it's a classic biopic: it covers events from before Malcolm X's 
birth up to his death, and beyond. And yet, through felicitous use of 
leitmotifs and repeated imagery, it has shape and unity, and none of that 
one-damn-thing-after-another feel of so many similarly scaled films. Imbuing a 
complex, deeply charismatic figure with breadth and depth while nailing the 
physical impersonation,Denzel Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/denzelwashington> is magisterial in the title 
tole. (He should have won the Oscar in 1993, but was robbed of it by Al Pacino, 
for Scent of a Woman.) Lee and Arnold Perl's historically faithful script 
briskly covers Malcolm's tragic childhood and zoot-suited gangster years (an 
excuse for a cracking dancehall sequence) and, eventually, his conversion to 
Islam in prison that led to his becoming an inspiration for the Black Power 
movement before his untimely death.

Never one to shy away from controversy, Lee accurately depicts X's once 
hardline separatist politics and understandable hostility to the white world 
that oppressed him. Predictably, the film was highly controversial. Yet even 
the most hardened, anti-X sceptic would be moved by the closing montage, an 
electric sequence featuring knife-sharp editing, stirring archive footage, 
Terence Blanchard's surging soundtrack, Spartacus allusions and a cameo 
appearance from Nelson Mandela.Leslie Felperin

2. The Social Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137709/social-network>
 The social skills of a mouse pad … Jesse Eisenberg as Facebook founder Mark 
Zuckerberg. 
Most people who are opposed to The Social Network, a biopic of the Facebook 
founderMark Zuckerberg <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/mark-zuckerberg> 
that contains an unusually high level of conjecture, offer the excuse that they 
don't like Facebook. Well, neither do the film's director, David Fincher, and 
its writer, Aaron Sorkin, if the unambiguously cautionary tone of the movie is 
anything to go by. The sinister score by Atticus Ross and Trent Reznor embodies 
the mood: industrial rumbles, distant alarms and a faint buzzing that suggests 
the sound of something, or someone, short-circuiting.

It's a supreme joke that Facebook, which helped redefine communication in the 
21st century, should have come from two Harvard undergraduates with the social 
skills of mouse pads and the popularity of computer virusus. As played by Jesse 
Eisenberg, Zuckerberg sounds like the speaking clock having a panic attack. 
Ninety per cent of what he says indicates that he regards you as privileged to 
live in his world; the remaining 10% only seems that way. Eduardo Saverin, 
played byAndrew Garfield <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrew-garfield>, is 
taller and better looking, but his handsomeness is undercut by an earnest 
expression that's always on the verge of crumpling with joy or anxiety.

Sorkin's screenplay, based on Ben Mezrich's book The Accidental Billionaires, 
scuppers any celebratory air by cutting back and forth between Facebook's rise 
and the multi-million dollar lawsuits in which Zuckerberg later becomes 
entangled. We see him sued by the strapping Winklevoss twins (both played, with 
the aid of digital trickery, by Armie Hammer), who had hired him to mastermind 
a dating site, and also by Saverin. Zuckerberg isn't given any opportunity to 
savour his salad days. It's as if the film-makers wanted to hit him with an 
almighty hangover before he'd had a chance to knock back a shot.

A minor plot-point involving a caged chicken that is fed the meat of its own 
species provides an insight into the picture's concerns about the creators and 
frequenters of Facebook. But no one aspect is predominant. The movie contains 
elements of screwball comedy, courtroom drama and class satire; it also touches 
on tragedy, asking what Zuckerberg might have forsaken on his way to world 
domination.RG

1. Andrei Rublev <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76518/andrei.rublev>
 Savage history … Tarkovsky's masterpiece Andrei Rublev. Photograph: Ronald 
Grant Archive 
Viewers and critics always have their favourites, but some films achieve 
masterpiece status, universally agreed on.Andrei Rublev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76518/andrei.rublev> undoubtedly has 
it, even though it's a film that people often feel they don't, or won't, get. 
It is 205 minutes long (in its fullest version), in Russian, and in black and 
white. Few characters are clearly identified, little actually happens, and what 
does happen isn't necessarily in chronological order. Its subject is a 
15th-century icon painter and national hero, yet we never see him paint, nor 
does he do anything heroic. In many of the film's episodes, he is not present, 
and in the latter stages, he takes a vow of silence. But in a sense, there is 
nothing to "get" about Andrei Rublev. It is not a film that needs to be 
processed or even understood, only experienced and wondered at.

From the first scene, following the flight of a rudimentary hot-air balloon, 
we're whisked away by silken camera moves and stark compositions to a time and 
place where we're no less confused, amazed or terrified than Rublev himself. 
For the next three hours, we're down in the muck and chaos of medieval Russia, 
carried along on the tide of history through gruesome Tartar raids, bizarre 
pagan rituals, famine, torture and physical hardship. We experience life on 
every scale, from raindrops falling on a river to armies ransacking a town, 
often within the same, unbroken shot.

With Andrei Rublev, Tarkovsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/andrei-tarkovsky> was consciously crafting a 
language that owed nothing to literature, and it's a pity so few others 
followed him. In today's cinema, we're still served up linear, cause-and-effect 
biographies of artists as if, by doing so, we'll understand the person and be 
able to make sense of their art. Andrei Rublev operates according to a 
different understanding of time and history. It asks questions about the 
relationship between the artist, their society and their spiritual beliefs and 
doesn't seek to answer them. "In cinema it is necessary not to explain, but to 
act upon the viewer's feelings, and the emotion which is awoken is what 
provokes thought," wrote Tarkovsky in 1962.

Despite its apparent formlessness, Andrei Rublev is precisely structured and 
entirely aesthetically coherent. Acts of creation are mirrored by acts of 
destruction, there are themes of flight, of vision, of presence and absence; 
the more you look, the more you see. And then there are the horses, Tarkovsky's 
perennial favourite: horses rolling over, horses charging into battle, swimming 
in the river, falling down stairs, dragging men out of churches. At times the 
screen resembles a vast Brueghel painting come to life, or a medieval tapestry 
unrolling. We're always conscious of life spilling out beyond the frame, and 
never conscious of the fact that this was made in the USSR of the 60s. In 
Tarkovsky's own turbulent time, the film lit all manner of controversy. Its 
Christian spiritualism offended the Soviet authorities; its depiction of 
Russia's savage history upset nationalists such as Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn, and 
its challenging form led to various cuts. After opening in Moscow in 1966, it 
was suppressed until the 1969 Cannes film festival, and didn't reach Britain 
till 1973.

We don't necessarily know, or need to know, how Andrei Rublev works or what 
it's telling us, but by the end we're in no doubt it's succeeded. In the 
closing minutes, the film pulls off its most famous flourish: the screen bursts 
into colour and we're finally ready to see Rublev's paintings in extreme 
close-up. Coming, as they do, at the end of this epic journey, they can reduce 
a viewer to tears. As the camera pores over the details, the tiny jewels on the 
hem of a robe, the lines forming a pitiful expression on the face of an angel, 
the tarnished gilding of a halo, we feel like we understand everything that's 
gone into every brushstroke. We're reminded of what beauty is. It is as close 
to transcendence as cinema gets.Steve Rose

More Guardian and Observer critics' top 10s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/top-10-films>

• Top 10 romantic movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/07/top-10-romantic-movies>
• Top 10 action movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/10/top-10-action-movies>
• Top 10 comedy movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/11/top-10-comedy-movies>
• Top 10 horror movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/14/top-10-horror-movies>
• Top 10 sci-fi movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/16/top-10-sci-fi-movies>
• Top 10 crime movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/18/top-10-crime-movies>
• Top 10 arthouse movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/21/top-10-arthouse-movies>
• Top 10 family movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/25/top-10-family-movies>
• Top 10 war movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/oct/28/top-10-war-movies>
• Top 10 teen movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/01/top-10-teen-movies>
• Top 10 superhero movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/04/top-10-superhero-movies>
• Top 10 westerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/08/top-10-movie-westerns>
• Top 10 documentaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/12/top-10-documentaries>
• Top 10 movie adaptations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/15/top-10-movie-adaptations>
• Top 10 animated movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/20/top-10-animated-movies-films>
• Top 10 silent movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/22/top-10-silent-movies-films>
• Top 10 sports movies 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/film/filmblog/2013/nov/25/top-10-sports-movies>
• Top 10 film noir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/29/top-10-film-noir>
• Top 10 musicals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/dec/03/top-10-movie-musicals>
• Top 10 martial arts movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/dec/06/top-10-martial-arts-movies>
 