
Theresa May promised radicalism on executive pay and boardroom governance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-tory-leadership-pitch-andrea-leadsom>
 but her government’sgreen paper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/573120/beis-16-56-corporate-governance-reform-green-paper.pdf>
 is not that. Most of the proposals represent tweaks to the current setup. The 
corporate lobby, one suspects, will breathe a sigh of relief. The pay of the 
average FTSE 100 chief executive has increased from 47 times that of the 
average worker in 1998 to 128 times last year. On the basis of this document, 
it would be hard to conclude that the gap is about to close.

The prime minister had already performed linguistic gymnastics to recast her 
promise to introduce workers’ representatives on boards; it turned out that her 
idea didn’t involve actual workers on actual boards, just mechanisms for their 
“voices” to be heard. It now appears that even her plan to give shareholders an 
annual binding vote on boardroom pay could be destinedfor reinterpretation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/government-business-shareholders-executive-pay-greg-clark>
.

Government says it will 'hold business to high standard' with reforms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/government-business-shareholders-executive-pay-greg-clark>
The green paper says binding votes could apply to all companies or only to 
those that have “encountered significant shareholder opposition” to the 
remuneration report. The latter idea would seem to continue to allow BP to pay 
its chief executive £14mdespite the opposition of 60% of its shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
, as it did this year. The only sanction would be that the company would find 
it harder to pull the same trick twice.

Prospects look brighter for pay ratios in the sense that the “pro” arguments 
received more space than the “cons”. And large private companies will be 
brought into parts of the governance fold, a reform that looks entirely 
sensible given what we’ve learned aboutBHS and Sir Philip Green’s Arcadia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-heading-for-administration-as-rescue-deal-fails>
 in recent months.

But Iain Wright, the chair of the business select committee, which did such a 
good job on BHS, is correct when he says the list of tentative options suggests 
a government “whose resolve may have weakened on getting to grips with 
corporate governance”.

If one digs deep, some big ideas are acknowledged, it should be said. One of 
the best has come from the Tory MP Chris Philp, with the backing of the 
governance old-hand Lord Myners and the lauded fund managerNeil Woodford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/01/fund-manager-backs-mps-plan-to-rein-in-executive-pay>
: Scandinavian-style shareholder committees that would, in effect, replace 
nominations committees and recommend the appointment and removal of directors.

The beauty of this proposal is that it would oblige shareholders to become 
more active in setting pay, listening to outside voices and questioning 
strategy – in short, participating in what is done in their clients’ name. It 
is one way to crack the problem of “ownerless corporations” – the single 
biggest impediment to reform.

Unfortunately, while Philp’s idea was included, the mention was brief and 
heavily qualified. Instead, the government seems inclined to embrace 
“stakeholder advisory panels”, which are fine as far they go but are ultimately 
powerless.

May should rethink. Or, rather, she should remember her own criticism in the 
summer of the insufficient scrutiny provided by non-executive directors “drawn 
from the same, narrow social and professional circles as the executive team”. 
Her point was excellent because it identified why most governance reforms have 
disappointed in the past 20 years: the same people have been left in charge of 
the decision-making. Few of the proposals in this green paper address that 
central problem. May needs to recapture her summer zeal.

EU to the rescue of Ofcom?

BT under increasing pressure from Ofcom to split from Openreach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/bt-openreach-competition-ofcom-european-commission>
Prepare the Brussels battalions. If BT won’t separate legally its Openreach 
subsidiary to the satisfaction of its regulator, it must be made to comply, 
which – for a little while yet – means summoning the European commission. 
Actually, it probably won’t come to that. BT will surely fall into line with
Ofcom’s wishes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/bt-openreach-competition-ofcom-european-commission>
 quickly because it has no other choice.


The telecoms regulator proposed legal separation of the Openreach subsidiary, 
the bit that manages most of the UK’s broadband infrastructure, in July to 
address competition concerns. Now it is a question of making it happen.

The main sticking point concerns the requirement for Openreach to have an 
independent board with a chief executive who reports only to Openreach’s 
chairman. Ofcom thinks BT’s current proposal leaves too many reporting lines 
open to the BT chief executive,Gavin Patterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/gavin-patterson>. The problem does not sound 
fundamental.

Legal separation of Openreach, under BT’s continued ownership, is an untested 
structure that may prove clunky in practice. But it is the one Ofcom has 
settled upon and it avoids the costs and hassle of a full breakup. It’s worth 
trying. BT should avoid the appearance of foot-dragging and get a move on.
 