
Toronto film festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/torontofilmfestival> 
organisers are predicting Whiplash director Damien Chazelle’s new musical, La 
La Land, will be a major awards contender.

Toronto film festival taps into Snowden and keeps it current with Denial and 
The Journey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/26/toronto-film-festival-line-up-snowden-denial-the-journey>
The film, which stars Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone, is part of this year’s 
lineup after a world premiere at the Venice film festival.

“La La Land is very strong, and it’s been getting a lot of attention in terms 
of its awards prospects,” said festival programmer Cameron Bailey. “I think 
it’s delightful and will do well.”

Festival CEO Piers Handling also said he believes La La Land will “rise to the 
top of the list”. Other films tipped by the pair include the gay dramaMoonlight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9NJj12tJzqc>, which Bailey said will “become 
one of the top films of the year” and the Amy Adams thrillerArrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/17/arrival-trailer-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-aliens-video>
, which Handling called “a very feminist sci-fi film” that will surprise 
audiences.

But the film on the Toronto lineup that has got most people talking is the 
slavery drama The Birth of a Nation. The film, which premiered at Sundance in 
January, is making headlines after actor, writer and directorNate Parker’s rape 
accusation came to light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/17/nate-parker-devastated-by-suicide-of-accuser>
, along with the suicide of his accuser.

Parker is expected to do press throughout the Toronto festival. Handling hopes 
the focus of interviews will be directed back to the movie. “It’s really sad in 
a way, because the film was extremely well-received in Sundance, and they held 
it for Toronto, hoping for a very strong awards launch into the season and now 
conversation has turned away from the film,” he said. “I don’t know whether two 
and a half weeks from now, when we screen [it], the conversation will have 
returned to the film or not. That’s impossible to predict at this stage of the 
game.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Ftoronto-film-festival-organisers-predict-awards-glory-for-la-la-land-musical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55af2d7bc5e954c05ee34e1ef6718ad6aeb9f36%2F0_32_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Toronto%20film%20festival%20organisers%20predict%20awards%20glory%20for%20La%20La%20Land%20movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Ftoronto-film-festival-organisers-predict-awards-glory-for-la-la-land-musical%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Toronto%20film%20festival%20organisers%20predict%20awards%20glory%20for%20La%20La%20Land%20movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Ftoronto-film-festival-organisers-predict-awards-glory-for-la-la-land-musical%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55af2d7bc5e954c05ee34e1ef6718ad6aeb9f36%2F0_32_2200_1320%2F2200.jpg>
 Nate Parker, whose film Birth of a Nation will show at the festival. 
Photograph: Fred Prouser/Reuters 
Bailey said: “I think what we want at our festival every year is for people to 
pay attention to the films and then have whatever debate about the films that 
they choose to,. We don’t limit that conversation. We want people to express 
every possible view they may have about the film, so we hope it is about the 
films more than other things.”

Toronto film festival adds Anne Hathaway monster movie to lineup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/09/toronto-film-festival-anne-hathaway-lineup>
There will also be a more diverse set of film-makers showcased in Toronto 
after recent festivals were criticised for failing to provide varied 
opportunities. “We’ve got our strongest representation of films directed by 
women,” said Bailey, noting that close to 30% of the films in the festival’s 
overall selection are in this category. “Not only are they directed by women,” 
he said, “but they’re telling very powerful stories about women that haven’t 
been seen on screen nearly enough.”

This year’s event comes months after increased security in Cannes due to 
concern about possible terrorist attacks. Handling says security plans have 
been reviewed in Toronto.

“Over the years, we have heightened our security, mostly behind the scenes, so 
the public do not notice,” he said. “This year, we did a revisit of our entire 
security plan from top to bottom. We’re very involved with all levels of police 
in the Toronto area, and we’re very aware of potential terrorist attacks. There 
will be bag checks in some cinemas and dogs onfestival street 
<http://news.nationalpost.com/arts/movies/why-tiffs-festival-street-is-the-most-accessible-part-of-the-festival>
.”

The Toronto film festival <http://tiff.net/?filter=this-week> runs from 8-18 
September.
 