
A group of 10 Conservative MPs has written to the home secretary, Amber Rudd, 
calling on her to do more to help vulnerable unaccompaniedchild asylum seekers 
living in “wretched” and life-threatening conditions in Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/child-refugees-despair-calais-camp-close>
.

The letter – signed by the former education secretary Nicky Morgan, and the 
acting head of the home affairs select committee, Tim Loughton – highlights the 
recent death of a14-year-old Afghan boy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/afghan-boy-killed-in-calais-in-attempt-to-climb-on-to-lorry-to-uk>
 on the roads near the French port. He died when he fell off a moving truck 
while trying to get to the UK.

The letter points out that the child had a legal right to be reunited with his 
brother, who lives in the UK, “but having waited for months in wretched 
conditions for the process to work, he took fate into his own hands with 
devastating consequences”.

Hungry, scared, and no closer to safety: child refugees failed by Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/02/child-refugees-calais-failed-by-britain>
“We are sure you feel as heartbroken as we do about this and the conditions in 
the camp he was trying to escape.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> are living alone in tents 
donated by the generous British people, living each day in fear of violence, 
exposed to criminals and, as we have seen, at risk of losing their lives. With 
the French authorities planning to dismantle the camp, life is only likely to 
get harder for these vulnerable children,” the MPs state.

The letter says it is vital that the Home Office works with French authorities 
in the run-up to the planneddemolition of the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/24/new-fears-for-lone-children-calais-refugee-camp>
 later this month, to find safe accommodation for the estimated865 children 
<http://i0.wp.com/www.helprefugees.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/census-edit-kids.jpg>
 living in the camp (nearly 80% of whom are there alone), and to make sure that 
those eligible to come to the UK understand their rights.

Charities working in Calais <https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> 
estimate that as many as 400 children have family in the UK, and are eligible 
to be resettled in Britain. “We must ensure that it is the authorities and the 
law that help these children, and not the criminals who would put them in the 
back of trucks,” adds the letter, which is also signed by David Burrowes, Anne 
Jenkin and Sarah Wollaston.

It adds to a growing chorus of voices demanding the government do more to 
assist children in the camp.Unicef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/child-refugees-despair-calais-camp-close>
 this weekend called on the British authorities to speed up the transfer of 
unaccompanied child refugees from Calais. Last month, Kevin Hyland, the UK’s 
anti-slavery commissioner who was appointed by Theresa May, said British delays 
in giving sanctuary to these children were forcing them into the hands of 
traffickers and people smugglers.

Lord Dubs, the Labour peer who earlier this year persuaded the government to 
promise to give sanctuary to vulnerable unaccompanied child refugees with no 
relatives in the UK,has described the slowness of the British response to the 
crisis as a “disgrace” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/disgrace-to-europe-former-child-refugee-lord-dubs-calais-camp>
.

In May, he secured a commitment that Britain would give homes to some of the 
estimated 88,000 child refugees 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-europe-migrants-minors-idUKKCN0XT15M> 
believed to be travelling through Europe, and this was set out in an amendment 
to the Immigration Act. Five months since the amendment was passed, none of the 
qualifying children has arrived in the UK.

The Home Office said: “The dismantling of the camp in Calais is a matter for 
the French government.

 “The UK government has made crystal clear its commitment to resettle 
vulnerable children under the Immigration Act and ensure those with links to 
the UK are brought here using the Dublin regulation. We will also continue to 
support the French government as it provides alternative accommodation to 
migrants in the camps and returns those not in need of protection to their home 
countries.

 “We continue to work with the French government and partner organisations to 
speed up mechanisms to identify, assess and transfer unaccompanied refugee 
children to the UK, where this is in their best interests.”

 