
One of the worst parts of being a parent, genuinely, is having to watch 
children’s TV with your kids. At first glance, during your tentative early dips 
into the channels you wouldn’t have touched with a bargepole three months 
earlier, all of it seems exactly the same. It’s either too loud or too stupid 
or too lazy.

And to be fair, a lot of it is – I’ve adhered to a strict “no live action” 
rule since my son was born, since all kids’ shows that star actual people tend 
to come off as the kind of thing serial killers post to their next victims. But 
dig deep enough and you’ll find a handful of children’s television programmes 
that – whisper it – are actually quite good. If you’re a new parent, about to 
navigate the choppy waters of preschool TV, please cling to these few good 
shows as hard as you can. Take my advice as a grizzled old veteran.

Hey Duggee (CBeebies)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde4ffcb1343510e82de1f80459de81c6a3f4391f%2F0_56_3799_2279%2F3799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tot%20trumps%3A%20kids'%20TV%20shows%20that%20are%20secretly%20brilliant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tot%20trumps%3A%20kids%27%20TV%20shows%20that%20are%20secretly%20brilliant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde4ffcb1343510e82de1f80459de81c6a3f4391f%2F0_56_3799_2279%2F3799.jpg>
 Dizzyingly brilliant … Hey Duggee. Photograph: BBC 
If, in December, you notice that the Guardian’s annual best TV list contains a 
weird little outlier about a giant scout leader dog, you’ll know to blame me. 
Hey Duggee is, simply put, terrific. It looks like nothing else on TV – all the 
characters are pared down and geometric, the locations are often just 
Kubrickesque blocks of colour, the music is old-timey gramophone fare culled 
from the BBC archive – and it seems as much made for parents as it is for kids. 
There are antelopes who whine about farmers’ markets, put-upon 
submarine-captain parents teetering on the brink of breakdowns and sporadic 
nods to Wes Anderson movies. To get started, try the episode entitled The 
Puppet Show Badge; I won’t spoil it for you, but the execution is dizzyingly 
brilliant.

Sarah and Duck (CBeebies)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22896c36dc7930c693862af4351ccbcb3d93ae71%2F205_0_5846_3508%2F5846.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tot%20trumps%3A%20kids'%20TV%20shows%20that%20are%20secretly%20brilliant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tot%20trumps%3A%20kids%27%20TV%20shows%20that%20are%20secretly%20brilliant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22896c36dc7930c693862af4351ccbcb3d93ae71%2F205_0_5846_3508%2F5846.jpg>
 It’s a treat … Sarah and Duck. Photograph: Karrot Entertainment 
I have to admit to being a late conversion to Sarah and Duck. On the surface, 
it seems like another slow, dull show about nothing, which exists purely to 
keep toddlers occupied while you put the tea on. But let it in for a second and 
Sarah and Duck will take up residence. The characters just have a little bit 
more to them than is usually required, which makes the series feel 
preposterously rich. For example, one peripheral character is an old lady whose 
only friend is a bag that seems to have taken against her long ago for an 
unknown reason. The best thing about Sarah and Duck, though, is the lovingly 
crafted incidental music that ebbs and flows throughout each episode. It’s a 
treat.

The clean, green and slightly bonkers world of CBeebies | Sophie Elmhirst
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/05/cbeebies-the-clean-green-slightly-bonkers-world>
Lily’s Driftwood Bay (Nick Jr)

This is ostensibly an animation about a little girl who lives in a beach hut 
with her dad and has adventures with the animals on the bay. But it’s also 
unbearably sad at times, too. One episode tackles how the characters deal with 
the sudden death of their friend – possibly, it’s insinuated, as a reflection 
of the recent death of the main character’s mother – and it’s dealt with in a 
way that’s both sensitive and matter of fact. Don’t be tricked into thinking 
Lily’s Driftwood Bay is solely about grief, though.Dolly Parton pops up from 
time to time 
<http://www.belfastlive.co.uk/news/tv/lilys-driftwood-bay-dolly-parton-11403144>
 too, so that’s fun.

Peppa Pig (Channel 5)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcff5d7d36b2c2fc6b6ebfa898f7f00bf4acd39fe%2F66_0_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tot%20trumps%3A%20kids'%20TV%20shows%20that%20are%20secretly%20brilliant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tot%20trumps%3A%20kids%27%20TV%20shows%20that%20are%20secretly%20brilliant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcff5d7d36b2c2fc6b6ebfa898f7f00bf4acd39fe%2F66_0_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
 Infectious … Peppa Pig. Photograph: Channel 5 
Clearly, there’s a lot wrong with Peppa Pig, not least in its openly 
disparaging portrayal of dads. But there’s a reason why kids go loopy for Peppa 
Pig: it’s especially well made. The voice work is infectious, the storylines 
often jag off into unexpected areas and Brian Blessed is in it sometimes, which 
is basically the highest compliment you can give a TV show. You’ve probably 
heard that it’s annoying, but, trust me, it’s one of the best ones. That’s how 
ropey most children’s TV is.

Teletubbies (CBeebies)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4fdaddf8cf74b806beea13303329ee2ad8f4d34%2F0_0_1985_1375%2F1985.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tot%20trumps%3A%20kids'%20TV%20shows%20that%20are%20secretly%20brilliant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tot%20trumps%3A%20kids%27%20TV%20shows%20that%20are%20secretly%20brilliant&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fkids-tv-shows-hey-duggee-sarah-and-duck-peppa-pig-teletubbies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4fdaddf8cf74b806beea13303329ee2ad8f4d34%2F0_0_1985_1375%2F1985.jpg>
 Revamped … Teletubbies. Photograph: Jeremy Porter/DHX Media 
Dragged back from the evil clutches of ironic nostalgia, the revamped 
Teletubbies is possibly even an improvement on the original. Watch a full 
episode of the old series on YouTube if you like; it’s almost superhumanly 
dull. Segments crawl along on their belly for what seems like hours, then die 
into nothing. Humans pop up and tell stories so abjectly tedious they might 
legally qualify as punishment. And the Teletubbies themselves were staggeringly 
creepy. The new version, though, manages to be tighter and brighter and 
funnier, and much easier for parents to sit through. That said, the Teletubbies 
still treat the Noo-Noo like a trafficked slave. God, I feel for the Noo-Noo.

What are the shows helping you through parenthood? Let me know below. For the 
love of God, let me know below.
 