
North Korea “is screwed up in every aspect”, says Gunnar Garfors who, aged 
just 37 <http://www.garfors.com/2013/01/why-198-countries.html>, became the 
youngest “hobby traveller” to visit every country in the world. “Staying there 
too long will mess with your mind.”

For over a decade the Norwegian journalist has doggedly gained access to 198 
countries –five more than the United Nations (UN) official tally 
<http://www.garfors.com/2013/01/why-198-countries.html>, as he included 
Palestine, the Vatican, Kosovo, Western Sahara and Taiwan.

As a hobby traveller, Garfors explains that he makes the trips in his spare 
time, and isn’t paid to do so. He insists he doesn’t have a lot of money, but 
has prioritised his globe-trotting over a “wife, a car or a CD collection” – 
though he has since written a book about his experiences.

‘The Stans’

Garfors developed a taste for adventure in 2004 after a trip through 
Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan. He says he was enchanted by the former Soviet states 
of Central Asia and decided to tick off the three other “Stans” before setting 
off for the rest of the world.

“Turkmenistan is number two on the crazy list,” says Garfors. “I could walk 
around more freely than in North Korea, but it was very apparent I was being 
watched.” The country consistently sits at the bottom of global freedom 
rankings, in the company ofNorth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> and Eritrea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7ef1f5a3cb4ef31b1b89d63fb17407c9ebd6f96%2F0_380_5614_3364%2F5614.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Totalitarian%20travels%20%E2%80%93%20by%20the%20man%20who's%20been%20to%20every%20country%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Totalitarian%20travels%20%E2%80%93%20by%20the%20man%20who%27s%20been%20to%20every%20country%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc7ef1f5a3cb4ef31b1b89d63fb17407c9ebd6f96%2F0_380_5614_3364%2F5614.jpg>
 Turkmenistan’s Darvaza Crater, otherwise known as the ‘door to hell’. 
Photograph: flydime/Getty Images/Flickr RF 
The equestrian-mad nation has recently started to open up to tourists who can 
visit the so-called “dictator’s disneyland 
<http://www.youngpioneertours.com/tour/turkmenistan-nawruz-tour>” in the 
capital, Ashgabat, which boasts a 20m statue of president Gurbanguly 
Berdymukhamedov sitting astride a golden horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/25/horse-turkmenistan-president-statute-berdymukhamedov>
.

The country’s other attractions include a burning pit at “the door to hell” in 
the Darvaza crater, and rarely seen stretches of the silk road, the region’s 
ancient trade route.

Africa’s hermetic borders 

In contrast, Garfors described Eritrea as a “truly amazing country” hindered 
by military conscription and a heavy-handed government – factors which are 
thought to contribute to the unprecedented exodus of up to5,000 citizens every 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/22/eritrea-migrants-child-soldier-fled-what-is-going>
.

Gaining access wasn’t easy. The first time he applied for a visa from the 
embassy in Stockholm he waited for six weeks before getting his passport back 
with a note: “Hellow! Your visa application rejected (sic).”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90db53de9f8dc6f1f0da94046b40ab04c31705b3%2F0_0_1920_2560%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Totalitarian%20travels%20%E2%80%93%20by%20the%20man%20who's%20been%20to%20every%20country%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Totalitarian%20travels%20%E2%80%93%20by%20the%20man%20who%27s%20been%20to%20every%20country%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90db53de9f8dc6f1f0da94046b40ab04c31705b3%2F0_0_1920_2560%2F1920.jpg>
 Garfors’ first attempt at gaining access to Eritrea. Photograph: Gunnar Garfors
He tried again, this time including a note about “how much I had heard about 
the country and why I wanted to visit”. It worked, and he made the trip in 2012.

But Garfors explains that Eritrea, now nicknamed “Africa’s North Korea”, 
wasn’t the hardest country on the continent to access. Angola,also known for 
human rights abuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/24/angolas-crackdown-on-human-rights-must-be-challenged>
, was harder still.

“They actually refused to return my passport because I made a mistake on the 
form,” he says. “But I was following instructions on a website that hadn’t been 
updated since 2003.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc18bb462883643ddcc8b33069e4a57be3af977b2%2F0_0_720_960%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Totalitarian%20travels%20%E2%80%93%20by%20the%20man%20who's%20been%20to%20every%20country%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Totalitarian%20travels%20%E2%80%93%20by%20the%20man%20who%27s%20been%20to%20every%20country%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc18bb462883643ddcc8b33069e4a57be3af977b2%2F0_0_720_960%2F720.jpg>
 A lone attraction during Garfors’ short stopover in Angola. Photograph: Gunnar 
Garfors 
Eventually, passport back in hand, Garfors booked a flight that had a 13-hour 
layover in the capital Luanda: “I walked from the airport and had breakfast in 
a bar that was playing soft porn, refused their offer to display something 
harder and walked back to the airport.”

He has since said 
<http://www.garfors.com/2013/05/the-hardest-most-difficult-countries-to.html> 
that Angola is the hardest country to visit in Africa, closely followed by 
Eritrea and Equatorial Guinea.

Thanks to his ambitious travels Garfors has become adept at negotiating with 
passport officials. “I never fill [the forms] out wrong anymore,” he says, 
before sharing a few other tricks of the trade.

He explains that it’s almost always easier to get a visa from a neighbouring 
country, which is how he got in toEquatorial Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/equatorial-guinea>. It’s usually cheaper to 
travel overland, as he did with Turkmenistan, and “sometimes its just boils 
down to getting the right official.”

Jogging in North Korea

Garfors developed his rules for what constitutes a “proper travelling 
experience” early on. “I think you need a story to tell, you must have been 
outside your vehicle or train, or airport,” he explains.

“You also need to have had a conversation,” he adds, lamenting associations 
like the exclusive Century Travelling Club, for people who’ve been to 100 
countries, but which allows itsmembers to count layovers or very brief stops 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/what-is-the-travelers-century-club-2015-9?r=US&IR=T>
 in their official tally.

Garfors says that his travelling experiences challenge some common 
misconceptions about some of the world’s most closed-off states. Getting into 
North Korea, for example, was not the incredible feat that some might expect, 
with its small but developed travel and tourism market.

However, the regime left Garfors frustrated when he visited in 2009: “I don’t 
enjoy being told what to do and I don’t like guided tours.”.

How do I get … to North Korea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/09/how-do-i-get-to-north-korea-dennis-rodman>
He did however manage to organise a run free from his tour guide. “We got him 
drunk on liquor the night before,” and the man, hungover, sent the driver to 
watch over them in his place, Garfors explains.

The driver, not a fitness pro, struggled to keep up with the Norwegian. 
Running along the Taedong river in Pyongyang, Garfors says he attracted 
“surprised looks” from locals as he raced solo along the bank.

After all those miles travelled, Garfors almost found lasting love with a girl 
in neighbouring South Korea, but he explains it didn’t quite work out. “The 
funny thing aboutSouth Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> is 
that they take wedding photos months before the wedding, so I have the photos, 
I’m just not married.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c65642b0f31a34963c59cb14d48f1af6933d008%2F0_0_3397_5102%2F3397.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Totalitarian%20travels%20%E2%80%93%20by%20the%20man%20who's%20been%20to%20every%20country%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Totalitarian%20travels%20%E2%80%93%20by%20the%20man%20who%27s%20been%20to%20every%20country%20in%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F26%2Ftotalitarian-travels-gunnar-garfors-the-man-whos-been-to-every-country-in-the-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c65642b0f31a34963c59cb14d48f1af6933d008%2F0_0_3397_5102%2F3397.jpg>
 The official photo from Garfor’s wedding that was never to be. Photograph: 
Gunnar Garfors 
Check your privilege

Another traveller to complete the complete world tally, former playboy editor 
Albert Podell 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/notes/2015/09/the-hardest-place-in-the-world-to-escape-to/40404>
, was recently accused of being culturally tone deaf after writing a piece for 
The Atlantic about thehardest places to visit 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2015/09/countries-difficult-visas-travel/403267/>
.

“There’s a tragic irony here,” wrote Nadine Ajaka, also for The Atlantic 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/notes/2015/09/the-hardest-place-in-the-world-to-escape-to/404041/>
. “As Podell describes the incredible feat of entering places like Sudan and 
North Korea, for much of the world, the United States is one of the most 
difficult and expensive nations to get into.”

Garfors insists he recognises his privilege as the holder of a Norwegian 
passport, arguably one of the easiest in the world for foreign travel.

He explains that one of the main takeaways from his adventures was that most 
people “hadn’t even heard of this country ofNorway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway>, that we think is the centre of the 
universe.”

“If you don’t become more humble in that process, then there’s something wrong 
with you.”
 