
At the end of a fiery and fully committed contest, a draw was probably a fair 
result, yet ultimately both teams may well reflect on what might have been. For
Tottenham Hotspur <https://www.theguardian.com/football/tottenham-hotspur> this 
was a chance missed to go top after largely dominating proceedings while for 
Bournemouth the feeling will be that having performed with great togetherness 
they could have won had their opponents been reduced to 10, and possibly even 
nine, players.

Bournemouth 0-0 Tottenham Hotspur: Premier League – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/oct/22/bournemouth-v-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-live>
On a different day and with a referee who showed less leniency than Craig 
Pawson did here, both Érik Lamela and Moussa Sissoko would almost certainly 
have been sent off for their respective displays of recklessness. Sissoko’s 
incident was the most blatant with the midfielder, having come on as a 
72nd-minute substitute, clearly striking Harry Arter with his elbow as the pair 
tussled by the near touchline. Arter was enraged and complained to Pawson, but 
the official, despite having a clear view of what had happened, took no action. 
That was also the case on 40 minutes, when Lamela lunged in on Dan Gosling 
having already received a yellow card. The Argentinian’s reaction was that of a 
man who expected to be dismissed, but he survived.

Not surprisingly, Sissoko’s foul on Arter was raised with both managers and, 
perhaps also not surprisingly, both claimed not to have seen the flashpoint. 
Instead, Mauricio Pochettino and Eddie Howe were more interested in praising 
the efforts of their players, with the latter claiming this display by 
Bournemouth had pleased him more than the one they delivered indefeating Hull 
6-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/15/bournemouth-hull-city-premier-league-match-report>
 here.

“I was really proud of the players,” said Howe. “More proud than I was this 
time last week, partly because of the quality of the opposition we were playing 
against.

“They’re supremely talented players and we felt our best option was to try to 
stop the ball getting into the final third with our workrate and intensity. The 
players delivered an incredible physical performance, full of endeavour and 
desire.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fbournemouth-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F489f4ffb9e26a3ee134794fc84b5de4a5ea7aaf4%2F168_123_3247_2290%2F3247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tottenham%20miss%20chance%20to%20go%20top%20at%20Bournemouth%20but%20escape%20red%20cards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fbournemouth-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tottenham%20miss%20chance%20to%20go%20top%20at%20Bournemouth%20but%20escape%20red%20cards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fbournemouth-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F489f4ffb9e26a3ee134794fc84b5de4a5ea7aaf4%2F168_123_3247_2290%2F3247.jpg>
 Bournemouth’s Adam Smith hooks the ball away from Christian Eriksen. 
Photograph: Steve Paston/PA 
In that regard, no one shone more brightly than Arter, who closed down 
opposition players with relentless desire and was quite rightly named man of 
the match Yet, as Howe intimated, this was a collectively impressive display by 
the hosts as they looked to push Tottenham back right from kick-off. Callum 
Wilson led the charge, with the lone centre-forward ably supported by the 
attacking trio of Joshua King, Jack Wilshere and Jordon Ibe. Behind them Arter 
and Gosling, who came into the starting lineup just before kick-off after 
Andrew Surman was ruled out because of illness, restricted the ability of Mousa 
Dembélé and Deli Alli to dictate proceedings and cause danger from centre 
midfield in their usual manner.

Bournemouth had the best chance of the match, a close-range shot from Charlie 
Daniels after five minutes that looked to be heading in, only for Hugo Lloris 
to deflect the ball on to the bar with this leg and make a second eye-catching 
stop in four days after his stunning block of Javier Hernández’s close-range 
strike in Tuesday’s Champions Leaguedraw with Bayer Leverkusen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/18/bayer-leverkusen-tottenham-champions-league-match-report>
.

Lamela almost scored for Tottenham on 17 minutes with a long-range drive but, 
overall, the visitors were left feeling frustrated during the first half, 
evident in part by the four bookings they collected during that period. A 
fifth, and second, for their No11 would have been justified.

The rebel World Cup: on the road with Kurdistan's football team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/oct/14/football-alternative-world-cup-kurdistan-team-jack-losh-sebastien-rabas>
The visitors were much improved after the break and deserved to remain the 
only undefeated team in thePremier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> given they had the lion’s 
share of possession – 61.8% – and created more chances than Bournemouth – 16 
compared to eight. However, few of those chances were clear cut and Son 
Heung-Min was largely anonymous as their lone striker. It is now one goal for 
Tottenham in their last three games. Harry Kane’s return from injury cannot 
come quickly enough.

“The game was tough but I am pleased with the efforts of my players,” said 
Pochettino before going on to concede his side needs to be more ruthless if 
they are to sustain their title charge. Tottenham are fourth, one point off new 
leaders Arsenal.

For Bournemouth <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bournemouth>, it is now 
four matches without defeat and soon after Sissoko’s strike on Arter – who said 
he received an apology from the Tottenham player for the elbow, which he 
accepted, saying “he isn’t that type of player” – there was one more moment for 
the majority of those in attendance to feel hard done by.

Wilshere – who completed a full match for the first time since September 2014 
– went down under a seemingly illegal challenge from Victor Wanyama inside the 
Tottenham area. Again, however, Pawson saw no wrong.
 