
Toyota <https://www.theguardian.com/business/toyota> has been fined $32.4m 
(Â£20.9m) by the US government for failing to swiftly recall millions of 
vehicles with faulty brakes and steering.

The fines are the maximum allowed by law. In April Toyota paid another $16.4m 
fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/apr/19/toyota-pay-record-fine-safety?INTCMP=SRCH>
 related to the recalls, bringing the total to $48.8m. The latest fines relate 
to two separate investigations: one over the recall of nearly 5m vehicles with 
faulty accelerator pedals that became stuck and a second involving steering 
rods that cracked and broke in some models.

Worldwide Toyota has recalled more than 11m vehicles since November 2009, 
including popular models such as the Prius hybrid, and Camry and Corolla 
saloons.

The fines follow months of investigations that concluded Toyota had failed to 
report defects to safety regulators, who found that Toyota began a recall in 
Japan over faulty rods but waited a year before conceding US models were also 
affected.

Another investigation was prompted by the fatal crash of a California highway 
patrol officer, Mark Saylor, and his family. They died after reporting a stuck 
accelerator while driving a 2009 Lexus ES 350.

In February Toyota's chairman and chief executive, Akio Toyoda, testified 
before Congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/24/akio-toyoda-statement-to-congress>
. Blasted by politicians, Toyoda said he was "deeply sorry" for his company's 
handling of safety scandals. He vowed to overhaul the way the company dealt 
with US consumers and regulators.

Toyota said in a statement : "These agreements are an opportunity to turn the 
page to an even more constructive relationship" with US safety regulators.

Ray LaHood, the US transport secretary said: "I am pleased that Toyota agreed 
to pay the maximum possible penalty and I expect Toyota to work co-operatively 
in the future to ensure consumer safety."

Toyota's recalls have hit US sales. The company has lost ground to companies 
including Ford and South Korea's Hyundai. Its US sales are flat this year, 
while the rest of the industry is up 13%. Toyota recalled 55,000 vehicles in 
September 2007, blaming out-of-position floor mats for its accelerator woes. 
But, after the Saylor family's fatal crash, an investigation by the US 
regulator, the national highway traffic safety administration (NHTSA), found 
that the pedal itself was poorly designed.

In the second case, the transport department said Toyota recalled Hilux 
pick-up trucks in Japan in 2004 after finding steering-rod issues. It told US 
safety regulators that there were no reports of problems but a year later 
recalled nearly 1m vehicles in the US after telling the NHTSA the steering 
defect was present in several US models. Toyota agreed to the fines without 
admitting any violation of law. The company is facing a barrage of class-action 
law suits over the recalls.
 