
By one of those peculiar historical coincidences, Cardinal Pell appeared 
before the royal commission into institutional responses to child sexual abuse 
just as theconservative attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/01/tony-abbott-attacks-safe-schools-program-as-social-engineering>
 on Safe Schools reached its peak. In doing so, he provided a striking example 
of why the program matters so much.

Several years ago, when working on my book Money Shot 
<https://scribepublications.com.au/books-authors/books/money-shot/>, I asked 
Save the Children’s Karen Flanagan, one of the country’s most experienced 
advocates for children’s rights, about the forms that child abuse took in 
Australia.

“Intra-familial abuse, that’s the most common,” she said. “Most children are 
abused by someone very closely related to them or very well known to them – in 
other words, a trusted, respected person. About a third of all sex offending is 
committed by adolescents, about 6% of reported sex offences are by women and 
the rest is by men. Probably about 95% would be intra-familial.”

I wrote the Safe Schools program Tony Abbott. It's vital and it changes lives 
| Chris Bush
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/01/i-wrote-the-safe-schools-lgbti-program-tony-abbott-its-vital-and-it-changes-lives>
In other words, most abused children know the perpetrator.

“If it’s not within the home,” Flanagan said, “it’s the babysitter, or the 
school or the sporting club. It’s people who know the child, who have a 
relationship with him or her, who are trusted.”

Child sexual abuse is, then, fundamentally a crime of authority. And that’s 
why traditional responses to it so often fail.

In her book Child Pornography and Sexual Grooming, the academic Suzanne Ost 
quotes a policeman from the sexual abuse squad in Britain:

We go to an awful lot of trouble and have done over the years [to say], ‘Don’t 
go with strangers, don’t take sweets.’ However what we don’t say is, ‘Don’t do 
what the babysitter tells you when they tell you to go and do this. Don’t do 
what your uncle says when he tells you to do this.’ What we tell them is, ‘Do 
everything the babysitter tells you to do. Be good for your uncle’.

Think about that in the context of Pell’s testimony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/29/cardinal-pell-admits-to-commission-that-he-heard-about-child-sex-abuse-rumours>
. His evidence painted a picture of the Ballarat diocese as an intensely 
hierarchical institution, in which kids were instructed (by schools, by the 
faith, by tradition) to look up to precisely those people doing the abusing.

It’s a perfect illustration of Ost’s point. Training young people to obey 
authority doesn’t merely fail to keep them safe. It can actually put them in 
danger. Statistically, they’re far, far more likely to be abused by someone 
they trust than they are by a stranger.

That’s why child advocates talk so much about “empowerment”. What does that 
mean? It means, among other things, that young people possess accurate and 
meaningful information about sexuality, their own and others’. It means that 
they can talk about their bodies, their feelings and emotions without 
embarrassment or awkwardness. It means they have access to support and 
resources. It means they know that they’ll be listened to if they speak, even 
(or perhaps especially) if what they’re saying makes others feel uncomfortable.

It means other things, too, but, even from the incomplete list above, the 
relevance of Safe Schools should be apparent. The Safe Schools coalitiongives 
its mission <http://www.safeschoolscoalition.org.au/who-we-are> as creating 
“safe and inclusive school environments for same sex attracted, intersex and 
gender diverse students, staff and families”. Obviously, it’s not a program 
about sexual abuse; equally obviously, institutions that aren’t “safe and 
inclusive” are more likely to become breeding grounds for abusive behaviour of 
all kinds, simply because if young people feel ashamed or guilty or even just 
confused about their sexual identity, they’re a lot less likely to stand up 
against an exploitative adult.

 “The Safe Schools program has nothing to do with highlighting bullying,” says 
Victorian MP Bernie Finn, the latest politician to condemn the scheme. “It is, 
in fact, afull-frontal assault 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/matthew-guy-warns-against-expanding-safe-schools-program-to-all-victorian-classrooms-20160304-gnb9aw.html>
 on the innocence of children and the role of families in society. It should be 
cut immediately from all Victorian schools.”

In practice, the invocation of “childhood innocence” has always meant 
preventing kids from talking openly and honestly about their own bodies, their 
own feelings and the sexualised world they see all around them.

Naturally, such prohibitions on frank discussions of sex means the subject 
becomes shrouded in prurient mystification. Take, for example, the cartoon 
produced by the Australian’s Bill Leak, a man whose work invariably gives form 
to the conservative id at its rawest. His contribution to the Safe School debate
portrays an old fashioned housewife 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/cartoons/bleak-gallery/image-gallery/ee8a4ef1032a9da5a37c87ecb7f34c5c>
 sending a cute little kid off to school – and telling the girl that there’s a 
“strap on” packed in her bag. Leak thus depicts Finn’s innocent child so as to 
transform an anti-bullying program into a sniggering baby boomer fantasy from 
Penthouse Forum.

As for Finn’s rhetoric about “the role of families in society”, let’s say it 
one more time: the vast majority of sexual abuse takes place within the family. 
Of course, that doesn’t mean that Mums and Dads should be treated as child 
molesters. Nonetheless, the statistics make clear the dangers of kids 
unquestioningly accepting familial authority rather than, say, feeling 
confident enough to seek help, even when the man making them uncomfortable is 
dear old Uncle Ted.

We learned about George Pell's pain. But what about the children? | David Marr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/03/we-learned-about-george-pells-pain-but-what-about-the-children>
At one point in the testimony last week, Gail Furness SC, counsel assisting 
the commission, suggested that Pell’s insistence that he’d been deceived by 
bishop Ronald Mulkearns and other senior clergy was “extraordinary”.

Pell replied: “Counsel, this was an extraordinary world, a world of crimes and 
cover-ups and people did not want the status quo to be disturbed.”

That exchange suggests that Cory Bernardi was on to something when he accuses 
Safe Schools of radicalism.

Sexuality <https://www.theguardian.com/society/sexuality> programs should be 
radical – if by that we mean they should enable students to stand up for 
themselves and speak freely and raise issues that almost by definition will 
make an older generation feel uncomfortable.

To repeat: child sexual abuse is a crime of authority. As Pell himself 
implies, the more that young people are equipped to disturb the status quo, the 
safer they will be.
 