
The Oscars has long been criticised for its lack of diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/08/oscars-so-white-diversity-issues-protests-sylvester-stallone-creed>
, but the Emmys embraced queer, gender and trans politics on Sunday.

Actor Jeffrey Tambor used his Emmy award acceptance speech for his portrayal 
of transgender woman Moira Pfefferman in Amazon’s Transparent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/13/transparent-review-season-three-hits-new-highs-as-the-pfeffermans-shine-brighter-than-ever>
 to call on Hollywood’s network heads, agents and producers to hire more trans 
actors.


When it comes to the Emmys, where are the Latino nominees?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/18/when-it-comes-to-the-emmys-few-latino-nominees>
“I’m not going to say this beautifully: to you people out there … please give 
transgender talent a chance. Give them auditions. Give them their story,” he 
declared while accepting the Emmy for best comedy actor.

“I would be happy if I were the last cisgender male to play a transgender 
female,” added Tambor, whowon an Emmy in the same category 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/20/emmys-2015-jeffrey-tambor-best-actor-comedy-transparent>
 for the same role last year.

In 2014, Orange is the New Black star Laverne Cox became the first openly 
transgender actor to receive anEmmys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/emmys> nomination, and was introduced 
as such in while presenting an Emmy for directing on Sunday.

She gave a shout out to Tambor’s speech and echoed his call: “Give trans 
talent a shot ... I would not be here tonight if I was not given that chance,” 
she said.

This year Her Story, a web series starring two transgender actors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/10/her-story-jen-richards-emmys-transgender-women>
, including its creator Jen Richards, nabbed an Emmy nomination for outstanding 
short form comedy or drama series, although it did not win.

But, the two first male acting gongs of Emmys night – including Tambor’s win – 
went to men who play women.

Comedian Louie Anderson took the best supporting actor in a comedy series for 
his roleas Christine Baskets in Baskets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/21/louis-ck-zach-galifianakis-baskets-clown-tv-fx>
, where he plays the mother of Zach Galifianakis’s characters.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fgame-of-thrones-and-people-v-oj-simpson-win-big-at-2016-emmy-awards-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Game%20of%20Thrones%20and%20People%20v%20OJ%20Simpson%20win%20at%202016%20Emmy%20Awards%20%E2%80%93%20video%C2%A0highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fgame-of-thrones-and-people-v-oj-simpson-win-big-at-2016-emmy-awards-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Game%20of%20Thrones%20and%20People%20v%20OJ%20Simpson%20win%20at%202016%20Emmy%20Awards%20%E2%80%93%20video%C2%A0highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fgame-of-thrones-and-people-v-oj-simpson-win-big-at-2016-emmy-awards-highlights&media=>
Game of Thrones and People v OJ Simpson win big at 2016 Emmy Awards – highlights
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/sep/19/game-of-thrones-and-people-v-oj-simpson-win-big-at-2016-emmy-awards-highlights>
“I haven’t always been a very good man, but I play one hell of a woman,” said 
Anderson in his acceptance speech, who added that his mother inspired his 
performance.

Emmys Sunday was also a big night for gay women. Jill Solaway, creator and 
writer ofTransparent <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/transparent> 
(who is in a relationship with New York poet Eileen Myles) won the Emmy for 
best director of a comedy series, Saturday Night Live’s Kate McKinnon took the 
best comedy actress gong and Sarah Paulson (girlfriend of actor Holland Taylor) 
took home the Emmy for best actress in a limited series.

When accepting her award for Transparent, the first show to center on a family 
dealing with trans issues, Soloway spoke of her joy of being part of a queer TV 
revolution.

“It’s a privilege, and it also creates privilege: when you take women, people 
of color, trans people, queer people and you put them at the center of the 
story, these subjects, instead of the objects, you change the world, we found 
out. We found out!” said Soloway.

She continued:

I’ve always wanted to be part of a movement, the civil rights movement, the 
feminist movement. This TV show allows me to take my dreams about unlikable 
Jewish people, queer folk, trans folk, and make them the heroes. Thank you to 
the trans community for your lived lives. We need to stop violence against 
transgender women and topple the patriarchy! Topple the patriarchy!

After Soloway walked off, host Jimmy Kimmel quipped: “I’m trying to figure out 
if ‘topple the patriarchy is a good thing for me or not?’ I don’t think it is.”
 