
A transgender identity should no longer be diagnosed as a mental disorder, 
according to thefirst field study 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/onlineFirst> to evaluate a proposed 
change in theWHO International Classification of Diseases 
<http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/en/> (ICD).


The mental distress experienced by many transgender people is primarily the 
result of social rejection and violence, the study found. Not, as has been 
assumed for decades, solely the result of being transgender.


The findings, published in the Lancet, show that viewing transgender people as 
having a mental illness might force them to get psychiatric care rather than 
the physical care they seek.

Authors of the “Removing transgender identity from the classification of 
mental disorders” study also warned that association with mental illness could 
be used by governments to deny decision-making authority to transgender people, 
in matters such as child custody and reproduction.

According to the first report 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmwomeq/390/390.pdf>
 by a UK parliamentary committee to tackle transgender issues, which was 
published earlier this year, as many as 650,000 people in the UK are gender 
incongruent to some degree. The transphobia they experience undermines their 
careers, incomes, living standards and mental and physical health, it found.

 A third of transgender adults and half of “gender-variant” young people 
attempt suicide, and transgender people in the UK face high levels of 
transphobia on a daily basis, theCommons Women and Equalities Committee  
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/women-and-equalities-committee/inquiries/parliament-2015/transgender-equality/>
concluded. MPs urged ministers to draw up a new strategy to tackle 
discrimination in the NHS, prison service, police and schools.

Changing the classification in the ICD, the most influential medical bible, 
will have a significant impact on how transgender people are treated by the 
medical establishment, as well as how they are viewed by society.

 “Stigma associated with both mental disorder and transgender identity has 
contributed to the precarious legal status, human rights violations and 
barriers to appropriate care among transgender people,” said senior author
Professor Geoffrey Reed, of the National Autonomous University of Mexico 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/article/PIIS2215-0366(16)30165-1/abstract>
.

“The definition of transgender identity as a mental disorder has been misused 
to justify denial of healthcare and contributed to the perception that 
transgender people must be treated by psychiatric specialists, creating 
barriers to healthcare services. The definition has even been misused by some 
governments to deny self-determination and decision-making authority to 
transgender people in matters ranging from changing legal documents to child 
custody and reproduction.”

 The study’s authors interviewed 250 transgender people. It is the first of 
several field trials and is currently being replicated in Brazil, France, 
India, Lebanon and South Africa.

 “Our findings support the idea that distress and dysfunction may be the 
result of stigmatisation and maltreatment, rather than integral aspects of 
transgender identity,” saidlead investigator Dr Rebeca Robles, of the Mexican 
National Institute of Psychiatry 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lanpsy/article/PIIS2215-0366(16)30165-1/abstract>
. “The next step is to confirm this in further studies in different countries, 
ahead of the approval of the WHO revision to the International Classification 
of Diseases in 2018.”

 The study found 83% of participants had experienced psychological distress 
related to gender incongruence during their adolescence. More than 
three-quarters had experience social rejection related to gender incongruence, 
most commonly by family members, followed by school and workmates, and then 
friends.

 Over 60% of participants had been the victim of violence as a result of their 
gender identity: in nearly half of these cases the violence was perpetrated by 
a family member. Psychological and physical violence were the most commonly 
reported, while some experienced sexual violence.

 A WHO working group has recommended that transgender identity should no 
longer be classified as a mental disorder. But it would not be removed from the 
codebook. Instead, transgender would be moved into a newly created category: 
conditions related to sexual health.

 This, however, has stirred further controversy. “I think there is a bit of a 
problem with the idea of putting it in a chapter on sexual health because it 
has nothing to do with sex,” said Dr Griet De Cuypere, a psychiatrist at the 
Center of Sexology and Gender at University Hospital in Ghent, Belgium 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/27/health/who-transgender-medical-disorder.html?rref=collection%2Ftimestopic%2FWorld%20Health%20Organization&action=click&contentCollection=timestopics&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=1&pgtype=collection>
, and a board member of the World Professional Association for Transgender 
Health. “If it’s possible to have it more separately, it would be better.”
 