
Hello Tricky <https://www.theguardian.com/music/tricky>, where are you right 
now?

In London, in a private members' club apparently. I got in through my 
management. If I'd come by myself, I don't think they'd have let me in.

I've been playing your new album, False Idols 
<http://www.trickysite.com/false-idols/>, and the builders working on our house 
have been singing and whistling along.

[Excitably] That's wicked! I love that! That means it can relate to everybody. 
I come from that kind of thing, you know. Real people. If I wasn't doing music, 
I might have been a builder.

The press release says you've been "lost" since you were on Island Records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2009/mar/23/island-records-fifty-simon-reynolds>
, over a decade ago. In what way?

Not realising how to do business, getting into stupid situations. On Domino 
Records [who released Tricky's last two albums] I spent a hundred grand on two 
videos. But you have to pay back that debt, so straight away you're playing the 
game of trying to make a radio record, which is impossible for me. On this 
album, I've done three videos and a short movie for five grand. Now I've got my 
own label I can do what I want. I'm having fun.

Is this record the followup to your debut [1995's Maxinquaye] that people have 
always wanted?

They've been waiting for 13, 14 years! I've been torn for ages about this. I 
used to think: "I don't wanna be a coffee-table artist." Then I met a kid who 
was in a coma for 10 days and his family played Maxinquaye to him. That made me 
realise why I'm here, to help people.Who are the co-vocalists on False Idols?

Francesca Belmonte, Fifi Rong and a girl called Nneka 
<http://www.nnekaworld.com/>. What impresses me about her is how she keeps her 
clothes on. You see artists like Rihanna who are selling sex. Nneka's a strong 
woman and she's talking about government and society. We need more women like 
that around.

On Maxinquaye, you could hear the relationship between you and Martina 
Topley-Bird <http://www.moon-palace.de/martina/bio.html> (1) <>. Is there a 
special chemistry when you duet with women?

Martina and I are like brother and sister now. She teases me. Usually with 
women, we're friends, but to be honest, the chemistry is: "This is not a 
democracy. Do what you're told!" I know that's bad, but it's the only way it's 
gonna work. Don't have an opinion, and don't sing the song afterwards. You 
know, some artists, they like their own voice and they start singing the song 
around my apartment. Don't do that to me! Cos that's narcissistic. So hopefully 
it's a one-way situation in the studio. My way.

You've got a song, Valentine <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8VIqmIMcXrQ>, 
featuring a sample of Rodgers & Hart's My Funny Valentine. Are you a bit of a 
romantic, really?

Very romantic, but I can also be: "I'm watching a film, don't talk to me." I'm 
a bit melancholy. I'm usually romantic after we've finished. Björk had a 
terrible relationship with me. I wasn't any good for her, but she used to play 
meChet Baker's version <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jvXywhJpOKs> of that 
song. So that's me trying to salvage something beautiful from a very bad 
relationship. Not her being bad, me. I couldn't see how good to me she was and 
how good for me she was. I wish I could say that to her now.

Has fatherhood changed you?

Definitely. Before I had a kid it was all about me. Now I don't give a fuck 
about me. My daughter's a traveller and is going to film school. Her successes 
mean more than my successes.

You were imprisoned at 17 (2) <>. Did that make you want to do music? 

Being surrounded by men and locked up for 24 hours a day didn't make sense. 
I've got one younger brother who can do prison like his breakfast, but I'm not 
built for it. So that definitely made me think: "Fuck this."

Do your family call you Tricky or Adrian (3) <>?

Some call me Tricky, some call me Age, short for Adrian. If someone calls me 
Adrian – like my aunty – I know I'm in trouble.

You've got a new song called We Don't Die 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WOttYLH7MJY>. Where do we go if we don't die?

The weird thing with me is I've had close people die, like my Mum (4) <>, but 
I don't get sad at death. I miss them, obviously, but move on. That's not 
because I'm a bad person or emotionally numb, but there must be a reason it 
don't affect me. I think it's because death doesn't really exist. I don't 
believe in it. In some ways I was lucky my Mum died when I was that young. I've 
seen friends lose people as adults and be so traumatised they can't eat or go 
off the rails and into prison. But I've never had a conversation with her. I'd 
love to sit down with her for one hour to see what she was like.

Do you still smoke weed?

I give up at times. Sometimes if I'm smoking too much I get too negative, but 
if I put it down for a few months I'm saying good morning to everybody. Hello!

You sound cheery today. 

Because I'm in a good place. I'm like anyone else, if I'm not having a good 
time you'll hear it.

Is it true that you've been recording with 3D again, 22 years after working 
together in Massive Attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/28/massive-attack-blue-lines-remaster>
(5) <>

He came over eight months ago. What's funny is I hadn't seen him for 10 years 
and within an hour of walking into my house we had a big argument. I had to say 
to him: "FuckMassive Attack <https://www.theguardian.com/music/massive-attack>. 
No one cares who the fuck you are." And he was all right after that. Look, 3D's 
a good heart, but he likes being 3D. Which winds me up. He didn't used to be 
the cool guy he is now. So I like bringing him down a bit. We recorded three 
tracks, but then I started getting texts. I don't wanna be your friend, mate. 
It ain't that kind of relationship. So I stopped answering my phone.

Are you still in contact with Chris Blackwell 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/music/rockandpopfeatures/9243693/Chris-Blackwell-the-original-trustafarian.html>
, who signed you to Island Records?

He's someone I'll always stay in contact with because he's a good man, bit 
strange. Who's the guy who got murdered from Bob Marley's band? Peter Tosh, 
yeah. I was with Chris late at night in Jamaica, we were in this hut and it was 
dark and I see this little coffin with Peter Tosh's name on it. With weed in 
it! I said: "Chris, what the fuck's that?" He said: "It's a Peter Tosh coffin. 
Do you want one?" I said: "I'm alright mate I don't need no coffin, not yet!"

David Bowie once called you "a shaman that had never slept with The Others, 
who's still pure"(6) <> ...

What's funny about David Bowie, right … I've never been a fan, I was into the 
Specials. But when he wrote that thing about me, I thought this guy should 
write a book, not make music. Cos he writes incredible.

What was Beyoncé like when you sang with her at Glastonbury 
<http://pappzd.com/2011/06/beyonce-glastonbury-tricky/>?

Very down to earth, very professional, but I was bored to death, mate. Waiting 
for four hours to go on to do one song. So I was backstage smoking weed, bored 
out of my mind. I used to live round the corner [in Bristol] so I've been 
bunking into Glastonbury since I was about 14. Then all of a sudden there's 
100,000 people out there, there's bright lights and dancers, and I'm: "Oh 
fuck." I was petrified.

Are you going this year, to see the Rolling Stones?

Old men in tight trousers? I don't know. [Chuckling] When 3D turned up at my 
house in Paris, I'm like: "Oi mate, you're a bit old for skinny jeans, aren't 
you?" All tight around his todger!

You've lived in Bristol, London, New York. Why have you settled in Paris?

Because I've got no discipline. If I lived in London or New York or LA I'd be 
running around partying and drinking. But Paris has got terrible nightlife, so 
its perfect for me. I've learned to enjoy a very simple lifestyle. My money 
goes on my daughter's school fees – she's going to film school. I've got a tiny 
apartment, the same equipment, and I'm content. I found having millions scary. 
At one time I had a house in New Jersey with eight acres of land, and I don't 
know what the fuck happened to this house! One minute I was living there, next 
minute I was living in LA and I don't own the house any more. Apparently I've 
spent the money. I'm not very good with things like that.

False Idols is released on False Idols on 27 May. 

Footnotes

 <>(1) Tricky's ex-girlfriend and mother of his daughter, Maisie. 

 <>(2) For buying forged banknotes. 

 <>(3) Tricky was born Adrian Nicholas Matthews Thaws, in Knowle West, 
Bristol, on 27 January 1968.

 <>(4) Tricky's mother, Maxine Quaye, killed herself when he was four. He 
named the album Maxinquaye after her.

 <>(5) Tricky appeared on Massive's seminal 1991 album Blue Lines as "Tricky 
Kid".

 <>(6) Bowie's 1995 Tricky eulogy appeared in Q magazine, who described it as 
a "bizarre, semi-poetic fantasy".
 