
Italy’s troubled lenders are offering lucrative opportunities for investment 
banks, with Monte dei Paschi di Siena set to pay some of the highest fees in 
Europe this year toarrange its high-stakes rescue plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/monte-dei-paschi-considers-rescue-bids-as-european-banks-await-stress-test-results>
.


 The emergency deal to save the 544-year-old bank, orchestrated by Mediobanca 
and JPMorgan, will incur about €250m (£212m) in underwriting fees for a 
proposed €5bn capital hike, according to three sources involved in the deal.

 The fees come on top of nearly €400m that the bank has paid out in the past 
two years for other capital hikes.

 There is no certainty that the proposed rescue plan will proceed, but if it 
is carried out successfully, investment banks working with Monte dei Paschi 
will have generated a payday of close to €1bn over the past three years, even 
though the bank’s market value now stands at €747m.

“The scale of fees that potentially are there in the Italian banking market – 
from restructurings and consolidation – are substantial,” said Peter Hahn, 
professor of banking at the London Institute ofBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> & Finance.

Monte dei Paschi emerged as the worst performer in European stress tests on 29 
July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rescue-package-in-place-as-europes-oldest-bank-fails-stress-tests>
. Italy’s largest lender, UniCredit , was also among the banks which fared 
badly.

Monte dei Paschi mulls rescue bids as EU banks await stress-test results
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/monte-dei-paschi-considers-rescue-bids-as-european-banks-await-stress-test-results>
 Monte dei Paschi’s poor showing in the tests – which predicted its capital 
would be wiped out if there was a severe economic downturn – came despite it 
tapping investors for cash twice since 2014.

The bank paid €130m to a pool of banks for a €3bn cash call last year. In 2014 
it spent more than any other company inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> on investment banking fees, 
paying advisers nearly €274m for its €5bn capital hike, according to Thomson 
Reuters data.

 By contrast Deutsche Bank paid €119m in 2014 to underwriters for its €8bn 
capital hike, according to its rights issue.

 Monte dei Paschi declined to comment.

 If successful, the bank’s rescue plan will mean even higher fees because it 
creates a special purpose vehicle (SPV) to hoover up Monte dei Paschi’s bad 
loans.

 Monte dei Paschi and its global coordinators, JPMorgan and Mediobanca, aim to 
make the cash call this year, most likely in November, the sources said. 
JPMorgan and Mediobanca declined to comment.

 The large fees reflect the fact investors are reluctant to sign up to the 
capital increase due to Monte dei Paschi’s history of failed turnarounds, the 
uncertain market conditions and fear of extra exposure to the eurozone’s 
third-largest economy.

 “It is way more expensive than any other equity capital markets [ECM)] deal 
in Europe because of the risk profile of the transaction,” said a London-based 
analyst who stressed that the “country risk” adds to the complexity.

 The bank has said it would plug capital shortfalls and restore its health by 
splitting into a good and bad bank, with the sale of €9.2bn in bad loans and a 
€5bn capital increase.

 However, none of the dozens of banks contacted by the troubled lender in 
recent weeks have made firm commitments to guarantee the capital hike, sources 
said.

The Mediobanca chief executive, Alberto Nagel, said on Friday: “This is a 
pre-underwriting agreement which by definition is not a hard underwriting and 
is not a commitment.”

Will Italy be Europe’s next casualty as Renzi risks all on referendum?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/06/matteo-renzi-italy-referendum-banks-brexit>
 The lack of commitment means the plan can still fall apart. 

However, any failure of the world’s oldest bank would damage the entire 
Italian banking system and could prompt contagion across Europe so Matteo 
Renzi’s government in Rome has pressured Italian and international investment 
banks to make the rescue work, sources said.

 The Italian government told Reuters it was not aware of any pressure on 
banks. Rome does not want to mount its own rescue because European rules say 
this would mean imposing losses on bondholders and depositors above €100,000.

 The absence of government support also pushes up the size of the fees. 

Adding to the overall uncertainty in Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> is a referendum on constitutional 
reform that Renzi called for October. He has said he will stand down if he 
loses the vote, a gamble that could revive market turbulencejust before the 
planned November cash call.


 