
Spoiler alert: this blog details events in the eighth and final episode of the 
second season ofTrue Detective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-detective>, which airs on Sunday 
nights on HBO in America, and Mondays in the UK on Sky Atlantic at 9pm & 2am.

For the episode seven recap, click here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/aug/03/true-detective-season-two-episode-seven-recap-black-maps-and-motel-rooms>

“Everything’s ending. Time to wake up”

And so, in the end, like Frank Semyon in the desert, or Ray Velcoro in the 
forest,True Detective <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/true-detective> 
season two departed on its own terms, unapologetically. Writer Nic Pizzolatto 
doubled-down on those tics that we all became familiar with (and, in some 
cases, became intensely irritated by) throughout the show’s run: the slavish 
adherence to noir tropes, the preoccupation with notions of “good” and “bad”, 
the florid dialogue, the mumbling. Even the doleful country singer returned for 
an encore.

That’s not intended as a criticism, as such. For good or ill, Pizzolatto knew 
what he wanted to do with this season and he stayed consistent to that vision 
to the end. The problem, though, is that Omega Station also doubled-down on the 
larger structural problems that have blighted this second season. It managed to 
feel both too long and too short, cramming in a season’s worth of exposition 
into a couple of scenes, and, at the same time, dragging out already dull 
conversations to interminable lengths. Time was wasted on things that didn’t 
need to be explored – did we really need to hear how Frank and Nails met? – 
while more intriguing elements, such as the Chessani family’s backstory, 
remained largely opaque. And, in the end, I’m not sure the finale, or the show 
in general, had anything terribly interesting or profound to say; about the 
nature of corruption, love, the human condition, or even the illicit history of 
the California public transport system.

But what was perhaps most disappointing about Omega Station was how utterly 
unsurprising it was. The case played out largely as expected, and that final 
reckoning looked cribbed from a million pulp novels. As with much of the rest 
of the season, I craved some of the unsettling oddness of Carcosa. Instead, we 
were left with a conclusion and a season that was less than the sum of its 
considerable parts.


“I was never big on running”


As widely predicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/aug/07/true-detective-place-bets-identity-killer#comments>
, Caspere’s killer was one of the Osterman siblings, the orphans from the jewel 
heist murder in 1992, now looking to get revenge for their parents’ deaths. It 
was Len, the set photographer from episode three, who carried out the killing, 
getting a little carried away while interrogating Caspere, and then driving the 
corpse along the route of the rail corridor for kicks. Ray and Ani find Laura, 
the other sibling, handcuffed to the three-bar fire in her house.

Len, as you might have guessed from the fact that he burned out another man’s 
eyes with acid and then took his body on a joyride across LA County, is a 
troubled individual, damaged by a difficult upbringing in foster care. He’s not 
the sort of person, in other words, that you want on your side while carrying 
out a difficult sting operation. It’s no surprise then, that when Ray 
intercepts Len in anAnaheim train station 
<http://www.amtrak.com/servlet/ContentServer?pagename=am/am2Station/Station_Page&code=ANA>
 and convinces him to help him incriminate Holloway and the rest of the crooked 
team rather than killing him, things don’t go to plan. Len, enraged by 
Holloway’s revelation that Caspere was the illegitimate father of Laura, starts 
stabbing him furiously before being shot by some nearby officers. In the 
ensuing melee, Ray’s dictaphone, containing all of Holloway’s damning 
testimony, gets stomped to bits. Only an intervention from Ani saves Ray from 
going the same way as his recording device. (The hard drive Len had stolen way 
back in episode two was left at the station, and was “self-wiping” so wouldn’t 
have proved useful.)

“I could lose these assholes with a tricycle”

With the dictaphone goes the last lingering chance of Ray and Ani exposing 
Vinci’s web of corruption, not to mention the chance of clearing Ray’s name; 
unsurprisingly, Burris has pinned the death of Woodrugh on him, as well as the 
death of Katherine Davis. The only option now is to flee. Fortunately, Frank 
has a ready-made plan that the pair can latch onto: hijack the cash handover 
between Osip and Catalyst, and high-tail it to the socialist paradise of 
Venezuela, where no one will ever find them.

The first part of the plan goes about as well as expected: Frank and Ray blast 
their way into Osip and Catalyst’s secret meeting, killing everyone in 
attendance in the process – including Osip, who Frank gets to off after 
delivering a niceJohn McClane-style <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_McClane>
 one liner. The second part of the plan, not so much: Ray agrees to meet Ani at 
the harbour, where they’ll both get the slow boat to Caracas, but instead of 
racing straight there, decides to take one final glimpse at Chad (who we later 
learn is actually Ray’s biological son). In the time it takes him to do so, 
someone manages to attach a tracking device to the underside of his car. Ray 
spots it and realises that heading to the harbour will only tip off his 
pursuers to Ani’s location as well as his. The jig is up: he rings Ani and 
tells her that he might be late and that she should get on the boat without him.

(As an aside, how disappointing it is that, after proving to be such a 
compelling and competent character in recent episodes, Ani is reduced here to 
the action movie trope of “doting girlfriend”. I’d hoped that Pizzolatto had 
responded positively to the criticism about the depiction of women in True 
Detective’s first season with the introduction of Ani this time around, but 
when we came to the crux of the series, she was sidelined in favour of the men: 
Ray and Frank’s fates are given top billing here.)

So, we head to the forest for a final shootout. Those who have been paying 
attention will remember that,in episode three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/jul/06/true-detective-season-two-episode-three-recap-maybe-tomorrow>
, Ray’s father appeared to him in a dream and warned of a premonition that he 
had of Ray running through the trees and being shot “to pieces”. That 
prediction lends the scene an ominous weight here, though it’s slightly 
undercut by the fact that Ray spends some of his final moments trying to send a 
“goodbye” audio message to Chad via email. I get the subtext behind this detail 
– signifying as it does Ray’s faltering connection with his son – but, in 
practice, it lends the scene an almost comic quality, with Ray racing about 
trying to get a phone signal like a character in anOrange Wednesday advert 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-O2kjnCxw_0>. Ultimately, it’s all for naught 
anyway: Ray’s message to Chad never sends. Farewell, Ray, you should have tried 
another provider.

“I’d give anything for 10 more years”

Goodbye, too, to Frank, who, for one shining moment, looked to have gotten 
away with his audacious escape plan. The one thing he overlooked? Those 
ruthless Mexicans, who it turns out weren’t entirely happy with his decision to 
torch the club and casino, two properties that they had just agreed to deal 
drugs in. They drive Frank to the desert, where he manages to convince them to 
let him live in return for his suitcase full of cash. Frank still has the 
diamonds on him, and could have escaped alive and still fairly wealthy (though 
he does face a treacherous walk out of the desert) but such is his pride that 
he can’t take the demand from one of the Mexicans that he hand over his own 
suit lying down. He’s stabbed and left to die in the wilderness. (Kudos to 
Joanna Robinson on the Vanity Fair recap, who spotted thatFrank uses his 
diamonds to try and stem the bleeding 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/hollywood/2015/08/true-detective-season-2-finale-recap>
.)

Frank’s desperate attempts to escape the desert prompts the episode’s most 
unusual – and, for my money, best – scene, as apparitions from his past come 
back to haunt him: his monstrous father, a gang that threatened him, a 
businessman he was forced to kill. All the while, vultures begin to follow his 
bloody trail, preparing to feast. But then Frank sees Jordan, wearing the white 
dress she promised to wear when they were reunited. Frank’s heavy limp recedes 
and the vultures disappear, but then Jordan points out that he “stopped moving 
way back there” and vanishes. It’s over.

With Ray and Frank dead, and Ani forced to abscond to Venezuela, the 
corruption investigation is again buried. In the episode’s epilogue, we see 
footage of Chessani’s son, Tony, being inaugurated as mayor of Vinci – Chessani 
himself was seen floating face-down in the pool earlier in the episode, likely 
murdered by Osip, or even Tony himself – and the rail project officially 
getting underway. Another group of wealthy white businessmen are there to 
celebrate its unveiling: most of the corrupt individuals involved setting it up 
are dead, but there’s always someone there to take their place. The people 
change but corruption itself remains unstoppable.


Except, there’s a tiny glimmer of hope. In Venezuela, we see Ani outlining the 
goings on in Vinci to a reporter, handing him the evidence she’s acquired 
before fleeing with Jordan, Nails and her baby, who I’m guessing she had with 
Ray. Even with that evidence and Ani’s testimony, you doubt the chances of the 
story ever coming to light: we’ve already seen how ruthless those in power can 
be at burying information , and, way back in episode one Ray, managed to squash 
an LA Times story simply by scaring the writer. Yet, in an otherwise 
pessimistic episode, it’s something to cling to, a hint of light in a world 
wherethe darkness is winning <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5PZsikK2DVg>.

Recommended reading

For those who missed it, this Slate piece  
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/browbeat/2015/08/03/true_detective_season_two_a_guide_to_the_plot_of_this_confusing_season.html>
provides an excellent summary of the plot of this second season, while 
simultaneously pointing out how wildly convoluted the thing has been. Meanwhile,
according to Wired 
<http://www.wired.com/2015/08/true-detective-impossible-road-trips/>, True 
Detective has featured some deeply implausible car journeys.

Notes and observations

 * Such is the gloomy country singer’s attachment to the bar, that she’s 
there, playing, even when it isn’t open. When we see her pack up and leave 
later on, we know that things are finally wrapping up. 
 * Another person who didn’t make it to the end of the season was Pitler, who 
Ani found in his office with his wrists slashed. 
 * I enjoyed Ray’s “disguise” in the scene at the train station: a Homer 
Simpson-sized stetson 
<http://vignette4.wikia.nocookie.net/simpsons/images/b/b3/Homer_and_apu.jpg/revision/latest?cb=20100919204604>
. 
 * Something left curiously unresolved was the fate of Betty, Mayor Chessani’s 
daughter, who Frank was asking after when he visited the mansion. She seemed to 
know plenty about the sectioning and death of her mother, another subject we 
never quite got to the bottom of. 
 * Jordan, contrary to some predictions, didn’t double-cross Frank, and was 
there waiting for him in Venezuela. She’s on the run with Ani now – an early 
pairing for the #TrueDetectiveSeason3 meme perhaps. 
 * About that third season: HBO honcho Michael Lomabardo says that the offer’s 
there for one, if Pizzolatto wants to do it 
<http://deadline.com/2015/07/true-detective-season-2-backlash-season-3-hbo-1201488104/>
. But after the (largely fair) criticism of season two, will he? And where 
would it be set? Season one, after all, was drawn from Pizzolatto’s Louisiana 
upbringing, while LA, the setting for season two, is his current home. Does he 
feel familiar enough with another location to set it there? And where would 
that location be? 
 * Finally, thank you for all your observations, criticism and witty asides in 
the comments. This has been a frustrating season to watch – and write about, at 
times – but your enthusiasm has certainly helped me to soldier on. See you in 
the same place for season three, if there is one!  