
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has sent some 
questionable tweets in the past, but none have been so mind-boggling as one 
posted early Thursday morning.

“They will soon be calling me MR. BREXIT!” the Republican presidential nominee 
tweeted at around 8am.

Is Trump claiming he was the driving force behind Britain’s decision to quit 
the European Union? Or that his troubled campaign, like Brexit, will end in 
surprise victory? Who knows, but as Trump likes to do when he asks: “Did Obama 
create Isis?” or “Is Hillary a murderer?”, we can take the available facts and 
say: we don’t know, but that’s what people are asking.



On Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>, the reaction to 
Trump’s new incarnation spanned bewilderment to sarcasm:
Anna Merlan (@annamerlan) 
This isn't at all the demeanor of a man who starts the day by huffing paint 
from a Waterford Scotch decanter, no sirhttps://t.co/bwL991yJt9 
<https://t.co/bwL991yJt9>
 <https://twitter.com/annamerlan/status/766253763246059520> August 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/annamerlan/status/766253763246059520> Jeva Lange (@Jee_vuh)
They call me Bell
They call me Stacey
They call me her
They call me Mr. Brexit
That's not my name
That's not my name
That's not my name
That
 <https://twitter.com/Jee_vuh/status/766254281649451008> August 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Jee_vuh/status/766254281649451008> Benjy Sarlin 
(@BenjySarlin) 
MR. BREXIT is a decent WWE wrestler name
 <https://twitter.com/BenjySarlin/status/766249166553042944> August 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BenjySarlin/status/766249166553042944> Elliott Schwartz 
(@elliosch) 
The one and only Mr. Brexit pic.twitter.com/4khNIcuFJI 
<https://t.co/4khNIcuFJI>
 <https://twitter.com/elliosch/status/766249968592101376> August 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/elliosch/status/766249968592101376> John Dingell 
(@JohnDingell) 
You misspelled Bullshit. And we've been calling you that for a while now. 
https://t.co/5G7eeE7Upa <https://t.co/5G7eeE7Upa>
 <https://twitter.com/JohnDingell/status/766250154517270528> August 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JohnDingell/status/766250154517270528> 
“Mr. Brexit? Because you’ll destroy the US economy, @realDonaldTrump 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump>, the way Brexit hurt the one in the UK? 
#Dipshit <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Dipshit?src=hash>,” wrote TV anchor Keith 
Olbermann.

But what did Trump really mean? There are some clues. First, it’s clear that 
Trump is an ardent supporter of the leave campaign – or at least, he became one 
when he finally found out what it was.

When Trump was asked by journalist Michael Wolff for a Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/features/donald-trump-conversation-politics-dark-898465>
 interview published in June what he thought about Brexit, he was flummoxed:

“And Brexit? Your position?” I ask.

“Huh?” replied Trump.

“Brexit.”

“Hmm.”

“The Brits leaving the EU,” I prompt, realizing that his lack of familiarity 
with one of the most pressing issues in Europe is for him no concern nor 
liability at all.

“Oh yeah, I think they should leave.”

The UK vote – inspired, in part, by fears of immigration and anger with the 
way the economy has been gamed by a global elite – has clear echoes of the 
billionaire property tycoon’s own platform. Immigration “has beena horrible 
thing 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/2016-gop-primary-live-updates-and-results/2016/05/donald-trump-brexit-222874#ixzz4HhECYHSg>
” for Britain, he told Fox News. “A lot of that was pushed by the EU,” he said.

And after the vote, on his trip to Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/24/donald-trump-hails-eu-referendum-result-as-he-arrives-in-uk>
 to promote his golf course, Trump called the vote “a great victory,” 
attributing the Brexit vote to immigration and opposition to the “global elite” 
before boarding his gilded private jet to return to the US campaign trail.

But why go back to Brexit now? Assuming Trump reads more than his own press 
cuttings, he may have spotted some news that suggests Brexit has not, as yet, 
been as catastrophic to the UK economy as first feared.

Yesterday, the US Federal Reserve issued the minutes of its latest meeting and 
mentionedBrexit 20 times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/17/federal-reserve-interest-rates-brexit>
. However, for all its concern the Fed concluded that Brexit had had little 
impact on the US and global economy. And in the UK, publicconfidence has 
rebounded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/17/public-confidence-in-uk-economy-recovers-after-brexit-vote-survey-finds>
 after the Brexit vote, with consumers shrugging off fears of imminent doom.

Of course, the consequences of Brexit (or a Trump victory) will play out over 
years, not weeks. All of Britain’s trade agreements with the EU must now be 
renegotiated. Top companies includingFord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/ford-considers-closing-factories-raising-prices-europe-brexit>
 and Goldman Sachs have warned they may cut back or leave the UK following the 
vote.

Back in the US, Trump’s economic policies are under attack and he has been 
forced to reshuffle his election team in the face of withering polls. But just 
for a moment this morning, maybe, Trump thought he’d backed a winner. And like 
the Brexit, he’ll surprise us all come November.

Go ahead, call him MR BREXIT.

 