
Perhaps no other building has shot from irrelevance to epicenter as quickly as 
Trump Tower in midtown Manhattan.

Following Donald J Trump’s shock of a winning campaign, the home of the 
president-elect has drawn to its doorstep the full presidential protection 
apparatus, as well as both sides of a deeply divided nation.

“He’s a male chauvinist, a fucking rapist!” yelled a woman, streaming the 
experience to the world on her phone. “Fuck Trump!”

Donald Trump's shock victory sparks protests across America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/anti-donald-trump-protests-new-york-chicago-san-francisco>
“’Scuse me! There are kids here,” another woman yelled, looking harried as she 
pushed through the crowd with a stroller, a tiny hand grasping hers.

A circus of protesters, supporters, tourists, gawkers and New Yorkers just 
trying to get where they were going formed in front of Trump’s home by the end 
of the week. Pedestrian traffic rivaled Times Square, as police arbitrarily 
cordoned off corners. Press were kept in a pen.

A uniformed cop adjusting barricades remarked: “This building was never 
important until just a couple days ago.”

The gray-glassed skyscraper on 56th Street and 5th Avenue was, on Monday, just 
a tower of steel built atop Gucci and Tiffany & Company stores. By Wednesday, 
it became the site of protests and pleas, rancor and adulation. The stink of a 
bitter campaign lingered over the building.

“Trump eat shit!” yelled one passerby. Another yelled back, “What about Bill 
Clinton?” his phone raised above the crowd.

A man with a sign scribbled on a spiral-bound notebook yelled, “Antisemitism 
is not OK!” The man, from Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, said he came to protest about 
“the way Jewish journalists were attacked”, during the campaign. He asked to be 
identified by James G, because he feared retaliation. “I guess I just feel 
vulnerable right now,” James said. “This is the first time I’ve ever protested 
anything.”


Others approached him and wondered aloud whether Trump would, “quote the 
Protocols of the Elders of Zion”, a fraudulent early 20th-century document used 
to justify antisemitism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-tower-protesters-new-york-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4f58e11099d399468fbebdda54d8cc102631508%2F0_201_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20Tower%20becomes%20focus%20for%20protesters%20and%20partisans%20of%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-tower-protesters-new-york-security%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20Tower%20becomes%20focus%20for%20protesters%20and%20partisans%20of%20New%20York&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-tower-protesters-new-york-security%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4f58e11099d399468fbebdda54d8cc102631508%2F0_201_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Hundreds protest near Trump Tower in Manhattan. Photograph: 
Nathanael/Rex/Shutterstock 
Added security in front of the building made it look more like a fortress than 
the monument to luxury it was presumably meant to embody. The Federal Aviation 
Administration instituted ano-fly zone 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/faa-implements-fly-zone-trump-tower-inauguration-day/story?id=43443566>
 in the area. Residents of the buildings, at Trump Tower and along the street, 
were required to show ID to get past barriers, New York police officers and the 
US Secret Service.

New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> area newspapers have 
reported that residents are considering moving from the tower.

“These are wealthy people. They don’t need this, and they can’t take it any 
longer,” an unnamed real estate broker told theNew York Post 
<http://nypost.com/2016/11/11/wealthy-trump-tower-residents-are-fed-up-with-protesters/>
. “They no longer want to stay there. Some of them are already planning on 
moving out, and they’ll decide later whether or not they want to sell.”

Deliveries of soda, dry cleaning, stationery and catering were all eyeballed 
for authenticity before guards let them behind blockades.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Protests%20against%20Donald%20Trump%20continue%20across%20US%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Protests%20against%20Donald%20Trump%20continue%20across%20US%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video&media=>
Protests against Donald Trump continue across US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/11/protests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video>
One man, looking to volunteer for Trump, was leaving the tower after he found 
the volunteer office closed.

“He’s powerful, he’s intelligent, he loves women, and look at this phenomenal 
building,” said Alex Ionescu, a Manhattan real estate broker, before further 
extolling Trump’s virtuous stance on women.

Ionescu’s Texan companion, a man skeptical of the media, said Trump would 
improve the world by removing liberals’ “rose-colored glasses”. He refused to 
give his name.

Liberal policy, he said, was like “walking through Harlem in the middle of the 
night in a mini-skirt, and thinking you’re not going to have a problem.”
 