
Rights activists have condemned Donald Trump for three cabinet appointments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet>
 they say could “undo decades of progress” towards racial equality and 
effectively legitimise the use of torture.

The US president-elect on Friday picked Senator Jeff Sessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeff-sessions> as attorney general, 
Representative Mike Pompeo as director of the CIA and retired 
lieutenant-general Michael Flynn as national security adviser.

The hawkish trio have made inflammatory statements about race relations, 
immigration, Islam and the use of torture, and signal a provocative shift of 
the national security apparatus to the right. For liberals they appeared to 
confirm some of their darkest fears about the incomingTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>.

Sessions, a 69-year-old senator from Alabama, a state with a tormented history 
of segregation that spurred Rosa Parks’ bus protest, has been accused of racist 
comments in the past. He will succeed two African Americans – Eric Holder and 
Loretta Lynch – who served under Barack Obama.

Sessions, who has emphasised “law and order”, seen by some liberals as a coded 
phrase for discriminatory policing of minorities, would have huge power as head 
of the Department of Justice, grappling with issues such as police shootings of 
African Americans, as well as whether Trump’s defeated election opponent 
Hillary Clinton should face criminal prosecution over her mishandling of 
classified information.

Civil rights campaigners were quick to criticise his selection. Sherrilyn 
Ifill, president and director-counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, said: 
“Jeff Sessions has a decades-long record – from his early days as a prosecutor 
to his present role as a senator – of opposing civil rights and equality.

“It is unimaginable that he could be entrusted to serve as the chief law 
enforcement officer for this nation’s civil rights laws.”

Sessions, who has served in the Senate since 1997 and was the first member to 
back Trump’s anti-establishment campaign, will face a confirmation hearing 
before his peers on the Senate judiciary committee, probably in January. One 
liberal pressure group, People For the American Way, called for a demonstration 
at the US Capitol on Friday to demand that senators reject his nomination given 
his “lengthy history of bigoted rhetoric and policies”.

Democratic senator Dianne Feinstein of California promised “a fair and 
complete review of the nominee” while acknowledging she differs from him on 
many issues.

Sessions’ last confirmation hearing, for a federal judgeship under Ronald 
Reagan in 1986, was derailed when former colleagues testified that he used the 
N-word, called a black assistant US attorney “boy” and joked that the Ku Klux 
Klan was “OK until I found out they smoked pot”. He was also alleged to have 
called the NAACP and American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) “un-American, 
Communist-inspired organisations”. He denied the claims but was rejected for 
the position.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Ftrump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcee43ad02a04b0fff307eb75ca927e0febf423cd%2F261_493_4811_2886%2F4811.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20cabinet%20appointments%20will%20'undo%20decades%20of%20progress'%2C%20rights%20activists%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Ftrump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20cabinet%20appointments%20will%20%27undo%20decades%20of%20progress%27%2C%20rights%20activists%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Ftrump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcee43ad02a04b0fff307eb75ca927e0febf423cd%2F261_493_4811_2886%2F4811.jpg>
 Senator Jeff Sessions with Trump campaign manager Kellyanne Conway at Trump 
Tower on Thursday. Photograph: Carolyn Kaster/AP 
Both organisations condemned Trump’s decision. Cornell William Brooks, 
president of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People 
(NAACP), said: “The nomination of Senator Jeff Sessions to be attorney general, 
to serve as chief law enforcement officer of the United States, is deeply 
troubling. Senator Sessions’ record is one that suggests that he has stood in 
an old, ugly history in which civil rights were not regarded as core American 
values.”

Anthony Romero, executive director of the ACLU, said: “Senator Sessions has 
called the ACLU un-American and communist, assertions we flatly reject. His 
positions on LGBT rights, capital punishment, abortion rights and presidential 
authority in times of war have been contested by the ACLU and other civil 
rights organisations.”

Sessions’ ascent to the role of America’s top law enforcement officer fuelled 
concerns that white nationalists, including the Ku Klux Klan, will feel 
emboldened and licenced to spread their views with impunity.

Charles Chamberlain, executive director of Democracy for America, said: “The 
handful of people who might be even less equipped than Jeff Sessions to 
dispense justice on behalf of the American people typically spend their 
weekends wearing pointy hats and burning crosses.

“Jeff Sessions was too racist to become a federal judge. In the 1980s. The 
idea that Jeff Sessions might become attorney general is a genuine threat to 
our country and the lives and safety of people of colour, Muslim Americans, 
women and working families.”


And Lisa Graves, executive director of the Center for Media and Democracy, a 
national watchdog, said: “When Trump rhetorically asked African Americans what 
they had to lose in this election, this was a big one: a justice department 
that believes justice for all is its highest mission. With Sessions, ‘justice 
for some’ would likely be a more accurate motto.”

Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>, however, 
rallied around the president-elect and his choices. Senator Lindsey Graham of 
South Carolina, an outspoken critic of Trump during the election campaign, 
said: “Senator Sessions is a fine, decent man and principled conservative.”

Senate judiciary committee chairman Chuck Grassley said: “He knows the justice 
department as a former US attorney, which would serve him very well in this 
position.”

Sessions was one of only nine senators 
<http://www.senate.gov/legislative/LIS/roll_call_lists/roll_call_vote_cfm.cfm?congress=109&session=1&vote=00249>
 who, in 2005, voted against a measure sponsored by Senator John McCain to 
prevent torture by the military under George W Bush. A year earlier, graphic 
photographs of army reservists mistreating prisoners at the notorious Abu 
Ghraib prison outside Baghdad became public. More recently he has questioned 
whether terrorism suspects should receive the protection of the US court system 
and objected to the planned closure of the prison on Guantánamo Bay.

The former federal prosecutor has also opposed nearly every immigration bill 
that has come before the Senate over the past two decades that has included a 
path to citizenship for immigrants in the country illegally. He is an 
enthusiastic backer of Trump’s promise to build a wall on the border with 
Mexico. Last year he wrote a 25-page report blaming job losses and welfare 
dependency on immigration.

Pompeo, 52, a third-term congressman from Kansas, was a surprise choice to 
lead the CIA. Elected to Congress as part of the 2010 Tea Party wave, he has 
enjoyed a quick rise, thanks in part to his penchant for incendiary statements 
about national security. After the Boston Marathon bombings in 2013, Pompeo 
falsely claimed that US Muslim organisations and religious leaders had not 
condemned terrorism. “Silence has made these Islamic leaders across America 
potentially complicit in these acts,”he said 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xxgd-DQjZSo> on the House floor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Ftrump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe63c03772c2fa1b6d3e0fda5fe416822ecc78756%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20cabinet%20appointments%20will%20'undo%20decades%20of%20progress'%2C%20rights%20activists%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Ftrump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20cabinet%20appointments%20will%20%27undo%20decades%20of%20progress%27%2C%20rights%20activists%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Ftrump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe63c03772c2fa1b6d3e0fda5fe416822ecc78756%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Republican congressman Mike Pompeo listening as Hillary Clinton testifies 
before the House select committee on Benghazi in October 2015. Photograph: Saul 
Loeb/AFP/Getty Images 
Yet Pompeo took a place on the House intelligence committee and sits on its CIA
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> and NSA subcommittees, where he has 
positioned himself as a vigorous advocate of the most hardline priorities of 
both agencies.

After the 2014 release of a landmark Senate report into CIA torture, Pompeo 
personally attacked Democrat Feinstein, the report’s leader, saying she had 
“put American lives at risk”. He called those at the CIA who participated in 
torture “heroes, not pawns in some liberal game being played by the ACLU and 
Senator Feinstein”.

Like Sessions, Pompeo has been a fervent opponent of closing the detention 
facility at Guantánamo Bay. And he has waxed enthusiastic about rolling back 
the minimal restrictions on the US surveillance apparatus enacted during the 
Obama administration, using descriptions of those restrictions that have not 
always been accurate. In a January op-ed in the Wall Street Journal, Pompeo
incorrectly claimed 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/time-for-a-rigorous-national-debate-about-surveillance-1451856106>
 the “collection of phone metadata under the Patriot Act was banned by Congress 
and finally ceased at the end of November”.

In fact, the USA Freedom Act of 2015 only restricted the bulk collection of 
domestic US phone metadata, without touching the vast powers the Patriot Act 
provides to the FBI for surreptitious collection of communications and 
financial data.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Ftrump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F500e2ae6373342c7e9d0248f8f29ee7178d274fa%2F0_45_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20cabinet%20appointments%20will%20'undo%20decades%20of%20progress'%2C%20rights%20activists%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Ftrump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20cabinet%20appointments%20will%20%27undo%20decades%20of%20progress%27%2C%20rights%20activists%20say&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Ftrump-cabinet-appointments-sessions-pompeo-flynn%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F500e2ae6373342c7e9d0248f8f29ee7178d274fa%2F0_45_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Lieutenant General Michael Flynn appears before the US House intelligence 
committee in 2014. Photograph: Michael Reynolds/EPA 
Flynn, 57, a retired US amy three-star general and one of Trump’s closest 
advisers, was fired from the Defense Intelligence Agency in 2014 – he has 
claimed this was because he told hard truths about the war on Islamist 
extremism. He has been a vocal critic of the Obama administration. When crowds 
chanted “Lock her up!” with reference to Clinton during this year’s Republican 
national convention, Flynn shouted: “Lock her up! Yes, that’s right, lock her 
up!”

Sarah Margon <https://www.hrw.org/about/people/sarah-margon>, Washington 
director of Human Rights Watch, said: “Michael Flynn has shown a stunning 
contempt for the Geneva Conventions and other laws prohibiting torture. By 
offering this key post to Flynn, President-elect Trump is undermining US 
commitments to international laws that have been broken to America’s detriment.”

Transition talks went on at Trump Tower on Friday. The tycoon faced criticism 
after it emerged that his daughter, Ivanka, and son-in-law, Jared Kushner, were 
allowed to sit-on ameeting with Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/japan-confidence-trump-president-shinzo-abe>
 and were photographed with him.

On Saturday in Bedminster, New Jersey, Trump is due to meet Mitt Romney, the 
Republican presidential nominee in 2012. Romney has been a fierce critic of 
Trump but is now rumoured to be in contention for the prize position of 
secretary of state.
 