
The wisdom of Things Could Be Worse is, unfortunately, one that tends only to 
be learned in retrospect, when Bad shuffles off and Worse turns up at the door. 
Of the three election seasons I’ve witnessed since moving to the US, I look 
back on the last two and can’t believe what a fuss we made about Mitt Romney.
Only pays 14% tax? 
<http://money.cnn.com/2012/09/21/pf/taxes/romney-tax-return/index.html> Who 
cares!Puts his dog on the roof of the car 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/mitt-romneys-dog-on-the-car-roof-story-still-proves-to-be-his-critics-best-friend/2012/03/14/gIQAp2LxCS_story.html>
? What a ditz! Ties himself in knots trying to Talk to Women Voters; oh, that 
guy.The epic sanity and reasonableness of a man who seemed, at the time, like a 
cold-hearted killer is one of the most disturbing aspects of this year’s 
election.

Trump campaign woes grow amid questions over Melania's visa – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/aug/04/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-campaign-2016-election>
But of course, compared with Trump, that’s how Romney now appears. Even George 
W Bush has started to look like a hopeless but relatively well-meaning 
individual when viewed through the prism of his Republican successor.

The ultimate beneficiary of this revisionism is, of course, Ronald Reagan, 
whose reputation has risen steadily since his death in 2004, surging after 
Nancy’s death earlier this year and rising to a peak at theDemocratic convention
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democratic-national-convention-2016> last 
week, where he was a favourite reference for centre-left Democrats trying to 
woo independents and Republicans appalled by Trump.

Love for the Gipper came thick and fast, from Obama comparing Reagan’s 
characterisation of America, as per its founding values, as “a shining city on 
a hill” with Trump’s dismal “divided crime scene”, to vice-presidential hopeful 
Tim Kaine reminding those faithful to the “party of Lincoln” that “we’ve got a 
home for you”, to Doug Elmets, a former Reagan spokesman, telling the 
convention: “Trump, you’re no Ronald Reagan”. Spoken to a room full of 
Democrats, this might once have been expected to trigger a complex emotional 
response, but not now.

Hillary Clinton has been approvingly quoting Reagan left, right and centre. 
(One of her campaign posters features an angry-looking Trump overlaid with a 
quote from Reagan on immigration, from 1984: “I believe in the idea of amnesty 
for those who have put down roots … even though some time back they may have 
entered illegally”).

You could say that this is only politics, or that Clinton is a 
crypto-conservative and has finally nailed her true colours to the wall. But 
clearly it’s more than that. Bernie Sanders may have dragged Clinton somewhat 
to the left, but it’s a bad business when the entire landscape has been shunted 
sufficiently to the right that all these old Republican bogeymen are suddenly 
beacons of light.

Hillary, the gardener?

After Clinton’s acceptance speech, the headline in the Broadway newsletters I 
subscribe to were not, naturally, about her repositioning as a friend to 
moderate Republicans, but rather her quotation from the musicalHamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jun/10/hamilton-the-musical-transfer-west-end-london-lin-manuel-miranda-broadway-tonies>
. Although, said Clinton, “We may not live to see the glory / Let us gladly 
join the fight,” she urged us to consider “planting seeds in a garden you never 
get to see”. In the show, these lines are spoken not only to evoke a 
generations’ long struggle, but by characters who assume they will shortly die 
in battle. No matter. They were stirring words, through which Clinton showed 
herself to be hip with the kids, but not in a frightening way. (It was, after 
all, still Broadway). On Twitter, Lin-Manuel Miranda, the show’s creator who 
reported the following day he was eating ice cream while watching the speech on 
TV and dropped the spoon,had the presence of mind to reply 
<http://www.playbill.com/article/hillary-clinton-quotes-hamilton-in-dnc-acceptance-speech>
: “I’m with her.”

Retail therapy

A friend’s new book is out, and she has been fielding compliments from 
everyone she knows. It used to be that, in order to convey one’s respect and 
admiration in these circumstances, people would say I bought a copy for my 
mother/husband/best friend. Not any more, apparently. Now, she said, people in 
her life were falling over themselves to say, “I bought it for my therapist.” 
We live in traumatised times.
 