
Donald Trump’s most senior advisers said on Sunday that he would not illegally 
use the White House for personal profit, as concerns mounted that he was 
already mixing business interests and official duties.

Trump’s vice-president-elect and chief of staff moved to reassure the public 
even as it emerged that he had been meeting overseas business partners between 
interviews for cabinet roles and making corporate pitches to foreign diplomats.

Mike Pence <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mike-pence>, the incoming 
vice-president, insisted on Sunday that Trump would not have conflicts of 
interest when he entered the White House. “I think during the presidency there 
will be the proper separation,” he told CBS’s Face the Nation.

Donald Trump's cabinet nominations: what we know so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/donald-trump-cabinet-nominations-what-we-know-so-far>
“I can assure you and all of your viewers that all of the laws pertaining to 
his business dealings and his service as president of the United States will be 
strictly adhered to,” Pence said, promising that Trump would “leave his 
business life in the past”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Flawyers-settle-donald-trump-lawsuits-for-25m-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lawyers%20settle%20Donald%20Trump%20fraud%20lawsuits%20for%20%2425m%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Flawyers-settle-donald-trump-lawsuits-for-25m-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lawyers%20settle%20Donald%20Trump%20fraud%20lawsuits%20for%20%2425m%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Flawyers-settle-donald-trump-lawsuits-for-25m-video&media=>
Lawyers settle Donald Trump fraud lawsuits for $25m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/19/lawyers-settle-donald-trump-lawsuits-for-25m-video>
Pence spoke after the Economic Times 
<http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/donald-trump-meets-indian-partners-hails-pm-modis-work/articleshow/55465060.cms>
 reported that Trump met last week in Trump Tower with three business partners 
who are building Trump-branded apartments in India, having said that he would 
hand control of his business to his adult children.


Trump’s children Eric and Ivanka also met with at least one of the Indian 
partners,the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/20/us/politics/donald-trump-pauses-transition-work-to-meet-with-indian-business-partners.html?_r=0>
 reported. Spokeswomen for Trump declined to say whether they had discussed 
Trump’s business interests in India.

The meeting at the Manhattan building, which has for months served as the 
headquarters both of Trump’s company and political operation, followednews that 
dozens of foreign diplomats 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/capitalbusiness/2016/11/18/9da9c572-ad18-11e6-977a-1030f822fc35_story.html>
 attended a sales pitch last week at Trump’s new hotel in downtown Washington 
DC.

Ivanka Trump, who is an executive vice-president of the Trump Organization, 
also joined her father last week for a meeting at Trump Tower with Shinzo Abe, 
the prime minister of Japan. Ivanka’s jewelry company had previously advertised 
a $10,800 gold bracelet that she wore during a TV interview alongside her 
father.

The US constitution prohibits public officials from receiving anything of 
value from foreign governments. Richard Painter, who served as chief ethics 
counsel to president George W Bush, has warned that Trump risked violating the 
constitution’s emoluments clause unless he took action before his inauguration.

“It had better stop by January 20,” Painter told ThinkProgress 
<https://thinkprogress.org/trump-poised-to-violate-constitution-his-first-day-in-office-george-w-bushs-ethics-lawyer-says-73e14789a935#.mf2ji8mz0>
.

Laurence Tribe, a professor of constitutional law at Harvard who taught Barack 
Obama,said on Twitter <https://twitter.com/tribelaw/status/800190739938504705> 
that Trump was risking legal action from business competitors if he did not 
move to stop the presidency benefitting him financially.

Tribe described Trump as “uniquely suable” thanks to his current corporate 
setup.

Trump’s attorneys have said that three of his children, Ivanka, Donald Jr and 
Eric, would be placed in charge of his sprawling business empire. The lawyers 
called this arrangement a “blind trust”, but ethics watchdogs and attorneys have
noted that it is not blind 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/11/donald-trumps-questionable-blind-trust-setup-just-got-more-questionable/?tid=a_inl>
, because Trump’s children remain in close contact with their father. Former 
New York mayor Rudy Giuliani, a close adviser to Trump and a former prosecutor, 
hasadmitted 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/14/giuliani-says-trump-cant-do-a-blind-trust-because-it-would-basically-put-his-children-out-of-work/>
 that the arrangement is not actually a blind trust.

The full extent of Trump’s corporate interests and earnings are unknown 
because of his refusal to release his personal tax returns, in a breach of 
decades in election tradition.

Trump transition provokes cries of nepotism – but can anything be done?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/donald-trump-nepotism-ivanka-jared-kushner-is-it-legal>
The Trump children are also on his transition team, and his son-in-law, Jared 
Kushner, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/stephen-bannon-jared-kushner-reince-priebus-trump-administration>
 hasreportedly 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/18/us/politics/donald-trump-administration.html>
 sought legal advice about whether he can join the administrationwithout 
breaking anti-nepotism laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/20/donald-trump-nepotism-ivanka-jared-kushner-is-it-legal>
.

Reince Priebus <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/reince-priebus>, the 
Republican official Trump has selected to serve as his White House chief of 
staff, also insisted on Sunday that the president-elect would put the country’s 
interests before his own. “His family is very important to him,” Priebus told 
CNN. “And while it’s unique, it’s certainly compliant with the law.


“We will have the White House counsel review all of these things and we will 
have every ‘I’ dotted and every ‘T’ crossed.”

Priebus said Trump’s attention to the US’s future was also why he agreed to 
pay a $25m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/trump-university-settlement-twitter>
settlement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/donald-trump-university-settles-president-lawsuit-25-million>
 to the plaintiffs in three lawsuits accusing him of fraud, through his
now-defunct Trump University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/31/donald-trump-university-playbook-real-estate-courses>
.

“All of that history, he wants to put behind him,” Priebus said. “There are 
some things that are important to you and there are some things that you just 
decide you move on, you’re not admitting wrongdoing.” The aide called the 
settlement “a positive sign”.

Some of Trump’s closest advisers may also face congressional scrutiny for 
potential conflicts of interest. Giuliani, who has sought a top cabinet 
position in the Trump administration, for years lobbied andconsulted for 
wealthy foreign clients 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory/giulianis-foreign-work-complicates-candidacy-top-post-43591089>
, including for Qatar and a Canadian oil company.

Retired general Mike Flynn, named Trump’s national security adviser, also ran 
a consulting company with foreign clients 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/trump-adviser-michael-flynn-plans-to-sever-consulting-firm-ties-if-tapped-for-administration-1479417634>
, and madeoccasional appearances 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/04/donald-trump-2016-russia-today-rt-kremlin-media-vladimir-putin-213833>
 on Kremlin-owned TV network Russia Today.
 