
With Donald Trump becoming the improbable Republican nominee for president, 
the party is slowly but surely uniting around him. Conservatives from House 
majority leader Paul Ryan to Fox News’s Megyn Kelly have met cordially with 
Trump, signaling that he’s an acceptable candidate. This rapprochement is not a 
one-way street, either. Trump clearly wants to win, and he needs support – 
financially and otherwise – from the Republican party to mount a serious 
challenge to Hillary Clinton. Today, Trumpannounced 
<https://www.facebook.com/DonaldTrump/posts/10157059611950725> a list of 
potential supreme court nominees – and it’s pretty much everything a 
conservative activist could hope for.

“This list,” Trump’s Facebook announcement was careful to emphasize, “was 
compiled, first and foremost, based on constitutional principles, with input 
from highly respected conservatives and Republican party leadership.”

Trump’s inability to identify a single person of color he considers qualified 
to be a supreme court justice is telling

The nature of Trump’s supreme court appointments doesn’t come entirely out of 
the blue. In March, Trumpsaid that 
<http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2016/03/22/3762275/trump-says-he-will-delegate-supreme-court-appointments-to-the-heritage-foundation/>
 he would effectively delegate his potential supreme court nominations to the 
conservativeHeritage Foundation <http://www.heritage.org/>. Whether or not the 
list he presented today was literally compiled by the think tank, it certainly 
could have been. Trump’s list does not just seek to appeal to the Republican 
establishment ideologically. One of those mentioned, Thomas Lee, isthe brother 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/latest-lee-supports-brother-trump-list-not-trump-204036915--election.html>
 of influential Utah senator Mike Lee.

Most of the judges picked, as Trump’s announcement was careful to note, 
clerked for conservative supreme court justices like Clarence Thomas, Antonin 
Scalia or William Rehnquist. The exceptions generally have some other clear 
signal of commitment to conservative constitutional values on their CV. For 
example, Texas supreme court Judge Don Willett served in the administrations of 
several conservative Texas governors.

Ideologically, all of Trump’s potential nominees profile as solid 
conservatives. No two justices are exactly alike – George W Bush’s two 
successful nominees, Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Samuel Alito, vote 
together most of the time buttwo of the exceptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/25/john-roberts-saved-obamacare-antonin-scalia-wordshttp://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/25/john-roberts-saved-obamacare-antonin-scalia-words>
 prevented the Affordable Care Act from being struck down or substantially 
damaged. On most issues, a Trump nominee would be as or more conservative than
Justice Scalia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/14/antonin-scalia-supreme-court-legacy-opinions-partisan-america>
, whose vacant seat the next president will try to replace.

The most common path to the supreme court in the 21st century is through the 
federal appellate courts, and Trump’s list has several such candidates, 
including 11th circuit judge William Pryor, 7th circuit judge Dianne Sykes and 
8th circuit judges Raymond Gruender and Steven Colloton, all appointees of 
George W Bush with solid conservative records. But Trump’s list also has number 
of judges serving on state courts, including Willett, Colorado’s Allison Eid, 
Michigan’s Joan Larsen, Utah’s Thomas Lee, and Minnesota’s David Stras.

One notable thing about Trump’s list is their lack of diversity. All 11 are 
white, and only three are women. Given the problems Trump already faced in 
attracting the support of minorities, this is a fact that Hillary Clinton is 
sure to mention more than once. Trump’s inability to identify a single person 
of color he considers qualified to be a supreme court justice is telling.

On the other hand, Trump’s nominees are more diverse in another respect. 
Currently, every member of the supreme court received his or her law degree 
from either Harvard or Yale law school. Trump’s nominees include graduates from 
the law schools of the University of Chicago, Marquette, the University of 
Minnesota, Duke, Washington University, Tulane, and the University of Michigan. 
This does not make up for the lack of racial diversity of Trump’s nominees, but 
it is something for which Trump deserves credit. Graduates of Harvard and Yale 
do not have a monopoly on constitutional wisdom, and presidents from both 
parties would be wise to cast a wider net in that respect.

With the next president having at least one supreme court vacancy to fill and, 
given that three sitting justices will be or turn 80 during the first term of 
the next president, the supreme court should be unusually silent during the 
upcoming election. If you liked Antonin Scalia, you’ll almost certainly like who
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> nominates to 
replace him. Hillary Clinton, for her part, will surely emphasize the 
opportunity for the first supreme court with a liberal median vote since early 
in the Nixon administration.
 