
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> asked the state 
of Michigan on Thursday to reject Jill Stein’s request for a recount of the 
presidential election.

Could Jill Stein's vote recount change the outcome of the election?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/election-recount-outcome-jill-stein>
Attorneys for the US president-elect argued in a filing to Michigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michigan> election officials that Stein 
was not entitled to the recount and that it could not be completed in time 
before the state must cast its electoral college votes.

“Michigan should not grant this lawless, insulting request, and its voters 
should not risk having the Electoral College door knocked off its hinges, all 
because a one-percent candidate is dissatisfied with the election’s outcome,”
Trump’s filing said 
<http://www.michigan.gov/documents/sos/Objection_to_Recount_Petition_544089_7.pdf>
.

Trump accused Stein of creating an “electoral farce” and claimed that she 
“aims to sow doubts regarding the legitimacy of the presidential election”.

Stein, who has also filed for recounts in Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, 
described Trump’s move as an “attempt to undermine democracy” and assured 
supporters that the recount would go ahead.

“The Trump campaign’s cynical efforts to delay the recount and create 
unnecessary costs for taxpayers are shameful and outrageous,” Stein said in a 
statement.

Ruth Johnson, Michigan’s secretary of state, said in a statement  
<https://content.govdelivery.com/accounts/MISOS/bulletins/1767cf6>that 
recounting, which was scheduled to begin on Friday and continue over the 
weekend, had been “put on hold” until the board of state canvassers had made a 
decision on Trump’s objection.

The recount is a distraction. Only a strong left can beat Trump | Kate Aronoff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/election-recount-distration-jill-stein-democratic-party>
Stein’s recount requests were made to states where Trump narrowly defeated 
Hillary Clinton, who had led in opinion polls prior to election day. Stein acted
on behalf of a coalition of election security experts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/security-experts-join-jill-steins-election-changing-recount-campaign>
, who are concerned that the electoral process could have been sabotaged by 
hackers.

The election took place following warnings from US intelligence agencies that 
Russian hackers were behind the thefts of emails from Democratic officials and 
had been intruding into the voter registration systems of several American 
states.

The Obama administration has said it is confident that no cyber-hacking 
interfered with election day and that the result was “the will of the American 
people”. A group of Democratic senators has, however, asked the president to 
declassify more information about Russia’s involvement in the US election 
process.
 