
Donald Trump has chosen Senator Jeff Sessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jeff-sessions> of Alabama for the job of 
US attorney general and Congressman Mike Pompeo as CIA chief, his campaign 
announced on Friday.

He also confirmed he would nominate Lt Gen Michael Flynn as assistant to the 
president for national security affairs.

Sessions is a longtime rightwing and anti-immigrant member of the Senate. 
Pompeo is avocal critic 
<http://www.mcclatchydc.com/news/politics-government/white-house/article115397733.html>
 of the Iran nuclear deal, and a supporter ofNSA bulk data collection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/15/nsa-reform-included-spending-bill-passes-house>
. Flynn is aformer military intelligence chief 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/david-petraeus-secretary-of-state-donald-trump>
 who has been a vocal critic of the Obama administration.

Trump was due to hold a two-hour transition meeting including 
Vice-President-elect Mike Pence on Friday, a campaign official said. He would 
then meet Mike Huckabee, the former governor of Arkansas, at 2pm.

On Saturday in Bedminster, New Jersey, Trump is due to meet Mitt Romney, the 
Republican nominee in 2012. Romney has been a fierce critic of Trump but is now 
rumoured to be in contention for the prize position of secretary of state.

Trump spokesman Sean Spicer told a conference call: “The president-elect wants 
the best and brightest and people who can suggest how to move this country 
forward.”

Trump intends to meet Republicans, Democrats and independents, he added, and 
yesterday’s talks with Henry Kissinger were an example of his inclusive 
approach. “The conversation with Mitt Romney is an opportunity to hear his 
ideas and thoughts.”

In a statement announcing the nominations on Friday, Trump called Sessions “a 
world-class legal mind” and “a truly great attorney general and US attorney in 
the state of Alabama”. Sessions said he was humbled to have been asked to serve 
by the president-elect, adding: “I enthusiastically embrace President-elect 
Trump’s vision for ‘one America’, and his commitment to equal justice under 
law.”

The president-elect said he was pleased that Flynn – a key ally from the 
military world throughout his presidential campaign – would be “by my side as 
we work to defeat radical Islamic terrorism, navigate geopolitical challenges 
and keep Americans safe at home and abroad”. Flynn said: “I am deeply humbled 
and honoured to accept the position as national security adviser to serve both 
our country and our nation’s next president, Donald J Trump.”

Trump said Pompeo would be “a brilliant and unrelenting leader for our 
intelligence community to ensure the safety of Americans and our allies”. The 
congressman said he “looked forward to working with America’s intelligence 
warriors, who do so much to protect Americans each and every day”.

Sessions, Flynn and Pompeo: who are the potential Trump cabinet picks?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/sessions-flynn-and-pompeo-who-are-the-potential-trump-cabinet-picks->
Sessions

Sessions has served in the Senate since 1997, and served as Alabama’s attorney 
general fortwo years before 
<http://www.al.com/news/index.ssf/2016/11/jeff_sessions_us_attorney_gene.html> 
that. The lawmaker has the rare distinction of once being passed over for a 
federal judgeship, because ofracist comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/sessions-flynn-and-pompeo-who-are-the-potential-trump-cabinet-picks->
 he allegedly made.

During Sessions’ confirmation hearing in 1986, lawmakers heard testimony that 
Sessions called respected civil rights organizations “communist inspired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/17/sessions-flynn-and-pompeo-who-are-the-potential-trump-cabinet-picks->
”. In another set of testimony, a prosecutor told Congress that Sessions had 
said he thought the Ku Klux Klan was “OK until I found out they smoked pot”. 
Sessions said the comment was a joke, but his judgeship was rejected.

Since working in the Senate, Sessions has proved one of the most 
anti-immigration members of the legislature.

Last year, he wrote a 25-page report blaming job losses and welfare dependency 
on immigration. TheImmigration Handbook for the New Republican Majority 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2015/01/12/jeff-sessions-defines-republican-position-on-immigration-in-25-page-roadmap-document/>
 argued for limiting work visas and “establishing firm control over entry and 
exit in the United States”.

“For decades, the American people have begged and pleaded for a just and 
lawful system of immigration that serves their interests,” wrote Sessions. “But 
their demands are refused. For years, Americans have been scorned and mocked by 
the elite denizens of Washington and Wall Street for having legitimate concerns 
about how uncontrolled immigration impacts their jobs, wages, schools, 
hospitals, police departments, and communities.”

Neema Singh Giuliani of the ACLU said: “When it comes to privacy and mass 
surveillance, Sessions has repeatedly been on the wrong side of the 
Constitution, public opinion, and laws passed by a Republican-controlled 
Congress.”


Pompeo

Pompeo, elected to Congress as part of the 2010 Tea Party wave, has enjoyed a 
quick rise on Capitol Hill, thanks in part to his penchant for incendiary 
statements about national security.

After the Boston Marathon in 2013 bombings, Pompeo falsely claimed that US 
Muslim organizations and religious leaders had not condemned terrorism. 
“Silence has made these Islamic leaders across America potentially complicit in 
these acts,” hesaid <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xxgd-DQjZSo> on the House 
floor.

Yet Pompeo took a place on the House intelligence committee and sits on its 
CIA and NSA subcommittees, where he has positioned himself as a vigorous 
advocate of the most hardline priorities of both agencies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F196336ac5e798e6661032941ba5b168d0c781333%2F0_0_5697_3418%2F5697.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20picks%20Jeff%20Sessions%20for%20attorney%20general%20and%20Mike%20Pompeo%20for%20CIA%20chief&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20picks%20Jeff%20Sessions%20for%20attorney%20general%20and%20Mike%20Pompeo%20for%20CIA%20chief&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fjeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F196336ac5e798e6661032941ba5b168d0c781333%2F0_0_5697_3418%2F5697.jpg>
 Mike Pompeo. Photograph: Jacquelyn Martin/AP 
After the 2014 release of a landmark Senate report into CIA torture, Pompeo 
personally attacked the report’s leader, California Democrat Dianne Feinstein. 
Feinstein “has put American lives at risk”, Pompeo said, calling those at the 
CIA who participated in torture “heroes, not pawns in some liberal game being 
played by the ACLU and Senator Feinstein”. His potential elevation to CIA 
director increases the chances that the agency and Senator Richard Burr, the 
North Carolina Republican on the Senate intelligence committee, will prevail in 
destroying the remaining classified copies of the report, currently caught in a 
legal limbo.

A relentless critic of the Iran nuclear deal, Pompeo has veered into wilder 
charges against Obama. After the treasury departmentpermitted 
<http://www.mcclatchydc.com/news/politics-government/congress/article103409752.html>
 Airbus and Boeing to sell passenger aircraft to the Iranian commercial airline 
in September, Pompeo said: “President Obama today announced he is essentially 
helping build the Iranian air force.”

Like many in the GOP, including Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, Pompeo has been a fervent 
opponent of closing the detention facility at Guantánamo Bay. Although 
Guantánamo interrogations stopped years ago, since the most recent detainees 
arrived in 2008, Pompeo in 2014 said Obama’s planned closure was “diminishing 
our ability to extract intelligence from jihadists engaged in terrorism”. 
Shuttering the facility was counterproductive as “the threat of radical Islamic 
terror has increased so drastically”.

Pompeo has waxed enthusiastic about rolling back the minimal restrictions on 
the US surveillance apparatus enacted during the Obama administration. Yet his 
description of those restrictions has not always been accurate. In a January 
op-ed in the Wall Street Journal, Pompeoincorrectly claimed 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/time-for-a-rigorous-national-debate-about-surveillance-1451856106>
 the “collection of phone metadata under the Patriot Act was banned by Congress 
and finally ceased at the end of November”. In fact, the USA Freedom Act of 
2015 only restricted the bulk collection of domestic US phone metadata, without 
touching the vast powers the Patriot Act provides to the FBI for surreptitious 
collection of communications and financial data.

Pompeo favored expanding US surveillance powers substantially, to include “
re-establishing collection of all metadata 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/time-for-a-rigorous-national-debate-about-surveillance-1451856106>
” and proposing a “comprehensive, searchable database” that includes “publicly 
available financial and lifestyle information”, without defining what 
“lifestyle information” means. “Legal and bureaucratic impediments to 
surveillance should be removed,” he continued, adding: “The use of strong 
encryption in personal communications may itself be a red flag.”
 