
Donald Trump added another billionaire to his presidential transition team on 
Wednesday: Carl Icahn, the 80-year-old activist shareholder and long-time 
friend who once helped Trump keep control of his troubledNew Jersey casinos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/12/trump-taj-mahal-strike-bankruptcy-carl-icahn-casino-workers>
.

Icahn will be a special adviser to the president-elect overseeing regulation, 
according to the transition team.

Donald Trump faces Senate backlash over ‘cabinet of billionaires’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/donald-trump-senate-backlash-cabinet-of-billionaires>
According to Forbes, Icahn has a net worth of $16.5bn 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/carl-icahn/> adding his wealth to a team that 
already looks set to be thewealthiest White Hous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/trumps-rich-pickings-president-elects-team-could-be-wealthiest-ever>
e team in history. Trump hadconsidered him 
<http://www.msnbc.com/morning-joe/watch/donald-trump--the-country-is-doing-terribly-467434563618>
 for the post of Treasury secretary but Icahnrejected  
<http://money.cnn.com/2015/11/03/investing/carl-icahn-donald-trump-treasury-secretary/>
the suggestions saying: “I’m not ever going to be secretary of anything in 
Washington.”

This appointment is not an official government position and Icahn will 
therefore not have to divest of his vast business holdings in order to comply 
with government-mandated conflict of interest rules.

The hedge fund manager has been one of Trump’s closest advisers and officially 
endorsed the president-elect in the summer of 2015. “Carl was with me from the 
beginning and with his being one of the world’s great businessmen, that was 
something I truly appreciated,” said Trump. Trump said Ichan’s “help on the 
strangling regulations that our country is faced with will be invaluable”.


Icahn has been a persistent critic of government regulation, most recently 
“crazy regulations” 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-08-15/carl-icahn-calls-on-epa-to-fix-mother-of-all-short-squeezes>
 at the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). He is a major investor in CVR 
Energy, an oil refiner, whose business he claims has been harmed by EPA 
regulations.


Trump consulted with Icahn before appointing Scott Pruitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-scott-pruitt-environmental-protection-agency>
, Oklahoma’s attorney general and another EPA critic, to head the agency.


“I am proud to serve President-elect Trump as a special adviser on regulatory 
reform,” said Icahn. “Under President Obama, America’s business owners have 
been crippled by over $1tn in new regulations and over 750bn hours dealing with 
paperwork. It’s time to break free of excessive regulation and let our 
entrepreneurs do what they do best: create jobs and support communities.”


Trump's cabinet picks: here are all of the appointments so far
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/donald-trump-administration-cabinet-picks-so-far>
The billionaire, who has a home near Trump’s Palm Beach base, Mar-A-Lago, 
started his career on Wall Street and has built a reputation as a fierce 
corporate raider.


Before Trump’s elevation, Icahn was best known for his often heated battles 
with executives at companies, including Apple, eBay, Dell and Time Warner. In 
2015 he took on Apple’s chief executive officer Tim Cook, telling him the 
iPhone-maker was“dramatically undervalued” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/may/18/apple-shares-carl-icahn-stock-market-value>
.


In the 1990s Icahn was a bondholder in Trump’s failing Taj Mahal casino in New 
Jersey. Trump was able to keep control if the casino despite failing to make 
payments to Icahn and other bondholders thanks in large part to advice given by 
another Trump appointee, Wilbur Ross, a billionaire bankruptcy expert and now 
Trump’s appointed commerce secretary.
 