
A huge shift to clean energy is under way in the US but the election of Donald 
Trump as president meansprogress could be reversed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/climate-change-trump-administration-environmental-protection>
 unless cities and states do more, energy experts have warned.


Trump administration could roll back US environmental protection, critics fear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/climate-change-trump-administration-environmental-protection>
Installed wind capacity has grown by more than 40% in the US since 2011, 
according 
<http://www.georgetownclimate.org/articles/new-report-shows-u-s-states-leading-a-shift-to-clean-energy.html>
 to the Georgetown Climate Center, with solar capacity ballooning by 577%.

The US Energy Information Agency has said 
<http://www.eia.gov/forecasts/aeo/supplement/renewable/pdf/projections.pdf> new 
coal-fired power plants are “not economically competitive with renewables and 
other generation sources”, with existing facilities soon to come under pressure 
from clean energy.

Trump’s victory, however, threatens this trend, with the president-elect 
promising <https://www.greatagain.gov/policy/energy-independence.html> to 
abolishthe Clean Power Plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/03/obamas-clean-power-plan-hailed-as-strongest-ever-climate-action-by-a-us-president>
, cancel all federal money for clean energy development and “unleash an energy 
revolution” by opening large areas to coal, oil and gas interests.

“Elections matter and who Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> appoints to key positions at 
the Environmental Protection Agency and Department of Energy, as well as the 
future of incentive programs, will have major consequences,” said Vicki Arroyo, 
executive director of the Georgetown Climate Center.

“When George W Bush took the White House we saw California and mid-Atlantic 
and New England states step up and create cap-and-trade systems and reduce 
emissions.

“It’s important to have federal policy but we may well be back into the cycle 
of states and cities, who see the consequences of climate change every day, 
stepping up to take leadership.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fclean-energy-donald-trump-climate-policies-reversals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cca747d84576eee626668a1e36809634d9cd3ed%2F0_0_640_347%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20could%20reverse%20'dramatic'%20progress%20on%20clean%20energy%2C%20experts%20fear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fclean-energy-donald-trump-climate-policies-reversals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20could%20reverse%20%27dramatic%27%20progress%20on%20clean%20energy%2C%20experts%20fear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fclean-energy-donald-trump-climate-policies-reversals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cca747d84576eee626668a1e36809634d9cd3ed%2F0_0_640_347%2F640.jpg>
 In 2015, 11 states generated at least 10% of their total electricity from 
wind. Photograph: US Energy Information Administration, Electric Power Monthly 
Analysis of 19 states 
<http://www.georgetownclimate.org/files/report/GCC_State_Leadership_Driving_the_Shift_to_Clean_Energy_11Nov2016.pdf>
 by the Georgetown Climate Center found there was a “dramatic shift” to clean 
energy under way, driven by concerns over climate change or simple economics.

While California has imposed a cap-and-trade system for greenhouse gases along 
with steep emissions-reduction targets, more conservative states are also 
embracing a shift to renewable energy.

Tennessee has slashed its emissions from electricity by 34% since 2005 and has 
spent millions of dollars expanding clean energy and battery storage to state 
buildings and low-income households.

Louisiana, a hub for the petrochemical industry, has cut its emissions and 
provided tax breaks for renewable energy projects. Iowa, South Dakota and 
Kansas are thethree largest 
<http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=28512> generators of wind 
energy in the union.

Renewable energy has been spurred by federal tax incentives for wind and solar 
as well as the plummeting cost of turbines and solar panels. Global market 
forces, which have hurt the coal and oil industries, have also opened the way 
for natural gas and, to a lesser degree, renewables.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fclean-energy-donald-trump-climate-policies-reversals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18b7ab5cf5322592e048f85075e30afe63f6ba64%2F0_0_621_390%2F621.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20could%20reverse%20'dramatic'%20progress%20on%20clean%20energy%2C%20experts%20fear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fclean-energy-donald-trump-climate-policies-reversals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20could%20reverse%20%27dramatic%27%20progress%20on%20clean%20energy%2C%20experts%20fear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fclean-energy-donald-trump-climate-policies-reversals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F18b7ab5cf5322592e048f85075e30afe63f6ba64%2F0_0_621_390%2F621.jpg>
 The Energy Information Administration’s projected North American share of 
energy generation from renewable and nuclear sources. Photograph: US Energy 
Information Administration, Annual Energy Outlook 2016 Reference case, 
International Energy Outlook 2016 
Despite these trends, Trump has called for “American energy independence” and 
the elimination of clean energy programs that have no “measurable effect on the 
Earth’s climate”.

'It was too hot, even to leave home': stories from the world's hottest year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/it-was-too-hot-even-to-leave-home-stories-from-the-worlds-hottest-year>
The next president has questioned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/14/on-trump-and-climate-america-is-split-in-two-by-these-demographics>
 the reality of human-caused global warming and is considering a number of 
fossil fuel executives and climate change deniers for key administration posts.

The US is already on track to miss its emission-reduction targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/26/us-climate-change-emissions-miss-2025-target-research>
. However, renewable energy advocates believe the sector has momentum that may 
not be completely reversed.

“There are red states and blue states prioritizing renewables, sometimes for 
climate change and sometimes around job creation,” said Arroyo.

“Federal policy has catalyzed action and market stability is important. It’s 
easier to tear things down than build policy but many people are wondering how 
those coal jobs will return given the market changes already under way.”
 