
Seema Verma, Donald Trump’s choice to head the two largest public health 
insurance programs in the US, is a conservative darling who has introduced work 
requirements and lockout periods for impoverished recipients into the medical 
safety net in three states.

A close adviser to vice-president-elect Mike Pence, Verma – Trump’s nominee 
for administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) – 
made her name devising Indiana’s Medicaid plan, one of the most punitive in the 
country.

Medicaid is a public health program that ensures America’s poor and disabled 
have health insurance. Obamacare dramatically expanded the program, which now 
serves more than 73 million people.

The unique requirements Verma and her consultancy firm SVC Inc designed for 
Indiana require that the destitute in that state have “skin in the game” by 
paying “premiums”, even if they were just $1.

What an Obamacare replacement could look like under Tom Price
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/obamacare-trump-administration-tom-price-hhs>
In Kentucky, her company developed a plan to require the poor to perform “work 
activity 
<http://kff.org/medicaid/fact-sheet/proposed-changes-to-medicaid-expansion-in-kentucky/>
”, which could include unpaid community service, in order to receive health 
insurance. Approval of that plan is still pending at the CMS, the agency she 
could soon lead.

In Ohio, a plan designed by Verma’s company and rejected by the current 
leaders of CMS required people withlow incomes 
<http://kff.org/health-reform/fact-sheet/proposed-changes-to-medicaid-expansion-in-ohio/>
 to be barred from public health insurance until all “premium” arrears were up 
to date.

Her plans were “about saving the dollars by any means possible”, said Indiana 
Representative Charlie Brown, the ranking Democrat on the public health 
committee.

As a consultant in each state, Verma was the driving force in designing 
Indiana’s “HIP 2.0” public insurance plan for the poor, and is highly regarded 
in conservative circles because of its emphasis on personal and fiscal “
responsibility 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/01/mike-pence-medicaid-expansion-114640>”. 

Though her plan expanded Medicaid to nearly 400,000 Hoosiers, she has argued 
that new recipients are “able-bodied 
<http://www.svcinc.org/our-company/news/healthy-indiana-2-0-is-challenging-medicaid-norms.html>
” enough to not need “the same set of policy protections” as the “aged, blind, 
or disabled”. Instead, Verma’s plan forces recipients to pay up to 2% of their 
income to “premiums”, held in a system similar to tax-free accounts available 
to commercial plans.

It is a plan meant to mimic the commercial market, as a financial lesson for 
its recipients. It remains one of the most complex and punitiveMedicaid 
expansions 
<http://www.ncsl.org/research/health/affordable-care-act-expansion.aspx> in the 
country, an outlier in a system of state-run safety nets largely free for the 
poor.


Further, it is built on the back of the Affordable Care Act, a law that her 
potential future boss, Congressman Tom Price, explicitly opposes. Trump has 
nominated Price to be health secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/tom-price-health-human-services-secretary-trump-administration>
.

“She’s a hired gun,” said Brown, who described his interaction with Verma as 
“intense and daily”. “That’s what she was in Indiana, that’s what the 
administration wanted – to save dollars, and so she comes up with masterful 
plans.” By 2014, Verma’s small company had secured$3.5m in state contracts 
<http://www.indystar.com/story/news/politics/2014/08/25/powerful-state-healthcare-consultant-serves-two-bosses/14468683/>
 with Indiana.

She is often described as a behind-the-scenes Republican operative. Regarded 
as smart and talented, she is also considered single-minded and conservative. 
She is a registered Republican, and recently agreed to participate in the 
“leadership network” of the American Enterprise Institute, a rightwing 
thinktank.

Her father, Jugal Verma, 77, described her as someone with “passion” for her 
work, and sympathy for the poor. Each morning on her way to work, he said, she 
pulled her car to the side of the road to hand the same homeless man cash. “It 
used to amaze me,” he said.

“She grew up in a Democratic household. I am a staunch Democrat,” said Jugal 
Verma, discussing his daughter’s work in the deeply conservative Pence 
administration. “She doesn’t do anything if she doesn’t believe in it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fseema-verma-trump-centers-medicare-medicaid-cms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19932c7504097eb5e943aa1d925f7d9a3bf16dbb%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20pick%20for%20key%20health%20post%20known%20for%20punitive%20Medicaid%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fseema-verma-trump-centers-medicare-medicaid-cms%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20pick%20for%20key%20health%20post%20known%20for%20punitive%20Medicaid%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fseema-verma-trump-centers-medicare-medicaid-cms%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19932c7504097eb5e943aa1d925f7d9a3bf16dbb%2F0_137_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Tom Price is poised to be the next US health secretary. Photograph: Jim Lo 
Scalzo/EPA 
She and Price, if he is confirmed by the Senate, will be charged with helming 
a more than $1.1tn budget dominated by public health programs for the very 
poor, disabled and elderly. Medicaid alone covers more than73 million Americans 
<http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/total-monthly-medicaid-and-chip-enrollment/?currentTimeframe=0>
, nearly one-quarter of the American population. Neither Verma nor a Pence 
spokesman replied to a request for comment.

Verma’s best known work used a little-known provision of federal health law to 
push conservative ideas through despite the Obama administration. The strategy 
made her an influential consultant to Republican state administrations.

In Indiana, for example, some of the most controversial provisions of the 
state’s law were pushed through using this obscure 1115, or “eleven-fifteen”, 
waiver. While Obama’s administrator of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services did not approve all of Verma’s plans – a punitive provision developed 
with Ohio was denied – some were successful. Others are still pending the 
approval of an agency she may soon run.

“One example of a provision in Indiana, which I think is very severe, 
burdensome, and in fact does not promote the objectives of the Medicaid 
program, [is] if someone [can’t pay premiums], they get kicked off the 
program,” said Andrea Callow, a policy analyst at Families USA, a 
not-for-profit organization focused on consumer health.

Premiums are typical of commercial insurance plans – they require 
beneficiaries to make a monthly payment. But Medicaid recipients typically do 
not pay premiums because their incomes are so low. The Medicaid expansion 
carried out under Obamacare allows people to earn a salary of about 138% of the 
poverty level, about $16,000 for an individual, and remain eligible.

In Indiana, if people on Medicaid earning between $11,000 and $16,000 don’t 
pay their “premiums”, they can be locked out of the program for up to six 
months, a provision even commercial insurance does not impose.

“If someone can’t scrape up the money for premiums for two months, they get 
dis-enrolled, and they get locked out for six months,” said Kallow. “Then say 
they get cancer, they get hit by a truck, they have an accident. They have 
absolutely no place to turn for health coverage.”

Kentucky’s 1115 waiver, on which Verma’s company SVC also consulted, proved 
equally complex and even more controversial. The state asked CMS to allow 
Kentucky to impose work requirements beginning three months after benefits 
began, something no state in the country requires as a condition of Medicaid.

“Kentucky’s new expansion proposal has work requirements,” said Kallow, 
“There’s even sort of unpaid community service, which is very troubling.”

After three months, “able-bodied” adults of working age would need to 
participate in a “work activity” for at least five hours per week. After one 
year, that requirement would increase to up to 20 hours per week. If that 
requirement were not met, the state could end the person’s benefits.

“There seemed to be a paralysis of analysis as it relates to the downtrodden, 
those who are in the greatest needs,” said Brown.

Good luck getting healthcare in Donald Trump's America | Miranda Yaver
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/donald-trump-tom-price-healthcare-affordable-care-act>
During a public comment period on Kentucky’s 1115 waiver, 90% of the 1,700 
comments 
<http://kypolicy.org/comments-washington-proposed-medicaid-changes-9-1/> 
received were negative. Analysts also contend that such requirements mean 
building a new, large bureaucracy just to track whether Medicaid beneficiaries 
are complying.

“I have no problem with the personal responsibility features to the extent 
that they improve outcomes,” said Ed Clere, former Republican chair of the 
Indiana House public health committee. “One of the big questions going forward, 
both for Indiana and now for the country, will be: is there a link between 
these personal responsibility features in the way of financial participation 
and improved healthy outcomes?

“I haven’t seen any evidence.”

However, even critics said portions of the plan designed by Verma improved 
services. The fact that a voluntary, Obamacare-sponsored Medicaid expansion 
took place at all in Indiana, a deep red state, had a huge impact in the eyes 
of many serving poor patients there. Another 19 states still have not expanded 
Medicaid, even though Obamacare pays for 90% of expansions.

“I have insurance, my child is sick, I take her to the doctor,” said Lauren 
Lamb, outreach coordinator at a chain of north-west Indiana health clinics, 
HealthLinc. “I don’t think about it, but when you see people that don’t have 
that coverage ... they worry if their kid is sick, if they can even take them 
to the doctor.”

The change, Lamb said, comes when patients realize they are eligible for 
health insurance they can afford.

“You see them, and they leave, and they’ve got tears in their eyes, because 
they can’t believe how lucky they feel that day. It just sits in your heart.”
 