
Interest rates <https://www.theguardian.com/business/interest-rates> available 
on current accounts are to plummet, after Lloyds and TSB both announced they 
would follow Santander in slashing the returns on their highest-paying accounts.

A day after Lloyds announced it was halving the top rate available on its Club 
Lloyds account from 4% to 2%, the top-paying current account fromTSB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tsb> has has also been cut.

TSB’s Classic Plus account will no longer offer a generous 5% on balances up 
to £2,000 from 4 January 2017. Instead it will pay 3% on balances held up to 
£1,500.

This means, instead of earning a potential £100 in interest a year, savers 
will earn just £45.

The Lloyds change also comes into force next January.

Related: As cash Isas leave savers despairing, it could be worth taking a 
chance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/05/cash-isas-savers-despair-alternatives-for-your-money>

High-paying current accounts have been used by banks to attract new customers 
in recent years. Facing terrible rates from traditional savings accounts, 
consumers have moved their money into current accounts to take advantage.


A Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> spokesman said: 
“These changes follow a review of our full current account range, taking into 
consideration changing market conditions. We believe these changes ensure that 
the products remain both attractive to customers and competitive in the market.”

TSB said: “We will be writing to our affected customers giving them two months 
notice, during which time they will continue to benefit from the current rates 
and applicable balances.”


The move, which has been announced less than two months after Santander 
announced a rate cut on its hugely popular 123 account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/15/santander-slashes-123-interest-rate-savers>
, is another setback for savers.

Santander’s account is the most popular of these high-interest deals, with 
more than 4 million account holders.

Nationwide still offers 5% on a slightly larger balance of £2,500 for Flex 
customers. However, this is only for the first 12 months. Savers could earn up 
to £125 in that year. At least £1,000 must be paid in each month and two direct 
debits must be set up.

Andrew Hagger, of financial website MoneyComms, said: “High interest current 
accounts have proved extremely popular with disgruntled savers over the past 
couple of years but now many will be disappointed and frustrated, as yet 
another 100% safe opportunity to earn a reasonable rate of return is being 
withdrawn – they must wonder if the savings nightmare will ever end.”

Hagger said that for Santander customers, who will see the rate cut from 1 
November, the question was “whether to stick or twist – the answer is not as 
straightforward as yes or no, as it will depend not only on your average credit 
balance but also whether you take advantage of the 123 cashback option on 
household bills paid by direct debit.”
 