
Martin Clunes: Islands of Australia 
8pm, ITV

Rather than be tied down – like a kangaroo, perhaps? – to the mainland, this 
new three-part travelogue sees the enthusiastic Doc Martin star explore some of 
the 8,000 islands that surround Australia. That means strolling along 
sun-dappled beaches, attempting to clamber up palms and learning moves from 
hip-swaying troupe the Baunti Byuutis. He also has a chinwag with Seaman Dan, a 
pearl diver-turned-unlikely pop star.Graeme Virtue

Our Dancing Town 
9pm, BBC2


Like a hoofing Gareth Malone, choreographer Steve Elias believes in the power 
of dance to change lives. How to demonstrate this? The self-styled 
working-class boy heads to Yorkshire to stage a series of spectacles infused 
with the democratic, inclusive spirit of the London 2012 opening ceremony. 
Elias begins this five-part series in Barnsley, where those he’s trying to 
persuade to perform include ex-miners as well as young Billy Elliots. Jonathan 
Wright


Sugar Free Farm 
9pm, ITV


Peter Davison, Alison Hammond, Joe Pasquale, Ann Widdecombe, Stavros Flatley 
and Gemma Collins (from Towie) swap white baps and fudge for flaxseed shakes 
and spiralised courgette, as the C-list dietary boot camp makes its return. 
Rather than push the dubious suggestion that refined carbs and sugar are pure, 
untouchable poison, the danger of our addiction to them is made abundantly 
clear. Especially when one contestant is hospitalised on day two.Jack Seale

Rectify 
9pm, AMC 


The fourth and final season of the grossly underrated, poignant and 
occasionally dark US drama about a man released from death row continues. Janet 
in particular is struggling to cope with Daniel’s absence, while Amantha and 
Teddy work out a plan to switch places that could keep both of them sane. 
Slow-moving, sparse and downbeat as ever, this week’s episode focuses less on 
the murder arc and instead offers an intriguing window into Holden/Talbot 
family dynamics.Hannah J Davies

Building the Dream 
9pm, More4


Charlie Luxton returns for a new series of the home makeover show, helping to 
transform dowdy dwellings. Tonight’s opener sees Charlie team up with Sam and 
Eryka in Brockley, south-east London, as they attempt to convert a derelict 
industrial unit into a modern warehouse-style home with room for an artist 
studio. With life savings on the line, and planning permission to 
circumnavigate, finding the perfect balance between work and living space will 
be essential.Mark Gibbings-Jones

Revolting 
10pm, BBC2 


True enough, Heydon Prowse and Jolyon Rubinstein aren’t always funny. However, 
you can’t deny that they fully throw themselves into their satirical 
interactions (as their pal Grant Shapps might concede). Getting stuck into some 
city gents and ladies as Labour canvassers has its moments. And their chutzpah 
as they waltz into a BHS and command staff to sell stock, so Philip Green can 
have a “truly bedazzling” fourth yacht, is an impressively off-kilter caper.
John Robinson

This Is Us 
10pm, Channel 4


The weekly weepathon keeps on giving, with the drama’s timeshift format 
highlighting the Pearson family’s choices and regrets. Kate aces a job 
interview, but is thrown when the motive for hiring her is revealed. Kevin is 
having trouble letting his emotions out for a new role, so Olivia comes up with 
a novel (and dishonest) way to unlock them. Back in the past, Rebecca and Jack 
face a dilemma over Randall’s schooling when it emerges that he is gifted.
Hannah Verdier

Film choices


The Blue Dahlia (George Marshall, 1946) 2.55pm, Film4
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftuesdays-best-tv-martin-clunes-islands-of-australia-our-dancing-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faed5d5a29eba334f786e4f90b223d16781944f9e%2F0_0_2569_1916%2F2569.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tuesday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%3A%20Martin%20Clunes%20%E2%80%93%20Islands%20of%20Australia%3B%20Our%20Dancing%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftuesdays-best-tv-martin-clunes-islands-of-australia-our-dancing-town%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tuesday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%3A%20Martin%20Clunes%20%E2%80%93%20Islands%20of%20Australia%3B%20Our%20Dancing%20Town&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftuesdays-best-tv-martin-clunes-islands-of-australia-our-dancing-town%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faed5d5a29eba334f786e4f90b223d16781944f9e%2F0_0_2569_1916%2F2569.jpg>
 Veronica Lake and Alan Ladd in The Blue Dahlia. Photograph: Allstar 
Collection/Cinetext/PARA/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
This hard-boiled, Raymond Chandler-scripted thriller stars Alan Ladd as war 
vet Johnny Morrison, returning to LA only to be framed for his wife’s death. 
Dodgy blonde Veronica Lake is pure trouble, while war buddy William Bendix gets 
blinding headaches on account of the steel plate in his head – or maybe his 
drinking habits: “Bourbon, straight! With a bourbon chaser!”

Wałęsa: Man of Hope (Andrzej Wajda, 2013) Tuesday, 10pm, BBC4

One of the late Andrzej Wajda’s last films is a powerful biopic of Lech 
Wałęsa, the electrician who jumped over the wall into a Polish shipyard in 1980 
to lead the strike that gave birth to Solidarność. That movement’s election 
helped end communist rule and hasten the fall of the Berlin wall. It’s a 
compelling record of events, recording the state’s brutal efforts to uphold its 
complacent leaders, while Robert Więckiewicz captures Lech’s bullish 
confidence, and also his tenderness with his wife Danuta (Agnieszka Grochowska) 
and their six children.Paul Howlett

Today’s best live sport


League Cup football: Manchester United v Hull City Semi-final, first-leg 
fixture from Old Trafford (kick-off 8pm). 7.30pm, Sky Sports 1

French League Cup football: Sochaux v Monaco A quarter-final from Stade 
Auguste Bonal.7.45pm, BT Sport 2

NBA: Toronto Raptors v Boston Celtics Eastern Conference Atlantic Division 
clash (tip-off 12.30am). 12.30am, BT Sport 2
 