
Our Dancing Town 
9pm, BBC2

Steve Elias is on an entertaining mission to get four Yorkshire towns dancing. 
Last week it was Barnsley. Tonight, it’s Skipton, a place of considerable 
natural beauty and a great deal of sheep-based history. Strange as this show 
may be, it works because Elias is a people person, as guilelessly open-hearted 
as his project. Although the locals are mystified by his appearance at a 
Skipton livestock auction, no one tells him to sod off, which seems like a good 
start.John Robinson

Meet the Trumps: From Immigrant to President 
10pm, Channel 4

If you think you can bear to hear the words “Donald Trump” again without 
shuddering, this programme sees Anthony Barnett trace the president-elect’s 
ancestral roots back to his penniless German grandfather, who arrived in the US 
in time to run bars and brothels during the gold rush, as well as looking at 
the life of his mother, who travelled from the Outer Hebrides to work as a maid 
in New York before marrying his tycoon father.David Stubbs

Idris Elba: Fighter 
10pm, Discovery

“No sport threatens your wellbeing the way fighting does,” Idris Elba notes at 
the outset of this doc. Quite why he’s decided to train as a professional 
kickboxer is a bit of a mystery then, but here we are. In this three-part 
series, the Wire man seeks to reach the level of pro fighter, aided by 
kickboxer-turned-Luther co-star Warren Brown and experienced trainers. This 
opener sees him decamp to Japan to learn martial arts and meditation. A bit 
silly, but Elba throws himself into it all with typical elan.Gwilym Mumford

This Is Us 
11.05pm, Channel 4

The Pearsons’ humble washing machines provide a common thread to this week’s 
family flashbacks. In the present, Randall and Kevin have it out; cue further 
insight into how the brothers’ relationship soured, with 90s Kevin eschewing 
their shared room to camp out in the basement next to a noisy dryer. Plus, 
household appliances past help tell the story of Jack and Rebecca’s 
relationship highs and lows. If sometimes mawkish, it’s competent and 
occasionally crushing.Hannah J Davies

Sugar Free Farm 
9pm, ITV

Second instalment of yet another reality show commissioned by hacking Alan 
Partridge’s Dictaphone: seven celebrities, a slender majority of whom you might 
just about have heard of, are dispatched to the Hampshire countryside to farm, 
and then live off, a natural and healthy diet. This enterprise is framed by the 
usual patronising voiceover and the customary massaged drama. Tonight, someone 
who was once on Britain’s Got Talent makes cheese.Andrew Mueller

Revolting 
10pm, BBC2

Heydon Prowse and Jolyon Rubinstein’s trite, derivative prankster satire 
trundles on. In tonight’s instalment, some Scots are unsurprisingly irritated 
by being called drunken savages. Britain First’s Paul Golding is revealed to be 
a paranoid Islamophobe (hold the front page!). And, in a sketch that has the 
feel of someone attacking a tank with a spud gun, spoof tabloid hack Dale Maily 
(take that, Dacre!) pointlessly harasses some BBC employees. Lame.Phil Harrison

The Paper Thistle: 200 Years of the Scotsman 
10pm, BBC2 Scotland

Ken Stott narrates an inky-fingered history of the Edinburgh paper, first 
published in 1817. Things really livened up in the 1950s – up until then, the 
front page was reserved for classified ads – but despite changes in ownership 
and recent circulation issues, the Scotsman has remained a vital voice in 
turbulent times. Hacks past and present reflect on its legacy, with Andrew Marr 
recalling his days as a cub reporter.Graeme Virtue

Film choice
 Entertaining blend of video game action and sweet romcom … Michael Cera and 
Mary Elizabeth Winstead in Scott Pilgrim vs the World. Photograph: Kerry 
Hayes/AP 
Scott Pilgrim vs the World (Edgar Wright, 2010), 9pm, Comedy Central

Edgar Wright, maker of Brit comedies such as Shaun Of The Dead and The World’s 
End, defects to Canada for this whizzy adaptation of Bryan Lee O’Malley’s 
graphic novel. It stars Michael Cera as geeky Scott Pilgrim, who, to win over 
rock chick Ramona (Mary Elizabeth Winstead), must defeat her seven evil, 
superpowered exes, in an entertaining blend of video game action and sweet 
romcom.Paul Howlett

Live sport

Live Snooker: The Masters Former world No 1 Judd Trump (no relation) takes on 
Marco Fu in the last 16. 1pm, BBC2

FA Cup football: Third-round replay: Lincoln City v Ipswich Town Coverage of 
the game from Sincil Bank. 8pm, BBC1

Australian Open tennis Day three coverage. Can Djokovic and Kerber retain 
their titles? 12midnight, Eurosport 1
 