
A Syrian journalist who was raised in Britain, and who has been living for 
five years inTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>, was detained by 
the Turkish immigration authorities on Wednesday (17 February) after applying 
for residency.

The reasons for the arrest of Rami Jarrah 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rami_Jarrah> are unclear although a journalist 
familiar with the case, but who asked not to be identified, told the Committee 
to Protect Journalists (CPJ) that he was questioned about his journalistic work 
.

Jarrah, who once used the name Alexander Page when reporting from Syria 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/15/world/middleeast/15iht-m15-syria-blog.html>, 
lived most of his life in London before going to Damascus in 2004. After 
fleeing Syria in 2011, he co-founded a citizen journalist group,ANA Press 
<https://www.facebook.com/ANAPRESS.EN/>, which provides filmed reports to 
international outlets.

He has regularly risked his life by crossing into Syria to report on the 
aftermath of Russian military strikes and atrocities committed by Isis. One of 
his reports, after a bombing raid on Aleppo in December,can be seen here 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O2-S4qe8eD0>.


Jarrah fled Syria with his wife and child in 2011. He had previously been 
detained by the Syrian authorities and feared his role in reporting on the 
conflict for outlets such as CNN,Al-Jazeera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/al-jazeera> and America’s NPR had put him in 
danger.


His ANA Press group has since provided footage and reports to outlets that 
include the New York Times and theHuffington Post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/huffington-post>.

Jarrah was held by immigration officials while trying to apply for a residency 
permit in the Turkish border city of Gaziantep. He has been allowed access to a 
lawyer and has not been charged with any crime.

The CPJ has called for his immediate release. Its Europe and central Asia 
programme coordinator, Nina Ognianova, said Jarrah should be allowed to work in 
Turkey without obstruction.

She said: “Jarrah is known for his independent reporting on the war in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, which he has been covering for years 
at great risk. Syrian journalists like Jarrah, who have turned to Turkey for 
safe refuge, should be protected rather than subjected to detention and 
harassment.”

Sources: CPJ 
<https://cpj.org/2016/02/cpj-calls-for-turkey-to-release-syrian-journalist-.php>
/YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O2-S4qe8eD0>/New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/15/world/middleeast/15iht-m15-syria-blog.html>/
ANA Press <https://www.facebook.com/ANAPRESS.EN/>
 