
Spoiler alert: this piece contains spoilers for Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock>, Mr Robot and Pitch. 

Anyone who thought Mary Watson’s time in Sherlock was up when a treacherous 
secretaryfired a bullet through her chest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/02/sherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers>
 must have been gobsmacked to seethe latest episode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/09/sherlock-recap-series-four-episode-two-the-lying-detective-toby-jones>
 of the whizzy detective drama. There was Mary, sans bullet wound, offering 
encouragement and advice to her bereaved husband John. Was it one of Sherlock’s 
narrative-resetting, “actually I’m not dead after all” twists? No. Instead, 
Mary was the latest in a long line of characters not letting their own passing 
prevent them from a bit of additional screen time.


TV can’t move for living dead people these days. There’s Nicola Walker in 
detective drama River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/13/river-review-police-abi-morgan-stellan-skarsgard>
, sporting a great gaping head wound as she traipses around after her grieving 
ex-partner. InTaboo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/07/taboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero>
, Tom Hardy’s 19th-century adventurer finds himself mentally tortured by a 
vision of his former slave. Rami Malek’s paranoid hacker Elliot has long 
back-and-forths with his dead dad inMr Robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/17/mr-robot-christian-slater-rami-malek>
, whilePitch’s female baseball star receives nuggets of sporting advice from 
her own deceased pa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/22/pitch-review-fox-female-baseball-drama-hits-it-out-the-park>
. Even EastEnders isn’t immune, asa dying Peggy Mitchell hallucinated her old 
sparring partner Pat Butcher in her final moments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/24/eastenders-peggy-grant-mitchell-coronation-street-hollyoaks-emmerdale>
. Indeed, at this stage it would be easier to count shows that don’t feature a 
character having a chinwag with their deceased friend/lover/family member/pet 
hamster.

Related: Why I'm so disappointed by gutless Sherlock's big twist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2017/jan/10/sherlock-gutless-why-im-disappointed-in-the-big-twist>

Of course, from Macbeth’s Banquo to Randall and Hopkirk (Deceased) and The 
Sixth Sense, showing a character interact with a dead person has long been a 
prominent dramatic device. For the most part though, these appearances tended 
to be framed as supernatural: spirits returning to haunt old acquaintances. The 
difference with the contemporary strain of talking dead is that they tend to 
exist only in the mind of their protagonist, a psychological projection to 
provide catharsis, closure, or sometimes just a bit of lively chatter.

On paper, the dead person vision is an effective way of showing something 
intangible. Depicting grief on screen can be hard, both for the actor and the 
writer, so using a tidy shortcut is understandably tempting. The problem is 
that the trope’s overuse has nudged it into cliche. We all know exactly how the 
dead person vision will pan out. The dead person appears to the living person 
to help them work through something monumental. Because the dead person is 
aware of the deep truth about the living person, they’re almost always an 
insufferable know-it-all, prone to saying things like “I see you’ve finally 
figured it out” while lying on a chaise longue reading the newspaper. These 
people aren’t just dead, they’re dead smug. Then when the living character has 
finally realised what was causing them such angst, the dead character 
disappears for good, leaving the living person staring into space and looking 
confused.

 Mr Robot’s visions are intrinsic to the show’s scratchy paranoid quality – 
but it’s an exception to the rule. Photograph: Peter Kramer/USA Network 
This isn’t to say that the “dead person vision” can’t make for great art. Mr 
Robot’s visions are intrinsic to the show’s scratchy paranoid quality, with 
Christian Slater’s barked pronouncements acting as an extension of Elliot’s 
frazzled psyche. And Mad Men used the trope to create a weird and wonderful 
coda to the episodeWaterloo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/may/28/mad-men-recap-season-seven-episode-seven-waterloo>
, as Don witnessed anall-singing, all dancing musical number performed by the 
recently deceased Bert Cooper <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FKgPTkIulEI>. 
(And no one should ever complain about getting more Bert Cooper.)

These are outliers though. In less adept hands, the resurrection of dead 
people has become lazy and obvious. It favours tidy resolutions over emotional 
complexity. It should be consigned to the TV scrapheap along with “it was all a 
dream”. So please, Sherlock and TV writers everywhere: leave the dead buried.
 