
He has used soap actors to pay tribute to Syrian refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/29/john-oliver-days-of-our-lives-syrian-refugee>
, mocked Fifa vice-presidentJack Warner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/10/john-oliver-trinidad-television-mock-jack-warner-fifa>
 and made headlines with his treatment of dry topics such asnet neutrality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/10/internet-slowdown-net-neutrality-reddit-mozilla-netflix>
. At the weekend, John Oliver continued to push the boundaries of current 
affairs reporting on his HBO show Last Week Tonight with a typically frank 
response to theParis attacks <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks>. 

During Sunday night’s monologue he took advantage of the US cable channel’s 
relaxed policy on swearing. “After the many necessary and appropriate moments 
of silence, I’d like to offer you a moment of premium cable profanity … it’s 
hardly been 48 hours but there are a few things we can say for certain.

“First, as of now, we know this attack was carried out by gigantic fucking 
arseholes … possibly working with other fucking arseholes, definitely working 
in service of an ideology of pure arseholery.

“Second, and this goes almost without saying, fuck these arseholes …


“And, third, it is important to remember, nothing about what these arseholes 
are trying to do is going to work. France is going to endure and I’ll tell you 
why. If you are in a war of culture and lifestyle withFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, good fucking luck. Go ahead, bring 
your bankrupt ideology. They’ll bring Jean-Paul Sartre, Edith Piaf, fine wine, 
Gauloise cigarettes, Camus, camembert, madeleines, macarons, and the fucking 
croquembouche. You just brought a philosophy of rigorous self-abnegation to a 
pastry fight, my friend.


“Nothing about what these arseholes are trying to do is going to work. France 
is going to endure,” he said before concluding, “So to the people of France, 
our thoughts are truly with you and I do not doubt there will be more to say on 
all of this as events unspool.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dglxh9ZgP7kc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dglxh9ZgP7kc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dglxh9ZgP7kc&media=>
 John Oliver on Paris.  