
It had been a long season, filled with humour and flailing and complete 
misdirection, by the timeKyle McLachlan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/jun/24/kyle-maclachlan-this-much-know>
’s Agent Cooper returned to theRed Room 
<http://mentalfloss.com/article/62824/10-terms-twin-peaks-explained>, a kind of 
purgatory in the thick woods outsideTwin Peaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/twin-peaks>. “I’ll see you again in 
25 years,” a spirit who looked like Laura Palmer (Sheryl Lee) told him in that 
episode, which aired 25 years ago today. Cooper had gone into the Red Room to 
save his love interest Annie (Heather Graham) from remaining in the Black Lodge 
– the show’s version of hell – indefinitely. He succeeded, but not before being 
pursued through the Red Room’s maze by a doppelganger.

Cooper woke up in his hotel room, surrounded by the sheriff and a doctor. He 
asked, “How’s Annie?” He was reassured that she was all right. He stepped into 
the hotel bathroom. He picked up a tube of toothpaste. He began squirting it 
into the sink. He looked at himself in the mirror then, and his eyes went dark. 
Suddenly, he smashed his forehead into his reflection. But the reflection, as 
it turned out, wasn’t his: it was of the demon Bob (Frank Silva), a malevolent 
entity with a flair for denim. The mirror cracked into a cobweb, blood dripped 
into the sink.

Turning toward the door, where the sheriff was knocking, Cooper took on Bob’s 
rictus grin, and starts mocking his act: “How’s Annie? How’s Annie? How’s 
Annie?”

Roll credits. 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0rjJ51N7qZY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0rjJ51N7qZY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0rjJ51N7qZY&media=>
It was the beginning of a story, not the end. But it was the very last scene 
of Twin Peaks as a network show that had been weirder than anything television 
had seen before it aired in 1990 and 1991. ABC cancelled its hit show because 
it had struggled to keep the interest of its viewers after it revealed that 
Leland Palmer (Ray Wise <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0936403/reference>), by way 
of Bob, was the one who’d killed his daughter, Laura. The mystery solved, some 
obsessives proved fickle and ratings dropped below blockbuster levels.

In hindsight, this seems silly of the network. They had a genuine piece of art 
in their hands, and one that had proven, with proper directing, to be able to 
sustain wide popular appeal. Whatever replaced Twin Peaks in its time slot has 
long been forgotten. Meanwhile our friends of the White and Black Lodges are 
still hot enough that a prequel appeared in 1992,Twin Peaks: Fire Walk With Me 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/film/film-news/11153925/Fire-Walk-With-Me-the-film-that-almost-killed-Twin-Peaks.html>
. AndShowtime will air its revival sometime late next spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/09/twin-peaks-revival-postponed-until-2017>
 with nearly the full cast returning, picking up where that uniquely strange 
scene left off, presumably to illuminate us on what Laura Palmer’s ghost truly 
meant by “I’ll see you again in 25 years.”

It’s almost like we’ve forgotten that when Twin Peaks disappeared from prime 
time, it had long been without a narrative direction. According toBrad Dukes’ 
Reflections: An Oral History of Twin Peaks 
<http://welcometotwinpeaks.com/news/reflections-oral-history-twin-peaks-book/>, 
for most of the second season, David Lynch and Mark Frost, the show’s creators, 
were preoccupied with other projects. (Lynch did not participate in the book, 
but Frost did.) And it’s not clear that there was ever a larger vision for the 
series than the nine-episode version of its first season. When Laura’s murderer 
was revealed, for example, even Wise wasn’t entirely sure that he was going to 
be the ultimate bad guy. “David said, ‘Ray, it’s you. It was always you,’” Wise 
is quoted as saying in Reflections. “I don’t know if that was true in his mind 
the whole time.”

Plotting was never the key to Twin Peaks anyway, only an excellent means of 
advertising, with “Who killed Laura Palmer?” plastered on bumper stickers 
across the country. Any detective novel worth the price on the cover could 
deliver twists just as unexpected as those which permeated Cooper’s 
investigation into Palmer’s death. What most any other show probably could not 
do is sustain the key Twin Peaks atmosphere of undeniable strangeness, the 
sweet combined with the sick in, for example,the weird way that Agent Cooper 
was obsessed with pie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BloTVTziM6c>. No one is 
behaving recognizably human, most of the time, but it is possible to have great 
affection for the characters’ individual quirks. The pitch of the acting was 
always full tilt, campy without totally abandoning certain emotional 
undercurrents. It was uncanny camp, at best.

The supernatural elements of the show – the White and Black Lodges, the Red 
Room – obviously helped to keep goosebumps raised in the audience. But they 
were not strictly narrative “mythologies” in the way one comes to expect from 
genre shows such as Buffy the Vampire Slayer or space operas. The horror of Bob 
was the horror of the way he looked, the way he walked, the fixed gaze of his 
eyes. He did not need a complicated backstory to menace you. Not unlike another 
bad guy of early-90s television, Tim Curry’sPennywise the clown 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/notes/2015/11/20-years-of-pennywise-the-clown/416577/>
, the very look of him was enough. Backstory was irrelevant.

Whether the new show will be able to recreate that atmosphere is really the 
key question. Frost and Lynch have had 25 years to build up a proper story. 
Frank Silva, the set dresser who Lynch cast as Bob on a whim, died in the 
interim since the last series. But Lynch, reportedly,has directed the entire 
show himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/16/david-lynch-new-series-twin-peaks-showtime>
. His brand of the uncanny can hardly be missing. After all, that unforgettable 
finale was largely Lynch’s baby. In Reflections, Dukes’ sources told him that 
last episode was shot largely off script, with Lynch improvising. The result 
was a magnetic hour that seemed to return to every element that had made the 
first 15 or 16 episodes of the show so unforgettable. It was too late by the 
time that last scene aired to save it. Hopefully that won’t be the case this 
time.
 