
Why doesn’t anyone want to buy Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>? After the company’s board met 
on Thursday, it told CNBC that there were “no bids on the table” and that 
instead it was exploring cost cuts – an announcement that drove another 
sell-off in the stock and pushed it down 6%, as shareholders who had hoped to 
see a September swoop from a tech or media company were disappointed. On Friday 
the shares were changing hands at around $18 – 20% down this year and well 
short of their float price of $26 three years ago.

That doesn’t mean, however, that Twitter is not a target. It can boast 
313 million monthly active users, of whom 66 million, or 21%, are in the US. 
But unlike that other social networkFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>, its growth has stalled (user 
numbers were up just 1% year-on-year in the quarter to the end of June), and it 
is far from profit, losing $107m on revenues of $602m – although the latter, at 
least, were up an encouraging 20%.

In fact, Twitter, for all its impact on news and communication since its 
foundation in 2006, has never made a profit since going public in November 
2013. A month later its shares hit an all-time high of $69, but have steadily 
declined since, while losses have worsened; shares handed out to existing and 
acquired staff count against any profit, and the company has been on a minor 
acquisition spree to try to expand its video offerings.

It’s unlikely to go bust, having a cash pile of $3.6bn. But in financial 
circles the feeling is that Twitter’s time as an independent entity is running 
out, because shareholders want to see growth and profit – and co-founder Jack 
Dorsey, who has been back as chief executive for just over a year, isn’t 
delivering on the hope his appointment engendered.

After the board meeting, Michael Pachter of Wedbush Securities sounded an 
optimistic note on CNBC. “Twitter has to figure out who they want to be,” he 
said. “They should want to be the first source of news. Their addressable 
market is the two-and-a-half-billion people on the internet who want to know 
about anything.” In his view, “there’s only one strategic buyer, and it’s 
Facebook … [Twitter is] instant news, and that’s the one element that Facebook 
is missing. I think Facebook really wants to be a media company, and that’s the 
one element of media that they’re really sorely lacking.”

Certainly the row over Facebook’s censorship of a famous Vietnam war photograph
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/09/facebook-deletes-norway-pms-post-napalm-girl-post-row>
 suggests Mark Zuckerberg’s company isn’t good at instant news. But the 
Facebook founder has repeatedly insisted that his is a “tech company, not a 
media company”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftwitter-140-characters-in-search-of-a-buyer-takeover-facebook-google-microsoft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2007e469fd9e8de4f1867812f3f8244df6e4432%2F0_177_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Twitter%3A%20140%20characters%20in%20search%20of%20a%20buyer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftwitter-140-characters-in-search-of-a-buyer-takeover-facebook-google-microsoft%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Twitter%3A%20140%20characters%20in%20search%20of%20a%20buyer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fsep%2F10%2Ftwitter-140-characters-in-search-of-a-buyer-takeover-facebook-google-microsoft%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2007e469fd9e8de4f1867812f3f8244df6e4432%2F0_177_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Jack Dorsey: back as chief executive. Photograph: Drew Angerer/Getty Images 
He might also feel that he could do without the explosive rows Twitter suffers 
as a result of tweets from misogynists, racist groups and would-be terror 
recruiters. And $18bn is nearly as much as Facebook paid for communications 
service WhatsApp, which Facebook isbeginning to exploit for advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/25/whatsapp-to-give-users-phone-number-facebook-for-targeted-ads>
.

If not Facebook, what about Google? That idea has been around since 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/10/why-would-google-be-interested-in-buying-twitter>
. Certainly, owning Twitter would bring Google closer to its mission “to 
organise the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful”.

Ben Thompson, an independent technology analyst who writes the Stratechery 
blog, thinks it makes perfect sense. Google badly needs a compelling product 
used daily on mobile platforms. (On average, people carry out very fewGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> searches on mobile compared to 
desktop; they tend to use apps instead.)

However, as Thompson pointed out last week in a newsletter to his subscribers, 
Twitter signed up in 2015 to use Google’s DoubleClick advertising platform and 
give the search engine access to the “firehose” of every tweet as they happen, 
to roll into search results. “This, effectively, eliminated the top two reasons 
for Google to buy the company,” he observed. As long as those deals exist, 
Google gets almost all the benefit of owning Twitter without the downsides.

What about a media company purchase? After all, if Twitter is a news service, 
a news company might want it. Pachter at Wedbush suggested Rupert Murdoch’s 
News Corp would be the best fit; Time Warner and Disney don’t want a pure news 
feed. “Most of the media companies aren’t actually in the news business, except 
for News Corp,” he said. But Murdoch will remember his$500m purchase of MySpace 
in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/jul/24/newscorporation.digitalmedia>: 
within a few years, Facebook had trounced it.

Microsoft’s purchase of LinkedIn for $26.2bn in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/13/linkedin-bought-by-microsoft-for-262bn-in-cash>
 may have heartened Twitter shareholders, but the two companies look very 
different: LinkedIn makes money, and is comparatively orderly. Twitter, by 
contrast, is trying to fight longstanding problems with abuse by its users, 
while also seeking a feature that can’t immediately be copied, and then 
executed and monetised better, by Facebook – as happened with its livestreaming 
app Periscope, which Facebook trumped with Facebook Live.

“I see [Twitter’s] model as being slightly broken and in need of a fix,” said 
Pachter. “Give Dorsey another year and let him fix it. If he doesn’t, get 
somebody who can.”

Dorsey might not have any offers to buy – but he might soon want some.
 