
At first, Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> was 
changing the timeline, and then it was not changing the timeline, and then not 
changing the timeline next week.

But Twitter has now confirmed it has introduced a new feature that does change 
the way users view messages in their timeline, pushing algorithmically selected 
“best” tweets to the top.


Some users responded badly to reports of the new feature over the weekend, 
saying Twitter should prioritise bugs and dealing with harassment on the site. 
But Twitter’s senior director of product, Jeff Siebert, said reports about the 
timeline were wrong because the change would not “insert tweets throughout the 
timeline or completely shuffle them so there’s no order”.

It will be called “show me the best tweets first”, and the selection will show 
in reverse chronological order at the top of the timeline. All other tweets 
will show in the next section, again in reverse chronological order. The 
feature will be accessible on the web and on Twitter’s iOS and Android apps.

Twitter is replacing favourites with likes – but does anyone heart it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/03/twitter-replacing-favourites-with-likes-does-anyone-heart>
When a user opens the app, it will select what it thinks are the most 
important tweets and show those at the top of the timeline. The number and type 
of tweet depends on the user’s behaviour, how long they have been away and how 
often they tweet. Twitter says that in testing, it encouraged more users to 
tweet and retweet posts.

The new feature has been launched to all users as a new option, but after 
several weeks it will be on by default. It canstill be switched off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/10/twitter-how-to-turn-off-best-tweets-feature>
 in settings, Siebert said.


“We set out to solve a very special problem on Twitter. Hundreds of thousands 
of users say Twitter is an essential and engaging part of their daily life, but 
when they wake up on a Monday or come out of the gym, there’s a lot to catch up 
on. We heard that, and felt that users were missing important tweets.”

Siebert said he anticipated the new feature would be greeted much the same as 
theintroduction of hearts, which replaced stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/nov/03/twitter-replacing-favourites-with-likes-does-anyone-heart>
 to mark out favourite tweets on the service. “People didn’t like it at the 
time but it has been a massive success, and millions of people who had never 
used the favourite feature have now used hearts.”

Some Twitter users reacted in characteristically colourful language to the 
introduction of hearts as well as rumours of changes to the timeline, the 
latter prompting the hashtag#RIPTwitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/08/jack-dorsey-riptwitter-timeline-twitter>
.
YasmineVanWilt (@YasmineVanWilt) 
I understand you need to monetize, but turning @twitter 
<https://twitter.com/twitter> into @facebook <https://twitter.com/facebook> so 
you can flog more ads alienates me & many others.#RIPTwitter 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/RIPTwitter?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/YasmineVanWilt/status/696541126774366209> February 8, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/YasmineVanWilt/status/696541126774366209> 
Siebert said: “We’re honoured to have a customer base that cares so deeply 
about the product, and that can use our own platform to give us feedback on the 
product.” Siebert said feedback would be combined with data and the experiences 
of a group of test users who have been using the new feature for several 
months, though he would not say how many had used it.

Twitter has been under huge pressure from investors frustrated by lack of user 
growth.

The service had 320 million monthly users in September 2015 – the last month 
for which Twitter released figures – but grew from only 284 million in the last 
quarter of 2014 to 307 million a year later. Rampant growth among Twitter’s 
rivals has made investors question the advertising and product strategies of 
its leadership:Facebook has 1.59 billion users 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/28/how-much-are-you-worth-to-facebook>
 and Instagram 400 million every month, and Snapchat at least 100 million every 
day.

Unlike Instagram, whose aesthetic has quickly attracted advertisers, Twitter 
has been relatively cautious in its implementation of advertising, offering 
promoted tweets, promoted trends and promoted ads. Its revenues have been 
healthy, with advertising up 58% to $569.2m for the third quarter of 2015.

Twitter planning 'regular and consistent action' to curb harassment and abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/09/twitter-online-abuse-harassment-nick-pickles>
Other changes have been mooted by CEO Jack Dorsey, including increasing the 
character limit from 140 to 10,000 characters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/05/twitter-shares-plummet-rumor-10000-character-tweets-jack-dorsey>
. Dorsey said Twitter had noticed users posting pictures to post longer 
messages but the information could not be searched or analysed in image form. 
Siebert would not comment on the character limit but agreed that it could 
present challenges to both Twitter’s design and navigation, as well as make 
more data accessible and searchable.

In its latest initiative, Twitter tackled one of its most controversial 
issues, establishing a new safety council to help develop its management of 
complex harassment and safety issues of its users.The council includes 
<https://blog.twitter.com/2016/announcing-the-twitter-trust-safety-council> the 
Samaritans, the Internet Watch Foundation and Feminist Frequency.

In another new development, Twitter is also introducing a new ad format that 
drops a video ad 
<http://techcrunch.com/2016/02/09/timing-is-everything-twitter-unveils-first-view-ads-videos-at-the-top-of-your-timeline/>
 at the top of a user’s feed.
 