
Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> is battling for a 
share of the internet’s booming video advertising budgets, its executives said 
on Tuesday, as the company reported its slowest growth in quarterly revenue 
since going public in 2013.

Facing increasing competition from fast-growing competitors such as Snapchat 
and Instagram, Twitter is attempting to encourage users to stay longer on the 
platform by adding more live video content from Periscope and on Twitter itself.

It has signed 250 media partners across politics, sports and entertainment, 
introducing ways to watch live video and simultaneously comment including live 
broadcasts of the Republican and Democratic party conventions in July.


“We’re working every day to make Twitter faster and more intuitive to use,” 
said its CEO, Jack Dorsey, “introducing changes to the timeline, character 
count and reply rules. We have exciting momentum on live video on Periscope and 
on Twitter.”

Adam Bain, Twitter’s chief operating officer, said that video now accounts for 
the majority of Twitter’s advertising revenue. “One year ago those products 
[Twitter’s video advertising offering] did not exist,” he said. “There’s a 
whole new set of video budgets out there – a$10bn marketplace in the US 
<http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Mobile-Spearheads-Digital-Video-Advertisings-Growth/1013611>
 alone.”

Bain said there had been strong demand for advertising around its NFL content, 
including the brands Sony, Nestlé, Verizon and Anheuser-Busch.

Twitter’s user base, however, modestly increased to 313 million average 
monthly active users in the second quarter, up from 310 million in the first 
quarter.


The company, which has been struggling with stagnating user growth and lower 
spending by advertisers, is doubling down on efforts to attract users.

Under Dorsey, the company is working to better define its role in the growing 
social media landscape. Twitter rolled out a video ad this week that showed it 
as the place to go for live news, updates and discussion about current events.

Twitter for dummies: a guide to the social network that still confuses us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/twitter-new-ad-campaign-what-is-guide>
The microblogging service operator’s shares plunged 10% in extended trading as 
revenue for the quarter fell short of analysts’ estimates. Revenue forecast for 
the current quarter also came in below estimates.

Twitter forecast current quarter revenue of $590-$610m, well below the average 
analyst estimate of $678.18m.

Excluding items, the company earned 13 cents per share, topping the average 
analyst estimate of 10 cents.

The company’s net loss narrowed to $107.2m, or 15 cents a share, in the second 
quarter ended 30 June, from $136.7m, or 21 cents a share, a year earlier.

Revenue rose about 20% to $602m, missing the estimate of $606.8m. 
 