
Uber’s main British business paid only £411,000 in tax last year while the 
commission fees from thousands of drivers in the UK disappeared into a 
controversial tax structure in the Netherlands.


The latest accounts for Uber London Ltd 
<https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/08014782/filing-history/MzE1OTIxOTcxNGFkaXF6a2N4/document?format=pdf&download=0>
 show the UK company’s turnover doubled to £23.3m last year, but all of this 
income was earned by providing unspecified “support” to other companies within 
the taxi-app group, and not from driver commissions.


After deducting expenses, this small subsidiary, which employs 105 staff, made 
a profit of £1.8m and paid tax of £411,000.

Meanwhile, accounts for the company’s international sales hub in the 
Netherlands reveal that commissions from drivers in London and scores of other 
cities around the world were booming in 2015, pushing revenues up to $520m 
(£420m).

This was more than seven times the figure for 2014. Passengers pay their fares 
directly to drivers, who automatically hand over a commission fee toUber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> that ultimately appears in the 
group’s Dutch accounts.

Uber International BV is one of a handful of companies in the Netherlands that 
together form the core of the group’s complex tax planning arrangements, 
helping minimise its tax bills around the world.


Details about Uber’s aggressive tax planning come as the group separately 
fights claims that it is aggressively exploiting UK employment laws. The US 
corporation isbeing sued by a group of UK drivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/19/uber-drivers-court-tribunal-self-employed-uk-employment-law>
 who say they should be classified as employees of Uber, which would allow them 
to receive a range of benefits. A court judgment in the case is expected to be 
release this month.

Alex Cobham, research director at campaign group Tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/tax> Justice Network, said: “Uber’s UK 
accounts confirm the extent to which major multinationals are impervious to 
policymakers’ rhetoric, and willing to take full advantage of both the 
weaknesses of international tax rules and of the absence of transparency.”


Anneliese Dodds, Labour MEP and tax campaigner, said: “Compared to the way you 
pay for ordinary taxis, this kind of structure [used by Uber] is ridiculous … 
There is quite a lot of evidence it depresses wages and taxes.”


In a statement, Uber said: “The vast majority of the revenue generated by our 
technology goes straight into the pockets of drivers who use our app and so 
stays in the local economy. We look forward to expanding to more cities and 
creating more economic opportunities in the months to come.

“While we recorded a profit here last year, globally we make a loss as we are 
a young company that is still expanding and investing heavily. Uber is also 
creating thousands of economic opportunities in every city we operate in.”

Uber is the latest US tech company to resist pressure from British politicians 
to abandon its controversial tax structure and bring its UK business onshore.

In her speech to Conservative party conference this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-consigns-cameron-to-history-in-populist-speech>
, Theresa May said she was determined to tackle tax avoidance. “If you’re … an 
international company that treats tax laws as an optional extra,” she said. 
“I’m putting you on warning. This can’t go on any more. A change has got to 
come.”

Similar threats have been made by previous leaders. In 2013, David Cameron 
said: “When some businesses aren’t seen to pay their taxes that’s corrosive to 
the public trust. Some forms of avoidance have become so aggressive that I 
think it is right to say these are ethical issues and it is time to call for 
more responsibility. This is an issue whose time has come … [Multinational 
companies should] wake up and smell the coffee.”

A year later, the then chancellor, George Osborne, said: “Some technology 
companies go to extraordinary lengths to pay little or no tax here … If you 
abuse our tax system, you abuse the trust of the British people. And my message 
to those companies is clear: we will put a stop to it.”

In the run-up to the 2015 general election, Osborne announced the introduction 
of a punitive tax on those multinationals artificially shifting revenues from 
Britain to overseas operations in order to lower their tax bills.

However, reaction from big international businesses to this measure – known as 
the diverted profits tax – has been mixed. Amazon and Facebook have unwound 
their controversial arrangements for shifting UK sales overseas. But others, 
including Google, eBay and Uber, appear to have left their arrangements largely 
unchanged.
 