
A contest between a "fair man and the devil" is how a spokesman for the main 
opposition party, Forum for Democratic Change (FDC), describes the forthcoming 
general election inUganda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/uganda>.

Recent primary elections for the FDC in Katine sub-county passed by with no 
malpractices reported, which was in stark contrast to earlier primaries held by 
the ruling National Resistance Movement (NRM), which were linked with reports of
widespread vote-rigging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2010/sep/07/katine-election-malpractice/>. 

The FDC has been holding national primaries to elect the party's candidates to 
stand in constitutencies across Uganda. Most were either elected in a fair and 
free contest or went unopposed.

In Soroti district, which includes Katine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/katine/2008/sep/23/background.news/>, voting was 
peaceful with most of the losers accepting results.

"This has been a free and fair election," said Daniel Ewadu, vice-chair of 
Soroti district local council, who won the FDC ticket to contest the council 
seat. "We did not have issues of voter bribery and rigging, unlike our 
counterpart, NRM. This is an indication that the 2011 general election will be 
a contest between a fair man and the 'devil'."

According to Ewadu, the FDC elections succeeded because there were clear rules 
disqualifiying anyone caught trying to bribe voters. Unlike the NRM, which used 
adult suffrage to elect its candidates, the FDC used an electoral college that 
was easy to manage. (Adult suffrage permits all registered members of a party 
to vote, whereas a electoral college system only allows specific members who 
are in party leadership positions to vote.

"Our electoral commission was also trained to handle the elections â”€ that is 
why we were able to register good results," said Ewadu. He beat his close 
rival, John Enomu, a councillor representing Katine at the district council to 
win the position. Enomu got 83 votes against Ewadu's 109 votes.

For the Soroti district woman MP's seat, Angeline Osege narrowly beat her 
opponent, Ruth Ikuna, by 85 votes to 80 . The third candidate, Immaculate 
Atayo, got no votes.

Osege said she had entered politics to bring a much needed social change in 
the country by advocating a free and fair society where all individuals could 
enjoy equal rights to the country's resources. "We want good policies," she 
told the Guardian. "We need room for everyone to qualify for jobs. This is not 
[a priority] in the current government."

Peter Omolo, current Soroti county MP (whose constituency includes Katine), 
heavily beat his opponent, Moses Etalu, by 466 votes to 41.

Meanwhile, the municipality MP, Willy Ekemu, was beaten into second place by 
Moses Attan by 133 votes to 74. The other contestants Anthony Ayabu and 
Geoffrey Okoto hardly troubled the count with two and seven votes respectively.

Attan's main opponent in the general election will be the NRM's former junior 
minister, Mike Mukula, who was also a former high-profile official in the 
Ugandan programme linked to the UN's Global Fund to fight Aids, TB and malaria.

Attan said the general election ought to focus on issues that affect the 
community. "This government has failed to provide health services, there is 
hunger, and service delivery has completely died. Even if it means us 
surrendering our lives, for as long as our children benefit, we shall not waver 
from the truth," he vowed.

Paul Aruo held on to his Soroti municipality mayoral seat, retaining his 
ticket to vie as a mayor with 104 votes against James Peter Olupot's 66 votes.

The FDC's Soroti district registrar, James Okello, said he was happy the 
exercise had been free and fair and appealed to the condidates to maintain the 
spirit in the general election next year.
 