
Three years ago, Edith Apiango used to wade up to her thighs through the muddy 
waters of a swamp to reach a place where a few bubbles marked the mouth of a 
flooded spring.

She would fill her 20-litre yellow jerrycan with water full of parasites and 
disease-causing bacteria. Unsafe water was just one of the hazards of life in 
Katine, in north-east Uganda.

Apiango, 23, knew the swamp water was a danger to her young children's health. 
"My boy almost died," she said. "I took him to Ojom [the small local health 
centre] but there was no improvement so I went to town [Soroti, which is nine 
miles away]. They treated him but they said he will continue to get sick if you 
use that water."

Much has changed in the three years since editor-in-chief Alan Rusbridger 
launched the Guardian's groundbreaking development project in Katine 
sub-county, supported by the generosity of readers. Katine's people, some of 
the poorest on the planet, have clean water, better schools, less childhood 
disease and the knowledge to improve their livelihoods and better organise 
their communities.

Apiango and her grandmother now walk to a new borehole, well maintained by 
their own community, and pump clean water for the family. In a display of 
enthusiasm, the grandmother, Erima Anayo beats her hands on her sides and 
throws them in the air. "We are very, very happy and very grateful to receive 
this borehole," she said several times. "We don't have diarrhoea these days – 
only malaria."

To suggest that the lives of all the 29,000 people in the sub-county's six 
parishes have been transformed would be an exaggeration, but as the Guardian 
prepares to bring its comprehensive coverage of the Katine project to a close, 
there is clear and measurable change that has affected all in some way.

The project, funded by Guardian readers and Barclays and run by the African 
Medical and Research Foundation (Amref), aimed to improve lives through an 
integrated focus on five areas – health, education, water and sanitation, 
livelihoods and governance.

Every aspect of the project was tracked by Ugandan journalists based in 
Katine, bringing unprecedented transparency to a development project through a
dedicated website <https://www.theguardian.com/katine>.

Some of the changes are visible, such as the new school building at Amorikot, 
the community centre and produce store, and the health centre's lab for 
diagnostic testing of diseases such as malaria and HIV.

Some, arguably the most important, are not – such as the training of villagers 
to educate their communities in hygiene measures to prevent disease, or the 
widening of farmers' skills.

These are some of the achievements of the last three years:

• 11 boreholes have been dug and handpumps installed, and five shallow wells 
built, bringing safe water to about 69% of households.

• 16 primary school classrooms have been built and another 22 refurbished. 
More than 5,000 textbooks have been distributed, bringing the ratio down to one 
book between four students.

• Campaigns to encourage parents to send their girls to school and keep them 
in school have paid off, with enrolment up from 4,230 in 2008 to 4,940 in 2010.

• Malaria cases are down, following the distribution of more than 7,100 
insecticide-treated bed nets for pregnant women and children under five years 
old.

• 150 village savings and loans associations have been set up and 66 farmers' 
groups have been helped with training and given seeds.

• The number of women in leadership positions in the community has increased 
by 50%.

Pastor Charles Eromu of Katine parish said: "The project has helped us a lot. 
It has changed us in Katine. Knowledge was given to people. When someone is 
given knowledge about health and other activities, that will help them for 
their whole life.

"The problem is that change takes time. But people are happy."

Amref will remain in Katine for one more year to ensure that the project 
investment will be sustainable.

The Guardian's full-time coverage of the project ends today with the 
publication of a free supplement in the paper - The Story of Katine - which 
details how our readers' donations were spent and how lives have been saved.
 