
Stuck in a mobile notspot? Can’t watch YouTube on the bus? Twitter dead on 
your canal trip? TheNational Infrastructure Commission (NIC) feels your pain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/14/uk-4g-coverage-worse-than-in-romania-and-peru-watchdog-finds>
. You might not have heard of the NIC – unsurprising, since it was only set up 
in October 2015, by a long-forgotten politician called George Osborne.

But the NIC is an independent, non-governmental body which is overseeing 
£100bn of infrastructure spending. The members of the NIC are not to be sneezed 
at; they include former transport secretary Lord Adonis, former deputy prime 
minister Lord Heseltine, and Demis Hassabis, the founder of the British 
artificial intelligence companyDeepMind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/16/demis-hassabis-artificial-intelligence-deepmind-alphago>
, which was snapped up by Google for £400m.

Having already looked at smart power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/04/improved-energy-storage-could-help-save-britain-8bn-a-year-says-report>
, Crossrail 2, and thehigh speed north 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/high-speed-north-a-national-infrastructure-commission-report>
 rail scheme, the NIC has now looked at the UK’s prospects for 5G mobile 
networks.

UK 4G coverage worse than in Romania and Peru, watchdog finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/14/uk-4g-coverage-worse-than-in-romania-and-peru-watchdog-finds>
What – 5G? Most of us still noodle along on 3G mobile data, for which the 
carriers spent £22.5bn in abandwidth auction in 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/dec/20/4g-spectrum-auction-britain>
. 4G is much faster, and followed in 2014 (after raising only £2.3bn in its 
bandwidth auction). But 4G is also far less prevalent: the typical user can 
only access 4G 53% of the time, whereas 3G is available nearly everywhere.

The NIC is very upset about our performance in 4G: “Britain is 54th in the 
world for 4G. There are too many digital deserts and partial notspots, even 
within our city centres.” Being 54th means our4G 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/4g> networks are behind Romania, 
Albania, Panama and Peru. Sad face emoji.

The NIC report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-must-take-action-now-to-secure-our-connected-future-so-we-are-ready-for-5g-and-essential-services-are-genuinely-available-where-they-are-n>
 is wonderfully buzzword-compliant: 5G, it explains, “means seamless 
connectivity. Ultra-fast, ultra-reliable, ultra-high capacity transmitting at 
super-low latency.” You can almost imagine the advert: breezy music playing 
while a happy young couple runs down the beach in slow motion as they upload 
holiday videos.

That’s not enough for the NIC. It notes that “mobile connectivity has become a 
necessity. The market has driven great advances since the advent of the mobile 
phone, but government must now play an active role to ensure that basic 
services are available wherever we live, work and travel, and our roads, 
railways and city centres must be made 5G-ready as quickly as possible.”

It sees a future of self-driving vehicles, and lots of people on trains who 
are using the internet to its full capacity (videoconferencing work while 
they’re delayed by strikes, perhaps). The NIC says that by 2025, the UK should 
be “5G-ready”: “the railway network must improve connectivity with a trackside 
network” – estimated cost £550m – and major roads must have “mobile networks 
fit for the future” at a cost of £380m. It’s fun to observe that giving rail 
passengers better connectivity takes away one of the key claimed benefits of 
HS2 – the necessity of getting businesspeople to the ends of the line faster.

Certainly it makes sense to improve connectivity around the rail and road 
networks. The key question is, will government do this better than mobile 
carriers?

So far, the mobile market in the UK has done things very effectively. I’ve 
frequently been critical of the way that the UK’s fixed-line infrastructure – 
essentially,BT’s Openreach network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/24/ofcom-review-to-decide-future-of-bt-openreach>
 – has failed rural internet users. But when it comes to mobile, we’re flying: 
Ofcom’s data shows that in 2014 and 2015 theUK was first and second in terms of 
pricing <https://www.ofcom.org.uk/research-and-data/cmr/cmr15/international> 
for mobile services, ahead of Italy, France, Germany, Spain and especially the 
US.

The NIC says we’re doing badly in 4G. But I’d say we’re doing OK. The UK’s 4G 
auction was ridiculously delayed by arguments over the allocation available to 
EE (now owned by BT). Even so, in just under three years, we’ve gone from 0% to 
53% availability.

What about these rivals who are outgunning us? Peru had a year’s head start on 
us in building 4G networks, and is home to boththe fastest and slowest mobile 
speeds in South America, according to OpenSignal 
<https://opensignal.com/reports/2016/06/peru/state-of-the-mobile-network/>. 
Romania has been doing 4G since 2012 
<http://www.zdnet.com/article/vodafone-and-orange-scramble-to-be-first-to-4g-in-romania/>
, so it should beat us. Panama only began in March 2015; but it’s a much 
smaller country. And Albania began in July 2015, but it’s a small country too: 
only 3 million people, with five competing networks.

As the NIC points out, you need the government to step in where markets would 
fail. Covering all our roads and railways won’t happen commercially. The costs 
are relatively low, and the new chancellor could view it as a desirable 
infrastructure boost for the economy. We might finally end up with a proper 
internet infrastructure. All we need after that is to act on the NIC suggestion 
of having someone at cabinet level equivalent to the secretary of state for 
transport. Who will be the first secretary of state for the internet?
 