
Homebuyers now have to save for up to 24 years to set aside a deposit large 
enough to buy them a foot on Britain’s housing ladder, according to new 
research.

The Resolution Foundation thinktank has used the Bank of England’s latest 
survey of household finances 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2015/q404.pdf>
 to show that with house prices rising sharply, it would now take almost a 
quarter of a century for low- and middle-income households to accumulate a 
deposit on average, if they set aside 5% of their disposable income each year.

It is lower than the peak reached before the financial crisis, but 
dramatically higher than the three years that was the norm in the 1980s and 
1990s – and comes despite interest rates remaining at the emergency level of 
0.5% set by the Bank of England in the depths of recession.

George Osborne has introduced a series of help-to-buy policies, including 
shared ownership schemes and taxpayer guarantees for mortgages for first-time 
buyers, and pledged in hisspending review last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2015/nov/25/spending-review-george-osborne-autumn-statement->
 to “turn generation rent into generation buy”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fuk-home-buyers-save-24-years-housing-ladder-deposit-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc808cd6e99a500296369e69f02ba97664ad04a1%2F0_0_920_614%2F920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20buyers%20need%20to%20save%20for%20up%20to%2024%20years%20to%20get%20on%20housing%20ladder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fuk-home-buyers-save-24-years-housing-ladder-deposit-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20buyers%20need%20to%20save%20for%20up%20to%2024%20years%20to%20get%20on%20housing%20ladder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F20%2Fuk-home-buyers-save-24-years-housing-ladder-deposit-study%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc808cd6e99a500296369e69f02ba97664ad04a1%2F0_0_920_614%2F920.jpg>
 How long does it take savers to accumulate a deposit? Photograph: Resolution 
Foundation 
But Resolution’s chief economist, Matt Whittaker, warned that help to buy may 
simply boost house prices, lifting them further out of the reach of 
lower-income households.

“To the extent that these schemes have stoked demand and so propped up house 
prices in recent years, they have served to make homeownership even less 
attainable for many, while increasing the gains flowing to older homeowners who 
have been the main beneficiaries of the sustained housing boom,” he said.

Resolution said it is concerned that the rising cost of homeownership is 
exacerbating a generational divide, which has seen the baby boomer generation 
accumulate a financial cushion, while younger workers have struggled as wages 
have been squeezed.

Its analysis of the Bank’s data shows that among households headed by 
under-45s, 28% of non-homeowners say they do not think they will ever manage to 
buy. Among the poorest fifth of households, the figure rises to 39%.

Ashley Seager, co-founder of the Intergenerational Foundation thinktank, which 
campaigns for a better deal for younger households, said: “Today’s wealthy baby 
boomers found it easy to buy housing a generation or two ago, especially as 
MIRAS tax relief on mortgages was available to them. But now their children and 
grandchildren cannot access housing in anything like the same way.”

He welcomed the chancellor’s recent crackdown on the buy-to-let market, which 
has restricted the tax relief landlords can claim, with the aim of levelling 
the playing field with owner-occupiers.

The Bank of England’s financial policy committee, which has been given the 
task of preventing future financial crises, has also warned that it is becoming 
increasingly concerned about whetherbuy-to-let borrowers are fuelling an 
unsustainable boom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/01/bank-of-england-scrutinises-vulnerable-buy-to-let-mortgages>
.

Osborne is currently consulting about whether to hand the FPC new powers over 
buy to let, which could see the supply of mortgages dry up, even if the Bank’s 
base rate remains at zero.
 