
Britain’s economy performed far better than expected in after the Brexit vote, 
with GDP growth falling to 0.5% from0.7% in the previous quarter.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/uk-economy-grows-by-07-in-second-quarter>

The strong showing, which defied City forecasts that growth would more than 
halve to 0.3%, came after the dominant services sector expanded at a faster 
rate in the past three months than during the period before the referendum vote.


But the figures were marred by a contraction in agriculture, construction and 
manufacturing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/manufacturers-feel-falling-pound-is-bad-despite-increasing-their-exports>
 that prompted business groups to urge the chancellor, Philip Hammond, to use 
the autumn statement next month to support measures that boost investment and 
productivity.

The data from the Office for National Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/office-for-national-statistics> covers the 
three months to the end of September and is the first official verdict on how 
the economy has performed since Britain voted to leave the European Union.


The main boost to services came from transport, storage and communication, 
which grew at its fastest pace since the fourth quarter of 2009, rising 2.2% 
over the period in contrast to 0.6% in the second quarter.

The ONS said higher output in the film, music and TV sectors was the main 
driver, indicating that Britain’s creative industries sailed through the 
uncertainty surrounding the referendum unscathed.

The expansion of the services sector helped to offset the steepest fall in 
construction since the third quarter of 2012, with a slide in new housebuilding 
dragging the entire building industry down 1.4% between July and September.

Manufacturing dropped by 1% in the third quarter, while production fell 0.4% 
and agriculture slipped by 0.7%.

 The figures rule out the prospect of a technical recession – defined by two 
consecutive quarters of contraction – in the second half of the year that was 
predicted by many economists before the referendum vote.

UK GDP growth figures to show Brexit vote's impact on the economy – business 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/27/uk-gdp-growth-figures-brexit-impact-economy-business-live>
The 0.5% rise also beat the latest forecasts from Bank of England 
policymakers, who were predicting at the time of theAugust inflation report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 that third quarter growth would come in at 0.1%.

Threadneedle Street is likely to use the data as a reason to delay any further 
stimulus to the economy until next year, placing further pressure on the 
Treasury to support industry.

Hammond said the figures demonstrated the resilience of the UK economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/philip-hammond-rules-out-splurge-in-public-spending-in-autumn-statement>
, which was “well-placed” to deal with the challenges and opportunities created 
by the EU referendum.

“We are moving into a period of negotiations with the EU and we are determined 
to get the very best deal for households and businesses. The economy will need 
to adjust to a new relationship with the EU, but we are well-placed to deal 
with the challenges and take advantage of opportunities ahead.”

Challenging the chancellor’s assessment, several City analysts warned the 
Brexit bounce would prove temporary.

Kallum Pickering, senior UK economist at Berenberg bank, said the resilient 
post-referendum performance “does not say anything about the UK’s ability to 
perform outside of the EU”.

He said: “The good quarter of growth merely reflects the momentum heading into 
the vote and the healthy underlying fundamentals after some three years of good 
growth. The data does not alter our long-term view that Brexit will lower UK 
trend growth, to around 1.8% from 2.2% per year, via less trade, migration and 
investment with its major market, the EU.”

Business groups also warned the chancellor that industry remained vulnerable 
to uncertainty after the Brexit vote, and he should open his cheque book to 
prevent a longer term slump in output.

Mike Spicer, director of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said: 
“Although many manufacturers saw a bounce this summer, in part from the lower 
exchange rate, this was not enough to prevent a contraction in industrial 
output overall. Many have found themselves on the wrong side of currency 
movements – facing increased costs for imported components.”

For this reason “boosting business confidence must be a key task for 
government in the months ahead”, he said.

The TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said the government needed to do 
more to help UK manufacturing. “We can’t yet say what impact Brexit will have 
on our economy, but these figures show there’s no room for complacency. British 
manufacturing is still struggling, and now faces real uncertainty following the 
vote to leave the EU.

“The government must use next month’s autumn statement to boost Britain’s jobs 
and wages. This means investing in infrastructure like roads, rail and homes, 
and raising the national minimum wage.”

Britain’s economy has been growing for 15 consecutive quarters. The relative 
resilience of the UK economy since the Brexit vote on 23 June has largely been 
attributed to awillingness among consumers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/uk-household-spending-rose-in-september-figures-show>
 to keep spending, as well asstrength in the services sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/services-sector-growth-brexit-vote-uk>
.

The International Monetary Fund has predicted that Britain will be the fastest 
growing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/04/britain-fastest-growing-g7-economy-imf-international-monetary-fund-brexit-vote>
 of the G7 leading industrial countries in 2016, with growth of 1.8%. The 
Washington-based fund accepted that its warning of apost-Brexit-vote financial 
crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/18/imf-says-brexit-would-trigger-uk-recession-eu-referendum>
 had proved too pessimistic.
 