
Alain Juppé, the frontrunner in next year’s French presidential elections, is 
to visit London and has suggested a deal may be possible on free movement of 
workers that will allow the UK access to the single market.

Brexit explained: article 50 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=article_50>
Juppé is quoted in the Financial Times 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/cc4028fa-411f-11e6-b22f-79eb4891c97d.html#axzz4DQhy3e89>
 as saying the issue is up for negotiation. The politician from the mainstream 
French right will visit London on Monday and is certain to be pressed to give a 
fuller explanation about how much flexibility of movement he envisages. His 
remarks do not tally with the position of either the European commission or the 
German or French governments.

Juppé is also expected to seek assurances about the status of French citizens 
living in the UK after the frontrunner for the Tory leadership, Theresa May, 
saidthe status of existing EU migrants would be a factor in any negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/03/theresa-may-eu-migrants-pawn-brexit-talks-tory-leadership-race>
 on the terms of a British withdrawal from the EU.

Her remarks were supported by the foreign secretary, Philip Hammond, who said 
it would be absurd to give assurances on the status of EU citizens in the UK 
before similar assurances came from the EU about UK citizens. Hammond has been 
a leading UK voice arguing for a trade-off in talks between access to the 
single market and free movement of EU citizens.


The EU is uneasy about giving the UK any concessions on free movement since it 
is likely to lead to calls for similar treatment from other nationalist 
politicians inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

The EU has been refusing any concessions for the Swiss on free movement 
despite a referendum in 2014 insisting the government impose immigration 
controls. Switzerland is wary of losing access to the European single market, 
and may have to hold a second referendum if no deal is offered by the EU.

The Financial Times interview did not provide full quotes on freedom of 
movement from Juppé, who polls show is likely to be the main candidate from the 
mainstream French right and is favourite to win the presidency.

Alain Juppé: from cold, grey automaton to saviour of France?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/01/alain-juppe-from-cold-grey-automaton-to-saviour-of-france>
However, it quoted him saying everything was “up for negotiation”.

“We need to find ways to cooperate, to find a solution to have the UK in the 
European market, one way or another – whether that is part of the European 
Economic Area or something else,” he said.

Juppé also said in the Financial Times that the UK border, currently at Calais 
under the terms of a non-EU treaty, should bemoved back to British soil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/25/french-border-deal-wont-be-affected-by-brexit-paris>
. Possible border movement was raised during the referendum campaign with 
figures including Juppé, the economics minister, Emanuel Macron, and French 
regional politicians all calling for Britain to take it back.

He said the bilateral Le Touquet accord that allows French customs officials 
to work on British soil and vice versa should be renegotiated. “The logic 
requires that border controls should take place on British soil,” he said.

The Calais refugee and migrant camp that has grown up in the past two years as 
thousands of migrants seek to avoid border controls there and reach Britain 
illegally through the Channel tunnel is controversial on both sides of the 
Channel.

Calais business leaders claim it has detroyed tourism, and undermined 
relations between northernFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> and 
south-east England.

Some senior French figures are still hoping that the UK will rethink Brexit, 
but others believe it is vital to deal with the uncertainty and the UK must be 
forced out as quickly as possible.

Sir Peter Ricketts, the former UK ambassador to France, told a conference in 
Aix, dubbed the Davos of Provence, that: “Brexit is the revenge of the losers 
from globalisation, and rejection of elites in London or Brussels offering 
uniform solutions … It is necessary that the parliamentary political class 
begins to explain why Europe is necessary.”
 