
British organisations criticised in an official report which branded members 
of theMuslim Brotherhood <https://www.theguardian.com/world/muslim-brotherhood> 
as “possible terrorists” have denied they have any link to the organisation.

The Muslim Association of Britain (MAB), which helped the Finsbury Park mosque 
emerge from the shadow of militant preacher Abu Hamza, and the Cordoba 
Foundation, a Middle Eastern thinktank which has negotiated the freedom of 19 
hostages in Iraq – sometimes at the request of the government – denied having 
“any links to the Muslim Brotherhood”.

Released by David Cameron a few hours before parliament’s Christmas recess, 
the report stopped short of banning the Muslim Brotherhood but said the group 
characterised the UK as fundamentally hostile to the Muslim faith and identity 
and had expressed support for terrorist attacks by the Palestinian Islamist 
groupHamas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hamas>.

The Cordoba Foundation, set up to promote peace in the Middle East, was said 
to be “associated with the Brotherhood”. However in a press conference held at 
Finsbury Park mosque, Anas Altikriti, the founder of the Cordoba Foundation, 
said he had “absolutely no links to the Muslim Brotherhood”.

“I think that the Muslim Brotherhood remains the most important democratic 
voice that espouses multiculturism, human rights and basic freedoms. But I do 
not have any links to it. I just think these values are essential … to reach 
out to Muslim youth.”


He added that he supported Hamas “only on the basis that it is the 
democratically elected government in Palestine. It does not mean I support 
every tactic or statement Hamas makes. I am against suicide bombing on 
religious and political grounds. As for Hamas, Tony Blair has held meetings 
with the leadership so is it an issue for him?”

The report accuses the MAB of being “dominated by the Muslim Brotherhood”. 
However Omer El-Hamdoon, the president of the association, said it had no links 
with the organisation. He also took issue with the claim that the MAB had 
“consistently opposed programmes by successive governments to prevent 
terrorism”.

Prevent programme 'lacking referrals from Muslim community'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/25/prevent-programme-lacking-referrals-from-muslim-community>
“What we have said is that we are specifically taking issue with 
(anti-radicalisation programme)Prevent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/25/prevent-programme-lacking-referrals-from-muslim-community>
. We think the measures go too far in terms of registering and inspecting 
nurseries and out-of-hours schooling. It’s not just us; students and teachers 
also have raised concerns.”

El-Hamdoon said the danger was that critics were being tarred as possible 
terrorists. “The danger is that if anyone criticises the government then you 
are attacked. We think we have a right to disagree with the government over 
Iraq or Palestine or Prevent – but we do so with peaceful protest. Opposing and 
speaking out is part of being an active citizen. But we are not enemies of the 
state.”


The report came after a long-delayed official inquiry into Muslim Brotherhood 
activities in Britain and went far further than expected by claiming that 
“aspects of Muslim Brotherhood … are contrary to our values and have been 
contrary to our national interests and our national security”.

In November, the Guardian revealed that the United Arab Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/06/uae-told-uk-crack-down-on-muslim-brotherhood-or-lose-arms-deals>
, dominated by the oil-rich emirate of Abu Dhabi, threatened to block 
billion-pound arms deals with the UK, stop inward investment and cut 
intelligence cooperation if Britain did not act against the Muslim Brotherhood, 
which UAE regards as a terrorist outfit.

A trio of the UK’s closest allies in the Arab world – Egypt, Saudi Arabia and 
the UAE – have all complained that London is a base for the Brotherhood, which 
began and was developed inEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>. The 
MAB is also outlawed by the UAE.


These Arab nations have all outlawed the group and accused it of links to 
terrorism. The Brotherhood denies this, saying it is a peaceful political 
movement. The report accepts that the organisation has opted for “non-violent 
incremental change on the grounds of expediency”.
 