
Households would be able to choose their water supplier for the first time 
under proposals from Ofwat which it claims would cut bills and improve services 
by introducing competition.

However, the proposed overhaul of British water supply would only save 
households about £8 a year on their water bill, the industry watchdog said.

Under the existing system homeowners can only buy water from a handful of 
regional suppliers such as Yorkshire Water, Severn Trent or Thames Water. But a 
report by Ofwat suggests restructuring the industry to encourage new entrants 
to the market in an effort to improve services and bring down bills.

The new regime would allow private companies to buy water in bulk from the 
existing major suppliers and sell it on to households.

They could also offer packages including other services such as gas or 
electricity, Ofwat said.

The plan echoes a similar overhaul of water supply to businesses, which will 
be able toswitch their supplier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/17/regulators-water-industry-shakeup-business-suppliers-england>
 from next April. Large industrial users of water can already switch suppliers.

Baths to washing machines: welcome to the (almost) waterless home of the future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/28/baths-washing-machines-drybath-almost-waterless-home-of-the-future>
Ofwat said there would be significant costs in opening up the market which 
would “ultimately fall on companies and customers”.

“It is for the government to decide whether in principle it wants to introduce 
competition and, if so, how and when to do so,” it said.

Cathryn Ross, Ofwat’s chief executive, said greater competition would benefit 
customers by encouraging firms to offer better services, such as allowing them 
to manage their bills with a mobile phone app.

“We are living in an age of retail revolution, but water customers are being 
left behind,” said Ross.

“The service offers from water companies can feel behind the curve compared to 
the innovation customers benefit from when buying other goods.

“The uncomfortable truth is that, when it comes to retail offers, water 
companies provide an analogue service in a digital age.”

Water UK <http://www.water.org.uk/>, which represents the water companies, 
said: “Extending retail competition to over 20m households could secure 
potential benefits for domestic customers, but would also be a major 
undertaking and so deserves to be given very careful consideration.

“We look forward to a timely decision from government which helps sustain the 
stability the industry needs to continue successfully meeting the needs of its 
customers.”

The government has to approve any proposals before the market is opened up.

Ofwat’s intervention comes after it was criticised by MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/13/uk-households-overpaying-water-regulator-miscalculation>
 on the public accounts committee, who blamed the regulator for allowing bills 
to rise too much.

The committee said Ofwat habitually overestimated water companies’ costs, 
allowing them to inflate bills.
 