
Interest rates are going up in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/us-federal-reserve-raises-interest-rates-second-time-since-2008>
, but inthe UK they are going nowhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/bank-of-england-uk-interest-rates-slowdown-growth>
.

That, bluntly, was the message from the Bank of England as it announced its 
latest decision on borrowing costs less than 24 hours after the US Federal 
Reserve not only tightened policy but signalled more to come in 2017.

As far as central banks go, the Fed is an outlier. Growth and inflation are 
both picking up and the US president-elect, Donald Trump, is planning tax cuts 
and extra spending on infrastructure. The normal rule of thumb is that looser 
fiscal policy should be offset by tighter monetary policy, hence the suggestion 
there could be three interest-rate rises in the US next year.

Bank of England leaves UK interest rates on hold at 0.25%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/bank-of-england-uk-interest-rates-slowdown-growth>
Elsewhere, though, it is a different story. The European Central Bank has 
recently announced an extension of its quantitative easing programme and the 
Bank of Japan is working overtime to keep deflation at bay.

The minutes 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/Documents/mpc/pdf/2016/dec.pdf>
 of the latest meeting of the Bank of England’s monetary policy committee say 
the next move in UK interest rates could be either up or down, depending on how 
the economy evolves over the coming months.

Threadneedle Street has been pleasantly surprised by how well growth has held 
up since the EU referendum. On its own, that would suggest the MPC should be 
thinking about following the Fed’s lead and raising rates.

But the Bank of England suspects that the good news is not going to last. It 
wonders how long consumers will continue to spend so freely once rising 
inflation starts to affect living standards. It thinks the unexpected increase 
in investment in the third quarter was a flash in the pan. If the outlook is 
for markedly weaker growth in 2017, that would point to further stimulus from 
the Bank, either through a cut in interest rates to 0.1% or by an extension of 
its QE programme.

There are two added complications. The first is that the Bank knows inflation 
is going to breach its 2% target next year but it doesn’t know by how much, or 
whether rising prices will feed through into higher wage settlements.

The second unknown is the impact on the economy of triggering article 50 in 
early 2017, the moment at which formal divorce proceedings start between the UK 
and the other 27 members of the EU.

What does all that mean? It means interest rates are likely to stay where they 
are in 2017. If they do move, they will move downwards.
 