
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> is expected to cut 
interest rates for the first time since the financial crisis this week and 
lower its UK growth forecasts by the biggest margin on record, in response to 
the uncertainty caused by the EU referendum result.

The Bank’s monetary policy committee will announce a decision on Thursday, 
when the latest inflation report and growth forecasts will be published. If 
interest rates are cut, it will be thefirst time they have changed 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/boeapps/iadb/Repo.asp> since being set at 0.5% 
in March 2009.

The MPC held off reducing official borrowing costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/bank-of-england-leaves-uk-interest-rates-on-hold-at-05>
 from their record low in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote on 23 
June. However, the committee has dropped heavy hints that it will act this week 
when fresh forecasts for the economy are published. Mark Carney, the Bank’s 
governor, warned before the referendum that voting to leavecould push Britain 
into a recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/bank-of-england-keeps-interest-rates-on-hold-as-brexit-fears-bite>
.


Interest rate cut: what will it mean for the UK economy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/interest-rate-cut-what-will-it-mean-for-the-uk-economy>
The Bank’s forecasts are expected to include an unprecedented downgrade of the 
prospects for the British economy. In May’s inflation report, it forecast that 
the economy would grow by 2.3% this year, but economists believe this could now 
be slashed to less than 1%, which would be the largest downgrade in the Bank’s 
forecasts between inflation reportssince it became independent in 1997 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1997/may/07/economy.uk>.

The nine-member MPC will make its decision nearly two weeks after business and 
consumer surveys conducted folowing the vote to leave the EU signalled adecline 
in activity and confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/22/britains-economy-shrinking-at-fastest-rate-since-2009-says-survey>
. Cutting borrowing costs could shore upactivity in a jittery housing market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/25/rents-fall-as-landlords-remain-nervous-over-brexit>
 by lowering mortgage costs. The Bank will also hope to boost business 
sentiment andcompanies’ willingness to keep investing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/manufacturers-feeling-gloomy-about-future-after-brexit-vote>
 amid the uncertain outlook. As such, it may go further than rate cuts and 
announce a programme of money printing or lending schemes.

The Bank’s chief economist, Andy Haldane, has called for a big package of 
measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/15/bank-of-england-chief-economist-calls-for-big-post-brexit-stimulus>
 to support the UK’s post-referendum economy. The policymaker Martin Weale, who 
has previously opposed the rest of the committee and voted for rate rises, 
suggested that he was likely to use this week’s meeting tosupport some form of 
stimulus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/bank-of-england-hawk-signals-interest-rate-cut-to-tackle-slowdown>
 for the economy.

Some economists have warned that cutting interest rates on the basis of the 
early reaction to the Brexit vote would be premature, but most experts believe 
the Bank will want to act swiftly, and the consensus is that it will cut rates 
to 0.25%.


In a Reuters poll of 49 economists 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-boe-policy-poll-idUKKCN1061IE> published last 
week, all but three expected the Bank to cut at least 25 basis points to 0.25%. 
It is a stark contrast to expectations before the vote to leave the EU, when 
the next move in interest rates was seen as likely to be upwards.

Allan Monks, an economist at JP Morgan. said: “The Bank of England seems all 
but certain to ease policy, with only the scale and form of easing in question.”

Monks is predicting a bigger cut than many of his peers in the City, 
pencilling in a drop in official interest rates to zero. “We see little reason 
for the Bank of England to restrict itself to a 25 basis point rate cut in 
August, in terms of both the need for a larger policy response and the Bank of 
England’s ability to deliver one,” he said.
Interest rates since 2009 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jul/2016-07-14T14:46:35/embed.html>
There are expectations that the Bank will expand the quantitative easing (QE) 
programme, whereby it creates electronic cash to buy bonds and so inject money 
into the financial system. But economists are wary of predicting that such a 
move will come as soon as this week.


Alan Clarke, an economist at Scotiabank, said there is a mood of caution in 
the City after the Bank confounded many analysts bynot changing interest rates 
in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/bank-of-england-holds-uk-interest-rates-what-economists-say>
.

“Having had its fingers burnt at the July meeting, the market is 
understandably sceptical, as are we, about the extent of the package to be 
unveiled at the August meeting,” he said, predicting that interest rates will 
be cut to 0.25%, with a possible £50bn expansion of QE.

In the past, the QE programme has been criticised for not providing enough help
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/aug/23/britains-richest-gained-quantative-easing-bank>
 to the real economy.


Adam Marshall, the acting director general at the British Chambers of 
Commerce, said the Bank could design the next phase of QE to help small and 
medium-sized businesses (SMEs).

“If you could package up SME debt and use QE to buy it, that could be very 
interesting in terms of raising money when people are risk averse,” he said.

There are some expectations that the Bank could revitalise the funding for 
lending scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/30/bank-of-england-extends-credit-support-small-businesses-funding-lending-scheme>
, under which it has provided incentives for high street banks to lend more to 
households and businesses.

There is also the option of so-called helicopter money, under which a central 
bank prints money so that finance ministries can hand it out to citizens or 
spend it on big infrastructure projects.

Philip Shaw, an economist at Investec, said: “This option conveys visions of 
airborne aircraft dropping £20 notes on the streets of the UK. However, in 
practice, a helicopter money policy would most likely take the form of the BoE 
buying government perpetual bonds, perhaps covering specific infrastructure 
projects.”


But economists have warned that the impact of the Bank’s potential actions 
could be limited. “Interest rate cuts and QE are not panaceas for political 
uncertainty,” said Holger Schmieding and Kallum Pickering of Berenberg.

“The crucial factor weighing on the UK growth outlook is the uncertainty 
relating to the Brexit negotiations and new trade deal with the EU.”
 