
Women with later-stage breast cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/breast-cancer> may gain up to three months 
of extra life after health regulators gave theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> the green light to prescribe the 
first new drug to treat the disease in almost a decade.

About 1,500 women a year in England who have locally advanced breast cancer, 
or whose disease has spread despite two rounds of chemotherapy, will be 
eligible to receive the life-extending drug. On average, they usually only have 
two years to live after they have been diagnosed.

The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/the-national-institute-for-health-and-care-excellence-nice>
 reversed its previous refusal to approve eribulin because new evidence showed 
that it could result in “substantial” benefits.

Cancer deaths among women to rise 60% by 2030, new reports warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/cancer-deaths-women-rise-warning-lancet>
Prof Carole Longson, director of Nice’s centre for health technology 
evaluation, said: “For this appraisal we’ve been able to consider updated 
results from the trial used in the original guidance that show women taking 
eribulin lived on average almost three months longer compared with women taking 
other treatments.”

“The life expectancy of people for whom eribulin is licensed is short, and 
quality of life is very important.”

Breast cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/breast-cancer> charities 
said the decision to make the drug routinely available in England could make a 
big difference to women whose breast cancer had proved resistant to other 
treatments.

Delyth Morgan, chief executive of Breast Cancer Now 
<http://breastcancernow.org/?gclid=CMb145neitACFeoK0wodbmsA0A>, said: “This is 
immensely positive news. Eribulin is the first breast cancer drug in a decade 
to be approved and this represents real progress for certain patients in 
England.

“It offers a crucial life-extending alternative for patients whose breast 
cancer has become resistant to other therapies, and for those with triple 
negative disease, who desperately lack treatment options”.


Triple negative cancers are those that do not involve the three molecules that 
are used to classify breast cancers. About 225 of the potential 1,500 
recipients have that form of cancer.

Eribulin is the first new drug to be approved for use in patients with 
metastatic breast cancer since Gemzar, also known as gemcitabine, was given the 
go-ahead in January 2007.

Danni Manzi, head of policy and campaigns at Breast Cancer Care, 
<https://www.breastcancercare.org.uk/?gclid=CKTevrLfitACFRLgGwodgK4COg> said: 
“This decision could be life-changing for many women living with incurable 
breast cancer. Access to this life-extending drug eribulin will offer patients 
precious extra time to spend with their loved ones. For these patients every 
day counts.”

She hoped that Nice’s decision will lead to other breast cancer drugs being 
approved. “With so few treatment options available, it is momentous to bring 
another medicine to the table,” she said.

Breast cancer in women whose disease has spread to other parts of the body is 
deemed to be incurable. In those women whose cancer has advanced locally, 
though, it is seen as still potentially curable.

About 4,000 breast cancer patients have already received eribulin, which is 
also known as Halaven, since it became available in England through theCancer 
Drugs Fund, <https://www.england.nhs.uk/cancer/cdf/> in March 2011. It is one 
of the medicines the fund has paid for the most often.

Patients in Wales should also be able to receive the drug as the Welsh NHS 
follows Nice’s rulings on which medicines represent value for money. Scotland’s 
equivalent, theScottish Medicines Consortium, 
<https://www.scottishmedicines.org.uk/> approved the drug in March this year. 

Dr Mark Harries, a consultant medical oncologist working with the 
pharmaceutical company Eisai, who make the drug, said: “I am delighted that 
women in England with locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer will 
continue to be able to access eribulin and that the future of this treatment 
within theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is secure. Eribulin 
significantly improves overall survival in women with this disease and it is 
therefore an important option against breast cancer.”

Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer in women in England. There are 
about 45,000 new cases a year, with approximately 300 men contracting it. In 
2014, some 9,500 women and 60 men died from the disease.
 