
The generation that grew up under Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> were the first to start 
with lower incomes than their parents and have endured an increasingly divided 
Britain, according to the government’s social mobility commission.

Its annual “state of the nation” report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/state-of-the-nation-2016> published 
on Wednesday morning found that “Britain has a deep social mobility problem 
which is getting worse for an entire generation of young people”.

According to the commission, established by David Cameron as prime minister, 
those born in the 1980s are the first cohort since the second world war to not 
start their careers with higher incomes than their parents and immediate 
predecessors.

“The rungs on the social mobility ladder are growing further apart,” said Alan 
Milburn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/grammar-schools-expansion-disaster-social-mobility-tsar-alan-milburn>
, the former Labour MP who chairs the commission. “It is becoming harder for 
this generation of struggling families to move up.

“The impact is not just felt by the poorest in society but is also holding 
back whole tranches of middle- as well as low-income families – these treadmill 
families are running harder and harder but are standing still.”

Milburn drew parallels with the worst-off areas in the country also voting 
most strongly forBritain to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. 


Social mobility tsar calls for an end to unpaid internships and hits at 
‘elitist’ UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/12/unpaid-interns-elitist-uk-social-mobility-alan-milburn>
“The public mood is sour and decision-makers have been far too slow to 
respond,” Milburn said, calling for fundamental reforms to education, an active 
labour market and policies to aid regional economies.

The former Labour cabinet minister warned that social division could cause 
political turmoil: “We know from the history of our own continent that when 
people feel that they are losing out unfairly while a few are gaining unfairly 
that the mood can turn ugly.

“People often say to me that the closest parallel to today is the 1930s. I 
don’t know if that is right or wrong. But we are going to have a French 
presidential election next April or next May and the person leading the opinion 
polls is Marine Le Pen.”

 Instead, Milburn said, solving Britain’s social mobility problem should be 
“the holy grail of public policy”.

A government spokesperson said it would consider the recommendations of the 
report, which included a call for three million new homes to be built within 10 
years, efforts to close the gap in GCSE results between poorer children and 
their classmates, and a “social mobility league table” of university access.


“As the PM said on the steps of Downing Street, this government is committed 
to fighting injustice wherever it arises and ensuring that everyone in our 
country has the opportunity to go as far as their talents will take them,” the 
spokesperson said.


Equality looks further away than ever in a Brexit, Donald Trump world | Polly 
Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/brexit-trump-despair-equality-further-than-ever>
Milburn also criticised the government’s plans to open more grammar schools in 
England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/07/senior-tories-likely-to-resist-theresa-mays-grammar-schools-agenda>
, saying it would not solve the problem of getting the best teachers into the 
schools that need them most.

Gillian Shephard, the former Conservative education secretary and deputy chair 
of the commission <https://www.gov.uk/government/people/gillian-shephard>, 
agreed with Milburn’s position on grammar schools.

“My view is that structural emphasis in education policy is not as important 
as the quality of teachers. I have always said that. It applied when I was 
secretary of state for education [and] it applies to the grammar school 
debate,” said Shephard, a former school teacher who was education secretary 
under John Major.


Shephard said it was time for a major effort on improving teaching: “There has 
been a tendency to devolve all of those important responsibilities, [but] I 
believe it is the task of government to take responsibility for teacher 
quality, teacher supply and indeed teacher training.”

The report quoted figures showing that just 5% of children on free school 
meals went on to gain five As in GCSEs, compared with 17% of their better-off 
peers.

Only 5% of children who received free school meals gained five A*-A GCSEs 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-16T17:31:27/embed.html>
Among the specific proposals, the commission called for teachers to be paid a 
minimum of £25,000 starting salary working outside of London, and a £5,000 
bonus for those willing to work in the most deprived areas.

But Jonathan Simons, head of education at Policy Exchange 
<https://policyexchange.org.uk/about-us/> think-tank, claimed the policy would 
cost around £2bn a year, and was unlikely to improve the supply of teachers.

“Aside from the cost, it is a clunky recommendation that doesn’t take account 
of the fact that in some areas of low social mobility, teaching is already 
relatively well paid and living costs are low,” Simons said.

The report concluded that expectations earlier in the 20th century that each 
generation would be better off than the last have not been borne out, thanks to 
barriers to social mobility including an “unfair” education system,unaffordable 
housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ng-interactive/2015/sep/02/unaffordable-country-where-can-you-afford-to-buy-a-house>
 and a labour market divided between a prosperous middle class and those below 
on low-paid, insecure employment.
Between 2010 and 2014 only 0.1% of school leavers who received free school 
meals progressed to Oxbridge 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-16T17:31:48/embed.html>
The commission found that home ownership was in sharp decline among the young 
as house prices rise, with the proportion of those aged under 44 owning their 
own home having fallen by 17% in the space of 10 years.

Angela Rayner, Labour’s shadow education secretary, said: “This damning report 
from the government’s own commission on social mobility should make for 
sobering reading for the Tories. There’s a growing sense of two nations: the 
lucky few at the very top and the millions who make up everyone else.”

Susan Kramer, the Liberal Democrats shadow Treasury minister, said the report 
was “shocking” in its implications for young people’s life chances.

“We cannot go on reducing spending on the things young people need without 
doing serious damage to our society,” she said.

“Yet instead of supporting the next generation, the government’s priority is 
bringing back the deeply divisive 11-plus [grammar school exams], while failing 
to invest in housing, education and sustainable jobs of the future.”
 