
Some British volunteers driving cars full of donations for refugees in Calais 
have been turned away at the French border in Folkestone, and told that they 
were being denied entry because they posed a threat to public order, as French 
officials finalise plans for the camp’s demolition.

Holly Kal-Weiss, a teacher, who had packed a car full of food, clothes and 
tents, some of it donated by the Jamie Oliver Foundation, was told she would 
not be able to drive on to the Eurotunnel shuttle. She was given a document in 
French, setting out the reason, with a box ticked stating that she was “thought 
to represent a danger to public order or internal security”.

She said she was very surprised to have been stopped from entering France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, and had never previously been 
stopped at any border control. “I am the least threatening person in the 
world,” she said. “The car was full of tins of food, milk, sugar, coffee, tea, 
sleeping bags and tents, nothing very scary looking.”

Volunteers at an aid warehouse in Calais are making emergency packs for 
refugees, so that they have essential supplies when they are evicted from the 
camp later this month, and are still welcoming donations despite the imminent 
demolition.

Kal-Weiss tried driving to Dover to board a ferry with the donations, and was 
again refused permission by French border guards, so she was forced to return 
to London. She has made 12 similar trips with donations in the past year and 
has never previously been denied entry. Several other volunteers, also 
travelling with food and clothes for Calais refugees, were also turned away on 
Friday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fuk-volunteers-with-donations-for-calais-denied-entry-to-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc729eb82384f1773213986cf97e5e68a8b34f763%2F0_369_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20volunteers%20with%20donations%20for%20Calais%20denied%20entry%20to%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fuk-volunteers-with-donations-for-calais-denied-entry-to-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20volunteers%20with%20donations%20for%20Calais%20denied%20entry%20to%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fuk-volunteers-with-donations-for-calais-denied-entry-to-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc729eb82384f1773213986cf97e5e68a8b34f763%2F0_369_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Holly Kal-Weiss has made 12 similar trips with donations in the past year and 
has never previously been denied entry. 
Anissa, a school administrator who is French and living in the UK, (and who 
requested that her surname not be published) was helping to take donations to 
France, and travelling with volunteers planning to teach at the Calais refugee 
school. The car she was in was turned back at Folkestone by French border guard 
officials who told them: “Your trip is ending here.”

A spokesman for the Calais prefecture said: “Because of the ban on 
demonstrations in Calais today some British demonstrators who wanted to join 
the demonstration were informed that the event was prohibited and were 
therefore denied access.” Anaid convoy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/uk-aid-convoy-to-calais-faces-ban-over-security-concerns>
 was turned back in June for similar reasons.

“I made it very plain that I was delivering food. They didn’t ask me if I was 
going to a demonstration,” Kal-Weiss said.

Meanwhile, charities in Calais were working to prepare the estimated 1,300 
unaccompanied refugee children for the demolition, which is now expected to 
begin on 24 October. Save the Children was working with the Refugee Youth 
Service, based in Calais, to distribute a backpack containing a coat, mobile 
phone and emergency information to several hundred children over the weekend. 
Phones are given to allow children to make emergency calls and phone home.


“Crucially this gives us a way of tracking and monitoring the children who are 
making dangerous journeys,” a Save the Children spokesperson said.

Posters in Arabic, Dari, Farsi, Pashto, Tigrinya and several other languages 
have been printed offering advice to children on the planned demolition, but 
there is still very little available detail from the local authorities. Help
Refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, Secours Catholique and 
Care4Calais took the local authorities to court on Friday stating concern at 
the “absence of any valid plan for vulnerable people and children”; a ruling on 
their petition will be given next week.

The Council of Europe’s special representative on migration and refugees, 
Tomáš Boček, also expressed concern that detailed plans have yet to be 
disclosed by the French authorities for the accommodation and care of the 
camp’s residents, in particular unaccompanied minors and families.

In the UK, the chair of the Local Government Association’s asylum, refugee and 
migration task group called on the government to commit to “long-term funding 
arrangements” so that they could properly fund arrangements for their care.

“Many will have experienced horrendous conditions within and since fleeing 
their country of origin, so councils will want to ensure they are able to 
settle into communities as quickly and easily as possible,” David Simmonds said.
 