
Consider this: while Nigel Farage postures in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-uk-ambassador-us-donald-trump>
 apparently trying to choose between being our man in Washington orsigning a 
£750,00 contract to appear on I’m a Celebrity 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/2136013/nigel-farage-turned-down-a-million-pound-payday-to-appear-on-im-a-celebrity/>
, Ukip, the party of which he is supposed to be once again the leader, appears 
to be in meltdown.

How do we fight the loudmouth politics of authoritarian populism? | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/how-do-we-fight-loudmouth-politics-authoritarianism-populism-paul-mason>
This week Diane James, who but a few weeks ago was elected to the top job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/ukip-elects-diane-james-as-new-party-leader>
, only tostand down almost at once 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/04/ukip-leader-diane-james-resigns-after-just-18-days-in-job-reports>
,has left the party altogether 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/21/diane-james-quits-ukip> 
claiming a complete breakdown in relations with its national executive.So has 
Steven Woolfe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/17/ukip-mep-steven-woolfe-quits-party>
, an early starter in the race to succeed her.

In fact, candidates in the contest are dropping like leaves from the autumn 
trees. Theremay now be more <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37567690> 
former candidates than ones still in the race. But that may be the least of 
Ukip’s woes as it sups the bitter draught of victory.An Electoral Commission 
investigation 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/19/support-for-ukip-has-halved-since-eu-referendum/>
 into the party’s election spending has been launched, and party support in one 
poll (they’re all we have to go on) appears to have slumped to as little as 6%. 
A fortnight ago, Arron Banks, the party’s banker, warned that the party could 
be about to die.

Ukip, the sledgehammer that smashed the establishment (© Arron Banks 
<https://twitter.com/Arron_banks/status/789174401631604736>) is suffering a bit 
of a crisis of purpose. Like Brexit, Ukip means Ukip – but what does that look 
like? There are interesting questions about whether it might try to reshape 
itself to hoover up Labour voters who are not persuaded that Jeremy Corbyn has 
the answer to their discontent – a party that is both nationalist and populist.

But surely the significant point about Ukip – like Farage, who will always be 
its spiritual if not its titular leader– is that it is not actually a political 
party, at least not in any traditional sense. It is not left or centre or 
right, although it has some of the characteristics of the right and appeals to 
some on the left (a quarter of Ukip members have voted Labour in the past). It 
seems almost tailor-made to be the organising principle for an authoritarian 
populist party of the kind thatthe polling organisation YouGov recently 
described 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2016/11/16/trump-brexit-front-national-afd-branches-same-tree/>
. It embodies the movement politics that are so profoundly shaking western 
democracies.

Ukip should elect Paul Nuttall, or it risks collapse | Matthew Goodwin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/ukip-elect-paul-nuttall-brexit-inequality>
According to YouGov, the characteristics of authoritarian populists are 
cynicism about human rights, hostility to the state (or at least to the idea of 
a European state), opposition to immigration and an enthusiasm for a strong 
defence and foreign policy. You could sum it up as a kind of cultural and 
political miserableness, a sort of update of the Alf Garnett dystopia of the 
1960s: dissatisfied, distrusting and disapproving.

Candidates to lead Ukip would strongly deny that this is their party’s appeal. 
Suzanne Evans, one of the front runners, hasexplicitly pledged to rid the party 
of its “toxic” image 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/23/nigel-farage-attacks-suzanne-evans-leadership-bid-after-she-vows/>
, earning an angry rebuke from Farage. Yet, in a world where politicians still 
try to sell hope, Ukip markets grumpiness and discontent. This is its strength 
and its fatal flaw.

The reason why the Ukip leadership contest seems so fissile is that it is not 
actually a party at all. It is a state of mind. There is no party, in the sense 
of a rules-based structure with organised support across local communities 
working to achieve a set of mutually agreed policies. There is only emotion.

Emotions – as Donald Trump, a man utterly and entirely at odds with the party 
in whose name he stood, demonstrated – are a powerful thing in politics. But 
they are also the antithesis of conventional political organisation. They are 
not about discipline and focus; they cherish spontaneity and authenticity. They 
don’t want a leader, or a manifesto – or even, necessarily, MPs.

As the Farage-Banks duopoly likes to boast, one man who has never been elected 
to parliament has led the UK out of Europe and toppled a prime minister. Who 
needs a party when representing a state of mind can achieve so much?

• You can catch up on the discussion on this article and others on our Your 
Opinions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/your-opinions-is-the-labour-party-doing-enough-to-question-our-eu-exit-strategy>
 thread
 