


Recruiting children aged 16 and 17 into the British army places them at 
greater risk of death, injury and long-term mental health problems than those 
recruited as adults, according to a newreport 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B_f0UKLAPEC9elA1ZGtUeFo3dlpTVEpRYk01ZHlOMXJmeGZv/view>
.

The public health charity Medact <http://www.medact.org/> uses its report, 
published on Tuesday, to call for the minimum recruitment age to be raised to 
18.

“Minimum age laws exist to protect children from smoking, drinking, driving 
and watching violent films,” said Dr David McCoy, director of Medact. “It’s 
time for the UK to fall in step with the vast majority of countries and raise 
the minimum recruitment age to 18.”

The UK is the only country in Europe, and only permanent member of the UN 
security council, to still allow recruitment from age 16. Anationwide poll 
<http://forceswatch.net//sites/default/files/IPSOSsurvey2014-Forces_age.pdf> in 
2014 found that 77% of the general public support a rise in the recruitment age 
to 18.

The army’s policy of recruiting children has been strongly criticised 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-question/Commons/2014-11-17/214739>
 by multiple UN andUK 
<https://childrenandarmedconflict.un.org/.../MachelStudy-10YearStrategicReview_en.pdf>
 parliamentary bodies,child rights organisations 
<http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/crc/docs/AdvanceVersions/CRC.C.GBR.CO.4.pdf>
 and human rights groups.

Despite the criticism, Medact found child recruits to the British army are 
more likely to be deployed on the frontline. In Afghanistan, British soldiers 
who enlisted at 16 wereapproximately twice as likely to be killed or injured 
<http://child-soldiers.org/research_report_reader.php?id=699> when compared 
with soldiers who enlisted when they were over 18.

Child recruits are also more vulnerable to suicide, self-harm, post-traumatic 
stress disorder and alcohol abuse than adult recruits, the report found.

Steve Brown joined the army cadets aged 13 in 1995 and the army three years 
later. “I became a child soldier in the British army because they’d groomed me 
since the moment I joined the cadets,” he said. “The army turned up every 
couple of months with motorcycle displays and other spectacles, and promised us 
life in the army would be glamorous, fun and well-paid. There was no mention of 
the downsides, even at the recruitment office itself.”
 Steve Brown. Photograph: Brown family 
 Brown left the army after his second tour of Iraq in 2006. Now 35, he 
struggles with depression and post-traumatic stress disorder. “A decade after 
leaving the army, I’m still recovering from the damage it did to me,” he said. 
“I joined straight out of school, so didn’t have a chance to become an 
individual. When I left, I realised that I had never learned how to make my own 
decisions or have my own opinions. Because I’d joined so young, I had been 
completely moulded by the army and life outside was almost impossible.”

The army accepts applications from children aged 15 years and 7 months. In the 
last financial year,22.2% of recruits were under 18 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/uk-armed-forces-biannual-diversity-statistics-2016>
. New recruits under 18 have to sign terms of service  
<http://www.army.mod.uk/documents/general/TermsofService.pdf>which can prevent 
them from leaving the army for up to six years.

McCoy said that how the UK armed forces recruits children breaches its own 
definition of “informed consent”. He said: “Full and informed consent of these 
children is not always gained. There are compliance issues with theOptional 
Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict 
<https://childrenandarmedconflict.un.org/mandate/opac/>, which the UK has 
signed.”

Young veterans, aged 16-24, are more likely to kill themselves when compared 
with the general population 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/kcmhr/publications/assetfiles/.../resilience-paper.pdf>: 
between 1984 and 2013, male soldiers aged under 20 were 47% more likely to kill 
themselves than the same age group in the general population. “These findings 
are mainly a result of a higher prevalence of pre-service vulnerabilities 
amongst young recruits to the armed forces,” the report said.

The report comes after the defence secretary, Michael Fallon, announced that 
cadet army units 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/04/150-army-cadet-units-open-state-schools-michael-fallon>
would be expanded in state schools. While the government argues that the cadet 
programme helps raise pupils’ attainment, campaigners have expressed fears that 
these units act as a channel of recruitment into the armed forces, and that 
military activities for children as young as 12 are inappropriate in the 
educational environment.

 Citing evidence that military marketing strategies which glamorise war “take 
advantage” of the tendency of adolescents to be driven by immediate social 
rewards and risk-taking behaviours, the report also accuses the army of not 
being truthful enough about life in the military.

“The recruitment approach is designed to appeal to adolescent decision-making 
biases by portraying military life in glamorous terms whilst frequently using 
terms such as ‘big guns’, ‘awesome armour’ and ‘big boys’ toys’,” the report 
notes.

Recruitment materials “often fail to provide complete and accurate information 
about the terms and conditions of service for potential recruits”, the report 
says. They also don’t include information about the difficulties and long-term 
risks of an armed forces career while briefing materials for parents do not 
fully explain the demands or risks of military life.

“All too often, the claim is made that military life can be good for troubled 
adolescents,” said McCoy. “The argument is that the military can provide 
discipline and a sense of purpose for individuals who may be struggling with 
education, or who are engaged in self-harming or antisocial behaviour.

“There are two things wrong with this viewpoint. First, there is evidence that 
military life may be harmful to the health and wellbeing of those recruited as 
adolescents,” he said. “Second, there are other ways to support adolescents who 
are struggling with their education and social situation, and if the military 
is presented as the only viable option, then the recruitment of under-18s 
cannot be considered to be consensual.”

A Ministry of Defence spokesperson said: “The armed forces offer young people 
opportunities that aren’t available elsewhere, from basic literacy education 
and support for postgraduate degrees, to high-quality accredited training and 
unique employment prospects. Like everyone who serves our country, under-18s – 
who can only sign up with formal written consent of a parent or guardian – are 
fully supported throughout their service career.”



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Funder-18s-in-army-face-greater-injury-death-and-mental-health-risks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7d438c84721ee377788ea1a27b56f7f4696e4e8%2F0_196_1246_747%2F1246.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Under-18s%20in%20army%20'face%20greater%20injury%2C%20death%20and%20mental%20health%20risks'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Funder-18s-in-army-face-greater-injury-death-and-mental-health-risks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Under-18s%20in%20army%20%27face%20greater%20injury%2C%20death%20and%20mental%20health%20risks%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Funder-18s-in-army-face-greater-injury-death-and-mental-health-risks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7d438c84721ee377788ea1a27b56f7f4696e4e8%2F0_196_1246_747%2F1246.jpg>
 Wayne Sharrocks at 17 in 2006 in the Falklands. Photograph: Sharrocks family 
Case study: Wayne Sharrocks

 My father was in the army but I didn’t consider it as a career until I was 15 
and the Iraq war was happening. I was manipulated by the media: soldiers were 
always referred to as “heroes” and being in the army, fighting these 
terrorists, was presented as being the noblest thing a man could do. At 15, you 
desperately want to be a man. I was immature and naive: I didn’t even think 
about any of the realistic aspects of going to war and no one told me about 
them.

 I tried to sign up at 15 but problems with my eyes meant I had to wait. I 
joined the day I turned 17. The manipulation started immediately: we were 
battered into following orders without thinking, the loyalty to our unit was 
absolute and – most psychologically damaging – we had our human instincts 
destroyed, so killing someone wasn’t a big deal and always being ready to fight 
was second nature.

 If I’d been older, perhaps the training wouldn’t have affected me mentally in 
the way it did. But as a child, I accepted it entirely. My friends now say that 
I became hyper-aggressive and super-angry as a result of my army training. At 
the time, I thought that was a really good thing. As I say, I was a child. I 
had no wider experience of life to give me perspective. I was used by the army.

 I decided to leave after seeing two colleagues seriously hurt and being badly 
hurt myself in Afghanistan in 2011. But I was still so brainwashed that it took 
me a couple of years to actually get out.

 I spent the next few years in a terrible state. I’d lost my army family, my 
support system, my bubble of existence. The army promises you qualifications 
but they’re not transferable: I went from a position of responsibility in the 
army to spraying kitchen furniture as a civilian. There was nothing else I 
could do.

 I eventually had a breakdown. I was going to ask the army to take me back: I 
thought I couldn’t survive outside it. But I’ve had counselling and am working 
my way back up. I’m 27 now. The army has taken 10 years of my life. And yes, 
I’m angry about that. Very angry.


 