
It was one of those moments that evidently meant so much more than the handful 
of seconds it took for the ball to arc audaciously, astoundingly, over the head 
of the opposition goalkeeper. Jordan Henderson hit the ball with ferocious 
sweetness. He turned away from the goal and ran. A few paces later he sank to 
his knees. Yes, of course, a wondrous strike in itself is worthy of a showy 
celebration. But this was about more than the goal. This was soaked with 
catharsis.

Jordan Henderson’s sumptuous strike helps Liverpool to win at Chelsea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/chelsea-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
Henderson has not had the easiest of periods. He has had his doubters and 
still plays underneath the question mark of whether he is or ever can be a 
worthy successor to Steven Gerrard as the midfield captain. Etching his own 
identity in the team has been a challenge, with injury lulls dragging him back 
and momentum hard to build. His position in the XI was an issue that hung over 
from last season, where he suffered the personal disappointment of watching
Liverpool’s Europa League fina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/18/liverpool-sevilla-europa-league-final-match-report>
l as an unused substitute. He had pushed himself to regain fitness for a 
special night but never got on the pitch. His opposite number from Sevilla 
hoisted the silver.

While many debated, Jürgen Klopp never lost faith. “He has a lot of pressure 
on his shoulders and he gets better and better and better,” the manager said 
proudly. Henderson’s moment at Stamford Bridge was impeccably timed. With
Liverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> leading after Dejan 
Lovren appeared at the far post without the inconvenience of any marking to 
concern him to plant in the opener, the rest of the first half was spent 
pressing for more. When Daniel Sturridge danced into the area and steered wide, 
Klopp threw himself backwards into his seat. A manager who clearly sends his 
team out to attack in emphatic surges wanted another goal to show for their 
efforts against a Chelsea defence that was confused and disconnected. Henderson 
delivered magnificently, seizing Gary Cahill’s tepid clearance with stylish 
opportunism. It was a glorious goal but also the cushion Klopp sensed they 
would need. It turned out to be decisive.

Liverpool may still need some defensive tweaking but they have been more 
prolific than any other team in 2016. They hit the half-century duringtheir 4-1 
demolition of Leicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/10/liverpool-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 last weekend and surpassed it at Chelsea. The most intriguing element of the 
latest flurry was that it epitomised the variety in their team attacking, with 
goals coming from a defender and a notionally holding midfielder. In fact the 
only defender who did not make inroads to try to do damage in front of goal was 
the ever sensible, stand-in left-back James Milner.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fklopp-and-conte-weigh-in-on-liverpool-v-chelsea-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Klopp%20and%20Conte%20weigh%20in%20on%20Liverpool%20v%20Chelsea%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fklopp-and-conte-weigh-in-on-liverpool-v-chelsea-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Klopp%20and%20Conte%20weigh%20in%20on%20Liverpool%20v%20Chelsea%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F17%2Fklopp-and-conte-weigh-in-on-liverpool-v-chelsea-video&media=>
Klopp and Conte weigh in on Liverpool v Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/sep/17/klopp-and-conte-weigh-in-on-liverpool-v-chelsea-video>
It was at Stamford Bridge last season that the Klopp Liverpool ideology really 
kick-started, a3-1 victory that crackled with electricity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/31/chelsea-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
. It set the tone for what makes this current incarnation of Liverpool such a 
threat. Last season’s standout results on the road owed much to the thrill of 
the attacking chase –4-1 at Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/21/manchester-city-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
,6-1 at Southampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/02/southampton-liverpool-capital-one-cup-match-report>
,5-4 at Norwich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/23/norwich-city-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
,6-0 at Aston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/14/aston-villa-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
. The goals continue to flow.

The variety in their options beguiles. Roberto Firmino, excellent in recent 
matches, was out with a groin injury, Sturridge was granted a start in a big 
away game but disappointed. He did not spend too much time on the same 
wavelength as his high-energy team-mates but with Coutinho’s craft, Adam 
Lallana’s effervescence and Sadio Mané’s raw speed they are not short of 
possibilities.

David Luiz feels whirlwind of emotions on second Chelsea debut | David Hytner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/16/david-luiz-whirlwind-emotions-second-chelsea-debut>
The beauty of Klopp’s goal-hungry approach is that the mood is infectious. It 
is not just about the forward players. With the understandable exception of the 
goalkeeper, every Liverpool player wants – and has licence – to maraud forwards.

The question of how far Liverpool can go is an intriguing one. It concerns the 
back end of the team more than the front foot.Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> twisted the direction of traffic 
in the second half and pushed Liverpool back, cranking up the pressure when 
Diego Costa notched his fifth goal of the season.

The fade, the possibility to allow a team they have dominated back into the 
match, is something Klopp needs to address as Liverpool have conceded in the 
second half in their outings at Arsenal, Tottenham and Chelsea once their 
flexed muscles began to tire. Of course, even if they did dip, they did not 
cave in, which speaks of an improving resilience.

They hung on here and can reflect on an impressive start from a tough run of 
fixtures. With away trips atthe Emirates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/14/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
,White Hart Lane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/27/tottenham-hotspur-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 and now Stamford Bridge safely negotiated, and Leicester comfortably beaten, 
this is a clarion call of ambition. At the final whistle Klopp saluted his 
players with typical enthusiasm. He whacked Henderson on the back. As the 
captain walked off he could not have looked more chuffed.
 