
We’re halfway through Unforgotten and exactly what I hoped would happen is 
happening – tension slowly but surely being cranked up with each episode. As 
flesh is gradually put on the bones of Jimmy’s murder, the stakes rise; how 
this finishes is anybody’s guess. Reading some of the guesses in the comments 
last week, I was intrigued byID3446596 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/15/unforgotten-episode-two-recap-revelations-intrigue-and-flashbacks#comment-61563322>
 seeing parallels with An Inspector Calls andiharsten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/15/unforgotten-episode-two-recap-revelations-intrigue-and-flashbacks#comment-61503069>
 suggesting we haven’t heard the last of the stolen, yet-not-reported-stolen 
car. I agree that the Slater house is hiding something, and that a paedophile 
scandal would be a letdown. After all, this is ITV not the BBC.


Who's the best new TV cop: River's Nicola Walker or Unforgotten's Nicola 
Walker?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2015/oct/20/best-new-tv-cop-nicola-walker-river-unforgotten>
Sir Philip Cross 

Bolt cutters? Frankie C was an even nastier scrote than we thought. If you 
didn’t come up with the cash, then you’d be missing a few digits by the time 
Frankie was done with you. At least, that’s what old Fenwick crew villain 
Thomas Pinion (Alan Ford, Brick Top fromSnatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Observer_review/0,,363652,00.html>
, compellingly obnoxious as always) tells police. Pinion puts Frankie’s stay 
with the Fenwicks at about a year. He remembers the newly appointed 
entrepreneur tsar’s amputation approach as highly effective, and believes it’s 
likely he ran into Jimmy, who once borrowed £50 from the Fenwicks. Sir Philip’s 
flashback to Jimmy’s terrified face seems to back this up. This could be a good 
time to take a closer look at Jimmy’s phalanges. Rawlins from forensics looks 
for tell-tale signs of snip-and-run trauma, but nothing shows up.

It looks as if putting his daughter through law school could be the best money 
Sir Philip (Trevor Eve) ever spent, even if Bella gripes: “As a human rights 
lawyer, torture is a bit of a bugbear of mine and having my father accused of 
lopping people’s fingers off is, y’know, a tiny bit awkward.” Nonetheless, her 
“say nothing, do nothing, let them prove you lied” advice seems solid.


Keeping his yap shut, though, is not an option with Philip Gough. Whitehall is 
not as forgiving as the criminal underworld, and Gough assures him that, 
however this plays out, he’s done. “Seriously pissing off a prime minister is 
not a good career move.”

It may have been trebles and backslaps all round a heartbeat ago, but as 
quickly as the ruling class accepted him, they now slit his throat. The story 
about his criminal past runs in the press and all his denials count for 
nothing. The company share price drops 8% in less than an hour, and the board 
want him to step down as chairman. One front-page splash and their biggest 
asset is toxic to the brand.

Lizzie Wilton 

It’s a conversation she prayed she’d never have to have, but Lizzie lays it 
bare with Ray about her abusive childhood, her time as a violent racist and the 
reason why she never takes off those rings.

“So I was just your penance, was I?” he asks.

Lizzie swears not, but detonating this particular bomb was always going to 
lead to heavy fallout, a point well illustrated when Curtis overhears enough of 
the Wiltons’ conversation to learn the truth about her past. With his useless 
junkie mum at home and his surrogate mother figure for the last three years now 
effectively destroyed, Curtis looks all set to spiral out of control. He’s a 
no-show for his maths exam, although Lizzie impressively fights his corner with 
the invigilator, getting him a resit.

Despite everything, you feel for Lizzie in these scenes, and you can see why 
Mike Leigh keeps coming back to Ruth Sheen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/31/mike-leigh-women-another-year>. 
There’s a warmth and vulnerability about her that makes everyone she plays hard 
to hate. Still, we’re left wondering about her reliability when the Caribbean 
shopkeeper she and Erskine attacked contradicts her claim that she tried to 
stop the assault. He remembers a spitting, snarling, cheerleader, not the 
docile, put-upon waif Lizzie portrays.

Eric Slater

It all starts off so nicely with Eric’s fond reminiscences of sharing 
cigarettes with Jimmy at Arlingham House. He remembers JoJo, too, a girl barely 
out of school, having walked in on her having sex with “what’s-his-face from St 
Gildas” – Father Robert to you and me. We’d be inclined to think of Eric (Tom 
Courtenay) as an innocent bystander in all this, until Claire babbles something 
about the nights he never came home, and the cold soaks needed to “get it out”. 
It could be nothing, but the nasty black eye Claire sports that night, as Eric 
looks on menacingly, suggests something.

Robert Greaves 

For someone who has been doing a lot of it recently, Robert’s not very good at 
lying. Sunny andCassie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2015/oct/20/best-new-tv-cop-nicola-walker-river-unforgotten>
 clock immediately that he’s holding something back when he claims not to know 
any of the names from the diary. After a panic attack lands him in hospital, he 
gets further cause for anxiety when Sunny and Cassie return with the allegation 
about JoJo. It was a brief fling, and the worst mistake of his life, he tells 
them, and it all sounds plausible enough. But when he insists the last time 
that he spoke to her was 39 years ago, we know he’s lying. And he’s keeping 
quiet about his flashback, to what looks a lot like Jimmy stomping him out. 
Seems all that Liverpool-QPR football banter escalated quickly.

Notes & queries

 * In keeping with the theme of past events wreaking havoc in the present, we 
have Cassie’s father tormented by his dead wife’s affair. Some commenters 
speculated that he might somehow be tied up in Jimmy’s death. He would be an 
outsider, but a mystery man’s two-year tryst with his wife certainly gives a 
conspiracy theorist something to dig into.

 * Just as Sir Philip reels from the week from hell, he receives a phone call 
from one of the few remaining Fenwicks, Gordon, in Cyprus. It doesn’t sound 
like a social call.

 * “I am the brand!” says Sir Philip as the board try to ditch him. Yes, your 
lordship, and that’s the problem.

 * It’s a nice touch when Cassie and Sunny walk into the baptism just as 
Father Robert is renouncing the “deceit and corruptions of evil”. It put me in 
mind ofMichael Corleone <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EfbYp9oaIT8> 
renouncing Satan as the heads of the five families get whacked.

 * Who do you like as the killer now? Have this week’s developments changed 
anything? Please place all fevered speculation below the line.
 