
Spoiler alert: this blog covers details of episode six of the ITV drama 
Unforgotten <https://www.itv.com/itvplayer/unforgotten/series-1/episode-1>. 
Catch up withlast week’s recap here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/nov/05/unforgotten-episode-five-recap-its-not-ever-going-to-be-ok>
.

‘You really are an evil bitch aren’t you?’

A wedding, a funeral and a suicide: there’s a solid feeling of closure in an 
emotional finale where everyone gets what they deserve.

So in the end it was Claire who killed Jimmy. The “Claire as the killer with 
Eric protecting her” theory was first floated in the episode three comments, 
which makesDownFromTheCountry <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15448850>
 the Unforgotten champion (yes, it was a competition; sorry if I didn’t mention 
that before). As much as the show was about finding a killer, it was about 
unpacking motivations and chronicling consequences of past acts. It stayed 
psychologically astute and emotionally powerful until the end.

Eric Slater 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Funforgotten-episode-six-recap-nobody-escapes-the-past-in-a-finale-full-of-redemption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F050c271633cd31590cca3746b20793d4b36488ea%2F0_590_2244_1346%2F2244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unforgotten%20%E2%80%93%20episode%20six%20recap%3A%20nobody%20escapes%20the%20past%20in%20a%20finale%20full%20of%20redemption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Funforgotten-episode-six-recap-nobody-escapes-the-past-in-a-finale-full-of-redemption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unforgotten%20%E2%80%93%20episode%20six%20recap%3A%20nobody%20escapes%20the%20past%20in%20a%20finale%20full%20of%20redemption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Funforgotten-episode-six-recap-nobody-escapes-the-past-in-a-finale-full-of-redemption%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F050c271633cd31590cca3746b20793d4b36488ea%2F0_590_2244_1346%2F2244.jpg>
 Tom Courtenay as Eric Slater and Gemma Jones as Claire Slater. Photograph: 
John Rogers/ITV 
Having gone through the denial and anger stages of being accused of murder, 
Eric arrives at bargaining. For the promise of a transfer closer to Leslie, he 
tells Cassie that it was Claire who killed both Jimmy and Nicholas. It’s a tale 
so laughably preposterous it must be true and so it proves. Eric’s sexual 
relations with men proved a big stumbling block in their marriage and his 
lovers paid the ultimate price; Jimmy felled by a hammer to the head, Nicholas 
by a knife to the guts.

The deaths have tormented Eric ever since, driving him to the suicide attempt 
that put him in a wheelchair. Cassie thinks postpartum psychosis a likely 
factor in Claire’s killings. (Little understood in the 70s, the condition has 
since been successfully used in insanity defences in murder trials, notably 
that ofAndrea Yates <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Andrea_Yates>).

With Eric’s murder charge in the news, the rest of the Slaters have to deal 
with the press pack and Claire gets packed off to a country hideout.

With her mental deterioration only likely to accelerate, no one thinks a 
successful prosecution possible. Even though a flashback confirms she remembers 
murdering Jimmy, how could she reasonably defend herself? Eric will do time in 
prison but Claire gets away with a supervision order.

Don’t imagine that’s a victory, though. We haven’t seen much of the Slaters’ 
younger son Mattie (too busy “poncing off back to London”, to quote his 
brother) but it looks as if Claire is going to be seeing quite a lot of him.

“Me again,” he says with a malevolent glint in his eye as he gets her alone. 
His regular visits to his mother are merely to play Bait the Pensioner, 
tormenting her with sundry cruel tricks. You can understand the resentment, but 
he’s getting way too much pleasure from it.

Sir Philip Cross 

The smoke has barely cleared from Colin Fenwick’s house before Asil is shaking 
Sir Philip down for £2m. The timing offends Sir Philip’s sense of decorum and 
old-school gangster etiquette.

“I know people, Asil,” he tells him, people who will make him defecate through 
his ears which seems more likely to confuse than anything. This kind of 
dick-swinging is fine with Lady Cross because, as his Lordship points out, 
she’s always known about and even liked the Frankie C side of her husband. You 
can’t account for the actions of an idolising son, though, and when Josh 
grasses him up, Sir Philip is shamed into confessing to arranging Fenwick’s 
murder.

“All I ever wanted was for my children to be better than me,” he tells Josh 
and Bella, confident that with the low bar he set, he has comfortably achieved 
this. Right before he stands trial, he does his bit for prison overcrowding and 
hangs himself in his cell. So long, Sir Philip.

We never got a chance to say: “Thank you for the opportunity”.

Robert Greaves 

As Robert chats with Thea, you can see the family resemblance to Caroline 
although thankfully she’s significantly less violent. He looks likely to avoid 
a custodial sentence if he agrees in principle to pay all the embezzled funds 
back, which is a good result. It’s still bittersweet for Robert as his and 
Grace’s first grandchild is safely delivered via emergency section. There’s 
some redemption for him, though, after Thea tells Ellie and Grace that JoJo 
would have denied him access to his daughter if he ever told his family about 
her.

Happier times beckon. Robert walks Ellie down the aisle at the register office 
for her marriage to Tom. It’s not the church ceremony Robert wanted (as if any 
church would let him anywhere near the collection baskets). All things 
considered, though, things work out pretty well for him.

Lizzie Wilton 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Funforgotten-episode-six-recap-nobody-escapes-the-past-in-a-finale-full-of-redemption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa42e78707a79a6affcafa7a06eab72dbae800bde%2F0_213_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unforgotten%20%E2%80%93%20episode%20six%20recap%3A%20nobody%20escapes%20the%20past%20in%20a%20finale%20full%20of%20redemption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Funforgotten-episode-six-recap-nobody-escapes-the-past-in-a-finale-full-of-redemption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unforgotten%20%E2%80%93%20episode%20six%20recap%3A%20nobody%20escapes%20the%20past%20in%20a%20finale%20full%20of%20redemption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F12%2Funforgotten-episode-six-recap-nobody-escapes-the-past-in-a-finale-full-of-redemption%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa42e78707a79a6affcafa7a06eab72dbae800bde%2F0_213_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
 Ruth Sheen as Lizzie Wilton. Photograph: ITV 
As the Big Issue seller confirms to Ray and Curtis that Lizzie jumped off the 
bridge, it feels as though Lizzie’s tragic life story has reached its 
inevitable conclusion. Fortunately, a passerby saves her and her reconciliation 
with Curtis and Ray is a sweet, authentic moment. Even the boys on the football 
team don’t have it in their hearts to bear a grudge. The Wiltons carry on 
honouring their dead son and whatever was left of Beth Laws is exorcised 
forever.

Final thoughts 

I braced myself for an unbearable misery fest in the final episode but it 
didn’t turn out that way. The only person dead was the never-easy-to-like Sir 
Philip. Emotionally, Claire as the killer and Eric the loving husband covering 
up was satisfying even if the plausibility of this depressed housewife taking 
out two strapping young men was shaky.

Lizzie and Robert deserved their second chances. One way or another they paid 
a price for their crimes. Jimmy’s mum got peace of mind and was able to bury 
her boy knowing the culprit, the narrative, and that he didn’t suffer. But best 
of all Cassie got the satisfaction that her instincts were right. Jimmy’s death 
not only mattered, it was explicable, if not prosecutable.

Throughout the Operation Yewtree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/04/police-child-abuse-inquiries-operation-yewtree-to-operation-midland>
 saga that inspired Unforgotten, we would hear a sentiment along the lines of 
“it was the 70s, though” as if we all sleepwalked through some new Gomorrah and 
only twigged when it was too late. Nobody could escape their past on 
Unforgotten but ultimately it felt redemptive. People got what they deserved, 
good and bad.

What really impressed me was the discipline in the writing. Every action, 
every plot development and revelation felt organic, emerging inevitably from 
character and circumstance, not laziness or expedience. The story arc is 
complete now and nothing cries out for a sequel. That said, if Cassie and Sunny 
came across another cold case from another era with another set of suspects, I 
would very much be here for that.

Notes and queries  

 * There is some nice comic relief when Cassie walks in on her dad making out 
with Annie from The Feathers. Looks like everyone’s moving on.

 * Not sure if I buy Eric’s explanation of his beating of Paul West as a bit 
of rough sex-play gone bad, but at least it’s more plausible than the football 
argument story he originally went with.

 * Cassie showing Jimmy’s photo to Claire one, two, three, four times is just 
fantastic.Nicola Walker <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/nicola-walker>’s 
quiet intensity in these scenes is mesmerising.

 * “Peace, perfect peace,” the inscription on Jimmy’s grave, refers to Edward 
H Bickersteth’s hymn. 
 * Thanks a million for your comments each week: always sharp and on point, 
they’ve been a big part of my enjoyment of the show.

 * How was the finale for you? Did everyone get what was coming to them? 
Anyone feel let down?  