
Spoiler alert: this blog covers details of episode four of the ITV drama 
Unforgotten <https://www.itv.com/itvplayer/unforgotten/series-1/episode-1>. 
Catch up withlast week’s recap here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/22/unforgotten-episode-three-recap-let-them-prove-you-lied>
.

It’s a rotten week for all four core suspects, with the cracks in their 
modern-day facades becoming faultlines. There was some excellent sleuthing and 
theorising inlast week’s comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/22/unforgotten-episode-three-recap-let-them-prove-you-lied#comments>
, so many thanks for that.Martha Holmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/22/unforgotten-episode-three-recap-let-them-prove-you-lied#comments>
 suggested it was the stolen car that put Eric in a wheelchair,
DownFromTheCountry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/22/unforgotten-episode-three-recap-let-them-prove-you-lied#comments>
 had Mrs Slater in the frame for the killing, with Eric protecting her, and
iharsten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2015/oct/22/unforgotten-episode-three-recap-let-them-prove-you-lied#comments>
 pointed out the £50 Jimmy borrowed was the same amount the Slaters accepted 
from a friend when buying their home. I’m sticking with Inspector Clouseau’s 
mantra: “I suspect everyone and I suspect no one.”


Sir Philip Cross

Over at forensics central, Rawlins discovers what looks like a hole in Jimmy’s 
scaphoid, as if something was driven into it. Like a nail? An email from Gordon 
Fenwick to Bella with a photo of Sir Philip crucifying some poor sod (and 
Philip’s flashback to Jimmy’s crucifixion) confirms the worst. Bella viewing 
the photo means she is horribly compromised, facing career ruin or even prison 
if she stays quiet.

Sir Philip might try to characterise his troubles as “a few months, 40 years 
ago, I associated with some people I sincerely wish I hadn’t”, but everyone in 
the family knows he’s in deep. When he asks Josh to get his dicey Turkish 
associates to lean on Gordon Fenwick, we know that Sir Philip knows it, too.

It’s good to have your loved ones around you at a time like this, but 
regarding the morality of it all, Bella has a shocking thought about her 
father: “If he did it, he should be punished.”

I suppose every family needs a conscience, but talk about a buzzkill.

Lizzie Wilton

There is no shortage of innocent victims in Unforgotten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/unforgotten>, and Ray Wilton is a 
particularly poignant one. A black man defending his white wife’s racist past 
to a squad of angry black kids is a tough sell, particularly when he has his 
own doubts about her involvement in Jimmy’s death.

For Lizzie’s part, she confesses to robbing Jimmy of the £50 he borrowed from 
the Fenwicks to pay for an abortion for JoJo. That’s the thanks Jimmy gets for 
teaching her to read and write. No wonder morale in the teaching profession is 
low. The police charge her with assault with intent to rob, and Ray returns 
home to find a brick through the window, the words “RACIST SCUM” spray-painted 
on the garage door, and Lizzie gone with a note saying simply: “Sorry.”


Eric Slater

If TV drama has taught us anything, it’s that a celebration of any kind is a 
great time to explore human sorrow and despair. As preparations for Eric and 
Claire’s 45th wedding anniversary get underway, Eric punctuates them with a 
foul-mouthed outburst and an impromptu game of wheelchair frisbee with his 
dinner plate. Les starts to wonder if his mother’s black eye was really caused 
by a slip, and is given further concern when she starts babbling in the garden 
during the party. “And then he had his accident so he wouldn’t be able to hurt 
anyone any more anyway.”

Further light is shone on Eric’s dark side when police arrive to talk about an 
arrest he had for assault as a young man. Eric insists it was a trivial row 
about football, but the victim’s sister remembers a brutal gay-bashing that 
could easily have been fatal had police not intervened. The assault took place 
just a year before Jimmy’s murder, so that’s one more confirmed violent 
offender on the scene. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Funforgotten-episode-four-recap-if-he-did-it-he-should-be-punished%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffae0f3b771152c838a509c528c3931a4225af159%2F0_0_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unforgotten%20%E2%80%93%20episode%20four%20recap%3A%20'If%20he%20did%20it%2C%20he%20should%20be%20punished'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Funforgotten-episode-four-recap-if-he-did-it-he-should-be-punished%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unforgotten%20%E2%80%93%20episode%20four%20recap%3A%20%27If%20he%20did%20it%2C%20he%20should%20be%20punished%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Funforgotten-episode-four-recap-if-he-did-it-he-should-be-punished%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffae0f3b771152c838a509c528c3931a4225af159%2F0_0_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
 Dominic Power as Les Slater and Adam Astil as Matt Slater. Photograph: ITV PLC 
Robert Greaves

For a moment, it looks as if Robert might be in the clear when Sunny declares 
all his mobile and landline numbers legit. Cassie, though, is relentless, and 
her hunch about the nearest payphone pays off when the records show a call to a 
“Joanna Bridges”. We’ve found our JoJo.

When police talk to her, it’s a damning interview for Robert. After Cassie 
does some subtraction, she realises that the priest slept with a 15-year-old 
girl. With JoJo taking up with Jimmy right after her fling with Robert, it all 
adds weight to the theory that Jimmy confronted Robert.


The time has come for Robert to tell Grace about a woman called Joanna.


“I remember Joanna. She was a girl, not a woman,” she tells her husband, who 
seems to be having a lot of difficulty remembering this fact.

He spills all about the fleeting dalliance with JoJo, and Grace is predictably 
shocked. When she shares the secret with her daughters, Caroline in particular 
starts to wonder exactly how well she knows her father, while the police 
hovering around asking questions about Jimmy’s murder isn’t settling anyone’s 
nerves.

It’s probably for the best when Robert decides to crash in Sheila’s spare room 
for a while. Fortunately, she has some great news for him. The police have CCTV 
footage of somebody entering the church hall at the time of the burglary – a 
really clear faceshot. They’ll be calling her in tomorrow to identify the 
scoundrel. For some reason, Robert doesn’t seem too thrilled with the prospect, 
and that very night he looms over her with some menace in his eyes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Funforgotten-episode-four-recap-if-he-did-it-he-should-be-punished%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52d9f98a9689d1a992b69b08be83b783958847e9%2F0_155_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unforgotten%20%E2%80%93%20episode%20four%20recap%3A%20'If%20he%20did%20it%2C%20he%20should%20be%20punished'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Funforgotten-episode-four-recap-if-he-did-it-he-should-be-punished%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unforgotten%20%E2%80%93%20episode%20four%20recap%3A%20%27If%20he%20did%20it%2C%20he%20should%20be%20punished%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2015%2Foct%2F29%2Funforgotten-episode-four-recap-if-he-did-it-he-should-be-punished%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52d9f98a9689d1a992b69b08be83b783958847e9%2F0_155_3366_2020%2F3366.jpg>
 De Oyefeso as Curtis and Valentine Olukoga as Brandon. Photograph: ITV PLC 
Notes and queries

 * “Call just came into the CID office – looks like we’ve got another victim.” 
Sheila is the hot favourite, but best to make no assumptions just yet.

 * “This feels slightly insane. Trying to find some kind of truth in that, in 
people’s utterly fucked memories.” Way to sum up the show’s premise, Cassie. 
She’s right, of course – eyewitness testimonies are faded and contaminated 
after the passing of decades. Some things you never forget, though, even if 
you’ve spent your life trying.

 * It’s impressive how Ray still fights Lizzie’s corner, confronting Curtis 
for punishing the woman who took him into her home, fed him and mentored him. 
Curtis’s response – “I’ve already got one fucked-up mum – I don’t need another” 
– is pretty crushing, though.

 * £12,000 deposited into Thomas Pinion’s bank account in cash at least ties 
in with his story, even if there’s nothing solid yet for the police to link it 
to Sir Philip.

 * Tom Courtenay’s switch from sweet old duffer to rage-fuelled tyrant is 
terrific. This cast has some heavy hitters going through the gears, and it’s a 
pleasure to watch.

Have this week’s revelations changed anything or is everyone still sticking to 
their theories? Please let us know.
 