
Italy’s biggest bank, UniCredit, has borne the brunt of lingering anxiety 
about the country’s banking sector, seeing its shares fall sharply following 
the EU-wide banking health checks. The 9.4% drop in UniCredit shares, which 
were being closely monitored by the Italian Borse on Monday amid heavy trading, 
followed Friday’s publication of stress tests on 51 banks across the EU.

In the European Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> 
Authority tests, UniCredit recorded a capital ratio of more than 7% after the 
stress test applied a hypothetical shock to global growth, interest rates and 
currencies. Although well above the legal minimumof 4.5%, it left Unicredit as 
one of the five weakest out of the 51 banks tested.

The EBA's stress tests reveal their own lack of credibility
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/aug/01/eba-stress-tests-reveal-their-own-lack-credibility>
The deterioration in its capital ratio was not on the scale of Banca Monte dei 
Paschi di Siena (MPS) – Italy’s third largest bank –which announced a rescue 
package 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rescue-package-in-place-as-europes-oldest-bank-fails-stress-tests>
 on Friday aimed at funding at least €5bn worth of capital, after the stress 
test showed that its entire capital base would be wiped out under the adverse 
scenario. MPS was the worst-performing bank of any bank tested.

Shares in MPS, regarded as the world’s oldest bank, were among the few to 
rally after the stress test results as its rescue operation appeared to 
alleviate pressure on the Italian government to intervene. Even so, questions 
remained about how easily MPS could find investors willing to stump up €5bn 
when its existing stock market value was less than €1bn.

The focus had been on Italian banks ahead of the stress tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/european-banks-prepare-for-possible-shockwaves-from-stress-test-results>
, which overall showed that the EU’s banking sector could weather a shock to 
the markets. The pan-European banks share index was off just 0.6%. Antonio 
Patuelli, president of the Italian Banking Association, welcomed the results, 
saying: “The credibility of Italian banks has now been strengthened.”

The MPS rescue was viewed as positive. Tomas Kinmonth, fixed income strategist 
at ABN Amro, said: “It could be suggested that the prime benefit of the EBA 
2016 stress test is that the Italian institution [MPS] is now significantly 
stronger.”

Portuguese and Greek banks were not big enough to be included in the tests, 
which also focused on banks inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, Spain and Austria as well 
Germany’s biggest bank, Deutsche, whose capital ratio fell below 8% under the 
test. Analysts at Capital Economics said: “Among the eurozone countries, 
Ireland’s and Italy’s banks stood out.”

Moody’s said: “The stress test results highlight major differences in the 
relative strength of banking systems across the EU. The system-level results 
reflect the relative weakness of banks inAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria>, Ireland and Italy. The key drivers 
are elevated credit risk of cross- border activities for the Austrian banks, 
and domestic market pressures for the Irish and Italian banks.”

The stress tests impose a series of scenarios on the capital bases of banks 
recorded at the end of 2015 and give results for three years later, without 
allowing the management of the banks to try to raise capital by selling off 
businesses.

Shares in UK banks Barclays and Royal Bank of Scotland slipped around 2%. 
Barclays’ capital ratio fell to below 7.5% under the stressed scenario,while 
RBS took the third largest hit of any bank to its capital under the test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/30/eu-bank-stress-tests-vulnerability-of-barclays-and-rbs-under-scrutiny>
. RBS’s capital position would sink by seven percentage points to 8%. Moody’s 
said this was in part caused by “litigation and restructuring charges” faced by 
the bank, which is 73% owned by the UK taxpayer.

Gary Greenwood, analyst at Shore Capital, said the results for UK banks were a 
“non-event” as they will be subjected to Bank of England tests later in the 
year.

RBS publishes its half-year results this Friday, while Barclays reported a 
£2bn half-year profit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/barclays-profits-fall-21-percent-amid-restructuring-ppi-africa>
last week.
 