
How did this start?

Following Donald Trump’s surprise victory in the presidential election, voter 
security experts began privately discussing their concerns about whether the 
results might have been tampered with, according to John Bonifaz, the founder 
of the National Voting Rights Institute.

The election had taken place against a backdrop of warnings from the US 
government 
<https://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/press-releases/215-press-releases-2016/1423-joint-dhs-odni-election-security-statement>
 that Russian hackers were “scanning and probing” the election systems of 
American states, and were behind the theft of emails from the Democratic 
National Committee and John Podesta, the chairman of Hillary Clinton’s 
presidential campaign. Eight days before the election, the White House hadused 
an emergency hotline to warn Russia 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/17/us/politics/white-house-confirms-pre-election-warning-to-russia-over-hacking.html?_r=0>
 against further interference.


Trump claims 'millions voted illegally' but offers no evidence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-scam-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton>
“I was getting calls from members of the election integrity community, so I 
joined them and began looking at possible discrepancies myself,” Bonifaz said 
in an interview.

Several concerns emerged. Trump appeared to have performed particularly well 
in Wisconsin counties only using electronic voting. There seemed to have been a 
sharp increase in the number of ballots cast in Michigan that left the 
presidential field blank. Electronic voting systems had briefly faltered in one 
North Carolina county on election day.

The group began hearing from Democratic-leaning activists and liberal writers 
convinced that Trump’s victory required further scrutiny. Increasingly dismayed 
as Clinton’s lead over Trump in the nationwide popular vote grew to more than 
two million, they were sharing apparent anomalies in the results online using 
the hashtag #AuditTheVote.

It was decided that this loose coalition would push for a full audit or 
recount in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin – three states critical to 
Trump’s electoral college win that pollsters had previously thought safe for 
Clinton. To do this, they needed to persuade one of the candidates who was 
actually on the presidential ballot to ask state authorities to review the 
results.

What evidence is there of voter fraud?

Though most agree that voter fraud is possible, experts disagree about its 
extent in the 2016 presidential election. J Alex Halderman, a professor of 
computer science of the University of Michigan, has been one of the leading 
voices claiming that there is sufficient evidence of fraud to justify a 
recount. Halderman provided anaffidavit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/jill-stein-election-recount-clinton-trump-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin>
 in the formal petition for a Wisconsin recount in which he said “one 
explanation for the results of the 2016 presidential election is that 
cyberattacks influenced the result”. Halderman elaborated on his views in a
Medium post 
<https://medium.com/@jhalderm/want-to-know-if-the-election-was-hacked-look-at-the-ballots-c61a6113b0ba#.gy8dlwqef>
 published on Saturday: “America’s voting machines have serious cybersecurity 
problems.”

Other experts have taken a more cautious view. Writing about a possible 
recount in USA Today on 18 November, Ron Rivest and Philip Stark, both advisers 
on the US Election Assistance Commission,said 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/opinion/2016/11/18/election-audit-paper-machines-column/93803752/>
: “While there is, as yet, no compelling evidence, the news about hacking and 
deliberate interference makes it worth finding out.”

Polling suggests that most of the American public accepts the vote results. A 
total of 18% said that they did not believe Trump was the legitimate winner of 
the 2016 election, according to asurvey 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/13/one-third-of-clinton-supporters-say-trump-election-is-not-legitimate-poll-finds/>
 published by the Washington Post and ABC News on 13 November. The poll, which 
was based on the responses of only 865 adults, found that the view was most 
common among Clinton supporters (33% of whom said the result was not 
legitimate) and least common among Trump supporters (just 1% of whom said that 
Trump was not the legitimate winner).

Those numbers suggest a reversal of attitudes prior to voting day when many 
Trump supporters were claiming that the election would be rigged. There were 
more than 600,000 allegations of vote rigging in the two weeks to 2 November, 
according to analysis by the thinktank Demos forMashable 
<http://mashable.com/2016/11/11/vote-rigging-trump-twitter/#uQLIxG_BoOqU>. The 
accounts associated with those tweets were largely either Trump supporters or 
conspiracy theorists, according to Demos. On 9 November, claims of vote rigging 
fell by almost 90%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Felection-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa073b8a0a4f579ed7d8847fe14dbabd98f476fe8%2F0_0_1200_589%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20election%20recount%3A%20how%20it%20began%20%E2%80%93%20and%20what%20effect%20it%20could%20have&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Felection-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20election%20recount%3A%20how%20it%20began%20%E2%80%93%20and%20what%20effect%20it%20could%20have&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Felection-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa073b8a0a4f579ed7d8847fe14dbabd98f476fe8%2F0_0_1200_589%2F1200.jpg>
 The analysis by Demos. Photograph: Mashable 
What does Jill Stein say about it?

Stein, the Green party’s candidate for president, agreed to spearhead the 
effort to secure recounts following requests from Bonifaz and the security 
experts. Having been reluctant initially due to financial concerns, Stein was 
persuaded that the cost could be met via crowdfunding. On Wednesday,the 
Guardian first reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/jill-stein-election-recount-fund-michigan-wisconsin-pennsylvania>
 that she had decided to act.

“This was all driven by the nonpartisan election integrity community,” said 
Bonifaz, who has been frustrated by some critics accusing Stein of trying to 
cash in on disappointment about the election result. “I’m the one who askedJill 
Stein <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/jill-stein> to file these petitions.”

Stein said she was acting on “compelling evidence of voting anomalies” and 
that data analysis had indicated “significant discrepancies in vote totals” 
that were released by state authorities. “In an election surrounded by hacks, 
the use of systems that have been demonstrated to be easily hacked should 
concern every American,” she said.

In her petition to Wisconsin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/jill-stein-election-recount-clinton-trump-michigan-pennsylvania-wisconsin>
, a copy of which was first obtained by the Guardian, Stein chose to focus on 
an apparent “significant increase” in the number of absentee ballots cast in 
Wisconsin. She suggested, without direct evidence, that hackers could have 
downloaded the state’s voter registration database and used this to file bogus 
absentee votes.

What does Hillary Clinton say about it?

Clinton has said nothing publicly. Her campaign was approached by Bonifaz and 
his coalition earlier this month, and listened during a conference call as 
election experts laid out their various concerns. But the campaign gave no 
official response on whether they would request recounts, leaving Bonifaz and 
his allies to turn to Stein and the Green party.

Once Stein had filed her petition in Wisconsin, Clinton’s most senior campaign 
attorney, Marc Elias,said in an online post 
<https://medium.com/@marceelias/listening-and-responding-to-calls-for-an-audit-and-recount-2a904717ea39#.rvr6ytgus>
 that the campaign would participate in the recounts “in order to ensure the 
process proceeds in a manner that is fair to all sides”. To Elias’s 
frustration, this was interpreted by Trump as Clinton joining Stein in casting 
doubt over the results.

In fact, Elias stressed in his post that the Clinton campaign’s experts had 
been poring over the results since election day “to rule in or out any 
possibility of outside interference in the vote tally in these critical 
battleground states” – and had so far “not uncovered any actionable evidence of 
hacking or outside attempts to alter the voting technology”.


Instead, the Clinton campaign was saying that it would not stand in the way of 
recount efforts that were already under way. “We believe we have an obligation 
to the more than 64 million Americans who cast ballots forHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> to participate in ongoing 
proceedings to ensure that an accurate vote count will be reported,” said Elias.

What does Donald Trump say about it?

Having remained relatively quiet over Thanksgiving about Stein’s actions, 
Trump’s team was enraged by the Clinton campaign’s intervention. Kellyanne 
Conway, Trump’s senior adviser and former campaign manager, said on NBC’s Meet 
The Press on Sunday that Clinton’s camp was being “a bunch of crybabies and 
sore losers about an election that they can’t turn around”.

Trump later posted a string of statements to Twitter dismissing the recount 
effort. “Hillary Clinton conceded the election when she called me just prior to 
the victory speech and after the results were in,” he said. “Nothing will 
change.”

He attacked Clinton’s camp for appearing to question the integrity of the 
result after being so sharply critical of his own claims during the campaign 
that the election would be “rigged” against him. According to two people 
involved in the recount effort, it was precisely this vulnerability to claims 
of hypocrisy that led several senior members of Clinton’s team to want to avoid 
getting involved.

Trump concluded his rant with outlandish claims, with no basis in evidence, 
that he had only lost the popular vote to Clinton because “millions” of people 
had voted illegally. He also falsely stated that “serious voter fraud” had been 
detected in Virginia, New Hampshire and California – all states that Clinton 
won.

Alex Padilla, California’s secretary of state, rejected Trump’s allegation 
<https://twitter.com/AlexPadilla4CA/status/803075782922813440>, which he 
described as absurd and unsubstantiated. “His reckless tweets are inappropriate 
and unbecoming of a president-elect,” said Padilla.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jill%20Stein%20calls%20for%20recount%20in%20order%20to%20verify%20US%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jill%20Stein%20calls%20for%20recount%20in%20order%20to%20verify%20US%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video&media=>
Jill Stein calls for recount in order to verify US election result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/25/jill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video>
How much will it cost?

The recount effort has so far raised $6.3m of its $7m 
<https://jillstein.nationbuilder.com/recount> funding goal. That budget is 
based on estimates of filing fees ($1.1m in Wisconsin, $0.5m in Pennsylvania 
and $0.6m in Michigan) plus an estimated $2m-$3m in attorney’s fees as well as 
the money required to hire recount observers across all three states.

But the fundraising goal wasn’t always $7m. When Stein first launched the 
campaign on 23 November, the fundraising goal was$2.5m 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20161124034634/https://jillstein.nationbuilder.com/recount>
, in part because attorney fees were initially estimated to be $1m. Just 12 
hours later, the goal was revised up to$4.5m 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20161124132047/https://jillstein.nationbuilder.com/recount>
 and by 25 November it was raised again to its current level of $7m.

Perhaps that is not surprising – vote recount costs are hard to estimate. 
There are numerousfactors 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/~/media/legacy/uploadedfiles/pcs_assets/2010/recountbrief1pdf.pdf>
 that affect the cost, in part because different state laws require different 
procedures for vote recounts. The Wisconsin election commission hassaid 
<http://elections.wi.gov/node/4436> it is still calculating the fee that it 
will charge the Stein campaign before beginning the recount. In 2011, Wisconsin 
held a statewide recount of the supreme court election, which the Associated 
Press estimated cost approximately $520,000. Twice as many votes were cast in 
this year’s presidential race.

Bonifaz said the coalition had retained the New York law firm Emery Celli 
Brinckerhoff & Abady, which has extensive experience in election disputes and 
had advised organizers to budget $7m for the effort.

“This is going to be a very costly campaign,” said Bonifaz, adding that the 
average contribution from the tens of thousands of supporters who had donated 
was about $42. “But it is something that a lot of people clearly want.”

Has this happened before?

Statewide vote recounts are relatively common; 25 took place between 1980 and 
2010, but it’s more rare for them to take place in presidential elections. Many 
will remember the 2000 presidential election when questions over the crucial 
Florida vote meant that George W Bush’s presidential victory over Al Gore was 
genuinely in doubt for weeks. But there were similar instances in 1876, 1884, 
1916 and 1960 of the race not being settled on election night,according 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/10/trump-election-night-concede-214379>
 to Edward Foley, a law professor at Ohio State University.

Though federal law <https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/3/5> requires 
states to choose electors six days before the electoral college members meet in 
person (this year, that deadline is 13 December) and the US Electoral 
Commission publishes a how-toguide 
<https://www.eac.gov/assets/1/AssetManager/Quick%20Start-Conducting%20a%20Recount.pdf>
 on vote recounts, the reality is still complicated. Only six of the 15 current 
potential swing states automatically require a recount based on a close margin: 
Arizona, Colorado, Florida, Michigan, Ohio and Pennsylvania.

Will it make a difference?

Recounts were only held for 27 of the 4,687 statewide general elections 
between 2000 and 2015. Of those 27, just three changed the final outcome (all 
in favor of the Democrats),according 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/recounts-rarely-reverse-election-results/> 
to the nonpartisan election research group FairVote.

Could Jill Stein's vote recount change the outcome of the election?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/25/election-recount-outcome-jill-stein>
Typically, though, there is little change in the number of votes following a 
recount – the median swing between the top two candidates is just 219 votes. 
That’s far less than the number of votes that separate Donald Trump and Hillary 
Clinton in the three states where Stein is campaigning for recounts. In 
Wisconsin, Trump won27,257 <http://www.nytimes.com/elections/results/wisconsin> 
more votes than Clinton; in Pennsylvania he won by68,236 
<http://www.nytimes.com/elections/results/pennsylvania>; and in Michigan he won 
by11,612 <http://www.nytimes.com/elections/results/michigan>.

But the overall number of votes matter too – the average swing in a recount 
according to FairVote was 0.2 percentage points, which could be enough to 
secure Clinton as the winner in Michigan. Even if that were the case, however, 
the former secretary of state would still need to win back another 22 electoral 
college votes to be declared the next US president.
 