
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> made her 
first move in the presidential election recount effort on Tuesday, declaring 
support for an attempt to force Wisconsin authorities to review the state’s 3m 
votes by hand.

Clinton intervened in the case of a lawsuit brought by Jill Stein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/security-experts-join-jill-steins-election-changing-recount-campaign>
, the Green party candidate, which seeks to bar officials in Wisconsin from 
carrying out recounts with machines, according tothe docket for the case 
<https://wcca.wicourts.gov/caseDetails.do;jsessionid=1E2E2F9221528BA38C36E652F6E92AB2.render6?countyNo=13&caseNo=2016CV003060&cacheId=70E879328412C28E61C8962D9FA1BDDC&recordCount=1&offset=0>
 at Dane County circuit court.

An attorney for Clinton said in a court filing that the former secretary of 
state argues, like Stein, that hand recounts are superior to automatic recounts 
of ballots by optical scanners, which are used by about 90% of counties in the 
state.


Security experts join Jill Stein's 'election changing' recount campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/security-experts-join-jill-steins-election-changing-recount-campaign>
Clinton “respectfully supports the issuance of an order requiring a manual 
recount of all ballots cast in the presidential election in Wisconsin”, 
attorney Joshua Kaul said in the motion, according tothe Madison Capital Times 
<http://host.madison.com/news/local/govt-and-politics/election-matters/hillary-clinton-files-motion-in-support-of-hand-recount-in/article_adb7ea51-5e50-5e48-9e2f-9dfb246e25db.html?utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter&utm_campaign=user-share>
.


Attorneys for Clinton did not respond to requests for comment.


A hearing on Stein’s case was taking place on Tuesday night at the court in 
Madison. Wisconsin authorities argued in opposition to the lawsuit that hand 
recounts would be too time-consuming and make it impossible to finish by a 12 
December deadline.

Stein’s request was denied late on Tuesday, when Dane County circuit judge 
Valerie Bailey-Rihn ruled that counties could choose whether to recount by hand 
or machine.

Wisconsin attorney general Brad Schimel welcomed the decision, which he said 
“followed the law enacted by the legislature”. Stein’s attorneys said they 
would decide on Wednesday whether to appeal against Bailey-Rihn’s decision.

Stein is seeking full recounts in Michigan, Pennsylvania and Wisconsin, all 
states where Clinton narrowly lost to Donald Trump. After declining to take up 
the recount cause, Clinton’s campaign said last weekend that it would cooperate 
in the process.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jill%20Stein%20calls%20for%20recount%20in%20order%20to%20verify%20US%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jill%20Stein%20calls%20for%20recount%20in%20order%20to%20verify%20US%20election%20result%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fjill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video&media=>
Jill Stein calls for recount in order to verify US election result 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/25/jill-stein-calls-for-recount-in-order-to-verify-us-election-result-video>
Trump’s campaign reacted furiously to the recount requests, accusing those 
involved of being “crybabies and losers”. Trump later made a series of wild 
claims on Twitter, without any evidence, that Clinton had benefited from 
widespread illegal voting.

Stein had been asked to act by a coalition of election security experts and 
activists concerned that foreign hackers could have sabotaged the presidential 
election. US intelligence agencies said during the election campaign that 
Russian hackers had intruded into some state voter systems and stolen emails 
from Democratic officials.

More than $6.5m for the recount effort has been raised online in a 
crowdfunding effort led by Stein. Authorities in Wisconsin confirmed on Tuesday 
that Stein had paid the $3.5m in fees required for the recount but said once 
again that price had increased.

The state election commission, which on Monday raised the asking price from 
$1.1m to $3.5m, said they had miscalculated and another $400,000 was needed. 
The commissionsaid it would proceed <http://elections.wi.gov/node/4457> and 
bill the Stein campaign after the recount.

Stein has further work to do in other states. In Pennsylvania, her supporters 
have filed recount petitions in more than 260 election districts around six of 
the state’s largest counties, according to Stein’s team. State rules require 
three voters in each to make such a request for a recount to be triggered there.

Stein’s tally of districts is well short of the total 9,163 across the state. 
A spokesman did not respond to a request to confirm that the petitions had been 
submitted before filing deadlines, which vary between counties.

The campaign said it intended to file a recount petition in Michigan on 
Wednesday, which is the state deadline. A spokesman said state officials had 
indicated they were willing to proceed with a recount by hand after the 
petition is filed.
 