
The US economy grew at its fastest rate in two years in the last quarter, due 
to a surge in exports and improving consumer confidence. The news represented a 
blow to Donald Trump’shopes of winning the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/ds-2710-trump-rally>.

'Don't believe the polls': Donald Trump's supporters back him against the odds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/ds-2710-trump-rally> 
The US commerce department on Friday reported  
<http://www.bea.gov/newsreleases/national/gdp/gdpnewsrelease.htm>that gross 
domestic product (GDP) increased by 2.9% in the third quarter, up from 1.4% in 
the second quarter and higher than economists’ expectations of a 2.5% expansion.

The figures, the strongest since the third quarter of 2014, are the last 
official health check on theUS economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> before the election on 8 
November.
US gross domestic product 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/04/us-gdp/> 
Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, has highlighted the weakness of 
the economy and attacked his Democratic rival Hillary Clinton’s “failed 
economic agenda”.

In the final presidential debate last week, Trump said GDP was hovering about 
1% and falling. He has promised that if elected on his mandate to “make America 
great again”, growth will exceed 3%.

Despite growth coming in far ahead of that prediction, the Trump campaign said 
Friday’s figures were “dismal”.

“Growth hasn’t risen above 3% for a full year in any of the Obama presidency,” 
Dan Kowalski, Trump’s deputy policy director, said in a statement. “Decades of 
strong economic growth and global leadership have been replaced with low-paying 
jobs, global chaos and a national debt that has doubled under Obama-Clinton.”

Kowalski said Trump’s economic plan would create at least 25m jobs and GDP 
growth of 4% via tax breaks, renegotiation of trade deals and energy regulation 
reforms.

Barack Obama’s lead economic adviser said the increased GDP figures were due 
to “strong export growth and continued strength in consumer spending”.

Jason Furman, chairman of the president’s council of economic affairs, said: 
“Exports, which have faced significant headwinds in recent years from slow 
growth abroad, grew at an annual rate of 10% in the third quarter, their 
fastest quarterly pace since 2013.”

The GDP figures came less than a week before Federal Reserve policymakers will 
meet to set rates, but economists expect little chance of a rate change so 
close to the election. Experts expect the Fed to go for a quarter-point rise in 
December.

Greg Valliere, chief global strategist at Horizon Investments, said: “This is 
still another reason why Trump will probably lose. The economy is in decent 
shape – so decent that the Fed will have to raise interest rates later this 
year.

“This report shows a solid economy with – ironically – decent export growth. 
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> simply 
has to avoid gloating. But this is a big plus for her, and she may get another 
pleasant surprise when the October jobs report is released next Friday.”
 