
US factories have suffered their worst month for three years, heaping further 
pressure on theFederal Reserve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve> to hold off from raising 
interest rates when it meets next month.

A sharp decline in exports and plunging domestic orders were blamed for the 
fall in activity for February, making the month the lowest point for US 
manufacturing since the start of 2013 and joint lowest with October 2009.

A survey of European businesses also disappointed investors and indicated that 
recent turmoil in global markets has dealt the eurozone economy a bigger blow 
than previously estimated.

Fed chiefs meet in three weeks to consider how to react to the global slowdown 
and slump in oil prices that has hit exports and stalled the US recovery since 
it raised rates in December for the first time since the financial crisis. 
Meanwhile, the European Central Bank has already indicated it is likely to 
inject further funds into the eurozone when its governing council meets in a 
fortnight.

The US 'manufacturing renaissance' doesn't exist, says new report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/12/the-us-manufacturing-renaissance-doesnt-exist-says-new-report>
Fed chair Janet Yellen is expected to push for a delay in the next rise to 
0.75% after she highlighted the difficulties faced by the global economy 
following a decline in Chinese manufacturing output and the knock-on effects 
for factories in the Asia region, Europe and the US.

But she could meet resistance from her deputy, Stanley Fischer, who is known 
to be more cautious about abandoning the previous expectation for four rate 
hikes this year.

John Williams, the head of the San Francisco Fed, told the Los Angeles Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-sf-fed-president-20160222-story.html> 
that he saw no reason to delay after an increase in inflation over recent 
months.


“The basic approach we took, which is a gradual rate increase, is still 
right,” he said.

US and European stock markets fell back on Monday as data appeared to show the 
worsening global situation spreading to the US, following a slight improvement 
in January.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fus-factory-woes-pressure-fed-hold-interest-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0774e600c786732925d1c0f52ab1e640a342064%2F0_50_5650_3392%2F5650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20factory%20woes%20add%20to%20pressure%20on%20Fed%20to%20hold%20interest%20rates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fus-factory-woes-pressure-fed-hold-interest-rates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20factory%20woes%20add%20to%20pressure%20on%20Fed%20to%20hold%20interest%20rates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F22%2Fus-factory-woes-pressure-fed-hold-interest-rates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0774e600c786732925d1c0f52ab1e640a342064%2F0_50_5650_3392%2F5650.jpg>
 Manufacturers were likely to start laying off workers if the situation 
persisted, analysts said. Photograph: Alamy 
But the prospect of a delay to US interest rate rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/09/interest-rates-markets-janet-yellen-briefs-congress>
 kept stock values from losing all their gains from earlier in the day and 
pushed the Dow Jones in New York 236 points higher (at 18:30 GMT) to 16,623.

The Dax climbed almost 2% to 9570 while the FTSE 100 closed at 6041, up more 
than 1.5%.

Brent crude jumped by 5% to $34.7 (£24) a barrel, higher than the $27 a barrel 
it hit at the beginning of the year, but lower than the $36 a barrel seen 
earlier this month.

The Fed should show some reserve and not plough on regardless
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/feb/08/fed-should-show-some-reserve-janet-yellen-interest-rates>
The Markit flash purchasing managers’ index (PMI) of US manufacturing 
businesses registered the third month of decline out of the past four.

Firms said they were largely unaffected by bad weather and instead blamed the 
high dollar for a steep fall in exports anduncertainty about the general 
economic outlook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/11/stock-markets-hit-by-global-rout-raising-fears-for-financial-sector>
, which encouraged customers to delay spending decisions.

After a rise in the index to 52.4 in January, it fell back to 51.0. A figure 
greater than 50 indicates expansion.

Some analysts speculated that a collapse in orders for equipment from the US 
and Canadian oil industries, and especially fracking firms crippled by the low 
oil price, had hit US manufacturing harder than previously understood.

Bill Lee, chief US economist at Citi, said before the PMI figures appeared 
that his previously bullish expectations of a recovery in manufacturing had 
failed to spot a crisis for factories manufacturing kit for the fracking 
industry. He said the expected “oil dividend” – where consumers had been saving 
money on fuel – had been banked rather than spent, delaying an expected upturn 
in demand for US goods.

Chris Williamson, chief economist at financial data provider Markit, which 
conducted the manufacturing survey, said: “US factories are reporting the worst 
business conditions for over three years. Every indicator, from output, order 
books and exports to employment, inventories and prices, is flashing a warning 
light about the health of the manufacturing economy.”

Companies, especially in the services sector, have continued hiring workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/20/us-unemployment-jobs-doctor-thomas-perez>
, but other indicators have shown the US economy stalling.

Williamson said manufacturers were likely to start laying off workers if the 
situation persisted.

“With backlogs of work slumping to the greatest extent since the height of the 
recession in 2009 and inventories rising for the third successive month, it’s 
likely that firms will come under increasing pressure to cut payroll numbers 
and production in coming months unless demand revives,” he said.

“The one caveat is that the survey was conducted in a month in which parts of 
the US suffered extreme weather. However, few survey respondents reported that 
the weather had a material impact on business over the month, instead often 
simply observing a general slowdown in trade and the economy.”

 