
The US economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> barely grew in 
the final three months of 2015, rising at an an anaemic 0.7% annual rate amid 
signs of a global economic slowdown.

US economic growth slows sharply in fourth quarter – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jan/29/volatile-trading-bank-japan-negative-rates-live>
Both consumers and businesses cut back on spending and US exports were hurt by 
economic weakness in overseas markets. Economists surveyed by the Wall Street 
Journal had been expecting a marginally higher number, 0.8%, and the news is 
likely to renew fears that the six-and-a-half-year economic expansion is losing 
momentum.

This was the Commerce Department’s first estimate of gross domestic product 
(GDP) for the quarter, the broadest measure of an economy’s strength, and may 
be revised up or down. Fourth quarter GDP has slowed sharply on a number of 
occasions since the end of the recession only to bounce back in the spring.

Friday’s estimate was less than half the 2% annual growth rate in the third 
quarter and was the weakest showing since a severe winter reduced growth to a 
0.6% annual rate in last year’s first quarter.
US GDP figures. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/us_gdp-zip/giv-27167VWHer2UWOZjL/>
It comes amid global stock market turmoil driven by fears of an economic 
slowdown in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/01/slowdown-in-chinese-manufacturing-deepens-fears-for-economy>
 and collapsing oil prices which have led to job losses and cuts in investment 
in the US’s once booming domestic oil business.

Earlier this week the UK announced its GDP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/uk-gdp-growth-rises-05-as-annual-rate-slows-to-three-year-low>
 growth had slowed in 2015 to 2.2% over the year, down from 2.9% in 2014.

Activity in the US should rebound in the current January to March period, 
though economists worry that China’s troubles and sinking oil and stock prices 
could dampen the recovery.


Paul Ashworth, chief US economist at Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>, called the slowdown “a 
temporary blip” and said growth would likely rebound next quarter. Next Friday 
the Labor Department will release its latest jobs report, and the US is 
expected to have added another 210,000 in January.

“People love doom and gloom. We had this the same time last year,” said 
Ashworth. “But GDP grew 2.4% last year and 2.4% the year before, that’s pretty 
good. It’s been enough to drive the unemployment rate down to 5% from 10% [at 
the peak of the recession].”

A boost this year is expected to come mainly from consumer spending, which 
typically fuels about two-thirds of economic activity. Continued solid job 
growth could embolden consumers to spend more. Personal consumption rose 2.2% 
in the fourth quarter, down from 3% in the third quarter.

The Federal Reserve issued a cautious assessment of the economy this week, 
leaving interest rates unchanged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/federal-reserve-interest-rates-unchanged-global-markets-recession>
 after raising its benchmark short-term rate in December from record lows.

Many analysts think that economic weakness, subpar inflation and global 
pressures will cause the Fed to slow its pace of rate hikes this year from what 
had been expected to be four increases to perhaps only two.

For all of 2015, economists have estimated that the economy grew around 2.3%, 
about equal to the 2.4% growth for 2014. That would continue the economy’s 
pattern of growth since the Great Recession officially ended in June 2009.

For 2016, economists are forecasting another year of modest growth of around 
2%. At the same time they have nudged up the prospects for a recession this 
year. While still low, the likelihood is now put at around 20%, though most 
analysts still see an outright recession as unlikely.

Many economists expect the strength in the domestic economy to offset weakness 
in export sales and in the US energy sector, which has been slashing investment 
in response to the plunge in energy prices.

While economic growth was lackluster last year, hiring was not. The economy 
added an average of 284,000 jobs a month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/08/us-jobs-report-december-2015-economy-jobs>
 in the final quarter of last year.

Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody’s Analytics, has said he expects strong 
job growth to keep lowering unemployment and to help boost wages, which have 
lagged in this recovery. He said the extra consumer spending, which will be 
aided by lower gas prices, will likely support economic growth of around 2.5% 
in 2015.

Growth at that level is above the economy’s potential right now, which many 
analysts put at around 2%, reflecting a slower pace of people entering the job 
market and slower productivity growth.

The Associated Press contributed to this report
 