
The US justice department has opened an investigation into the jail in 
Virginia where, the Guardianrevealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/28/jamycheal-mitchell-virginia-jail-found-dead>
, a young black man with mental health problems had died after spending months 
detained for stealing snacks worth $5.

Federal officials are investigating whether the civil rights of inmates are 
being violated at Hampton Roads regional jail in Portsmouth, where 24-year-old 
Jamycheal Mitchell was found dead in his cell last year.

Young black man jailed since April for alleged $5 theft found dead in cell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/28/jamycheal-mitchell-virginia-jail-found-dead>
“All prisoners, including those with mental illness, have a constitutional 
right to receive necessary medical care, treatment and services,” Vanita Gupta, 
the head of the department’s civil rights division, said in a statement.

Dana Boente, the US attorney for the eastern district of Virginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/virginia>, said: “Prisoners with mental 
illness are a particularly vulnerable population, and their rights must be 
safeguarded.”

Mitchell died of heart problems and a wasting disorder in August last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/28/jamycheal-mitchell-virginia-jail-found-dead>
, after a judge’s order that he should be committed to a mental health hospital 
wasmislaid by a state official and forgotten about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/21/jamycheal-mitchell-died-jail-cell-eastern-state-hospital-order>
. Relatives said he suffered from schizophrenia and other psychotic problems.

He had been arrested by Portsmouth police more than three months earlier, for 
the alleged theft from a 7-Eleven store of a bottle of Mountain Dew, a Snickers 
bar and a Zebra Cake that were worth a total of $5. Mitchell’s family has sued 
authorities for $60m.

The jail has the highest death rate of any in Virginia. Subsequent deaths of 
two other inmates who had requested medical attention,Henry Stewart, 60 
<http://pilotonline.com/news/local/crime/man-dies-in-hampton-roads-regional-jail-days-after-filing/article_b0ee8763-855a-56da-929f-00d80087ad62.html>
, andWilliam Thrower, 69 
<http://www.richmond.com/news/virginia/article_fc5f1317-9dfb-5359-b73f-a7890d2e872d.html>
, have come under scrutiny by the Virginian-Pilot and Richmond Times-Dispatch 
newspapers.

Amid mounting controversy about conditions at the jail, superintendent David 
Simons and assistant superintendent Eugene Taylor both stepped down from their 
jobs earlier this year.

A justice department spokesperson said officials would investigate whether 
inmates were being denied their constitutional rights to adequate medical and 
mental health care, and whether inmates with mental health problems were having 
their rights violated by being denied access to programs open to other inmates 
or secluded in isolation for prolonged periods.

They will look into the possibility that authorities at the jail oversaw a 
“pattern or practice” of violations of the Civil Rights of Institutionalized 
Persons Act and the Americans with Disabilities Act.

Gupta promised that the department would carry out “a thorough investigation, 
led by the facts and the law”.
 