
US stock markets got the post-New Year’s blues on Monday, opening with their 
worst performance since 2008, driven down by a slowdown in China’s economy and 
more trouble in the Middle East.


The Dow Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dowjones> Industrial 
Average closed down 1.6% after staging a late rally. It was still its worst 
post-New Year performance in eight years. The Dow had been down 2.5% in the 
morning, a new year trading dip unseen since 1922 when the markets closed down 
2.3% on the first day of trading after the holidays.

The S&P 500 lost 30.88 points, or 1.51%, and the Nasdaq Composite dropped 
104.32 points, or 2.08%.

The New Year’s rout started after a closely watched survey of China’s vast 
manufacturing sector showed itshrank for a 10th month running 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/04/china-manufacturing-slowdown-ftse-100-stocks-markets>
.

In China, shares were suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/04/china-halts-trading-for-day-after-7-shares-plunge-triggers-circuit-breaker>
 after a drop of 7% activated“circuit breakers” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/08/china-plans-stock-market-circuit-breaker-as-shares-slide-on-import-woes>
 on their very first day. The Shanghai Composite Index ended 6.9% lower.

Investors across the world joined the sell off. In London, the FTSE 100 lost 
2.4%, its worst opening day to a new year in 16 years and thesecond-worst on 
record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jan/04/chinese-data-disappoints-as-markets-await-uk-eu-and-us-manufacturing-live#block-568a9f7be4b0a530efbcc856>
. The pan-European FTSEurofirst 300 lost 2.8% and Germany’s Dax lost 4.3%, its 
weakest start to a trading year in the history of the index.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fus-stock-markets-new-years-performance-china-dow-jones-industrial-average-economy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0fd3438c2e94e1edd6510ed1afab257b6732c99%2F31_54_1139_874%2F1139.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20stock%20markets%20open%20with%20worst%20performance%20since%202008&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fus-stock-markets-new-years-performance-china-dow-jones-industrial-average-economy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20stock%20markets%20open%20with%20worst%20performance%20since%202008&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F04%2Fus-stock-markets-new-years-performance-china-dow-jones-industrial-average-economy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd0fd3438c2e94e1edd6510ed1afab257b6732c99%2F31_54_1139_874%2F1139.jpg>
 FTSE 100 index Photograph: Google 
In Brazil, the real fell 2% against the dollar and Brazilian equities dropped 
1.6% to 42,646.19, the lowest since 16 March 2007, as investors worried the 
country will fall deeper into recession. Moody’s Investors services is 
currently reviewing the country’s debt and is soon expected to downgrade its 
rating to junk amid the country’s political and economic crisis. Moody’s rivals 
Standard & Poor’s and Fitch made the cut to junk last year.

With all this bad news US markets looked set to open with a sell off even 
before the opening bell for trading was rung. Compounding woes fromChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> the latest report on the state of the 
he manufacturing sector from the Institute for Supply Management (ISM) proved 
weaker than expected. ISM’s index fell to 48.2 in December from 48.6 in 
November, its lowest level since 2009. A level above 50 indicates growth and 
analysts had been expecting a rise.
Markit Economics (@MarkitEconomics) 
Markit #US <https://twitter.com/hashtag/US?src=hash> Manufacturing #PMI 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/PMI?src=hash> falls to 51.2 in December, lowest 
level since Oct'12https://t.co/kSnmmAbUqU <https://t.co/kSnmmAbUqU> 
pic.twitter.com/KtkpIgnjlg <https://t.co/KtkpIgnjlg>
 <https://twitter.com/MarkitEconomics/status/684023276541181952> January 4, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/MarkitEconomics/status/684023276541181952> 
“The US manufacturing sector is dangerously close to recession and, given the 
dollar’s continued appreciation, we don’t anticipate any significant 
improvement until the second half of this year,” Capital Economics’ US 
economist Steve Murphy wrote in a note to clients.


Oil rose, briefly, after months of falls. Rising tensions between Saudi Arabia 
and Iran following the execution of Shia cleric Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/02/saudi-execution-of-shia-cleric-sparks-outrage-in-middle-east>
led to speculation that oil supply could tighten. But oil soon lost those gains 
as investors bet that continuingoversupply would outstrip demand.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/13/oil-prices-opec-market-share-strategy-el-nino-us-interest-rates>
 