
The US Senate passed a mammoth health bill on Wednesday that took two years to 
negotiate and boasts broad, bipartisan support.

The bill is now on its way to Barack Obama’s desk. On Wednesday, he said he 
looked forward to signing it.

“We are now one step closer to ending cancer as we know it, unlocking cures 
for diseases like Alzheimer’s, and helping people seeking treatment for opioid 
addiction finally get the help they need,” the president said in a statement.

“The bipartisan passage of the 21st Century Cures Act is an example of the 
progress we can make when people from both parties work together to improve the 
health of our families, friends and neighbors.”

Like many bipartisan works, the $6.2bn 21st Century Cures Act is chock full of 
compromises.

Critics argue it is part of a “deregulatory agenda” that dilutes high Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) standards in return for the unrealized promise of 
biomedical research funding. High-profile liberal senators, such as the 
DemocratsElizabeth Warren 
<https://www.statnews.com/2016/11/28/elizabeth-warren-21st-century-cures/> and 
Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.statnews.com/pharmalot/2016/11/29/bernie-sanders-21st-century-cures/>
, and some consumer groups have criticized what they see as “giveaways” to the 
pharmaceutical industry.

What an Obamacare replacement could look like under Tom Price
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/29/obamacare-trump-administration-tom-price-hhs>
 Proponents call the bill’s mental health, opioid addiction, and brain and 
cancer research provisions a boon to public health. Republican backers have 
heralded the bill as “transformational” and “life-saving”, and some 
not-for-profit groups such as the American Cancer Society have also expressed 
support.

“Patients, doctors and scientists are supporting 21st Century Cures,” said the 
Republican Senate health committee chairman, Lamar Alexander, in astatement on 
Monday 
<http://www.alexander.senate.gov/public/index.cfm/pressreleases?ID=BB1CC386-9621-4FCA-8D0E-33D3DA785D05>
.

The Democratic Colorado congresswoman Diana DeGette called the bill a 
“watershed moment for patients”.

“We’re bringing hope to millions of people suffering from cancer, Alzheimer’s 
disease, diabetes and a host of other ailments,” she said.

Caitlin Morris, a health system program director at Families USA, a patient 
advocacy group that has not taken a public position on the bill, said: “The 
intent of the law is to create additional pathways for new drugs to come to 
market quickly, ... That carries both risks and benefits, and I think that is 
the heart of the contention of this bill.”

Expedited approval

Stuffed within its thousands of pages, the 21st Century Cures Act attempts to 
expedite approval of some drugs and medical devices – to the potential 
detriment of the public, consumer groups argue.

“I think the negative concerning features of the bill are pretty substantial,” 
said Aaron Kesselheim, a physician, lawyer and associate professor in 
pharmacoeconomics at Harvard University. “We want innovation that works, and I 
think what this bill is about is trying to push through new treatments without 
first ensuring that they work.”

One contentious provision, for example, directs the FDA to assess whether new 
drug uses, or indications, could be approved based on “real-world evidence 
<https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/house-bill/34/text>”, such as 
observational studies.

I think what this bill is about is trying to push through new treatments 
without first ensuring that they work
Aaron Kesselheim, Harvard professor 
Currently, every indication needs to be approved using the “gold standard”, a 
randomized controlled trial, because such trials are consideredless biased 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3179209/> than observational 
studies.

Physicians are permitted to prescribe drugs whether or not they are approved 
for indications other than those on the label, but drug companies cannot 
advertise the drugs for those uses. Faster approval of new indications could 
allow drug companies to advertise more quickly, but critics argue it would also 
create a “double standard” in terms of determining which drugs should be used 
to treat what.

One example of common “off-label” prescribing is quetiapine, also known as 
Seroquel, a medication used to treat schizophrenia. It is commonly also 
prescribed to treat bipolar disorder, though this is not on the label. Stanford 
University pointed to this drug as one of the most “urgently needing study for 
off-label use 
<https://med.stanford.edu/news/all-news/2008/11/14-drugs-identified-as-most-urgently-needing-study-for-off-label-use-stanford-professor-says.html>
”.

“You are loosening certain restrictions,” said Morris. “On the one hand, it 
will get it to market sooner for folks that might benefit sooner, but on the 
other hand might lower the level of confidence we have on the safety and the 
efficacy of drugs we have and provide.”

Another measure would reclassify some medical devices, instruments permanently 
implanted in patients, as “breakthrough devices”.

“The last thing we need to do is any further weakening of this process,” said 
Michael Carome, a physician and director of Public Citizen’sHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Research Group, a consumer 
advocacy group, referring to medical device approval. “It’s already too lax. 
It’s already an expedited process, but [the] ‘breakthrough devices’ [provision 
in the new bill] would further rush the process and allow smaller clinical 
trials.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmammoth-us-health-bill-aims-to-approve-drugs-faster-but-concerns-linger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd46055d9b795868eec5a969892e43ab3d068e462%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20Senate%20passes%20%246.2bn%20health%20bill%20to%20expedite%20approval%20for%20drugs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmammoth-us-health-bill-aims-to-approve-drugs-faster-but-concerns-linger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20Senate%20passes%20%246.2bn%20health%20bill%20to%20expedite%20approval%20for%20drugs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmammoth-us-health-bill-aims-to-approve-drugs-faster-but-concerns-linger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd46055d9b795868eec5a969892e43ab3d068e462%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Barack Obama has urged the passage of the 21st Century Cures Act. Photograph: 
Monica Herndon/AP 
The bill does nothing to address prescription drug prices, which 77% of 
Americans said were “unreasonable” as recently as September, according to the
Kaiser Family Foundation 
<http://kff.org/health-costs/report/kaiser-health-tracking-poll-september-2016/>
.

The Cures Act expands innovation “vouchers 
<https://www.statnews.com/2015/11/28/priority-review-vouchers-rare-diseases/>”, 
a system under which drug companies can receive fast-track status for an 
application, and which critics have described as “broken 
<https://www.statnews.com/pharmalot/2015/12/14/martin-shkreli-priority-review-vouchers/?s_campaign=trendmd>
”. Therapies derived from stem cells, called regenerative medicine, are given a 
push.

“There’s already a great deal of quackery in the field,” said Carome, 
referring to regenerative medicine. “There are clinicians promoting these as 
cures for heart disease and Alzheimer’s … They should be subject to the most 
rigorous standards.”

Some measures have, however, won support from influential organizations such 
as the American Cancer Society and theMayo Clinic 
<http://newsnetwork.mayoclinic.org/discussion/mayo-clinic-ceo-comments-on-todays-21st-century-cures-action/>
. The bill proposes $1bn in funding for opioid treatment, and $4.7bn for the 
National Institutes of Health to give more biomedical research grants to 
scientists. The bill also funds Vice-PresidentJoe Biden’s “Moonshot” cancer 
research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/17/joe-biden-cancer-moonshot-program-update>
.

But funding for the bill is subject to approval in forthcoming appropriations 
bills – now and for the next 10 years. So each Congress needs to approve the 
funding.

Some are also concerned 
<http://healthaffairs.org/blog/2016/11/30/the-current-21st-century-cures-legislation-is-still-a-bad-deal-for-patients/>
 that $3.4bn comes from the Prevention and Public Health fund, a pot of cash 
meant to prevent hospital-acquired infections, chronic ailments, Alzheimer’s and
cancer 
<http://www.acscan.org/content/media-center/congress-urged-to-pass-21st-century-cures-bill/>
.

According to an NPR and Center for Responsive Politics analysis, lobbyists 
arguing for or against the 21st Century Cures Act courted lawmakers to the tune 
of$192m 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/12/02/504139105/winners-and-losers-if-21st-century-cures-bill-becomes-law>
 this year, as nearlythree lobbyists 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/11/25/503176370/legislation-that-would-shape-fda-and-nih-triggers-lobbying-frenzy>
 for every lawmaker poured into the capital.
 