
The US economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/useconomy> grew at a 
slightly slower pace than first thought in the third quarter of 2015, 
continuing a sluggish recovery trend started after the last recession.

The Commerce Department announced Tuesday that gross domestic product (GDP) 
for the third quarter of 2015 grew at an annual rate of 2%, down from a 
previous estimate of 2.1%. This was the department’s third and final estimate 
of the quarter’s GDP.

The latest GDP measure, the broadest indicator of a nation’s economic health, 
marks yet another quarter of low growth and is a marked slowdown from the 3.9% 
growth rate reported between July and September.

Federal Reserve officials are not expecting much improvement in 2016, 
estimating growth of 2.1% to 2.4%.

Consumer spending, which accounts for more than two-thirds of US economic 
activity, was one of the largest drivers of growth, growing at a 3% annual 
rate. Spending on plants and equipment, state and local government spending, 
residential investments, and exports all contributed to the growth.

The deceleration in GDP came mainly as companies spent less stockpiling their 
inventories.

Corporate profits after tax fell at a 1.7% rate in the third quarter and 
profits, undercut by the dollar’s strength and lower oil prices, were down 8.2% 
from a year ago.

The latest GDP figures come after the Fed voted to raise interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/16/federal-reserve-us-interest-rate-rise-fed-funds-janet-yellen>
 for the first time in close to a decade. While economic growth has remained 
sluggish, the US has now added new jobs every month since October 2010 and has 
added an average of 237,000 jobs a month over the past 12 months.

At a news conference announcing the rate hike, Fed chair Janet Yellen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/janet-yellen> said: “This action marks 
the end of an extraordinary seven-year period during which the federal funds 
rate was held near zero to support the recovery of the economy from the worst 
financial crisis and recession since the Great Depression.”


She said the economy “has come a long way”, though normalization “is likely to 
proceed gradually”.

“The economy should continue to expand at an above-trend pace through next 
year. With solid job gains, accelerating wage growth, lower energy prices 
boosting after-inflation incomes, and low interest rates, consumer spending 
will continue to lead overall economic growth,” said Gus Faucher, senior 
economist at PNC. “The more extended drag will come from trade, given soft 
global growth and the strong US dollar that makes exports from the US more 
expensive and imports to the US less expensive.”
 