
Sitting in the kitchen of Vicky Pryce's elegant south London home, it's hard 
not to think about the differences between her life and the lives of most of 
the women she met as she was serving her prison sentence earlier this year. 
Released from East Sutton Park open prison in May on an electronic tag after 
serving eight weeks of her eight-month sentence, Pryce haspublished a book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/shortcuts/2013/oct/07/vicky-pryce-prison-diaries-learned>
 about her experience. A combination of diary and economic analysis of the 
prison system, entitled Prisonomics,it is a sobering, compelling read 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/28/prisonomics-by-vicky-pryce-review>
 that would serve as a blueprint for any politician who wanted to focus 
seriously on reform.

Pryce understood immediately how lucky she was to have been able to make 
provision for her family before she received her sentence, leaving cheques, she 
writes, "for the pest control man, the milkman and generally for ensuring that 
the house and my children who lived there would survive my absence, at least 
financially".

As she points out in the opening chapter, 15% of prisoners report being 
homeless before entering prison. Many more faced eviction because of rent 
arrears. Significant numbers of children whose mothers go to prison end up in 
local authority care andthe rest are looked after by family, friends or 
acquaintances 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Women%27s%20Justice%20Taskforce%20Report.pdf>
.Reseach suggests  
<http://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Managing_the_Needs_of_Female_Prisoners.html?id=_QMtAAAACAAJ&redir_esc=y>
that more than half of women who go to court are not expecting a custodial 
sentence – children are often left with neighbours and mothers are often 
reluctant to notify social services in case the children are taken away and the 
family is further disrupted. About 17,000 children a year are separated from 
their mothers by imprisonment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/sep/30/prison-17000-children-separated-mothers>
 andfigures show that adult children of imprisoned mothers are more likely to 
be convicted of a crime than adult children of imprisoned fathers 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/Portals/0/Documents/Prisonthefacts.pdf>.

Pryce, a mother of five, doesn't want to talk about her family or her 
ex-husband, former cabinet minister Chris Huhne, whose motoring penalty points 
she took 10 years ago, leading to them both being imprisoned. Neither would I 
want her to – I am interested in what she made of prison. Did she feel that 
what she had done was so bad that she deserved to be locked up? "I didn't even 
think about that," she says. "The sentence was what society, in the form of the 
judge, had decided was necessary and I knew I had to do it. The important thing 
was to come out of it strong for my family and able to do something worthwhile."

Has it made her a better person? "I'd hate to think you have to go to prison 
to be a better person," she says. "I would not recommend anyone going to 
prison, but I think I would have been much less of a complete person if this 
hadn't happened. There would have been a whole chunk of something 
very important that is happening in society that I would not have realised was 
going on."

Pryce came to Britain from her native Greece alone as a teenager and worked in 
hotel room service to pay for O- and A-level studies before gaining a 
scholarship to study at the LSE. Her career as an economist took her to the 
highest levels of government. In 2002 she became the first woman chief economic 
adviser at the Department of Trade and Industry and in 2007 became joint head 
of the government's economic service. When the news broke that she had been 
sent to prison, I felt, like many, that the sentence was a disproportionate 
response to the crime – perverting the course of justice. But Pryce has worked 
withcharities that help unemployed people and ex-offenders 
<http://www.workingchance.org> so it may be no bad thing for a respected expert 
in economics to have a look at what is going on in our prison system from the 
inside.

Having worked in undeveloped countries in dangerous and unpredictable 
environments, Pryce says she felt no fear about going to prison. "Holloway was 
a great big chaotic place, but as soon as I started speaking to other girls it 
was very clear to me that prison was not necessarily the best thing for them. 
So many had problems that were not being dealt with and wouldn't be dealt with 
in prison. There were many who were in for things that you would have thought 
society could have dealt with in a different and more helpful way. So 
straightaway I was thinking about these things. You see what goes on in 
Holloway and you wonder what is gained for society by keeping people in those 
conditions. I began writing and making loads of points. There was no internet, 
so I had to wait till I got out to do proper research. People would send me 
stuff, likethe Corston Report on women in prison 
<http://www.justice.gov.uk/publications/docs/corston-report-march-2007.pdf> and 
economic stuff. It was quite obvious that this needed to be looked at from an 
economic viewpoint."

Her observations brought logical conclusions. "The majority of women, over 
80%, are in prison on short sentences of less than 12 months for non-violent 
offences. A good proportion of these women are mothers.The annual cost per 
prison place for a woman is more than £56,000 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-13666066>, yet intensive community orders cost 
less than a third of that and evidence shows they have more impact on reducing 
reoffending. It makes no economic sense to keep women in prison who present no 
threat of harm to others. Prison often exacerbates the problems these women 
were facing before they were sent away. The lack of co-ordinated governmental 
thinking on this is perpetuating the problems and doing nothing to lower costs 
or re-offending, which costs a staggering £9bn or £10bn a year."

Her grasp of the facts is startling. But how are politicians and 
decision-makers to be persuaded that changes are necessary and beneficial? 
There was bad news for the justice secretary Chris Grayling this month whenNick 
Hardwick, the chief inspector of prisons, published his annual report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/oct/17/prison-deaths-rising-cutbacks>
. Since he took over from Ken Clarke in September 2012, Grayling has been 
trumpeting his Transforming Rehabilitation agenda yet has presided over an 
increase in prisoner numbers of more than 3,000 in England and Wales. Hardwick 
reports that too many prisoners are spending too long locked in their cells 
with nothing constructive to do. He says that the quality and quantity of 
"purposeful activity" in prison has "plummeted" in the past 12 months and 
describes his findings on Grayling's watch as "the worst outcome for six years".

How would Pryce advise Grayling? "If there is a rightwing agenda, it's very 
hard just to change the language," she says. "What he needs to do is think very 
seriously about whether the present system works, which it clearly does not, 
and whether it gives value for money, which clearly it doesn't do either. The 
current approach is simply going to lead to your resources being spread too 
thinly and the benefits to society just not coming. If we just keep locking 
people up for longer and longer then all that happens is that recidivism is 
going to keep increasing. The cost to society then is going to be far greater 
than it needs to be. I think if anyone was to explain it in those terms, the 
savings for the taxpayer, fewer potential victims, this I think would be a vote 
winner. But it might just be a bit too complicated for him."

Pryce has often been depicted in the press as hard and manipulative. But when 
she speaks there is a quiet dignity in her voice and a strength I hadn't quite 
expected. Next month she takes up a visiting professorship at Warwick 
University and demand for her professional expertise in the City is high. After 
all she has been through I wondered why she still cared about prisons. Why not 
just put it behind her and get on with rebuilding her career? "Well you can't 
just ignore it when you have an experience in life like this. Being an 
economist I couldn't just bypass what I saw as a lack of economic rationale in 
what I found in prison. More important are the stories of the women and what 
happens to the children and the repercussions for society as a whole that has a 
huge impact and we are just not told. Few women in prison have a voice and I do 
have a voice and I want to use it to inform a serious debate. If what I have 
done with this book encourages a wider debate then at least I will have done 
something right for the girls I met and hopefully for whoever else is out there 
who may be heading that way."

Later that evening I attended a conference in London, organised by Re-Unite 
<http://www.re-unite.org.uk/>, the charity that helps keep mothers in prison 
connected to their children, where Pryce was due to speak. It was her first 
contribution to such an event since her release from prison. The hall was 
packed with representatives from penal reform and female prisoners' charities. 
Potentially this was her toughest audience. As she stood up and scanned the 
rows of expectant faces, she looked fragile and vulnerable – until she started 
talking. Eloquent and confident, she spoke without notes and without rancour. 
The applause when she sat down was testament to her credibility as a new and 
powerful force in the prison reform debate.
 