
The opening scene of Vinyl, the new HBO show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mediamonkeyblog/2015/aug/07/hbo-vinyl-martin-scorsese-mick-jagger>
 about the record industry in the 70s, is absolutely perfect. Label owner 
Richie Finestra (Bobby Cannavale) does a few bumps of coke and then stumbles in 
and sees the New York Dolls, in their best makeup and finery, jamming out
Personality Crisis <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ctg5FCS1wCM>. The crowd is 
hip and raucous, the band is an absolute spectacle, and director Martin 
Scorsese captures the action perfectly, with the swoosh of hair and fringed 
jackets slowed down in a gorgeous whirl. It’s enough to make you want to be 
there, right in that moment, and never leave. That is exactly the problem with 
Vinyl.

Gimme celluloid: a history of Mick Jagger on film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/mick-jagger-hbo-vinyl-acting-roles>
Created by Scorsese, Mick Jagger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/mick-jagger-hbo-vinyl-acting-roles>
, Boardwalk Empire creator Terence Winter, and former Rolling Stone editor Rich 
Cohen, Vinyl is a middle-aged white man’s idea of the glory days and it wants 
desperately to impress you with their never-ending cool. Our culture – 
especially the reboot- and revival-obsessed television culture of late – is 
mired in nostalgia and Vinyl falls into the stickiest of its mousetraps. Seeing 
a Times Square subway station covered in grime and graffiti feels just like an 
old codger telling modern Manhattanites that it was so much better back then 
and we just wouldn’t understand. No, we wouldn’t. But should we try to?

Our culture is mired in nostalgia and Vinyl falls into the stickiest of its 
mousetraps

Vinyl’s creative team has a median age of 62. Mick and Martin were in their 
prime in 1973, when the show is set, so the rest of us have to relive it with 
them and another generation will be saddled with the iron grip of Baby Boomer 
culture. Based on what the writers, directors, producers, and other over-50 
suits have been telling us for years, it has never been as good or cool or hip 
or fun or awesome as it was for them and they’re not going to let any of us 
forget about it until they go kicking and screaming into their graves (since 
retirement doesn’t seem to be an option).

That’s not to say that Vinyl is a bad show. Richie is trying to save his 
struggling label by focusing on what he loves about music while also ruing the 
bad decisions he made to get to the top of the heap and get that apartment on 
the Upper East Side and the house in Greenwich. It’s another rich white guy 
grappling with his bad decisions and having a midlife crisis right before our 
very eyes.Because we haven’t seen that before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/17/why-screen-drama-needs-to-lighten-up>
. To make sure it’s just like every other prestige pilot these days, there is 
also a murder in the first episode. What would we do without one of those?

The two-hour premiere is absolutely stunning. You get all of the Scorsese 
trademarks, the swirling camerawork, the sumptuous visuals, and expertly staged 
musical numbers by the man who made The Last Waltz. However, it’s also littered 
with Scorsese cliches. There is cocaine, murder, mafia dons, underwritten 
female parts, comical supporting characters, and even a voiceover that does all 
of the exposition. (I don’t know whether to be annoyed or relieved that the 
voiceover disappears after introducing the main cast members and leaving us 
with the eye-rolling description of Richie as having “a golden ear, a silver 
tongue, and a pair of brass balls. The problem became my nose and everything I 
put in it.”)

There is no doubt that Scorsese is a master and his magic is all over the 
first two hours, which will lure people into the show with its chrome and 
Lucite facade and inventive blues asides taking place in some strange 
netherworld that describes the character’s emotions. The acting is superb all 
around, with Cannavale falling on just the right side of scenery-chewing and 
Ray Romano, playing one of Richie’s colleagues, earning what is sure to be his 
first dramatic Emmy.

But after the magic of that first episode, it becomes obvious that there is 
nothing new about Vinyl. The executives drink and do drugs all day long, even 
though it sometimes gets in the way of business. Sounds prettyMad Men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/29/mad-men-box-set-review> 
to me. There is a plucky secretary (Juno Temple) who rises up in the 
male-dominated company thanks to her boss who sees something in her and gives 
her a leg up. Why not just call her Schmeggy Molson? For good measure, the 
show’s creators also added in a former model turned disappointed housewife 
(Olivia Wilde), who is married to the main character. No, her name is not Betty 
Draper, but it might as well be.

We get another conflicted white antihero in the post-Soprano age. When is this 
story going to change?

Unlike Mad Men or City on Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/18/city-on-fire-garth-risk-hallberg-review-new-york-city>
, Vinyl doesn’t give us a reason to revisit and re-evaluate the past. It just 
marinates in its perceived greatness, hoping that it will somehow infuse itself 
into the present and make it relevant. There are some period pieces that turn 
to the past to expand upon thematic elements. The Americans uses the cold war 
in the 80s to explore the way that all couples keep secrets and eventually 
betray each other. Halt and Catch Fire, also set in the 80s, explores the first 
tech startups to tease out the promise and inequality of the tech scene today. 
This synthesis of the past into something vital and necessary is totally 
lacking here. Vinyl expects us to get all worked up that Led Zeppelin and Alice 
Cooper are on our television screens and not care that much about the rest.

There is a great show to be made about pop music and how it shapes our 
culture, but this isn’t that show. This is about how the music industry shapes 
one man – another conflicted white antihero in the post-Tony Soprano age. When 
is this story going to change?

Why we’re still obsessed with the 1970s New York of Lou Reed and Patti Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/15/1970s-new-york-lou-reed-patti-smith>
The funny thing is, HBO <https://www.theguardian.com/media/hbo> and Terence 
Winter, who was a writer on The Sopranos, established this age. The channel 
used to be the place for fresh voices in television that gave us not only The 
Sopranos but Six Feet Under, Deadwood, and even Big Love. But the way the 
network makes prestige shows has calcified into a formula. After Boardwalk 
Empire, this is the second show created by Scorsese and Winter. This is just 
how they do things now. Take a sexy-seeming world from the past, throw in a 
bunch of great actors, expensive sets, and finely rendered costumes, have the 
characters stare discontentedly into empty rooms and hope that most people 
think it’s deep.

Since Vinyl is so obsessed with the history of rock’n’roll, it should learn a 
thing or two from it. While rock was complacent in dominating the culture, 
hip-hop slowly simmered below the surface, steadily gaining in popularity and 
influence until the top-selling rock group of the day, Coldplay, were 
completely overshadowed during their ownSuper Bowl half-time show by Beyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/08/beyonce-black-panthers-homage-black-lives-matter-super-bowl-50>
, whosenew track Formation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/feb/08/beyonce-formation-review-super-bowl-rallying-cry-black-consciousness>
 was produced by one of hip-hop’s go-to beat makers, MikeWillMadeIt. That is 
going to happen in TV, too. HBO used to be the place that would give those 
upstart voices a place to shine, but now it seems content to replay its 
greatest hits for eternity.

Vinyl starts 14 February on HBO, 9pm EST 
 