
On Sunday night Viola Davis made history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/sep/20/emmys-2015-viola-davis-best-actress-drama-first-woman-of-color>
 when she became the first black woman to win an Emmy for outstanding lead 
actress in a drama series.

At the end of her gorgeously nuanced speech – indeed after watching the Emmys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/emmys> as a whole, with wins for 
Regina King and Uzo Aduba – like probably every other black woman in America 
watching, I was left feeling deep elation and gratitude.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fviola-davis-speech-2015-emmys-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Viola%20Davis%20gives%20stirring%20speech%20after%20historic%20win%20at%202015%20Emmys%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fviola-davis-speech-2015-emmys-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Viola%20Davis%20gives%20stirring%20speech%20after%20historic%20win%20at%202015%20Emmys%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fviola-davis-speech-2015-emmys-video&media=>
 Viola Davis gives her acceptance speech at the Emmys 
Imagine, I thought, how this must translate for young black girls who are 
watching.

When Davis said “You cannot win an Emmy for roles that are simply not there” I 
was immediately reminded of a quote from 17-year old Lanika, who I interviewed 
for my bookSugar in the Raw: Voices of Young Black Girls in America 
<http://www.amazon.com/Sugar-Raw-Voices-Young-America/dp/0517884976>, and who 
talked with me about her experience as a black girl studying ballet in 
Birmingham, Alabama:

I’m going to tell you, though, even the tights are pink – the color is 
actually called European pink and is meant to blend in naturally with the white 
girls’ skin. But when I put those pink tights on, you can see my brown skin 
coming through. I told my ballet teacher that I wasn’t even tryin’ to wear pink 
tights because they are not made for me to wear. How am I gonna put those 
tights on and pretend that my skin doesn’t show through?

The tights are not made for Lanika and other black girls aspiring to become 
ballerinas. The roles in Hollywood are not made for Viola and other black 
female actors. And yet there stood Lanika and Viola, pushing through, 
persevering and changing the mainstream narrative.

I wrote Sugar in the Raw almost 20 years ago for the same reason Lanika 
studied ballet, and Viola fights for those roles – to turn the tide when it 
comes to the representation of black women. Not just in publishing or classical 
dance or television, but in the collective consciousness at large. At a time 
when Americansare watching more television 
<http://qz.com/237600/charts-how-we-watch-tv-now/> than ever Davis’s win has an 
especially important impact, but what kind will it have and at what cost?

On her way to the stage Viola hugged fellow nominee Taraji P Henson, in an 
achingly beautiful embrace, and started her speech with a quote from Harriet 
Tubman. She thanked her peers – and Henson – who continued to stand clapping 
even as everyone else remained seated, and Kerry Washington, who looked on 
tearfully with palpable joy and appreciation. She thanked How to Get Away with 
Murder showrunner Shonda Rhimes, who couldn’t attend the ceremony because of 
work commitments.

Although the sisterhood is in full effect, I cannot help but feel somewhat 
averse regarding the continuous weight black women are expected to carry in 
Hollywood. It is the burden of not only having to do the job better than white 
women in roles that are scarcely written for them, but of then having to be 
perceivably, and endlessly, grateful about it in an industry that is propelled 
almost entirely by white privilege and unaccounted for ignorance.


Viola Davis has been carrying this burden for years. Remember when Charlize 
Theron interrupted her mid-sentence 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2012/01/24/what-charlize-theron-doesn-t-get-about-black-hollywood.html>
 when Viola was trying to explain what it feels like to be unseen in Hollywood? 
Or when theNew York Times described her 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/21/arts/television/viola-davis-plays-shonda-rhimess-latest-tough-heroine.html?_r=0>
 as “older, darker-skinned and less classically beautiful”? Immediately 
following Viola’s win, General Hospital actor Nancy Grahn started in with a 
stream of tweets about how difficult it was for “all women” to get roles in 
television, among other utterly tone-deaf thoughts regarding diversity and 
liberalism and marching, or something.

But we know, black women most keenly, that Viola will show up for work the 
next day – whether for a television show written by Shonda Rhimes or a film 
directed by John Patrick Shanley – and tear that performance straight out of 
her gut, over and over again, with an unflinching measure of grace and poise 
and, yes, gratitude.

Earlier in the evening, when Jamie Lee Curtis presented the award for best 
supporting actor to Uzo Aduba 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/iramadison/laurie-strode-whats-good#.yqgQ3KYBe3> and 
blithely remarked that she’d had to ask Aduba how to pronounce her name, I was 
reminded of another moment from Sugar in the Raw: with 14-year-old Jaminica, 
who grew up in San Francisco:

When I was in the third grade … the teacher, who was white, hated me. She was 
just mean. I know that my name is difficult to pronounce, but it’s not that 
difficult, and after a month of being the class, she still couldn’t remember it 
at all. She didn’t take the time to remember my name and that made me mad. She 
didn’t take the time because I was the only black girl in the class and she 
didn’t want to know my name. I got an ulcer because of the stress I felt … The 
doctors were bewildered that a seven-year-old would have so much stress.

So when we celebrate Viola, Uzo, Regina, Shonda, Ava, Kerry and all the very 
visible and talented black women working and making history in Hollywood right 
now, let’s also remember the emotional fortitude, the visceral composure and 
elegant anger and strife that came before them and that will invariably come 
after them.
 