
Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> is poised to transfer 
thousands of refugees from overcrowded camps on its Aegean islands to the 
mainland amid escalating tensions in the facilities and protests from irate 
locals.


The leftist-led government said unaccompanied minors, the elderly and infirm 
would be among the first to be moved as concerns mounted over the future of a 
landmark EU-Turkey deal to stem migrant flows.

“The situation on the islands is difficult and needs to be relieved,” deputy 
minister for European affairs Nikos Xydakis told the Guardian. “Accommodation 
on the mainland will be more suitable. We will start with transfers of those 
who are most vulnerable, always in the sphere of implementing and protecting 
the EU-Turkey agreement.”

EU and Turkey restart talks over migrant pact
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/25/eu-and-turkey-restart-talks-over-migrant-pact>
The operation, expected to be put into motion this week, came as Ankara warned 
the pact would not hold if Brussels failed to honour its pledge to allow Turks 
visa-free travel to the bloc.

In a fiery speech before the newly reconvened parliament at the weekend, 
Turkish presidentRecep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan> gave his clearest 
signal yet that the six-month-old agreement was in danger of collapse because 
of slow progress over visa liberalisation. Under the plan, Turkey’s 
80-million-strong population was to be given access to Europe’s border-free 
Schengen travel area in October.

“This stance is a declaration that the European Union does not wish to keep 
the promise it made toTurkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>,” he 
told MPs.

Refugee flows, although rising again, have dropped by 90% since the deal was 
signed. At the height of the crisis, more than 7,000 men, women and children 
made the perilous sea crossing fromTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> to the Greek isle of Lesbos in a 
single day.

Racheting up the pressure, Erdoğan said the EU had to decide, once and for 
all, if it wanted to act on Turkey’s decades-long bid to become a member. “If 
the EU is going to make Turkey a full member, we are ready. But they should 
know we have come to the end of the game. There is no need to beat around the 
bush or engage in diplomatic acrobatics.”

Western diplomats in the Greek capital raised the spectre of chaos if the 
agreement collapsed. “If it does, there will be an influx of a million or more 
and this country is totally unprepared,” one European ambassador confided. 
“Athens will be overwhelmed, [as will] the mainland, people will be forced to 
live in fields, there will be scenes we’ll never have imagined.”

More than 60,000 refugees and migrants are in Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> after a succession of Balkan and 
eastern European states closed their borders earlier this year. They are being 
accommodated in conditions denounced as deplorable by human rights groups. 
Brawls between detainees, forced to wait months for their asylum applications 
to be processed, are commonplace.

Recently more than 4,000 people at the Moria camp in Lesbos – the island that 
has borne the brunt of the inflows – were evacuated afterfrustrated inmates set 
fire to the vastly overcrowded facility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/thousand-flee-as-blaze-sweeps-through-moria-refugee-camp-in-greece>
. In a letter passed to the Guardian from the heads of 141 families held at 
Ellinikon, a makeshift camp established in Athens’s former international 
airport, inmates described scenes of insufferable squalor, saying infectious 
diseases were rife because of conditions.

“There are rats, insects and reptiles including snakes everywhere in the 
camp,” they wrote adding that in the winter many fell ill to pneumonia and in 
the summer heat exhaustion. “Unclean water has caused diarrhoea and nausea. The 
longer we stay here, the worse conditions have got, and now most people are 
suffering from mental illnesses, depression and other diseases.”

About 14,000 refugees are now trapped on Greek islands with Turkish coastguard 
data showing the number of migrants caught trying to make the sea crossing more 
than doubling in September.

Acknowledging that camp conditions were far from ideal, Xydakis blamed the 
backlog in asylum applications on the EU’s failure to dispatch promised staff 
and push ahead with an agreed relocation scheme to other parts of the continent.

“We were promised 400 experts in asylum procedures but so far only have around 
29 on the islands. We are continuing to recruit and look for more staff but it 
is not easy,” he said. “The deal is not only in the hands of Turkey butEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> … some EU states are not 
respecting but neglecting their responsibilities.”

In the three months since Britain voted to leave the EU, the bloc had become 
ever more fractious, with central European and Balkan members increasingly 
pursuing their own agenda. “In the post-Brexit debate of how Europe will work, 
‘flexible solidarity’ has become the new key phrase,” he said. “If, in so many 
EU summits it has been agreed that the refugee crisis is a European problem 
then the solution to resolve it should be collective … allowing Greece to 
become [a holding pen for refugees] is absolutely unacceptable.”
 