
Warren Gatland has been researching referees, it appears, and has accordingly 
parked the venerable Gethin Jenkins and his hundredweight of capson the bench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/03/wales-warren-gatland-tom-james-ireland-six-nations>
. Jérôme Garcès, the French official deemed by popular consent – and by the 
Wales coach himself – to be top-notch, has the loosehead prop’s number at the 
scrum andhas singled him out  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/31/wales-england-six-nations-robin-mcbryde-referees>
in recent games for not holding a straight line there.

Nobody is saying the French referee is wrong and Jenkins has never exactly 
taken massive offence at the suggestion that scrummaging is his least favourite 
job. Does the selection, however, of Rob Evans of the Scarlets in his starting 
place and the ushering of the mighty Melon – so called for the size of a head 
that has mulled wisely for many a year on the game – still not carry a little 
indignity? Perhaps, but it is the start of a gentle exit, a managed and very 
fond farewell, that contrasts with the altogether less compassionate axing of 
Jenkins’s long-time front-row confrère, Adam Jones.

Warren Gatland shows softer side and wants Wales to open up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/03/wales-warren-gatland-tom-james-ireland-six-nations>
Jenkins at 35 is a rare creature at the start of a new World Cup cycle. Damien 
Chouly, for example, at 30 is the oldest player in the France squad. Jenkins 
lives on because he is special. He has been the captain, the setter of 
outstanding aerobic standards and – apart from one World Cup pass that floated 
into touch – very much at ease with the ball in his hands.

This notion incidentally that New Zealanders scoff at our amazement at deft 
skills performed by heavyweight forwards – like Joe Moody’s pass inthe RWC final
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
 – is misconceived. We should be more impressed by the fact that the props of 
New Zealand, whom our front rows used to shove around at will, have become 
excellent at the core skills as well as the more flamboyant.

Anyway, Jenkins is on the bench on Sunday, the point being that coach Gatland 
is in the unusual position of being able to muse on detail and make relatively 
fine adjustments. Joe Schmidt does not have that luxury, which must be gnawing 
at the nerves of a coach unafraid to exercise control over even the finest 
matters.

Cian Healy remains a long-term absentee from the Irish front row, but Mike 
Ross and Marty Moore are now missing from the other side as well. With a little 
tweak of irony, Nathan White, once one of those New Zealand props (he was nine 
years on the books of Waikato – pure Gatland-land) but now forthrightly of 
Connacht, will pack down against Evans. Out slides a Welsh 35-year-old to the 
bench; in comes a 34-year-old on the other side.

An emergency situation confined to the front row would have been manageable 
but Ireland’s go back through the ranks. Behind the propsthere will be no Paul 
O’Connell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/02/paul-oconnell-retire-ireland-international-duty-world-cup-toulon-rugby>
 – not so much a physical absence but a hole to be filled in the psyche. 
O’Connell was a giant on and off the field, and moving on will not be easy.

Especially without Seán O’Brien. Tommy O’Donnell has played well against Wales 
before and CJ Stander has been in commanding form for Munster, but they and 
Jamie Heaslip are untried as a unit. Against them are Taulupe Faletau, Sam 
Warburton and Justin Tipuric, as complementary and mutually trusting as will be 
found anywhere. And there’s always Dan Lydiate to come off the bench and 
tighten any fraying of Wales’s back-row togetherness.

All Wales need now is to make George North’s dream come true and play with 
adventure in the wider channels. It remains easier said than done, whatever the 
grand designs to pick up wherethe championship of 2015 finished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/22/wales-world-cup-italy-six-nations>
, whatever the collective will to crush the accusation that the northern 
hemisphere remains resistant to taking risks. Four years ago Wales began their 
campaign inreal style in Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/feb/05/ireland-wales-six-nations-2012>, 
with Rhys Priestland and North slipping Kiwi-prop passes to Jonathan Davies, 
but defences have been fortified since then and arms cannot be freed so easily 
to give those try-scoring deliveries.

Dan Biggar, who has taken over from Priestland and who is truly not without 
wit and cheek, has his own way, however, of controlling a game – one that will 
presumably include a lot of kicking. Nor will Jonathan Sexton be afraid to push 
his Irish forwards downfield either. If the world-champion All Blacks can do 
it, then there’s no reason why the muddy oldSix Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/sixnations> can’t kick too.

Ireland will pursue voraciously and if they find North and the returning Tom 
James a little too eager to make their mark and embrace another All-Black 
routine – the counterattack – then the home team may rack up points before any 
openness can be unveiled. Wales may have to be cautious at first and wait for 
the snap to go from the Irish legs – wait, that is, until their replacements 
are on. That then becomes the moment for one gracefully exiting prop to make a 
grand entrance and steal the show with something deliciously mischievous and 
dexterous in open play.
 