
With the score at 25-7, it couldn’t have been much worse for Wales. They had 
been struggling in every aspect of play, couldn’t hang on to a pass, had 
conceded a try to Anthony Watson and had had to stand around while their 
captain was very carefully placed on the cart. Luke Charteris, on just about 
every day of his working life a model of common sense and discipline, had just 
given away two penalties and in the process had dislocated his finger. While it 
was being put back he watched Owen Farrell kick the last of his six penalties. 
It was a day going completely wrong for the visiting team.

Even worse, Tomas Francis had just been spotted running fingers over the eyes 
of Dan Cole. This was not just a poor day on the normal spectrum of skills and 
tactics; this was about to turn ugly.

Luck suddenly kicked in. Francis may have a case to answer from the citing 
officer, but due to inconclusive evidence – just the one camera angle – the 
only sanction was a penalty. Cole, on the other hand, was sent to the bin for 
something technical. Still, England may have thought there were only eight 
minutes left.

Two converted tries later, England were scrambling to prevent a third. Manu 
Tuilagi has been away for a long time and may be a little short of wind, but he 
made one of the most important tackles of his career, shoving George North into 
touch just when it seemed the wing was away again. The number 25 seems to cause 
strange things to happen to England when they play Wales at Twickenham.

England 25-21 Wales: Six Nations – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/mar/12/england-v-wales-six-nations-live>
On this occasion, they survived. On this early evening, Wales could not spin 
their own way a game that had been going against them for almost its entirety. 
Would they have deserved it? Would they care?

As it turned out, they will be left to dwell on the negatives, for of those 
there were plenty. Warren Gatland could not deny that the first-half display 
had been substandard. England patiently and inventively went through their 
phases, while Wales lost control or simply booted the ball down the throat of 
Mike Brown. Only Liam Williams, rock steady under the high ball, revealed a 
skill-set unaffected by the occasion.

In this unedifying first half, there were collective meltdowns at the lineout, 
where Taulupe Faletau lost two to the wonderfully impressive Maro Itoje. There 
were bumps in midfield between players trying to avoid each other and Dan 
Biggar and Jamie Roberts exchanged words about what was precisely wrong.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fengland-wales-twickenham-nightmare-six-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2a16bc8a72bb1ed92c241cd54b9405401b4e0bc%2F0_51_3296_1977%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wales%20wake%20from%20their%20Twickenham%20nightmare%20thanks%20to%20never%20giving%20up%20%7C%20Eddie%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fengland-wales-twickenham-nightmare-six-nations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wales%20wake%20from%20their%20Twickenham%20nightmare%20thanks%20to%20never%20giving%20up%20%7C%20Eddie%20Butler&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fengland-wales-twickenham-nightmare-six-nations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2a16bc8a72bb1ed92c241cd54b9405401b4e0bc%2F0_51_3296_1977%2F3296.jpg>
 Wales fly-half Dan Biggar charges down his English counterpart George Ford to 
score under the posts and help the Welsh fightback. Photograph: Huw Evans/Rex 
Shutterstock 
It appeared that they did not come with an answer in their heated debate. Nor 
in the changing room at half-time. They were down by a further three points 
after the interval when they opted for scrums and lineouts close to the England 
line on the one occasion they did manage to approach it – but they came away 
empty-handed.

Or so it seemed. Perhaps there was a change of luck before the dramatic last 
few moments. Wales were lucky to be on zero when George Ford, having picked a 
difficult pass off his toes, delayed his clearance by a fraction of a second, 
and Dan Biggar charged it down. Was it luck? Biggar targeted the right-hand 
side of Ford, his brain working out the angles and the split-second of 
opportunity now opening up for him. Nobody judges time or another player’s 
misfortune more acutely or more cruelly than Biggar.

England weather late fightback to deny Wales and secure triple crown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/12/england-wales-six-nations-match-report>
It was but a crumb at the time. There was a little more urgency in the tempo 
now, but it was born more of desperation than a genuine turning of the tide. At 
some stage, Wales were always going to have a go – but even when Jonathan 
Davies released North for the first time, it seemed that England had the 
situation under control. And once they could lay hands on the ball, they could 
restore the rituals of the day – pressure leading to a penalty or even better.

Wales removed Alun Wyn Jones. It was like taking off John Charles or Gareth 
Bale. If he’s fit the mighty second-row plays. AWJ is an 80-minute player, with 
the biggest heart in his homeland. Here, off he trudged. And his team would not 
be far behind him because this had been a rotten performance.

Then came the swing. Ah, luck, you fickle foe. Gatland does not believe in 
luck. He believes in fitness and never giving up. You keep going because you 
never know. Even when you’re 18 points adrift and staring at the referee who is 
being advised by the Television Match Official that there is an incident of 
possible foul play – a scrape, a slide of a hand into the ultimate no-go area – 
you do not give up.

So it was that Wales did not go the way of so many others whose heads drop in 
the closing minutes when the result is already known. Keep going even when your 
mind and body are closing down.

It did not work, but it gave the scoreboard respectability. As if Wales care 
about that. It gave England a scare. That was something – but not much. It gave 
Wales reason to believe that out of nothing, out of a performance that will 
make them wince for weeks to come, something good came. That will help them put 
themselves together. This has been a ragged campaign, but never giving up will 
serve them well for better days ahead.
 