
Walter Mazzarri has been praised for instilling a “winning mentality” at 
Watford <https://www.theguardian.com/football/watford> by a player who 
contributed greatly to the Italian’s second victory as the club’s manager – 
Juan Camilo Zúñiga.

Manchester United stunned as Watford are spot-on with late show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/18/watford-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
Zúñiga restored Watford’s lead in their 3-1 triumph over Manchester United on 
Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/18/watford-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
, lashing a drive past David de Gea just 53 seconds after coming on as 
substitute with the score at 1-1 and United looking the more likely team to 
score next.

It proved an inspired substitution by Mazzarri and his side wrapped up all 
three points via Troy Deeney’s 90th-minute penalty. Watford fully deserved the 
win, and coming on the back of the 4-2 victory over West Ham United, has 
provided they and Mazzarri, whoreplaced Quique Sánchez Flores at Vicarage Road 
in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/20/walter-mazzarri-watford-new-manager>
, with real momentum.

“That is the mentality from our manager, a winning mentality,” said Zúñiga. 
“We don’t need to look at the name on the shirts against Manchester United or 
Chelsea or Arsenal, we just try and do our best. That is what the manager 
wants, he wants a winning mentality where we go on to the pitch we don’t ever 
look at the name on the back of the shirt, we do our job the best we can and 
that is the manager’s opinion on how to play football.

“The manager has told us to be humble but play and give everything. At the 
training ground we do what we do on the pitch, we are humble and go game by 
game.”

Zúñiga played for Mazzarri at Napoli and moved from them on a season-long loan 
in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/16/watford-sign-juan-camilo-zuniga-loan-napoli-colombia>
. The 30-year-old, who has 62 caps for Colombia and can play in either 
full-back position, has come on as a substitute in each of his four appearances 
and his hope is that he now gets a chance to feature from the start.

“When I come on I want to give everything, against Manchester United or any 
other team. When I go on the pitch I am professional,” he said. “It was a long 
time since I last scored, I can’t remember when. I had an injury before and 
this is the first goal after the injury. The injury was a long time ago and I’m 
fine now and try and help the team when I get a chance to do it.”
 