
The weird thing about the removal of Dalton Philips as chief executive of 
Morrisons is that no one seems to think that his strategy – to cut prices, even 
if that means lower profits – is the wrong one. Not even Andy Higginson, the 
former Tesco boss and newMorrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> chairman, who swung the axe. 
Higginson went out of his way to insist that Philips – who unveiled his plan 
last March to pour £1bn into cutting prices over the coming three years – was 
on the right road.

But although Philips was first with the big cuts, he was too late. Morrisons’ 
Christmas sales were down 3.1% – worse than Tesco and Sainsbury. It takes six 
months to a year for customers who do not normally shop in a store to recognise 
a change in pricing. And Philips’ Match & More loyalty card, which matches 
prices at Aldi as well as Morrison’s traditional rivals and was supposed to ram 
home the new price credentials, is too complicated at a time when shoppers 
increasingly just want clear, and cheaper, pricing.

And Philips made just too many mis-steps before arriving at the correct 
conclusion. He wasted time and money buying an online childrenswear business 
and a stake in a New York internet grocer in a bid to learn how to launch a UK 
online food operation, eventually doing a deal with Ocado. He tried to take 
Morrisons upmarket, when what shoppers wanted was more basic, cheaper shops, 
like Aldi. He opened a batch of convenience stores, only to later have to close 
some, admitting they were in the wrong locations. He boasted that sales would 
turn positive over Christmas 2013 – but delivered a shocking 6% downturn.

The shares, 300p when he took over and 300p in September 2013, had dropped to 
152p a year later.

With that history, Morrisons needed not to be the worst performer over 
Christmas if the boss was to keep his job. On Tuesday, as he was pointed to the 
checkout, the shares rose 4% to 184p.

So now Higginson must find a new chief executive, to pursue pretty much the 
same strategy but without the mistakes. He does not want, he said, someone with 
L-plates – possibly a sideswipe at Tesco’s decision to hire non-retailer Dave 
Lewis.

There are many potential candidates: Jim McCarthy of Poundland, TalkTalk’s 
Dido Harding, Monsoon’s John Browett, Brakes’ Ken McMeikan – all former Tesco 
and/or Sainsbury’s executives. Or maybe Kate Swann, who demonstrated how to run 
a business on tight margins and with declining sales at WHSmith.

Only one thing is certain: it will be a tough gig. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Fnew-morrisons-ceo-prediction-deflation-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421184735946%2Fdf1ca7be-dc72-4e22-a35f-195abe27080f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wanted%3A%20new%20Morrisons%20CEO.%20Same%20as%20old%20one%2C%20but%20without%20the%20mistakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Fnew-morrisons-ceo-prediction-deflation-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wanted%3A%20new%20Morrisons%20CEO.%20Same%20as%20old%20one%2C%20but%20without%20the%20mistakes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2Fnew-morrisons-ceo-prediction-deflation-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F13%2F1421184735946%2Fdf1ca7be-dc72-4e22-a35f-195abe27080f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Albert Edwards, doomsayer. Photograph: PR 
Analyst predicts a riot 


There are bears. There are überbears. And then there’s Albert Edwards of 
Société Générale. Financial markets always have a resident Dr Doom, the analyst 
who can always find a reason to be miserable. It was once Tony Dye of UBS; now 
it’s Edwards, who outlined his thoughts for 2015 to a packed house in London’s 
West End on Tuesday.

The theme was summed up by the title of his presentation: “2015 looks set to 
be the year deflation overwhelms the west. Markets set to riot.”

This, it hardly need be said, is a minority view. The consensus is that while 
the eurozone is struggling and Japan’s emergence from deflation is proving more 
protracted than expected, the signs from elsewhere are more promising. The US 
is seeing solid growth and decent levels of job creation; Beijing seems to be 
in control of China’s economic slowdown; and plunging oil prices reflect an 
oversupply of crude rather than a lack of demand.

The expectation, therefore, is that the US Federal Reserve will start raising 
interest rates in mid-2015. Investors are anticipating that stronger growth and 
higher borrowing costs will lead to a sell off in US Treasury bonds, just as 
they were a year ago.

Edwards takes a different view. He thinks China’s growth is much weaker than 
the official figures suggest. He is not convinced that the drop in the cost of 
crude from $115 a barrel to a little over $45 a barrel is simply the result of 
US shale and Saudi overproduction, pointing out that iron ore prices have 
collapsed as well. He thinks the US economic cycle is at a relatively advanced 
stage and says whole-economy non-financial profits have come down with a bump. 
Japan will use a cheaper yen to flood the world with cheap goods and China will 
be forced to respond. The hit to US profits will lead to firms cutting 
investment and, as in the past, this will be the trigger for recession. Shares 
will suffer and bond prices will rise.

Critics of Edwards say he is like a stopped clock, bound to be right sooner or 
later, and there is something in this. It is always possible to find the data 
to support a view, whether bullish or bearish, if you are smart enough. The sky 
has not fallen in, despite the repeated warnings that it is about to do so.

Even so, Edwards has a point. The three things that normally get the global 
economy out of a hole are time, policy easing and falling commodity prices. It 
is getting on for eight years since the start of the financial crisis, long 
enough in the past for the healing process to be complete. The policy response 
by central banks and finance ministries has been unprecedented. Oil prices have 
fallen by $70 a barrel in six months.

If all that doesn’t work, we really are in trouble.
 