
‘I know I’ve been a clown and wasted my life …’


No! It’s all over! Bring them back! Make Pierre regrow his bonkers prisoner 
beard! Make Sonya and Denisov get it on at a mazurka party! Bring Helene back 
to life and let’s see what a terrible mother she would have made! I can’t 
believe it’s over. But didn’t it end well? Setting aside the ridiculousness of 
Nikolai’s Duran Duran hair and peasant costume in the final “bucolic idyll at 
the dacha” bit. Where none of the actors looked a day older than episode one 
despite the passing of 15 years.

 Did they have to race to fit it all in? Da. Was there a lot of messing around 
with the novel to make that happen? Da. Was it a travesty? Nyet. Screenwriter 
Andrew Davies, director Tom Harper and the entire cast can hold their heads 
high as the final, almost-feature-length episode upheld the standards they have 
established from the outset: classy, sensitive, lavish, memorable.

 Best plot point of the last episode? Pierre’s attempts at heroism. “There’s 
something I have to do. Something terrible. Kill Napoleon.” Oh, Pierre. The 
only thing you’re good at killing is time, you great lummox. And don’t go into 
the burning building! Pierre, your destiny is not to assassinate Napoleon. Your 
destiny is to flail around like a loon, go gaga over Natasha and make profound 
statements about old men’s dogs.

Paul Dano: a resolutely hexagonal peg in the square hole of showbusiness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/06/guardian-profile-paul-dano-war-and-peace>
 Once again we had the collision of a gazillion coincidences, which are 
obviously so much more subtle in the novel (because they’re spread apart by 
many, many, many pages). Of all the millions of residents in Moscow, who’s this 
Natasha spots from her carriage in a split second? Why, it’s Pierre! Out of 
tens of thousands of soldiers, which French regiment does Dolokhov happen to 
attack? Why, the one holding Pierre prisoner! And in a country spanning an 
eighth of the world’s land mass and 6.5m square miles, to whose rural retreat 
is Prince Andrei conveyed? Why, Natasha’s, of course!

To mention all this, though, is rather like picking vshy (nits) out of 
Pierre’s prisoner beard. Because without these novelistic “moments of fate”, 
there would be noWar and Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/war-and-peace> at all. No matter, 
then. This was great television. The Frenchman who misguidedly recognised in 
Pierre a fellow Lover of Many Women. Helene with her blood-soaked gown. Ade 
Edmondson as Ilya, regal and hopeless in his coffin.

 The message? Beautifully conveyed via Pierre via the man with the dog. “He 
never worried. He took pleasure in the good things and endured the bad things 
cheerfully. So now I’m trying to live like him. Is that ridiculous?” No, 
Pierre. Not at all. (What is ridiculous, my friend, is walking around the 
Battle of Borodino saying, “Excuse me, do you require any assistance? Please 
don’t let me get in your way.”)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-six-bows-out-with-a-bonkers-prisoner-beard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb78b693538ab0d7d7a6d50056d5727236e89759d%2F0_163_4313_2589%2F4313.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%3A%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20bows%20out%20with%20a%20bonkers%20beard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-six-bows-out-with-a-bonkers-prisoner-beard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%3A%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20bows%20out%20with%20a%20bonkers%20beard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-six-bows-out-with-a-bonkers-prisoner-beard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb78b693538ab0d7d7a6d50056d5727236e89759d%2F0_163_4313_2589%2F4313.jpg>
 Pierre tries to cheer everyone up on the retreat from Moscow. Photograph: 
Laurie Sparham/BBC 
Those all-important Mr Darcy moments

No, Andrei, don’t die! We had a little weep at the flashback scenes in our 
house. (OK, OK, it was just me.) Prince Andrei has been a complicated hero but 
he has been the hero nonetheless. “Is it really you …? Natasha, I love you. I 
was in the wrong.” He then talked about how much he loved a buzzing bluebottle. 
This was not so impressive to Natasha. “Don’t talk too much. You’ll tire 
yourself.” These were poignant scenes between Lily James and James Norton, both 
of whom managed to bring an added maturity and depth to their characters when 
it counted.

 Runner-up heroes? Dolokhov and Denisov to the rescue! This was the most 
crowd-pleasing moment of all, especially Dolokhov’s crazily arrogant, 
ultra-proficient Eddie Izzard-style French-speaking: “Bonne chance et bonne 
nuit!” I was just waiting for him to say: “Le singe est sur la branche.” 
Dommage. Next time.

Villain of the week

Well, Helene got her comeuppance, didn’t she? “You must leave now, Countess. 
You never should have come.” Cue the most deep-throated Orthodox church singing 
you’ve ever heard and Helene drinking the poisonous Italian abortion medicine 
by candlelight. Not sure how she managed to not get pregnant until now with all 
her comings and goings, but never mind. (Tolstoy calls this, by the way, “a 
treatment to remove inconvenience”. What a mean way to talk about Helene.)

 I also want to mention Mademoiselle Bourienne on Villains’ Row because I feel 
she has been secretly, quietly evil all along. Although she did manage to leave 
the room at the exactly right moment in tonight’s episode. But what’s this? 
Here’s Prince Vassily! “She’s dead. My lovely girl.” Still wheedling, still 
vile, if a little more sympathetically beardy. Ah well, all the villains were 
punished in the end and rightly so.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-six-bows-out-with-a-bonkers-prisoner-beard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdef42d2001a2ba379b24d9b0ac6f59fc8b9d49ca%2F0_92_4397_2637%2F4397.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%3A%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20bows%20out%20with%20a%20bonkers%20beard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-six-bows-out-with-a-bonkers-prisoner-beard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%3A%20episode%20six%20%E2%80%93%20bows%20out%20with%20a%20bonkers%20beard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F07%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-six-bows-out-with-a-bonkers-prisoner-beard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdef42d2001a2ba379b24d9b0ac6f59fc8b9d49ca%2F0_92_4397_2637%2F4397.jpg>
 Pierre enjoys a drink with his French buddy, Ramballe. Photograph: Laurie 
Sparham/BBC 
Audrey Hepburn award for most beautiful lady acting

Sonya was at her fatalistic best tonight. Her face when she was writing the 
letter releasing Nikolai! Does anyone have a more miserable fate in this bloody 
book than poor Sonya? Even the people who die get heroic or tragic endings. 
Sonya just has to go on being the poor relation, pitied by all, with everyone 
knowing she loved Nikolai but can’t have him. “How can you be so 
self-sacrificing?” “Oh, because I’m used to it.” If this was Jane Austen she 
would have got Colonel Brandon, sorry, Denisov, as a consolation prize.

The overall award for most beautiful lady acting? I’m tempted to give it to 
Lily James, because she did a good job tonight. “No one will want me after my 
disgrace … I do wonder what happened to Pierre … Do you think we’ll ever see 
him again?” (Er … spoiler alert, Natasha! It’s the point of the whole book!) 
But Princess Marya (Jessie Buckley) has knocked them all into a cocked 
Napoleonic tricorne. Hasn’t she come a long way since the Oliver!-themedBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> talent show I’d Do Anything?

Russian pedant’s corner

 The pronunciation of names was unusually troubling tonight. What’s with 
“Princess Bolkonsky”? It should be Bolkonskaya for a woman. A lot of the 
transliteration has been inconsistent. And Karataev’s dog Sashenka should be 
pronounced with the accent on the first syllable. (Izvinite – excuse me – but 
this isn’t called Russian pedant’s corner for nothing.)

 The Russian pedant was, however, thrilled to see the Rostov family sitting 
down for ages before their journey away from Moscow. According to Russian 
tradition, it’s bad luck to return for something you’ve left behind. So you 
have to sit still for a while before you leave, pray for good luck and try to 
remember what that thing might be. It’s highly recommended as a custom if, like 
me, you are prone to forgetting things on your way out of the house. Give it a 
go, comrades! If you’re not too busy weeping that it’s finally all over. 
Personally, I’m not planning to leave the house for weeks. I may grow a bonkers 
Pierre prisoner beard.
 