
Just when you thought it couldn’t get any better. It’s Ken Stott with Fifty 
Shades of Freemasons! “I should like to help you if I can. But if for any 
reason you find conversation with me unpleasant, please say so.” No, please 
continue, Comrade Freemason. Our hero Pierre is in dire need of spiritual 
sustenance. “How can I know God if all my powers of reasoning tell me he cannot 
exist?” “God is apprehended not by reason but by life.” Amen. Bring Richard 
Dawkins to Freemason Stott now.

A beautiful episode and one that did a fantastic job of piecing together lots 
of short, anecdotal scenes and making them seem coherent. It’s so rare to see a 
piece of television where new characters can suddenly appear out of nowhere 
(such as Freemason Stott) and it doesn’t jar. In fact, you welcome these random 
types and don’t question their involvement in an already complex picture. 
SomehowWar and Peace <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/war-and-peace> 
creates an impression of a universe we know and don’t question: characters 
float in and out of focus without the audience losing sight of the through line.

The buildup to the Tsar’s Ball and the inevitable meeting of Andrei and 
Natasha was excellent. And the ball itself was a highlight of the series: 
wonderfully shot with a mix of intimacy and grandeur rarely seen on television. 
Tom Harper (director) barely needed to do anything here other than follow the 
face of Lily James (Natasha) who is a real delight and captures Natasha’s 
innocence perfectly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-three-fifty-shades-of-freemasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14cdb56db2a1654940c53064f574b3c42a595c58%2F0_0_4186_2513%2F4186.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%3A%20episode%20three%20-%20fifty%20shades%20of%20Freemasons!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-three-fifty-shades-of-freemasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%3A%20episode%20three%20-%20fifty%20shades%20of%20Freemasons%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-three-fifty-shades-of-freemasons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14cdb56db2a1654940c53064f574b3c42a595c58%2F0_0_4186_2513%2F4186.jpg>
 Prince Andrei (James Norton) and Natasha Rostov (Lily James). Photograph: 
Laurie Sparham/BBC/Laurie Sparham 
I was fractionally less convinced (and I’m splitting some hairs plucked from 
the outer parts of Dolokhov’s moustache here) by the scenes in rural Russia. Do 
we really understand the nature of the friendship between Pierre and Andrei? Or 
does it feel like a plot device? And they could have done with messing the 
scenery and the costumes up a bit. I know it’s supposed to represent a 
breathably idyllic Tolstoyan landscsape. The bees … the icicles … the snowy 
fields … I felt my asthma dissipating as I watched. But there would have been 
at least a bit of mud spattered about.

I’ll forgive all that, though, for the performance of Thomas Arnold as 
Denisov. His mazurka moment was so endearing and his proposal heart-breaking. 
“Oh dear. I wish you hadn’t said that.” “Please. Forget about it. A moment of 
madness. All over now.” I loved how this represented the fatalism of the piece. 
Life is not about getting what you want. Everyone seems a bit Austen. But this 
is Russia, my friends. This idea was echoed in Pierre’s face in this week’s 
final scene which said it all: happy for his friend, devastated for himself. 
“You’re the luckiest man on earth … don’t let her get away.”


Those all-important Mr Darcy moments

I am tempted to put Dolokhov in this category because it seems that he is 
coming to the fore as an object of fascination. (OK. That’s a euphemism. I have 
the hots for him. I won’t be shamed.) However, we can’t rob him of his true 
crown as Villain of the Week. Prince Andrei is still Darcy. And he showed here 
what an interesting and problematic character he is: yes, he is supposed to be 
a classic, swoonsome hero. But it’s not that side of him that Natasha falls in 
love with. It’s because there’s something quiet at the heart of him. People 
have talked about this in the comments here. James Norton is no Aidan Turner. 
But he has something else: an indefinable, calm charm. No bare-chested 
wood-chopping or lake-swimming required. I’m still surprised at (screenwriter) 
Andrew Davies’ restraint in this department. But it’s true to the novel and 
true to the character.


Villain of the Week

This week the award (represented by a twirly moustache made of gold filigree – 
I have commissioned it from Putin’s jeweller) goes to Dolokhov (Tom Burke). I 
am wary of the use of the world “legend” in modern parlance but I think it 
appropriate here: both actor and character are legends. “I’m just a man who 
loves to fight. It’s all I know ... to my shame.” The bit where he ate the snow 
was extraordinary. “Missed.” Wow.

This was swiftly followed by a typical Davies moment: showing us that this is 
not a one-dimensional figure by making Dolokhov have a howl about his good old 
mum and sister, whom he loves very much. This is Tolstoyan too: in terms of 
humanity, Dolokhov is about as low as you can go but there’s also a grudging 
admiration for him and an acknowledgement that no one is all bad.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-three-fifty-shades-of-freemasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bdc7834451f3375f02ddec846b733d05b86e97b%2F0_102_4175_2504%2F4175.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%3A%20episode%20three%20-%20fifty%20shades%20of%20Freemasons!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-three-fifty-shades-of-freemasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%3A%20episode%20three%20-%20fifty%20shades%20of%20Freemasons%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-three-fifty-shades-of-freemasons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bdc7834451f3375f02ddec846b733d05b86e97b%2F0_102_4175_2504%2F4175.jpg>
 Nikolai Rostov (Jack Lowden) and Dolokhov (Tom Burke). Photograph: Laurie 
Sparham/BBC/Laurie Sparham 
Audrey Hepburn award for most beautiful lady acting

The award (depicted by a lace-edged flesh-coloured negligee) must go to 
Tuppence Middleton for Evil Helene. Poor Boris didn’t stand a chance: “Are you 
hungry?” Tuppence Middelton is a fine, fine actress. (We will overlook her 
name. Her parents are called Nigel and Tina and she is from Bristol and it’s 
the nickname her grandmother gave to her mother. So leave her alone.)

She manages to capture a tiny flicker of humanity (although it truly is tiny) 
in Helene’s icicle-infested heart: she’s gorgeous and venal and utterly 
ruthless. But somewhere deep inside she is scared and doing all of this out of 
self-preservation. I also see a touch of Joan Collins circa 1979 (The Bitch) in 
this performance and that’s never a bad thing.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-three-fifty-shades-of-freemasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4003d46b018103a792e39a805f807ac2ae65d3fc%2F0_48_4242_2545%2F4242.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%3A%20episode%20three%20-%20fifty%20shades%20of%20Freemasons!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-three-fifty-shades-of-freemasons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%3A%20episode%20three%20-%20fifty%20shades%20of%20Freemasons%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-three-fifty-shades-of-freemasons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4003d46b018103a792e39a805f807ac2ae65d3fc%2F0_48_4242_2545%2F4242.jpg>
 Bilibin (Rory Keenan) and Helene Kuragin (Tuppence Middleton). Photograph: 
Laurie Sparham/BBC/Laurie Sparham 
Russian pedant’s corner

The poor Russian pedant (not that I’m identifying with this mythical person …) 
must have had their head in their hands during the folk-singing scenes. 
Dolokhov’s was bad. But Natasha’s and Nikolai’s was even worse. Why did they do 
this? It was a mistake.

No actor wants to learn to sing a song in Russian when their character has 
been speaking in English the whole time. It didn’t add to the flavour of the 
piece and was painful to listen to. I can’t imagine the Italian bit (with 
Natasha and Sonya on the balcony) was much better (I don’t speak Italian) but 
that’s not so important: Natasha and Sonya are not Italian so it would be fine 
if they sang in strongly-accented Italian. It’s not fine to sing in 
Rada-accented Russian.

Not their fault, of course. And well done for trying. But don’t do it again.
 