
‘I shall come to you as soon as I arrive in Moscow’ 

Oh dear, oh dear. It’s all taken a very wrong turn. Emotionally, I mean. (Poor 
Prince Andrei and his forever opening-and-closing Austerlitz wound!) 
Narratively, directorially and aesthetically everything is still on top form. 
The strands are slowing coming together and it’s all rising to fever pitch.

War and Peace recap: episode three - fifty shades of Freemasons!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/17/war-and-peace-recap-episode-three-fifty-shades-of-freemasons>
The Russian doom of this episode was most pleasing. It wouldn’t do to mix up 
our novels too much but, really, this is the part ofWar and Peace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/war-and-peace> that is most like Anna 
Karenina, designed by Tolstoy to showcase The Inevitable Ruination of Women, 
Even The Seemingly Good Ones (Because Ultimately All Women Are Evil).

Andrew Davies (screenwriter) has drawn this out cleverly: Tolstoy loves 
premonitions and portentous foreshadowing. In this episode, these signs were 
everywhere, with Natasha doing the reckless Gypsy dancing and seeing the wolf 
and Sonya in the haunted barn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-four-doom-with-a-view%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F172209315f08202888a880af5f7a410e4ed9ac37%2F0_0_4268_2563%2F4268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%20episode%20four%3A%20doom%20with%20a%20view&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-four-doom-with-a-view%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%20episode%20four%3A%20doom%20with%20a%20view&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-four-doom-with-a-view%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F172209315f08202888a880af5f7a410e4ed9ac37%2F0_0_4268_2563%2F4268.jpg>
 Country life: Natasha rides on. Photograph: Laurie Sparham/BBC 
Lily James did a fantastic job of portraying Natasha’s confused state of mind. 
It’s not an easy leap to make, this, as it seems to contradict everything we 
know about Natasha, who has been fairly child-like up until this point. I 
wasn’t so entirely convinced by the portrayal of Anatole (Callum Turner). 
Beware the creepy, gloved hand of creepy, bullying Anatole, Natasha! Be strong!

Anatole has been fabulously evil. But at this moment in the story he needs to 
show some quality that would attract and not repel Natasha. I’m not sure he 
did. We need to be shouting “DON’T DO IT, NATASHA” while understanding why she 
is strangely compelled to do it, and is not just a very silly girl. Because she 
needs to remain the heroine. Still, it was beautifully shot, with all those 
predatory glances around the coat hooks.

There was some superb humour this week to contrast with the high drama. The 
scene between the calculatingly opportunistic Boris (Aneurin Barnard) and 
oh-so-fragile, saucer-eyed drama queen Julie Karagina (Chloe Pirrie) was 
beautifully played. (Note: Karagina is not to be confused with Kuragina – she 
is nothing to do with The Evil Siblings. You’d think Tolstoy would find another 
name, but anyway … I suppose he was quite busy.)

Was there something a bit too Britishly embarrassed in the scenes between 
Natasha and Andrei’s family? Probably. But there are so many great scenes that 
any minor flaws are swept away. It was fascinating to see Rebecca Front wring 
every drop of nuance and wit out of her lines: “Of course … you haven’t heard! 
He’s the accepted suitor!” And I loved Ade Edmondson’s brilliant portrayal of 
total denial of reality when it comes to the state of his finances: “This is 
what we need! Forget our troubles and get out to see the real Old Russia!” An 
excellent description of the effect of this series on Austerity Britain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-four-doom-with-a-view%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2a2fa775ba1be0a162f9238a9448aef7579d5de%2F0_181_4258_2552%2F4258.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%20episode%20four%3A%20doom%20with%20a%20view&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-four-doom-with-a-view%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%20episode%20four%3A%20doom%20with%20a%20view&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-four-doom-with-a-view%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2a2fa775ba1be0a162f9238a9448aef7579d5de%2F0_181_4258_2552%2F4258.jpg>
 Anna Mikhailovna (Rebecca Front), Julie Karagina (Chloe Pirrie) and Boris 
(Aneurin Barnard). Photograph: Laurie Sparham/BBC 
Those all-important Mr Darcy moments

Now that we’re on episode four, I think it’s safe to set the “Mr Darcy” 
comparisons to one side for now, especially as Prince Andrei seems to have been 
thrown over. We can’t possibly anoint Anatole as the new Darcy, as he’s too 
evil. As is Boris. And Nikolai, despite eventually doing the right thing and 
pronouncing his love for Sonya, is too weak. If only he had married Julie 
Karagina and saved the family’s finances and carried on with Sonya on the side!

Pierre had a shout at some Darcy moments tonight. But he appears to have been 
on the pies and vodka in secret. So he can yell, “If I find you in Moscow after 
midnight tonight, I will kill you!” all he wants, but he hasn’t attained hero 
status yet.

Of course, if this were a mini-series and not an adaptation of the most 
admired novel in history then there would have been more Dolokhov and Denisov 
in this episode, for a touch of Lord Flashheart appeal (Rik Mayall’s character 
in Blackadder) and some light relief. But you can’t have everything, can you?

I did, however, particularly enjoy this line: “Why is he dressed like a 
Persian?” If you’re Dolokhov, you can dress however the hell you want.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-four-doom-with-a-view%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74e488ed202518519cbf67ca19ea6cfb36b70193%2F0_111_4213_2529%2F4213.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%20episode%20four%3A%20doom%20with%20a%20view&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-four-doom-with-a-view%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=War%20and%20Peace%20recap%20episode%20four%3A%20doom%20with%20a%20view&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F24%2Fwar-and-peace-recap-episode-four-doom-with-a-view%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74e488ed202518519cbf67ca19ea6cfb36b70193%2F0_111_4213_2529%2F4213.jpg>
 Super furry: Sonya (Aisling Loftus), Nikolai Rostov (Jack Lowden) and Natasha 
Rostov (Lily James). Photograph: Laurie Sparham/BBC 
Villain of the week

It’s a toss-up between Anatole and Helene here. Clearly Anatole is masterfully 
wicked. But is Helene even more evil? I think she might be. Anatole wants his 
way with Natasha. But Helene wants more than that: she wants to see Natasha’s 
utter corruption and ruin (possibly so that she can feel better about herself) 
and she wants to know that she has had a hand in it. Helene was the one who put 
Natasha in the box at the theatre where she was captive and powerless to escape 
the gloved hand of evil.

It’s not clear who Pierre is speaking to – the brother or the sister – when he 
says: “Wherever you are, there is depravity and evil.” But my money is on 
Helene. I’m convinced her hair is always so elaborate and beautiful because 
there are snakes growing beneath it. Helene wins.


Audrey Hepburn award for most beautiful lady acting

Aisling Loftus: 'Tolstoy is quite cruel about women'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/10/aisling-loftus-tolstoy-is-quite-cruel-about-women>
A word here for Sonya (Aisling Loftus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/10/aisling-loftus-tolstoy-is-quite-cruel-about-women>
). This should be a miserable, simpering role to play: a girl who is resented 
by the family she lives with and who knows that she has little chance of ending 
up with the man she loves, or, really with any man, because she has no fortune 
and no outstanding beauty. But Aisling Loftus has brought a lovely, quiet charm 
to this role. She was instrumental in this episode in showing how unthinkable 
Natasha’s behaviour was. Let’s shout it loud and proud: no one puts Sonya in 
the corner.


Russian pedant’s corner

The Russian pedant (for it is I, thinly disguised by a Freemason’s blindfold) 
has only just emerged from the dunce corner after getting one of the 
character’s names wrong in this section last week. Even pedants can fail to be 
sufficiently pedantic sometimes. One thing I will say this week is this: real 
Russians would not go out in the snow in such flimsy clothes, 19th century or 
not. Also: the balalaika sing-song in ye olde worldeizba (log house) was a bit 
too clean for its own good, in both psychological and hygienic terms. Doesn’t 
anyone ever get their hands dirty in the middle of the Russian countryside?
 