
To be honest – and I say this as an unashamed Downton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey> obsessive, so making 
no claim whatsoever to modish tastes in television – I didn’t think I was going 
to much likeThe Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/04/the-crown-review-netflix-100m-gamble-on-the-queen-pays-off-royally>
. It sounded to me like the kind of British national portrait whose value 
resides in its high resale value to American audiences. It felt like 
anachronistically well-trodden territory, in the Netflix age; as 
kneejerk-compelling yet as fundamentally “so-what?” as theredesigned shape of a 
Toblerone bar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/nov/08/mind-gap-toblerone-mondelez-chocolate>
. I don’t know about you, but I don’t feel as if I have been deprived of 
thinkpieces on the lines of “Not the Union Jack Waving type but the Queen is 
Actually Rather Marvellous”, over the past couple of years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78f71db488022e579b196fdca215e4c40bede22d%2F0_139_2261_2736%2F2261.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20the%20throne%3A%20why%20we%20still%20care%20about%20royal%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20the%20throne%3A%20why%20we%20still%20care%20about%20royal%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78f71db488022e579b196fdca215e4c40bede22d%2F0_139_2261_2736%2F2261.jpg>
 Actor Meghan Markle, Prince Harry’s girlfriend. Photograph: George 
Pimentel/Getty Images Portrait 
But in a week when Prince Harry’s new girlfriend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/shortcuts/2016/nov/02/when-harry-met-meghan-markle-and-dragged-the-royals-into-the-21st-century>
, Meghan Markle, has been subjected to such febrile and malicious scrutiny that
Kensington Palace felt the need to issue a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/08/prince-harry-lambasts-press-over-meghan-markle-coverage>
 reminding the world that her life “is not a game” and calling out the media on 
the “racial undertones of comment pieces”, it seems clear that, like it or not, 
what the royals look like is a subject that still compels. And anyway, when the 
Emmy-winningGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> costume designer 
Michele Clapton has recreated the Queen’s wedding dress at a cost of £30,000, 
it would be a dereliction of fashion editor duty not to take a look. Also, it 
stars Claire Foy, who I have been completely obsessed with sinceher mesmerising 
Anne Boleyn in Wolf Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/26/claire-foy-wolf-hall-perfect-anne-boleyn>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f96e02e36280f54e45fe4884f866e50ad0d0065%2F0_83_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20the%20throne%3A%20why%20we%20still%20care%20about%20royal%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20the%20throne%3A%20why%20we%20still%20care%20about%20royal%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f96e02e36280f54e45fe4884f866e50ad0d0065%2F0_83_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 The Queen’s £30,000 wedding dress in The Crown. Photograph: Alex Bailey/AP 
Well, guess what? I was wrong. It is brilliant. And the costume budget makes 
perfect sense, in a show in which the fashion does so much storytelling. Take 
the wedding scene. It is deeply emotional, not in the starry-eyed, 
you-may-kiss-the-bride swoony way of some wedding scenes but in its portrayal 
of a woman who is facing up to the challenges of both her public and private 
lives. The moment where the princess steps down from the car outside 
Westminster Abbey is heartstopping: this is mostly about Foy’s incredible face 
(did I mention I’m obsessed with her?) and how the firm set of her jaw 
contrasted with the liquid anxiety swirling in her eyes, but it is also in the 
cut of the dress, the way the high neckline does nothing to flatter her shape 
but accentuates the heave of her chest as she takes big gulping breaths to calm 
herself.

The Crown review – the £100m gamble on the Queen pays off royally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/04/the-crown-review-netflix-100m-gamble-on-the-queen-pays-off-royally>
“Duty” sounds like a word from another era, but the royal soap opera still 
speaks to modern audiences because the tension between our public and private 
selves is a pressure that has not gone anywhere. If anything, we are all the 
more aware of this pressure. Once upon a time, the perk of being one of the 
little people was that once you had finished your work for the day, you could 
clock off and put your slippers on and mind your own business until you had to 
turn up for work the next morning. But in the 24-hour connectedness of modern 
life, we have created for ourselves a scenario in which relationships, social 
life and family are all on public display – in other words, we have recreated 
for ourselves the situation that celebrities such as the royals have struggled 
with for decades. The Crown is very good on how the royals must keep up 
appearances, especially Jared Harris as King George VI, who keeps the knowledge 
that he is dying carefully hidden under the hospital corners of his smile. 
Thanks to social media, most of us know a little better than before the 
challenges of making small talk on days when we want to crawl back under the 
covers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f4e39ff30918f670462c93a0be3d6593a7a12d8%2F0_227_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20the%20throne%3A%20why%20we%20still%20care%20about%20royal%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20the%20throne%3A%20why%20we%20still%20care%20about%20royal%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f4e39ff30918f670462c93a0be3d6593a7a12d8%2F0_227_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Matt Smith as Prince Philip in The Crown is unexpectedly dashing in uniform. 
Photograph: Alex Bailey/Netflix/Netflix 
The Netflix drama, the first 10 episodes of which are reported to have cost 
£100m to make, is named not for the Queen herself, or even for her country – 
but rather, for what she wears on her head. There is no clearer image of the 
symbolic power of what we wear, than that of the diamond diadem. The royal 
family dazzlingly demonstrate the role of clothes in public life, because the 
more ostentatious the public role is to be, the more ostentatious must be the 
look.Matt Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/matt-smith> as Prince 
Philip is unexpectedly dashing in uniform. In his civvies, however, spitting 
acidic asides about being left at home to measure curtains by his more 
high-powered wife, he gives off a quiet venom that was matched on television 
last weekend only byDavid Attenborough’s racer snakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/shortcuts/2016/nov/08/iguana-racer-snakes-planet-earth-ii-bbc>
. Foy’s wardrobe as the Queen is compelling for its fundamental lack of vanity. 
Clapton, the costume designer, told a recent interviewer that the designs were 
meant to look as if Elizabeth’s clothes had been made after one fitting – 
whereas her sister Margaret would have insisted on four or five fittings, 
because their different personalities, as well as their roles, meant that this 
is how it would have been. Clapton has captured something really interesting 
about the lack of self-regard in the Queen’s own wardrobe that seems to 
contrast with the Disney-princess level of vanity we have come to see as normal 
for women in public life. And while veracity is important, costume drama must 
add enough artistic licence to make the look speak to modern audiences. There 
is plenty in The Crown that does this: the white fur evening stole that the 
Queen wears in the second episode is remarkably evocative of the faux-fur
“Crown” jacket 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/the-crown-jacket/p/p22488595?image=SD_01_T49_0928_NU_X_EC_90&color=NEUTRAL&prevPage=plp&pdpredirect>
 currently on sale for £99 inAlexa Chung’s M&S collection 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/l/women/alexa-chung/alexa-chung-collection>. 
Meanwhile, Vanessa Kirby as Princess Margaret is a very modern style icon, in 
her off-the-shoulder silhouettes and modishly swept-up eyeliner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e36192af09ab35ee5dd822e8679db1055e50ef3%2F0_0_2292_2739%2F2292.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20the%20throne%3A%20why%20we%20still%20care%20about%20royal%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20the%20throne%3A%20why%20we%20still%20care%20about%20royal%20style&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fstill-care-what-royals-look-like-the-crown-prince-harry-girlfriend-mehgan-markle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e36192af09ab35ee5dd822e8679db1055e50ef3%2F0_0_2292_2739%2F2292.jpg>
 The Crown jacket from the Archive by Alexa collection by M&S. Photograph: 
Marks and Spencer 
Last week, the Daily Mail reported that Markle was “not in the society blonde 
style of previous girlfriends”. Its point being,as Afua Hirsch pointed out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/prince-harry-britain-race-royals>
, that she is mixed-race. The tabloid press, which has been desperate to marry 
Harry off for years, is now fuming at not being consulted on her hair colour, 
possibly the most baffling British quibble since British Rail complained about 
snow on the line. When a member of the royal family is calling for 
enlightenment against racism and sexism, it feels as if it’s time to take 
another look at the royals. Because when we talk about how they should look – 
whether it’s Markle’s skin tone, or the glamour gulf between the princesses in 
The Crown – we give away a lot about what we consider to be ideal. A crown 
represents universality as well as celebrity, righteousness as well as power, 
and honour as well as glory. The world looks very different than it did when 
Elizabeth became queen, but the royals are a long way from being out of the 
picture.
 