
Angola <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angola> is about to mark the 40th 
anniversary of its independence, but residents are in no mood to celebrate. The 
MPLA, the party that has governed for more than three decades, is crushing any 
and all dissent in a political climate that has become increasingly paranoid.

In late June, 13 young men gathered to read Gene Sharp’s From Dictatorship to 
Democracy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/From_Dictatorship_to_Democracy>, a 
book about non-violent protest. But before they finished it, the police barged 
in and arrested them. Two days later, two more young men were detained.

Reading the revolution: the book club that terrified the Angolan regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/30/angola-book-club-dos-santos-arrests>
They have now been held for 115 days, well past the legal limit, indicted for 
“preparing acts pursuant to a coup d’etat”, because of the book’s association 
with the Arab Spring.

At the 90-day mark, eight of them embarked on a hunger strike. One of them, 
Luaty Beirão, persists. Now in his third week, his health is significantly 
compromised. The consequences of this could be tragic not just for this young 
man, his family and friends, but for Angola’s political future.


For the government, the case provides much needed distraction from an economy 
in crisis. Once ascending on an oil boom after the civil war ended in 2002, it 
is now contracting as theglobal price of oil drops 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-29643612>. Rumours swirl around president 
Jose Eduardo dos Santos’s May trip to China, suggesting he gave away the 
country’s southernmost province toChinese state owned corporations 
<http://paginaglobal.blogspot.com/2015/06/eduardo-dos-santos-vende-angola-aos.html>
 in exchange for more loans. Last week, it emerged that the Angolan economy is 
too weak for officials to issue a$2bn Eurobond 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-10-07/angola-to-sell-2-billion-bonds-locally-after-eurobond-delayed>
.

 To stay in power, the regime has mostly resorted to force 
<https://www.hrw.org/world-report/2015/country-chapters/angola> despite peace 
accords signed with former enemy Unita in 2002 and victory at the polls in 2008 
and 2012.

In the last five years, Angolans have become used to violence and killing 
perpetrated by government forces. In 2010, police and state security officers 
allegedly killed two military veterans,Alves Kamulingue and Isaís Cassule 
<https://www.hrw.org/news/2013/11/22/angola-officials-implicated-killing-protest-organizers>
, who organised a protest against arrears in pension payments.Manuel Hilberto 
Ganga <http://mg.co.za/article/2013-11-28-brutal-crackdown-fuels-angola-rage>, 
an opposition party member who hung up signs protesting the murder of those 
men, was later allegedly shot in the back by Dos Santos’s Presidential Guard.

 Best known is the case against journalist Rafael Marques de Morais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/rafael-marques-de-morais> for criminal 
libel (he received a suspended prison sentence in May) for his bookAngola’s 
Blood Diamonds 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/world/2015/may/21/angolan-journalist-settles-defamation-case-blood-diamonds>
, about corruption in the diamond mining industry by a trio of generals close 
to the Angolan presidency.

Repression generates more dissent. The prisoners ought to be able to await 
trial in their homes, as the law permits
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fangola-repression-generates-more-dissent-politics-mpla%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e00140028132bf0d000fe179a6888d07e3d2bba%2F0_760_2553_1530%2F2553.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20out%20Angola%20%E2%80%93%20repression%20only%20generates%20more%20dissent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fangola-repression-generates-more-dissent-politics-mpla%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20out%20Angola%20%E2%80%93%20repression%20only%20generates%20more%20dissent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F13%2Fangola-repression-generates-more-dissent-politics-mpla%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e00140028132bf0d000fe179a6888d07e3d2bba%2F0_760_2553_1530%2F2553.jpg>
 Angolan activist Luaty Beirão working on his laptop in Luanda. Beirao has been 
detention without trial since June, along with 14 other opposition activists. 
Photograph: Stephane de Sakutin/AFP/Getty Images 
Most recently, heavily armed police raided a religious sect at Mount Sumi that 
rejected state initiatives such as vaccination campaigns, the national census 
and public schooling. Aiming to arrest the group’s leader, José Julino 
Kalupeteka, police met resistance from sect members. Many months later it is 
still unclear what happened, but severalcredible sources allege a massacre 
<http://www.dailymaverick.co.za/article/2015-05-27-angola-in-focus-the-mount-sumi-massacre-an-atrocity-that-will-come-to-define-the-new-country/#.VhetbSpVhBc>
.

Liberdade Já!

 But it is the arrest of the book club that is galvanising the latest protests 
against the regime. When police, acting on information from a state security 
officer who had infiltrated the group of activists, arrested the 15 young men 
and accused them of crimes against public order and state security, it 
unleashed a public outcry.

 Demonstrations were organised, and coordinated protests were held in Lisbon, 
Berlin and Brussels. Luanda protestors met arrests, kidnapping, violence and an 
MPLA counter-protest in the same square. The mothers, sisters and wives of the 
activists organised another demonstration on 8 August, the president’s 
birthday, appealing to him as a father. But when they went to exercise their 
constitutional right, they were beaten and some were bitten by police dogs.

Prison and intimidation: the price of being a journalist in Angola
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/18/angola-journalist-prison-rafael-marques-de-morais>
 Angolans of many different political stripes have expressed their discontent 
online. A group of family and friends of the prisoners set up a video campaign 
and a petition, Liberdade Já <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lG12vi8z8xI> 
(Freedom Now!), that has mobilised an international line-up of authors, 
artists, scholars and activists in support of the cause. Sadly, the Angolan 
government responds with silence.

 Some have taken to the streets. The past days have witnessed four consecutive 
nights of vigils for Beirão, and the other prisoners – Marcos Mavunga, a civil 
society activist recently sentenced to a six-year prison term in a trial 
Amnesty International called a “travesty of justice”, and two young women also 
named in the state’s case against the book group.

The fourth vigil dispersed peacefully when it was surrounded by police with 
water canons and canine units, despite sitting peacefully and praying silently 
in front of a church.

Collectively, the jailed men, Mavunga and the indicted women have become known 
as the 15+1+2. One sign at the vigil announced “15+1+2=24.3 million” (Angola’s 
total population).

Repression generates more dissent. The prisoners ought to be able to await 
trial in their homes, as the law permits. In so doing, the state would save a 
life, forgo a martyr, and step closer to dialogue.
 