
The fringe becomes mainstream not by slow increments but by sharp lurches – 
or, more exactly, gradual acceptance manifests itself through dramatic 
breakthroughs, as quantity gives way to quality.

Last week’s Essential Poll, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/21/progressives-can-attract-hanson-supporters-but-not-by-insulting-them>
 with its finding that 49% of Australians support banning Muslim immigration, 
represents one of those moments.

The figures reveal a deep anti-Muslim sentiment cutting across all political 
parties. Sixty per cent of Liberal voters would ban Muslim immigration – but, 
so, too, would 34% of Greens supporters.

Of course, a “ban on Muslim immigration to Australia” remains, at this stage, 
an abstraction, a fantasy that respondents can interpret however they like. 
Responses to specific anti-Muslim legislation might well be very different, 
just as people who endorse capital punishment in general can still oppose 
specific, real executions.

Progressives can attract Hanson supporters. But not by insulting them | Peter 
Lewis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/21/progressives-can-attract-hanson-supporters-but-not-by-insulting-them>
Nevertheless, we shouldn’t delude ourselves: the poll reveals a substantial 
constituency into which Hansonism can tap.

It’s worth then considering the difference between the first and the second 
incarnations ofPauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson>.

The 90s-era One Nation targeted “Asians” and Indigenous people, denouncing the 
bipartisan commitment to multiculturalism in the name of an older Australia and 
its cultural norms. That rhetoric was largely nostalgic, since the Anglo 
monoculture of the Hansonite imaginary had, at least in the cities, already 
given way to multiracial cosmopolitanism.

Since then, of course, the integration of Australian capitalism into Asia has 
only intensified with, for instance, recent economic prosperity driven by a 
mining boom dependent upon Chinese markets.

The widespread pandering to Hanson after her early electoral successes masked 
the extent to which One Nation was pushing against the prevailing economic and 
political winds.

The rebooted project is rather different.

In Hanson’s recent speech, Asians barely featured. In their place, we heard an 
almost exclusively anti-Muslim rhetoric. That rhetoric built on 15 years of 
warnings by the major parties that al-Qaida (and then Islamic State) 
represented a near-existential threat to Australia.

The “war on terror” has fundamentally reshaped both foreign and domestic 
policy. In its Defence Budget Brief 2014-2015,the Australian Strategic Policy 
Institute estimates 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/iraq-deployment-to-cost-australia-about-400-million-a-year-20140915-10h35o.html>
 the nation has allocated nearly $20bn on military deployments in the past two 
decades, overwhelmingly in Muslim nations. Since 9/11,Australia has enacted 
more than 60 separate anti-terrorism laws 
<https://theconversation.com/reactive-anti-terror-laws-risk-further-eroding-freedoms-without-making-us-safer-50959>
, many of which challenge basic principles of democratic jurisprudence.

The most recent budget allocates over $35bn to defence, national security and 
law enforcement. “Keeping Australia and Australians safe and secure is the 
highest responsibility of the government,”we’re told 
<http://www.budget.gov.au/2015-16/content/glossy/nat_sec/html/nat_sec-01.htm>.

In other words, if the original One Nation was swimming against the tide, 
Pauline Hanson 2.0 is surfing a wave. Since 2001, Australians have been told 
again and again to be very scared of Muslims. The Hansonites repackage that 
message in a more plebeian format, presentingIslam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam> as an all-purpose scapegoat for 
social and economic anxieties.

Presented in that light, the Essential Poll isn’t that surprising.

Yet an explanation of anti-Muslim sentiment shouldn’t become a justification 
for it.

That’s why the response by my colleague Peter Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/21/progressives-can-attract-hanson-supporters-but-not-by-insulting-them>
, andothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/04/pauline-hanson-takes-centre-stage-again-but-this-time-we-should-listen-not-lampoon>
, deserve to be debated.

“[H]ere’s the challenge to everyone concerned or affronted by these findings,” 
Lewis writes. “How do you tell half the population that they are wrong? The 
answer is you don’t.”

Lewis notes that one quarter of voters think they’ll be less secure in their 
job in the next two years, and only a third expect to be employed by the same 
boss in five years time.

That genuine uncertainty, he says, fuels populism of the left and the right. 
Rather than denouncing Hanson voters, we should be addressing their real 
concerns. He argues:

There is a progressive political agenda that can resonate with all these 
disengaged and distrustful people, while at the same time taking the heat out 
of their fear and insecurity.

It’s about such unfashionable ideas as income distribution, workplace 
bargaining rights, industry development and corporate responsibility.

That’s the political challenge to responding to Hanson and her supporters: not 
to call them names that may make us feel superior but to listen and harness 
their sense of protest to more constructive ends.

Certainly, we’ve seen a depressing tendency in which so-called progressives 
respond to Hansonism and other manifestations of conservative populism by 
denouncing ordinary people as incorrigible bigots and suggesting measures to 
short circuit the democratic process so as to keep the oiks under control.

And there’s a lot to like in Lewis’ call for a different kind of politics.

Nevertheless, you can’t build a “progressive political agenda” without 
tackling bigotry.

In Jim Crow America, for instance, the vast majority of whites identified 
African Americans as inferior. Would anyone really argue that, in that context, 
progressives should have opted not to say that white supremacy (a majority 
sentiment) was wrong?

In any case, Islamophobia, like other forms of racism, isn’t merely a moral 
obscenity. It’s also a material obstacle for those committed to progressive 
change, undermining unity against our common enemies. How, for instance, do you 
campaign for workplace rights if your co-workers want to deport you for wearing 
a headscarf? How do you mobilise people against corporate power if they’re 
obsessed with banning halal foods?

To put it another way, reconstructing a different kind of politics depends on 
defeating racism, just as much as defeating racism rests on rebuilding a 
different kind of politics.

First Dog on the Moon's reverse-racist history of Australian racial intolerance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/first-dog-on-the-moons-reverse-racist-history-of-australian-racial-intolerance>
Furthermore, while popular Islamophobia might sometimes be a cipher for 
economic uncertainty, that doesn’t mean that activists fighting for economic 
justice should orient to Islamophobes. On the contrary, precisely because the 
left’s so weak, attempts to reconstruct a progressive alternative should begin 
with those who reject bigotry, not those who embrace it.

In particular, progressives need to build support among those communities 
facing the brunt of contemporary racism. How will that ever be possible if 
we’re not willing to denounce Islamophobia whenever we encounter it?

Again, it’s not simply a moral question.

Almost as soon as any serious movement gets off the ground, activists will be 
confronted by questions about national security, Islam, terrorism and the like, 
simply because those issues are so central to contemporary politics. That’s 
part of the reason the anti-globalisation movement of the late 90s collapsed: 
anti-corporate campaigners weren’t prepared for the post-9/11 world.

You can’t dodge the key issues of the era – and, as the Essential Poll shows, 
one of the key issues today is Islamophobia.

Though the survey’s definitely worrying, there’s no reason to conclude the 
bigots can’t be defeated. But if we’re going to win, we need to actually fight.
 