
Vice-President Joe Biden’s Cancer Moonshot Blue Ribbon Panel 
<http://www.cancer.gov/research/key-initiatives/moonshot-cancer-initiative/blue-ribbon-panel>
 has released 10 recommendations to accelerate a new national effort “to end 
cancer as we know it 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/06/28/fact-sheet-cancer-moonshot-summit-vice-president-biden-announces-new>
”. These initiatives, focused mainly on the US, will almost certainly extend 
the lives of some cancer patients in the future.

However, cancer deaths worldwide are estimated to increase by over 50% 
<http://www.cancer.org/research/cancerfactsstatistics/global> between 2015 and 
2030, mainly due to expanding and ageing populations. We already have the 
knowledge and technology to reduce this toll for future decades without waiting 
for new breakthroughs.

Facing my fear: did I have the cancer mutation that killed my dad? | Jean 
Hannah Edelstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/09/facing-my-fear-cancer-mutation-diagnosis-health-genetic-chance>
About half of cancer cases and deaths worldwide are preventable 
<http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@epidemiologysurveilance/documents/document/acspc-027766.pdf>
. For instance, lung and liver cancer are the most common causes of cancer 
deaths around the world and cervical cancer is the fourth leading cause among 
women. And we already know how to prevent almost all of them.

Like many of my colleagues who study cancer prevention, I believe that scaling 
up existing preventive interventions and already available treatments over two 
to three decades could save millions of lives around the world.

Cut the number of lung cancer deaths globally

Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer death 
<http://globocan.iarc.fr/Pages/fact_sheets_cancer.aspx> in the US 
<https://www.cdc.gov/cancer/lung/statistics/> and around the world, killing 
over 1.5 million men and women a year. But in American men, lung cancer death 
rateshave fallen 
<http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@research/documents/document/acspc-047079.pdf>
 by about 40% over the past 25 years. In women, lung cancer rates have peaked.

That’s because the proportion of adults in the US who smoke has decreased by 
about50% <http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/tables/trends/cig_smoking> 
since the 1960s, due to public education, indoor smoking bans and higher prices 
due to higher tobacco taxes. This reduction happened despite the ongoing, 
vigorous efforts of tobacco companies tocombat these public health initiatives 
<https://theconversation.com/big-tobacco-aims-its-guns-to-kill-california-tobacco-tax-63750>
.

Similar reductions in France and South Africa have been achieved by increasing 
cigarette prices <http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMra1308383>. However, 
the number of smokers is still increasing in countries such asChina 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/10/13/health/study-shows-spread-of-cigarettes-in-china.html>
 andIndonesia 
<http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2016/06/01/indonesia-on-track-to-worlds-highest-smoking-rates.html>
 as tobacco companies seek new markets, and a demographic bulge of younger 
potential smokers enters adolescence.

The World Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control 
<http://www.who.int/fctc/en/> is the international blueprint on policies to 
reduce the uptake of smoking and encourage current smokers to quit.

The United States is one of only seven countries that has signed but not 
ratified the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control. If our country is serious 
about cancer control, we should join the180 countries that 
<http://www.who.int/fctc/signatories_parties/en/> have ratified the convention.

How do people die from cancer? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Ranjana 
Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/17/how-do-people-die-from-cancer-google>
Liver cancer: focus on vaccines and curing hepatitis C infections

Liver cancer is the second most common cause of cancer death worldwide 
<http://globocan.iarc.fr/old/FactSheets/cancers/liver-new.asp>, killing about 
three-quarters of a million people. It is thefifth most common cause of cancer 
death 
<http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@research/documents/document/acspc-047079.pdf>
 in the US.

The most common causes of liver cancer are infection with hepatitis B or 
hepatitis C virus. In some countries thedietary contaminant aflatoxin 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11922091>, produced by molds that grow on 
stored grains or nuts, exacerbates the risk that hepatitis B infection will 
cause liver cancer.

Hepatitis B infection is almost entirely preventable by vaccination in 
infancy. In fact, an 80% decline in liver cancer rates has been observed in 
Taiwanese birth cohortsthat have received the vaccination early in life 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1089326115000021>.

While rates of infant hepatitis B vaccination are high around the world, many 
babies are still missing out 
<http://www.who.int/immunization/monitoring_surveillance/burden/vpd/surveillance_type/passive/HepB_map_schedule.jpg?ua=1>
. Universal vaccination would lead to a further decline in liver disease and 
liver cancer globally.

Hepatitis C causes about a quarter of liver cancer 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/carcin/bgp263> deaths worldwide. Curative therapies 
like the new drugSovaldi 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/20/business/high-cost-of-hepatitis-c-drug-prompts-a-call-to-void-its-patents.html>
 may be another tool to prevent liver cancer. Researchers think that curing 
patients of their hepatitis C infection will prevent them from going on to 
develop liver cancer.

But the current cost of these drugs is a substantial barrier 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1056/NEJMp1400160> to their use in both lower-income 
countries and in the US.

However, in Egypt, public-private partnerships have made the drugs available 
at less than 1/100th 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/12/16/health/hepatitis-c-treatment-egypt.html> of 
their price in the United States. A vigorous international effort to use these 
new drugs to lower the number of infections would have a substantial impact on 
liver cancers caused by hepatitis C.

Heavier alcohol drinking also increases the risk 
<https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/causes-prevention/risk/alcohol/alcohol-fact-sheet>
 of liver cancer (as well as cancers of the breast, esophagus, pancreas, colon 
and rectum). According to the World Health Organization consumption has been 
increasing in the two most populous countries,India and China 
<http://gamapserver.who.int/gho/interactive_charts/gisah/consumption_change/atlas.html>
.

Cervical cancer: vaccines and Pap smears

Cervical cancer kills more than 250,000 women a year worldwide, making it the 
fourth-leading cause of cancer death among women 
<http://globocan.iarc.fr/old/summary_table_pop-html.asp?selection=224900&title=World&sex=2&type=1&window=1&sort=2&submit=%C2%A0Execute%C2%A0>
. In the US, however,it is 14th 
<http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@research/documents/document/acspc-047079.pdf>
. From 1975 to 2012, the incidence of cervical cancer in theUS decreased by half
 <http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts/html/cervix.html>, due to Pap smear tests 
screening and removal of precancerous lesions.

However, almost all cases of cervical cancer are due to infection with the 
Human Papillomavirus (HPV), and we now have a vaccine against the main strains 
of HPV. In theory, cervical cancer is almost entirely preventable if HPV 
vaccination before the onset of sexual activity is followed by screening in 
adulthood to detect precancerous lesions caused by virus strains not covered by 
the vaccine. Yet the vaccine is not availableto most girls in the world 
<http://www.gavi.org/uploadedImages/Types_of_support/NVS/HPV/HPV-vaccine-infographic-1600_source.jpg>
.

The World Health Organization’s Expanded Program on Immunization 
<http://www.who.int/immunization/programmes_systems/supply_chain/benefits_of_immunization/en/>
 ensures that 85% of the world’s young children now receive at least DPT 
vaccine against diptheria, pertussis and tetanus. This program created new 
distribution channels for vaccine and could be a model for increasing the 
number of prepubertal girls who receive the HPV vaccine.

Making sure that more women around the world receive the decades-old Pap smear 
testing or introducing the new HPV tests would also help reduce cervical cancer 
incidence.

We can also tackle childhood leukemia and breast cancer

In developed countries, the most common form of childhood leukemia, acute 
lymphocytic leukemia, is cured by conventional chemotherapy in over80% of 
affected children 
<http://www.cancer.org/cancer/leukemiainchildren/detailedguide/childhood-leukemia-survival-rates>
. These life-saving, relatively inexpensive drugs have been available in the US 
for decades. Yet in other parts of the world, most children with leukemia die 
because they do not receive treatment.

Drugs like Tamoxifen 
<https://www.cancer.gov/types/breast/research/10-years-tamoxifen> and aromatase 
inhibitors 
<https://www.cancer.gov/types/breast/breast-hormone-therapy-fact-sheet> have 
decreased mortality from estrogen-fueled breast cancers in the developed world. 
Yet most women in the developing world with these cancers do not receive these 
inexpensive medications.

While leukemia and breast cancer require relatively sophisticated diagnostic 
and treatment infrastructure, they don’t require new treatments. The 
still-missing piece is the political will and funding to expand access to these 
long-established treatments.

Optimizing the technology and knowledge we already have

Pinning our hopes on new technologies isn’t the only way to reduce cancer 
deaths worldwide. A moonshot-level impact could be guaranteed just by ensuring 
the interventions and treatments we already know to be effective are deployed 
around the world.

Critically, we already have models that show how this can be done. Programs, 
such asthe President’s Emergency Fund for Aids Relief <http://www.pepfar.gov/> 
and theGlobal Fund for HIV, TB and Malaria <http://www.theglobalfund.org/en> 
made lifesaving antiretroviral drugs available to millions of HIV patients by 
negotiating much lower drug prices. The programs also helped countries 
establish the necessary infrastructure to deliver the drugs and monitor 
patients.

There is much more we can do to prevent cancer in the US. Although smoking 
rates have done down,17% of adults still smoke 
<http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/adult_data/cig_smoking/>
. Less than half of our teenage girls and boys received the recommended three 
doses of theHPV vaccine 
<https://www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2011/p0825_hpv_vaccine.html>. Racial 
disparitiesstill exist <http://www.cancer.gov/research/areas/disparities> in 
access to early detection and treatment of cancers.

For the cancers we cannot prevent, we will always need new and better 
therapies. But we should not wait for future cures to do what we can to prevent 
cancer deaths around the world.

We can choose to prevent many cancers and cancer deaths globally. In the words 
ofPresident John F Kennedy 
<https://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/about/history/jsc40/jsc_gallery_people_image29.html>
 in launching the first moonshot:

because that goal will serve to organize and measure the best of our energies 
and skills, because that challenge is one that we are willing to accept, one we 
are unwilling to postpone.

This story first appeared on The Conversation <https://theconversation.com/us>.
 