
I, Daniel Blake <https://www.theguardian.com/film/i-daniel-blake>, Ken Loach’s 
study of a working man’s descent into poverty and despair while battling to 
receive disability benefit, has rightlycaused disquiet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/28/arrogance-poverty-social-housing-benefits-ken-loach-i-daniel-blake-unrealistic>
 at the ways the systems and services established to provide welfare can 
instead cause misery. Many who work in society’s “safety net” – social workers 
among them – have tried since the film’s release to show that they are 
shoulder-to-shoulder with people who have been disempowered.

As the film was being created, released and watched, the British Association 
of Social Workers’ adults policy, practice and ethics group was attempting to 
address some of these issues. We set up a working group led by the national 
network of service users and disabled people,Shaping Our Lives 
<http://www.shapingourlives.org.uk/>, whose aim was to produce a charter to 
ensure disabled adults and social workers work together to improve wellbeing.

We are making a case for disabled people and social workers to join forces, 
recognising how much we have in common

This charter <http://cdn.basw.co.uk/upload/basw_52212-6.pdf> [pdf] sets out 
how we can work together to tackle the physical, social, economic and other 
barriers to independent living, so disabled adults have the same choices, 
control and freedom as any other citizen – at home, at work and as members of 
the community.

The working group emerged from some uncomfortable conversations between 
disabled people and social workers over the past year. We talked honestly about 
how powerless both parties could feel and how badly we can sometimes relate to 
one another. One disabled member of the working group described the social care 
process as “hideous”, saying “you want to prove what you can do and then have 
to prove what you can’t do”.

Social workers in turn acknowledged the impact of bureaucratic pressures at 
work. “There are targets for one week to sign off assessments,” explained one, 
“it’s not long enough for people.” But we also discussed how things could be if 
we were able to put values back at the centre of social work and prioritise 
conversations about ability and rights, rather than focusing on what we aren’t 
able to achieve. This was summed up as “think big – be ambitious for each 
other”.

Stop calling disabled people superhuman - just treat them as human
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/sep/15/stop-calling-disabled-people-superhuman-just-treat-them-as-human>
This small group of disabled activists and social workers decided that 
together we wanted to create something that would help us work better in 
partnership. One disabled person summarised this brilliantly: “I want my social 
worker to feel that she’s not burdened and constrained by her environment and 
that I am not by mine – this binds us together.”

We are hopeful our resulting charter can provide a foundation for lasting 
change in the relationship between disabled people and social workers. We are 
making a case for disabled people and social workers to join forces so that we 
can tackle barriers together, recognising how much we have in common. Despite 
the very real pressure on services, when we work together we can achieve so 
much more.

We want people to use the charter to lobby for change at national and local 
level

Some of the suggestions in the charter are simple and inexpensive: we will be 
honest about what is possible and what is not, for example. Others require 
sustained effort and support to promote rights and secure access to services 
and opportunities.

We are calling on people to use the social model of disability 
<http://www.scope.org.uk/about-us/our-brand/social-model-of-disability> – which 
says that disability is caused by the way society is organised rather than by a 
person’s individual differences – and urge social workers to always begin with 
a human rights-based approach.

We want people to use the charter to lobby for change and improvement at 
national and local level, and to get involved in joint action to improve 
disabled people’s rights and lives.

The charter ends by stating: “We will not be satisfied until everyone has full 
and equal citizenship.” We don’t know how long this will take. But we do know 
that this is what all of us should be entitled to. Ultimately, this is about 
recognising each other as fellow humans – we could all be Daniel Blake.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 