
Since June 2014, when the Child Support Agency became the Child Maintenance 
Service 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/fairness-for-families-children-and-taxpayers-as-new-child-maintenance-system-is-launched>
, any parent who wants to apply for child maintenance must pay a £20 fee.

My job as a caseworker is to help secure financial support for children whose 
parents have separated. I do my best, but I see hundreds of single-parent 
familieswith little to no savings <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37504449> 
get turned away, unable to access a public service even though they are the 
ones who need it most and often struggle to access funds they might have had in 
joint bank accounts.

Why the silence on the scandal of unpaid child maintenance? | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/16/silence-scandal-unpaid-child-maintenance>
Sadly, it isn’t easy to deliver the sort of humane and quality public service 
families expect and deserve. Like other benefits assessors who havewritten for 
this series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/aug/20/work-pensions-disability-claim-call-handler-benefits-dwp>
, I work in a stats-driven department. When I talk to families, I have to read 
verbatim from a script – and all our calls are monitored.

Every family is different, but the only difference that the DWP is interested 
in is whether or not they can afford to pay the access fee. I am often asked 
whether the fee can be deducted from the first child maintenance payment, or 
why the claimant has to pay a fee, when it’s their ex-partner who should be 
paying. Others ask if they can pay in instalments, a couple of pounds a week. 
But the answer every time has to be no.

Every day I see parents who qualify for child maintenance get their 
applications rejected, simply because they are too impoverished to pay the fee. 
And more than 90% of parents applying for child maintenance are women.

The turning point for me was when a manager towered over me and instructed me 
to terminate a call from a mother sobbing her heart out. The mother explained 
that her family had fallen apart and she had suffered a mental breakdown and 
had lost her job as a result. She begged me to waive the fee but my manager 
regarded that as simply “wasting time” while other applicants queued on the 
switchboard.


It is a very emotional experience for many parents to talk to me about their 
family situation and what they have been through. Many make childcare 
arrangements so their children aren’t within earshot of what is a very 
difficult phonecall.

I assess if you are fit for work. I hate having to score your life this way
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/nov/12/assess-disability-benefits-esa-fit-to-work-dwp>
To this government’s shame, the £20 fee was charged to hundreds of survivors 
of domestic abuse earlier this year, despite it being explicit policy thatthey 
should be exempt 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/proposed-child-maintenance-fees-exemption-for-victims-of-domestic-violence>
. My colleagues and I were told by senior managers that even if the operator 
transferring the call flags up domestic abuse, we must take the fee, unless the 
applicant says directly they are a victim of domestic abuse. We successfully 
pushed back and made complaints about this.

Gingerbread <https://gingerbread.org.uk/news/327/CMS-abuse-%20survivors-risk>, 
which represents single parents, andWomen’s Aid 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/child-support-system-unsafe-domestic-abuse-survivors-charities-warn-a7238366.html>
, a charity for domestic abuse survivors, have been among the organisations to 
raise concerns over the handling of domestic violence cases.

They have been right to point out that caseworkers do not always get the 
specialist training in working with domestic abuse survivors or in how to spot 
the signs of financial coercion. And yet the DWP itself estimates that32% 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/220461/estimating-impacts-csa-case-closure-and-charging.pdf>
 of parents applying to the service will have experienced domestic abuse.

To top things off, we use an archaic computer system that has a chronic 
tendency to crash. Caseworkers are told to provide pointless log-off records to 
explain why they are logged out following system crashes. The irony is that 
filling out log-off records and being taken off the phones to explain systemic 
failures only wastes more valuable time that should be spent helping 
applicants. Every day hundreds of calls go unanswered or are lost partway 
through. It only adds to the frustration of the parents and staff alike.


As for the mother whose call I was told to terminate, maybe she found a way to 
pay the fee. I don’t know what she did to get help, or if she ever got any help 
at all.


This series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/series/public-servant-my-letter-to-the-public>
 aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by 
mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, 
politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, 
contactkirstie.brewer@theguardian.com <mailto: kirstie.brewer@theguardian.com>


Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 