
The starring role in BBC1’s Doctor Who was offered to a black actor but it 
“didn’t work out” according to the series showrunner,Steven Moffat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/stevenmoffat>. Moffat said it would be 
“amazing” to have two non-white leads after Pearl Mackie, whose father is from 
the West Indies, was cast as the Doctor’s companion earlier this year.

He said the producers took a conscious decision to cast a non-white actor as 
the companion “because we need to do better on that. We just have to”. Moffat 
said the show had tried to go one further by casting the first non-white 
Doctor, but the choice later fell through.

Pearl Mackie announced as new Doctor Who companion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/23/pearl-mackie-announced-as-new-doctor-who-companion>
With Peter Capaldi signed up to do at least one more series, Moffat said it 
would be refreshing if the next Doctor wasn’t white. “Absolutely it would [be 
refreshing],” he told thenew issue of Doctor Who magazine 
<http://www.doctorwhomagazine.com/>. “Two non-white leads in Doctor Who would 
be amazing. In fact, a lot of people would barely notice … I certainly don’t 
think there’s ever been a problem with making the Doctor black, which is why it 
should happen one day.

“I mean, we’ve tried. The part has been offered to a black actor. But for 
various reasons, it didn’t work out.”

Before Capaldi landed the job three years ago, there was speculation that a 
black star might land the role, with Idris Elba, David Harewood, Chiwetel 
Ejiofor and Paterson Joseph said to have been in the running. It is a debate 
that will run and run, with Elba also touted as the first black James Bond.

There have also been mounting calls for each of the roles to be given to a 
woman for the first time. With Daniel Craig expected to quit the 007 role after 
last year’s Spectre, The Fall and X-Files star Gillian Anderson hinted that she 
might like to pick up the Walther PPK as “Jane Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/31/007-james-jane-bond-gillian-anderson-emilia-clarke>
”.

On Mackie’s casting as the Doctor’s companion Bill, unveiled last month, 
Moffat said: “We decided that the new companion was going to be non-white, and 
that was an absolute decision, because we need to do better on that. We just 
have to. I don’t mean that we’ve done terribly – our guest casts are among the 
most diverse on television – but I feel as though I could have done better 
overall.”

It's Bond, Jane Bond: Gillian Anderson throws hat into the ring to be next 007
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/24/jane-bond-gillian-anderson-next-007-twitter>
Moffat, the show’s executive producer and lead writer, will step down as 
showrunner at the end of next year’s series, when he will hand over to Chris 
Chibnall, aDoctor Who <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> fan 
and writer best known for ITV’s hit murder mystery Broadchurch.

Moffat said Doctor Who had “no excuse” not to feature a diverse cast of black, 
Asian and minority ethnic actors. “Sometimes the nature of a particular show – 
historical dramas, for instance – makes diversity more of a challenge, but 
Doctor Who has absolutely nowhere to hide on this,” he said. “Young people 
watching have to know that they have a place in the future. That really 
matters. You have to care profoundly what children’s shows in particular say 
about where you’re going to be.

“And we’ve kind of got to tell a lie: we’ll go back into history and there 
will be black people where, historically, there wouldn’t have been, and we 
won’t dwell on that. We’ll say, ‘To hell with it, this is the imaginary, better 
version of the world. By believing in it, we’ll summon it forth.’

“And, outside of the fiction, it’s about anyone feeling that they can be 
involved in this industry as an actor, a director, a writer … It’s hugely 
important, and it’s not good when we fail on that. We must do better.”

His comments come after actor and comedian Lenny Henry put diversity at the 
top of the industry’s agenda, leading a campaign to increase the number of BAME 
stars on screen and more diverse industry talent behind it.

One of Doctor Who’s best-known writers, Neil Gaiman, said three years ago that 
the Doctor role had been offered to a black actor. “Would I like a person of 
colour as the Doctor? Absolutely. I have no doubt there will be,” he wrote on 
his blog. “I know one black actor who was already offered the part of the 
Doctor, and who turned it down,” he added. “You can ask [who it is], but seeing 
that it was something I was told in confidence by the actor in question, you 
won’t get an answer.”


The BBC declined to comment.
 