
People who work with Alabama 3 talk about them with pride, respect - and a 
certain amount of fear. Some call them "the last of a dying breed", others "the 
only real rock'n'roll group left". By the time I arrive in Salisbury, where 
they are playing as part of their current tour, the message is clear: some 
bands are all mouth and no trousers;Alabama 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/alabama-3> are a huge amount of trouser.

As far as jamming goes, the band have decided to up the ante and get me on to 
play in the gig. So, for one day, I became a member of Alabama 3. At 4.30pm the 
town hall in Salisbury is being crawled over by sound technicians and roadies. 
Segs, the bass player, pops down from the dressing room. "I'm off to get some 
carrots," he says. He does juice for the band before gigs - as far as healthy 
living goes, that will be it for the day.

Alabama 3 are more like the Alabama 7 to 11, but there's only a couple of them 
around for the soundcheck. Getting them all on stage requires a lot of agitated 
shepherding. The odds of getting Rob Spragg and Jake Black, the two frontmen, 
up there, I'm told, are on a par with raising the dead. But it happens, and the 
stage fills up with the resurrected, Rob behind an enormous pair of shades. 
We've decided to try a track called Gospel Train. "I've always wanted a 
trombone on that, Jake," says Rob. "It's fuckin' Christmas. Must have done 
something right this year."

Rob (aka Larry Love) delivers the tune in his decimated voice; Jake (aka Rev 
Dr D Wayne Love) evangelises over the top, both in deep south American accents. 
"That's fuckin' great," says Rob, and offers a hug. "Give it some of that New 
Orleans at the end. Come on for the encore too. Just go mental." "Aye, good," 
says Jake. "I heard a little bit of JJ Johnson there." Uh oh, he knows his 
trombonists. Rehearsal over.

Up in the dressing room, another journalist has come to do an interview. "You 
gonna do this one, Jake?" says Rob. He is now back to his Welsh accent: "You 
never get fuckin' Laurel and Hardy together, see Pascal?" He seems to have a 
hangover the size of Everest, but is enjoying its peak, like an expert 
mountaineer. Running down the back of his neck is a large, neat scar. He has 
recently been in hospital with a broken neck, after giving someone a piece of 
his mind at either a gig or a wake (stories vary). It's annoying him that he 
has to sit on a stool for the gig. "I wanted to come on in a wheelchair with 
two nurses in PVC outfits, and have two drips - one vodka, one tomato juice. 
But it freaked the band out. I think they were jealous."

The rest of the band are getting out their country shirts, funereal suits and 
wide-brimmed hats ready for the journey to Alabama. Jake is still in a grubby 
T-shirt having a big smoke. He may look all over the place, but talking to him 
leaves you feeling like you have never read a book, seen a film or listened to 
a CD in your life. In less than five minutes he covers: the unique cassette 
tape he had of John Coltrane playing Chim Chimney for over 90 minutes (someone 
trod on it); why Davis and Coltrane and Monk should be as revered as Mahler; 
the genius of Albert Ayler; his days as a journalist; why film students don't 
go for Bresson; the shirt that was made for him by the son of Celtic FC player 
Steve Chalmers. Oh, and my "metal gurus", which I work out means my shoes. 
Inexplicably, he's fascinated by them.

The manager pops up, looks around at the drink: "I thought this was going to 
be an alcohol-free tour?" "I think you mean free alcohol," comes the swift 
reply. Then Pix arrives. He's the guy who perplexes reviewers by just standing 
there on stage during gigs, looking like an enormous screw from an Alabama 
penitentiary. "Well, it was another night in south London or this," he says. 
"Put an Alabama shirt on if you're comin' on," says Jake.

Time to go on. Everyone is in place back stage, except for Jake, who is 
determined to finish his chat about authors who really push the boundaries of 
narrative structure. It's flattering, the kind of undiluted attention he gives 
a near-stranger, oblivious to the crowd waiting downstairs. Rob introduces me 
to Derek, his skull on a stick with two ivory horns: "Makes a great crack 
pipe." Seggs, meanwhile, is running through his collection of jokes about 
dyslexia. Dog help us.

Alabama 3 play a glorious, dirty show championing the world's underdogs. You 
could call it "country house" music. Tunes like Hello, I'm Johnny Cash and Woke 
Up This Morning (the Sopranos theme) are classics. I get chatting to a man 
backstage who is waiting to go on. "Oh, yeah, I know some people at the 
Guardian - my dad does too. The editor, in fact - and one of the crime 
reporters." He realises that I don't know who he is, and that the band are 
about to do a song about his dad. "He was one of the great train robbers, Bruce 
Reynolds."

"I found a young Big Issue seller with a trombone. Shall we give him a go?" 
asks Rob on stage. "Pascal the bone! From the Big Issue to big fuckin' Alabama. 
Look at the skinny little thing." I'm on. I put the lack of nerves down to the 
band: they are incredibly welcoming. I close my eyes, do my thing, and it is 
all over too soon.

Waiting for the encore, Rob pours himself a drink. Correction: he is relieving 
himself of a drink, which he plonks near the drinks table. "How much for a 
pint?" I ask. "Very expensive, this. A lot of good drugs in there." He looks at 
my shirt: "Far too happy, that. Next time we'll bring you on in a coffin."

"I'd take that horn off you if you couldn't play it. You know that?" says 
Jake. I take it as a great compliment. "The thing is, you're not a prick," says 
Rob. I take that as a compliment too.

Â· Alabama 3's Hear The Train A' Comin' DVD is out on One Little Indian on 
November 14. The band play Birkenhead Pacific tonight, then tour.
 