
Five is old enough to have mastered the basic life skills and yet here is my 
son, in the amusement arcade on holiday, insisting on simply rolling tuppences 
down the various chutes without even the tiniest hint of the techniques I have 
struggled for a week now to impart to him.

And his father just keeps handing him the money.

Related: Take the kids to … Winchester Science Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/aug/02/winchester-science-centre-family-days-out-uk>

“Stop giving it to him!”

“It’s tuppence.”

“I know!”

“You know what tuppence means, don’t you? Two pence?”

“Of course I do! I used it in my opening paragraph!”

“Two. Pence.”

“It doesn’t matter what the amount is. It matters that he learns what to do 
with it.”

“We’re in an amusement arcade. He’s here to amuse himself. The clue’s in the 
name.”

I turn back to our son, who has wasted another eight pence while I’ve been 
distracted by someone who knows nothing about anything. “Look, darling – I know 
trying to hit the clown’s face is fun, but really it’s just a distraction. Keep 
watching – see how the things slide in and out? You’ve got to time it so that 
your coin ends up there, on the metal, where it might do some good by pushing 
the others off on to the next bit and then: ker-ching! A big clump falls off 
into the tray below! Wouldn’t that be exciting! Then mummy will take those and 
… ”

“Yes?” says my husband with interest. “What will mummy do with them?”

Mummy will do what she does with all spare coins. “Save them somewhere. Hoard 
them against the day we have no coins. The day we would bitterly regret letting 
our son roll them mindlessly down miniature chutes into oblivion. For what? 
Amusement!”

“They’re. Tuppences.”

“It. Doesn’t. Matter.”

You can’t argue with a saver. Especially not one with an Irish Catholic 
peasant history going back to the dawn of time

“A tuppence saved is a tuppence earned, is that what you’re saying?”

“Exactly. And several tuppences saved is several tuppences earned.”

“Do you honestly envisage them as the thin brown line between us and, at some 
unspecified future date, penury?”

“Yes, I do. Doesn’t everyone?”

You can’t argue with a saver. Especially not one with an Irish Catholic 
peasant history stretching back to the dawn of time. Husbanding resources is in 
my blood and bones - both of which I would wish you to make a nutritious stock 
out of if the crops have failed when my time comes. In my heart, there’s rain. 
It is falling on ground covered with a thick layer of portents of doom before 
draining away to the fields to rot those crops.

Just then, the air fills with the glorious sound of coins dislodged and 
cascading into the tray. I scoop them up and into my bag. “Well done, son,” I 
say. “Mummy will save these now.” Mummy will save everyone.

Need to escape? Join the club 

Speaking of investment, as we almost were – I have long cherished the idea of 
setting up a chain of clubs called The Greta Garbo, where people can pay just 
to pop in and read a book / sit in silence / have a nap / daydream for 20 
minutes, without having to queue, buy and waste a coffee they don’t want, worry 
about other people starting conversations, or be bothered by muzak – and I 
think the time is now propitious.Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
,Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, Channel 4’s Naked 
Attraction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/30/naked-attraction-dating-show-nude-channel-4>
: there is now an overwhelming need for escape and retreat. Venture 
capitalists, please get in touch. These coppers have not added up as quickly as 
I’d hoped.

Inside, she’s crying 

Khloe Kardashian described herself as “internally sad 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/1385793/im-internally-sad-khloe-kardashian-left-devastated-as-rob-reveals-blac-chyna-is-pregnant-during-family-chat/>
” when her brother Rob announced that his fiancee were pregnant. I don’t have 
time to unpick all that is contained within this formulation by one of the most 
mediated entities in modern life, so I’ll just roll it down the chute and hope 
it hits a psycholinguist with anything from a monograph to an entire PhD to 
write. I suspect it heralds a veritable cascade of delights.
 