
“Awkward timing at the Woman of the Future awards with Jack Monroe surprised 
with a prize”, read the diary in Wednesday’s London Evening Standard. “The 
problem? Last week Jack came out as transgender …” But my award wasn’t just 
awkward for the writer. I can normally tell the trolls from the satire and the 
genuinely ignorant, but after scrolling through 24 hours of social media 
screeching about how I “stole an award from a real woman”, I’m not so sure: 
there seemed to be a consensus among the discontented that I shouldn’t have 
accepted it.

The Brave Man video is a fair portrait of trans life – it does not deserve 
your rage | Jack Monroe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/20/brave-man-video-trans-transgender-jack-monroe>
But to reject that award would have been to reject a decision made by a panel 
of men and women, all media savvy and informed ofmy decision to come out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/20/brave-man-video-trans-transgender-jack-monroe>
. It would have been disingenuous. I am the same person I was when Sandi 
Toksvig gave me aWoman of the Year award in 2014 
<http://www.womenoftheyear.co.uk/2014-award-winners/>. Should I hand them all 
back?

I’m probably never going to get another “women’s award”. But in the same way 
my birth certificate says “female”, my previous awards say “woman”. That 
doesn’t cause me any great trauma, so why does it bother anyone else?

When the news was leaked earlier this year that Caitlyn Jenner would be sharing
 
<http://uk.eonline.com/news/711262/caitlyn-jenner-reese-witherspoon-and-more-named-glamour-s-2015-women-of-the-year>
 Glamour magazine’s “Women of the Year” cover with Reese Witherspoon, the 
chatterati erupted.Germaine Greer defined womanhood 
<http://nypost.com/2015/10/26/theres-a-feminist-civil-war-brewing-over-caitlyn-jenner/>
 as having a “big hairy smelly vagina”. Ladies with sparse or no pubic hair, or 
lacking a degree of “smelly” – get to the back of the womanhood queue: 
according to the great feminist icon, your genitals betray your gender.
 ‘I am the same person I was when Sandi Toksvig gave me a Woman of the Year 
award in 2014.’ Photograph: Vicki Treadell 
One Twitter user told me that “you have a working reproductive system so you 
are a woman”. By that logic, women who cannot reproduce; who have had 
hysterectomies, like my mum; who have ovarian cancer, like my friend; or the 
many thousands in need of fertility treatment – they are somehow not considered 
real women because apparently real women have working reproductive systems. The 
arguments against self-defined gender are weak, ghastly and easy to pick apart.

According to some people on Mumsnet, I am a “traitor to my gender” and 
“decimating my body” by consideringtop surgery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/30/trans-top-surgery-changed-my-life>
 .They must have said the same thing to AngelinaJolie when she had a 
pre-emptive double mastectomy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/14/angelina-jolie-double-mastectomy-women>
 – and yes, breast cancer is rife in my family history, and part of the reason 
behind my decision to reduce my large and unwieldy tits. Why does making them 
smaller make me a traitor to women, when pumping them full of silicone wouldn’t 
elicit the samepearl-clutching 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/double_x/doublex/2012/01/pearl_clutching_how_the_phrase_became_a_feminist_blog_clich_.html>
 response? I am not my bra size.

The trolls and naysayers can’t have it both ways. The bigoted arguments for 
denying Jenner a women’s award – namely that she was assigned male at birth – 
are surely the same defence of me collecting mine. But there is no real 
argument, other than a thin veneer of conservatism and dinosaur-matriarchy 
covering a hideous transphobia. The core of the “Caitlyn Jenner and Jack Monroe 
shouldn’t get women’s awards” arguments is that neither of us are “women”. You 
can’t have it both ways. Both these awards were decided by people who just 
maybe recognise that being a woman is more than a set of chromosomes.

So where do I fit in? Why do we segregate awards by gender anyway? Or 
children’s clothing? Aren’t we all a bit “non-binary” inside? In rejecting my 
“female” gender, I am not enforcing binary stereotypes, but asking why the hell 
we have them in the first place. My descriptions of my childhood experiences of 
pinkness and dresses making me uncomfortable may have been clunky, but they 
were the recollections of a child, unsettled by yet another pair of pink jelly 
shoes or plastic high heels, looking longingly at her brother’s Meccano set and 
wondering why she couldn’t have one. We are conditioned from birth to slot into 
a gender box. I’m trying to hurl it out of the window.

I don’t know if John Bercow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/18/john-bercow-re-elected-commons-speaker-politics>
 has ever had dinner with a lesbian-turned-transguy before, but he applauded my 
speech loudly and giggled at the one-liners. Peers and MPs congratulated me for 
helping them understand a bit better. If that goes some tiny way to changing 
the way that transgender people are vilified by our current government, then 
that makes all the brouhaha and trolling worth it. You don’t change the world 
solely by changing legislation - you also put personal testimony in the firing 
line and open hearts and minds. For a greater understanding and to break 
through barriers and social constructs, it’s the only way I know.

No amount of testosterone or top surgery will erase being catcalled out of car 
windows while walking to school

No amount of testosterone or top surgery will erase being catcalled out of car 
windows while walking to school in my uniform. Being called a slut as I walked 
home from school. Being pinned to a sofa and repeatedly sexually assaulted in 
my early 20s by a man that I thought was my friend. Being uninvited from family 
weddings for refusing to wear a dress. Being hit across the head by a man who 
followed me and my friends home from Girls’ Brigade one night and sexually 
propositioned us.

I am not denying that I was raised a girl and then a woman. My parents always 
told me I could be whoever I want to be – prime minister, I used to joke. Now, 
I just want to be myself. Flatter-chested, a bit stronger in the arms and 
shoulders, and able to pass for a “young man” on public transport. I could 
still do that as a butch lesbian, but it doesn’t fit.

If this threatens you, go and have a long hard look at yourself and ask why my 
ovaries-and-testosterone combo makes you so uncomfortable, or why the contents 
of Caitlyn Jenner’s knickers is any of your goddamn business; and go check out
Conchita Wurst’s fashion advert 
<http://fashion.telegraph.co.uk/columns/olivia-lidbury/TMG11044085/Conchita-Wurst-dresses-down-in-suspenders-for-Karl-Lagerfeld-in-new-shoot.html>
 while you’re there. Gender constructs need to be deconstructed, for all of our 
sakes –that’s feminism, and I’m not waiting around for Germaine Greer to catch 
up with us all to do it.
 