
Would you want to be able to book a taxi from your email program? How about 
being able to send emails from your music organiser? Or maybe you’d like to be 
able to order a pizza while using your dating app?

Unlikely scenarios, all three; and yet many of the apps that we use would like 
to be able to encompass functionalities as diverse as that. It was part of the 
integrated approach that Microsoft’s Windows Phone introduced in 2010 with its 
“People Hub” idea. That didn’t have much success, arguably because it was too 
early and the implementation wasn’t great. But the idea that when you 
communicate, you want to be able doall sorts of communication – whether via 
Facebook or Twitter or text or email – is one that is catching on in a big way.

As a result, some apps are beginning to suffer from a sort of late-teenage 
bloat. Apple’s iTunes on the desktop is the poster child for this. Having 
startedas software to rip CDs and play MP3s 
<http://www.apple.com/pr/library/2001/01/09Apple-Introduces-iTunes-Worlds-Best-and-Easiest-To-Use-Jukebox-Software.html>
, it has added functionality so that now it enables you to (deep breath) buy or 
stream a huge catalogue of songs, albums, podcasts, TV shows and films, and 
also to buy and download mobile apps – though the need to do the latter barely 
arises, since you can just add them to your device.

Can you do ‘real work’ on an iPad?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/dec/07/ipad-pro-review-tablet-versus-computers-work>
But iTunes wasn’t the first. Email programs have long been able to display 
photos, videos and documents; Microsoft did it first and most thoroughly in 
Outlook. In the same way Slack, the app that many look on as email’s better 
replacement (because it obviates the blizzard of separate emails in favour of 
chat spaces and links), has expanded to include the ability to show all sorts 
of content natively. Others are getting into the multifunction app. Facebook 
and Twitter have done it for a while: they’re not just text platforms but also 
photos and videos. Facebook is taking it further by having Facebook Messenger, 
and including in that Facebook M, its “assistant” to help you with various 
tasks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fmultifunction-apps-charles-arthur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd77a062119b05fa6d7f428c94ccb7fffb2b48b16%2F0_323_3200_1921%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=WeChat%3A%20want%20an%20app%20that%20lets%20you%20do%20everything%20at%20once%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fmultifunction-apps-charles-arthur%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=WeChat%3A%20want%20an%20app%20that%20lets%20you%20do%20everything%20at%20once%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F15%2Fmultifunction-apps-charles-arthur%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd77a062119b05fa6d7f428c94ccb7fffb2b48b16%2F0_323_3200_1921%2F3200.jpg>
 Wechat in action. Photograph: Imaginechina/Corbis 
Every app, after all, wants to be the one where you spend all your time. But 
on mobile, the risks associated with overloading the user interface (user 
confusion and complexity of updates) mean that established products tend to 
splinter instead.

Facebook has added news, video, audio and messaging; more recently it took the 
brave decision on mobile tosplit Messenger  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/apr/10/facebook-messenger-app-removing-chat>
(for person-to-person contact) off as a separate app. Similarly on iOS, Apple 
has parcelled out the functions of the desktop iTunes to five apps – Music, 
Podcasts, Films, iTunes Store and App Store.

Yet not all take that approach. WeChat <http://www.wechat.com/en/>, a Chinese 
messaging app, dwarfs most western products both in scale – it has around 700 
million active accounts – and ambition: despite being first released only in 
January 2011 as a text/voice/photo-sharing app, it has expanded to provide 
functionality so that you can order cabs, buy film tickets, play games, check 
in for flights, pay bills … the list goes on and on. Connie Chan of venture 
capital firm Andreessen Horowitz wrote anastonished blogpost 
<http://a16z.com/2015/08/06/wechat-china-mobile-first/> about its capability, 
noting that “while Facebook and WhatsApp measure growth by the number of daily 
users on their networks, WeChat cares more about how relevant and central [it] 
is in addressing the daily, even hourly, needs of its users”.

BT hasn’t put the money into broadband because it hasn’t been forced to
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/14/bt-broadband-fibre-optic-slow-speeds>
So why don’t we have a WeChat in the west? Facebook comes closest, but as 
noted above, it’s splitting apart on mobile. Possibly it’s because we tore apps 
apart on the desktop; Outlook’s ability to show documents was exploited by 
scripting viruses such asILOVEYOU <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ILOVEYOU>, so 
historically there’s caution around having too much capability inside an app. 
China, WeChat’s home ground, never went through the same desktop evolution – it 
jumped direct to mobile, where apps are more rigorously “sandboxed” in their 
interaction with other phone functions. We tend to praise apps that “do one 
thing well” – and then grumble because they can’t do some specific thing thatwe 
alone want to do.

This desire to be everything to everyone marks WeChat out – but it’s obvious 
that Facebook and WhatsApp want to do the same; in India, WhatsApp already 
serves some commercial functions as a link between businesses. Global ambition 
may mean globally large app functionality, rather than siloed mobile apps with 
single functions like Uber. In a few years, individual apps may have been 
swallowed into bigger ones. Need a cab? In the future it might be as easy as 
opening your camera app;Uber is already part of Messenger 
<https://newsroom.uber.com/messengerlaunch/> in some US cities.
 