
The Worst Witch 
4.30pm, CBBC


Jill Murphy’s anarchic novels about young Mildred Hubble’s struggles at a 
magical boarding school predate Harry Potter. Previously adapted for TV in the 
late 1990s, this new Murphy-approved version adds some modern touches, but 
leaves the core story untouched: a plucky non-adept brass-necking her way 
through an arcane curriculum. Amid a talented cast, Raquel Cassidy stands out 
as icy deputy head Miss Hardbroom.Graeme Virtue

Hospital 
9pm, BBC2


This documentary looks at life in five hospitals across London, painting a 
brutal, realistic and frustrating picture of the NHS today. While a cancer 
patient waits for life-saving surgery after a string of cancellations, a woman 
with a ruptured aneurysm is rushed towards St Mary’s in Paddington in an 
ambulance. All the surgeons want to do is get on with their work, but, with 
only one bed, decisions must be made by the overstretched team.Hannah Verdier

Italy’s Invisible Cities 
9pm, BBC1


The great cities of Italy have been so thoroughly tramped by junketing TV 
presenters that finding plausible new angles presents a challenge. Hence a bit 
of technology – 3D scanning, drone cameras, CGI, virtual reality – to 
illuminate what might otherwise be a fairly boilerplate travelogue. This week, 
Alexander Armstrong and classics boffin Michael Scott explore Venice – but by 
far the most interesting sections are the computerised sequences.Andrew Mueller

No Offence 
9pm, Channel 4


Paul Abbott’s pacy and compelling police drama continues, with the 
consequences of the crematorium bomb continuing to multiply. And, as her team 
face life-threatening situations, Joanna Scanlan’s DI Viv Deering is only just 
holding it together. The strength of No Offence lies in this beautifully 
realised vulnerability: these cops are hard-bitten, but very human, and their 
dilemmas, anxieties and mistakes give the series heart, heft and a real ring of 
truth.Phil Harrison

James May: The Reassembler
9pm, BBC4


The least ridiculous Grand Tour host puts interesting things back together in 
his workshop, musing away like an uncle with a New Scientist subscription. This 
week, he reassembles the tiny 1976 Honda Z50A mini trail motorbike, AKA the 
Monkey Bike (“Just about the least motorcycle you can get away with”). Somehow, 
it’s hard to imagine the other two allowing themselves to be filmed with dirty 
nails and big sticking plasters on their fingers.Ali Catterall

Common Sense 
10pm, BBC2


A bit like Gogglebox, but for the news, this new series finds the topical 
stories of the day – from breaking news to bizarre headlines – dissected by 
“real British people”. So, that means dinner ladies from Leeds, market traders 
from London’s East End and butchers from Birmingham. The folk giving their two 
penn’orth are so chosen for their incisive wit and “unfiltered” manner, so 
expect blunt reactions to the week’s news. Ruth Jones is on voiceover duties.
Ben Arnold

The Chris Ramsey Show
10pm, Comedy Central


A new offering in which the geordie comic welcomes guests to a TV studio 
seemingly decked out to resemble a teenage boy’s bedroom, where he besieges 
them with games and challenges. Like Ramsey himself, it’s amusing and 
good-natured, although Jimmy Carr’s reliably sharp, close-to-the-bone gags 
threaten to overshadow both the host and fellow guest Natasia Demetriou in 
places. Plus, ever-orange Vicky Pattison offers tanning tips.Hannah J Davies

Film choices

The Two Faces of January (Hossein Amini, 2014), 7.10pm, Film4
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwednesdays-best-tv-hospital-italys-invisible-cities-no-offence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bf2fc5a1828b73a7ae44864f6d896d6f2d0d050%2F0_38_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Wednesday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%3A%20Hospital%3B%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Invisible%20Cities%3B%20No%20Offence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwednesdays-best-tv-hospital-italys-invisible-cities-no-offence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Wednesday%E2%80%99s%20best%20TV%3A%20Hospital%3B%20Italy%E2%80%99s%20Invisible%20Cities%3B%20No%20Offence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwednesdays-best-tv-hospital-italys-invisible-cities-no-offence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bf2fc5a1828b73a7ae44864f6d896d6f2d0d050%2F0_38_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Viggo Mortensen and Kirsten Dunst in The Two Faces of January.
 Photograph: Allstar Picture Library 
Chester and Colette MacFarland (Viggo Mortensen, Kirsten Dunst) are a handsome 
American couple holidaying in Greece, where they meet tour-guide-cum-chancer 
Rydal (Oscar Isaac). It’s no time at all before Chester’s shady business 
dealings return to haunt him, leading the three of them into a labyrinthine 
swirl of sex, double-cross and murder. It’s beautifully shot, but an efficient, 
rather than outstanding, thriller.Paul Howlett

Beasts of the Southern Wild (Benh Zeitlin, 2012), 1.35am, Channel 4

Zeitlin’s affecting fable is a masterful piece of magical realism, inspired by 
hurricane Katrina, which devastated Louisiana in 2005. It’s set deep in the 
bayou, where a small community lives in houses on poles, among them the ailing 
Wink (Dwight Henry) and his six-year-old daughter Hushpuppy (Quvenzhané 
Wallis), through whose eyes this extraordinary tale of dreams and reality 
unfolds.PH

Live sport


Greyhound Racing: Coronation Cup, 7pm, Sky Sports 2 Coverage of the race from 
Romford greyhound stadium.

League Cup football: Southampton v Liverpool, 7.30pm, Sky Sports 1 Semi-final 
first-leg contest from St Mary’s stadium (kick-off 7.45pm).

Tennis: Sydney International, 1am, Eurosport 1 Day five of the men’s event, 
featuring the quarter-finals.
 