
West Ham United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/westhamunited> and 
Chelsea supporters face body searches, alcohol restrictions and post-match 
segregation as part of a “robust policing plan” aimed at minimising crowd 
trouble at the EFL Cup tie on Wednesday.

There has been trepidation surrounding the fixture ever since the draw for the 
fourth round was made last month given the rivalry that exists between the 
clubs and the fact it takes place at the London Stadium, which has been dogged 
by disturbances and incidents of violence following West Ham’s move there from 
Upton Park before the start of the season.

Premier League: 10 talking points from the weekend's action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/24/premier-league-10-talking-points-from-the-weekends-action>
There have been nine arrests outside the Stratford venue, while 23 banning 
orders have been issued by West Ham, ranging from drinking in view of the pitch 
to breaking the line of segregation. There were clear instances of disturbances 
in the stands during the Premier League fixtureagainst Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/13/west-ham-olympic-stadium-radio-system-met-police>
.

Recent matches have brought an increased line of segregation and more stewards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/12/west-ham-united-fans-want-action-london-stadium-segregation-problems-police-presence>
, as well as improved levels of training, but there are fears there could be 
further trouble inside the stadium and across surrounding areas on Wednesday 
for what has officially been deemed a high-risk fixture.

“The Metropolitan Police Service have been working closely with all London 
Stadium stakeholders ahead of theChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> game, and there is a robust 
policing plan in place to deal with crime and disorder,” said a spokesperson 
for London Stadium partners West Ham, E20 Stadium LLP and London Stadium 185.

West Ham’s stadium move and ‘rebrand’ a success, insists Karren Brady
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/05/west-ham-karren-brady-stadium-move>
“The depth of the line of segregation between home and visiting fans at London 
Stadium was made significantly wider after the game against Watford with 
additional stewards deployed in that area. We have had no issues with the new 
segregation and we have had positive feedback from supporters in that area and 
consider this issue to now be resolved.”

Chelsea have been allocated just under 5,200 tickets for Wednesday’s tie. 
Ticket sales for home fans have been limited to those with a recorded purchase 
history, while no alcohol will be sold pre-match from mobile bars outside the 
stadium. Those inside will be open as normal, albeit serving drinks in plastic 
cups, while there will be no post-match sales.
 