
Spoiler alert: this blog is published after Westworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> airs on HBO in the US on 
Sunday night. Do not read unless you have watched episode two, which airs in 
the UK on Sky Atlantic on Tuesday at 9pm.

The way she does just what she’s told

So Dolores has stopped sleeping. If, that is, robots sleep. Or indeed if the 
hosts of Westworld are actually robots and not sentient beings, only made of 
silicon. The host who introduced us toWestworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld>, whose daily ritual 
defined the format of the opening episode, has had her regimen shaken by a 
voice in her head. A voice that takes her to the bounds of her father’s ranch 
late at night, to a plot where a rifle is buried.

To whom the voice belongs and to what end the rifle will be put are questions 
the viewer is left asking. But what is clear is that Dolores can remember the 
past – something a host should not be able to do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cb1749cf861fd24b6eb7d0bbdef29c7e6f1417b%2F0_329_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20do%20androids%20dream%20of%20electric%20slaughter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20do%20androids%20dream%20of%20electric%20slaughter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cb1749cf861fd24b6eb7d0bbdef29c7e6f1417b%2F0_329_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Newcomer William, a man who unlike most of Westworld’s paying customers 
possesses some shred of morality. Photograph: HBO 
We’re not the only ones fascinated by Dolores. Chief designer Bernard is also 
hanging out with her, having secret robo-therapy sessions. He demands the 
sessions be wiped from her memory lest the subjects of discussion (as yet 
unidentified) be discovered by others. Also an admirer is Newcomer William, a 
man unlike most of the paying customers in that he possesses some shred of 
morality. He has fallen for Dolores. You can tell from the way he picked up her 
tinned peaches.

Dolores is a prism through which we can view Westworld’s developing themes; 
individual agency, the power of memory, the role of women in a chauvinist world 
and, of course, what makes a human. Events this week suggest she will also be a 
first order protagonist. Not only is she in possession of a weapon, but she can 
access the same foreboding biblical rhetoric as her (now decommissioned) 
father. When she is disturbed from a memory of a previous slaughter in the town 
by whorehouse madam Maeve, Dolores’s response is to stare steelily into eyes 
and repeat: “these violent delights have violent ends.”

A girl who has just changed her ways
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb182171fc15a287de427dc06809f78a56c8d06e4%2F84_0_2499_1500%2F2499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20do%20androids%20dream%20of%20electric%20slaughter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20do%20androids%20dream%20of%20electric%20slaughter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb182171fc15a287de427dc06809f78a56c8d06e4%2F84_0_2499_1500%2F2499.jpg>
 Maeve is deemed by Westworld HQ to be under-performing in her role. She must 
be brought in for a personality tweak. Photograph: HBO 
Maeve has her own journey of discovery this week, one apparently forgotten by 
episode’s end. She is adjudged by those in Westworld HQ to be under-performing 
in her key role; persuading guests to have sex with androids. She must be 
brought in for a personality tweak. The subsequent work makes her more 
assertive but also notes that she has MRSA (on which, more below). She goes 
back to the saloon, reprogrammed but no more seductive. This may be because the 
real reason for Maeve’s below-par performance is that she is dreaming, or more 
accurately having nightmares, of another existence on the prairies where she 
and her daughter were almost killed by a Native American tribe.

[An aside: just writing Native American makes the oddness of Westworld’s 
dramatic situation stand out. To what extent do race and gender politics play 
out in this future world, and therefore in this contemporary drama? Maeve is an 
English-accented woman of colour in an imagined 19th century. That she is too 
“assertive” for white customers is a concept familiar in 2016. But no mention 
is made of her race in “the park”. Set at an indeterminate point in the future, 
there are clearly imbalances between gender; female hosts being abused by ugly 
men is part of the reason for the park’s existence. But in the drama, that 
divide is subsumed into the science fictional one of human v host.]

Maeve wakes from her bad dream to find herself under the knife. The MRSA is 
being chopped out of her all-too-fleshy organs. The surgeons are afraid of a 
revivified Maeve and back away. She in turn pulls a scalpel of her own. She 
escapes the operating theatre and makes it to what can only be described as an 
abattoir for hosts. She falls to her knees. The surgeons find her and 
deactivate her again. In the charnel dome is a decommissioned Teddy watching 
everything with blank eyes.

It’s down to me, yes it is

Maeve is reprogrammed once again and, this time, she has the charm the punters 
want. The person responsible for this success is Elsie, who works in the lab. 
She cares about the hosts and their ability to function successfully. She also 
believes that hosts can’t dream, that the nightmares they experience are 
actually pre-programmed horrors, a safety mechanism should a host’s memory ever 
fail to be properly scrubbed clean after a nasty encounter with a guest.

Elsie is the diametric opposite of the foul-mouthed Lee Sizemore and his 
narrative team. It was Narrative who upped Maeve’s assertiveness, trying to 
force the issue. They also devised the new storyline, one whose aim is largely 
to provoke fear. Odyssey on Red River contains Native American warriors and 
famous civil war generals. It is overruled by old man Ford. He says it doesn’t 
allow the guests to explore themselves. And an expensive outlay for a 
foundering company is cancelled.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10f4b5a0ace5b7e335e7de9407a470b380a48daa%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20do%20androids%20dream%20of%20electric%20slaughter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20do%20androids%20dream%20of%20electric%20slaughter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10f4b5a0ace5b7e335e7de9407a470b380a48daa%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Dr Ford decides what the theme park’s next storyline will tackle: religion. 
Photograph: HBO 
Ford (named after Henry? Or John? Or both?) may have more reason for 
suggesting Westworld is about exploring one’s self than his company knows. For 
out in the desert, it appears he has created an android version of his younger 
self. An idle boy on holiday in the park, but miles away from anywhere and 
anyone, and a child who received the very same advice from his father as Ford 
did, the pair take a walk through the desert and Ford shows the boy what the 
actual next storyline will involve: religion.

Notes from the prairie

I am having difficulty understanding the biology of our hosts. I’m assuming 
that the milky stuff we see them being spun out of is some sort of conductive 
material. But if they are robots as we understand them they’d need batteries 
and microprocessors, but we don’t see any of those. What we do see are lots of 
blood and guts. Which raises two questions: a) how do they squeeze them in 
there and b) why bother with the real thing (that can catch MRSA) when the sole 
need for them is so newcomers can feel like they’ve killed something? A bit 
weird.

Also, if they melt down every host each time they’re “killed” (a la Teddy) is 
that not a bit expensive? And if they do, why had Papa Albernathy already 
played several characters?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05db57a1e0e119d0def813630bbf024da02509e7%2F0_23_2250_1350%2F2250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20do%20androids%20dream%20of%20electric%20slaughter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20two%20%E2%80%93%20do%20androids%20dream%20of%20electric%20slaughter%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-two-do-androids-dream-of-electric-slaughter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05db57a1e0e119d0def813630bbf024da02509e7%2F0_23_2250_1350%2F2250.jpg>
 The Gunslinger goes one level deeper in his hunt for the ultimate secret. 
Photograph: HBO 
After last week’s discussion over the Gunslinger and his humanity or 
otherwise, Jonathan Nolan confirmed that he was human. This week he goes one 
level deeper in his hunt for the ultimate secret and visits a village populated 
by Mexicans. He kills them all, of course, but gets the info he needs about 
where to find the maze (as mapped on Kissy’s scalp) from the mouth of a young 
girl: “The maze isn’t meant for you. Follow the blood of oryo (sp?) to the 
place where the snake lays its eggs.” Which if I’m right in thinking, means 
Nando’s in Milton Keynes.

Finally, Bernard and Theresa are having an affair. As well as talking to each 
other in secluded corridors like they simply hate each other. Whatever turns 
you on I guess.

Questions for next week

Will Maeve wild out? Will Dolores kickstart the revolution? Will William 
succumb to base desire?
 