
Spoiler alert: this blog is published after Westworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> airs on HBO in the US on 
Sunday night. Do not read unless you have watched episode five, which airs in 
the UK on Sky Atlantic on Tuesday at 9pm.

Watch your backs. Lock up your Nitroglycerin. Keep your condensed milk in a 
safe place. Here comes Dolores the lawless!

Westworld’s favourite host, the wholesome rancher’s daughter with big dreams 
(admittedly dreams that usually involve fire and corpses) has gone rogue. She’s 
broken out of her loop, hooked up with some guests, formed a gang of bandits, 
performed a robbery and shot up some fat soldiers without even blinking. Though 
that last one may be because her eyes are programmed that way.

Dolores, along with William, Logan and their captive host Slim have embarked 
on a new plotline inWestworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld>. Dolores can’t tell it’s a 
plotline, so all she sees is a bunch of amoral depravity. But she’s on the lam, 
so what the heck. Under the instruction of mysterious underworld figure El 
Lazo, the gang hold up a wagon laden with explosives. This, they are reliably 
informed, is the best way to get a reputation as a bunch of badasses, impress 
some dangerous Confederate mercenaries and finally enjoy the innocent bliss of 
going to “war”.

 The gang pull a fetching set of kerchiefs over their faces and hold up the 
wagon, manned by a bunch of Yankee soldiers. Logan, being the little dirtbag we 
all know and loathe, is bang up for some murder with his robbery. But the 
Yankees turn out not to be the docile opponents Logan is used to and start 
beating some shades of schmuck out of him. With such a twist, it falls to 
William to save the day. Will professes not to be into the whole shoot-and-shag 
side of Westworld, but he does seem cut out for it and shoots three soldiers 
dead, one of whom was in the process of strangling Logan to (we presume) not 
quite death.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-five-hold-on-to-your-hats-its-dolores-the-lawless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44b30f11f4d13069eb27a9ab569dd468bd6f7246%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20hold%20on%20to%20your%20hats!%20It's%20Dolores%20the%20lawless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-five-hold-on-to-your-hats-its-dolores-the-lawless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20hold%20on%20to%20your%20hats%21%20It%27s%20Dolores%20the%20lawless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-five-hold-on-to-your-hats-its-dolores-the-lawless%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44b30f11f4d13069eb27a9ab569dd468bd6f7246%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Dolores and William are troubled by the shoot-and-shag side of Westworld. 
Photograph: HBO 
 Dolores is troubled by all of this. Like William, she finds casual acts of 
violence a little dispiriting, particularly when the end game is to get 
involved in something even more violent. But after returning the wagon, Dolores 
discovers that El Lazo has gone and double-crossed the gang. He’s stolen the 
nitro and plans to use it to blow up the Confederates who are in fact racists 
and deserve it (wonder if they’ll be voting next Tuesday?). Dolores runs to 
tell William and plot their escape, but before they can vamoose, the 
Confederates rumble the plot and surround our young couple. What will happen? 
I’ll tell you what will happen: Dolores shoots the lot of them dead. William 
pretends to be shocked that a host could do such a thing, but really we know 
he’s just jealous.

 Those of us who have been paying keen attention to this series noted 
something funny about El Lazo. In many ways, he looked oddly similar to the guy 
who’d just been killed by the Gunslinger in this very same episode. Yes El Lazo 
is Lawrence and, if my understanding is correct, our heroes have embarked on 
the “maze” storyline that so fascinates the Gunslinger.

 As for the Gunslinger, last week he and Lawrence were the best of pals. This 
week the host is just a mobile blood bag. The Gunslinger slices Lawrence’s 
throat and uses haemoglobin, or whatever type of science madness it actually 
is, to reflate a near-dead Teddy. The only host to have ever survived an 
assault by Wyatt, Teddy is now more useful to the Gunslinger than Lawrence and 
in the bad lands of Westworld, there’s no time for sentiment.

 The one exception to the no-sentiment rule is Ford, who likes nothing more 
than telling a rambling story about when he was a kid and there was a hungry 
dog. Ford springs a surprise on the Gunslinger this week by materialising in a 
cantina and quizzing him on his mission. We don’t learn much, beyond the fact 
that the Gunslinger believes Arnold is behind the maze and that Wyatt has been 
developed to stop him getting to the heart of it. He also hints that he may 
have chucked some money at the park to stop it from going under after Arnold’s 
death. On Ford’s part we see he has programmed hosts to prevent him from coming 
to any harm, using Teddy to stop the Gunslinger from giving him a pasting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-five-hold-on-to-your-hats-its-dolores-the-lawless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30fce5962e8a7281accf81d56c0a28aaaad18aa6%2F0_179_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20hold%20on%20to%20your%20hats!%20It's%20Dolores%20the%20lawless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-five-hold-on-to-your-hats-its-dolores-the-lawless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20hold%20on%20to%20your%20hats%21%20It%27s%20Dolores%20the%20lawless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-five-hold-on-to-your-hats-its-dolores-the-lawless%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30fce5962e8a7281accf81d56c0a28aaaad18aa6%2F0_179_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Ford springs a surprise on the Gunslinger by materialising in a cantina and 
quizzing him. Photograph: HBO 
 There has been a lot of talk about whether the Gunslinger is William a few 
decades into the future. The fact of Dolores’s memories of the Gunslinger and 
her losing Teddy to Wyatt before meeting William makes me wonder how that can 
be true. But as we see quite frequently – Dolores spotting herself in this 
week’s day of the dead procession, for example – maybe memories are not to be 
trusted.

If William is a young Gunslinger then as EVP of the Logan family corporation 
he might have a bit of money to keep the park afloat in future. At the same 
time though, you wonder why it’s taken him 30 years to get to the end of the 
maze, especially when it’s printed on all of Lawrence’s crates.


 Back in corporate HQ, we get a little more sense of what the men in white 
coats really get up to. Turns out it’s reprogramming birds.

A dude called Felix is one of the lab technicians charged with fixing up hosts 
after they get all stabbed, shot and smashed up by the guests. His colleague 
thinks they are nothing more than “butchers”, but Felix believes there is 
beauty in all of Ford’s living creatures and takes it on himself to restore a 
broken bird to life.


 He does so by fiddling with the avian code. The first time he tries it 
doesn’t go so well and the feathered friend makes a noise like a 3am techno set 
at the Berghain. But Felix is not to be dissuaded and gives it another go. This 
time he’s successful, which gets a round of applause from host Maeve, who was 
supposed to be lying inert on an operating table. “Hallo Felix,” she says, with 
the reanimated bird on her finger, “it’s time you and I had a chat.”

 While we’ve been used to seeing Maeve have funny turns, we’ve not yet seen 
her turn so funny as to be inhabited by an entirely different persona. But that 
appears to be the case here, and my money would be on her being inhabited by 
the spirit of Arnold. So what is Arnold up to? In other HQ-related 
could-be-Arnold news, Eloise discovers that her rogue woodcutter has a 
“laser-based satellite uplink” stashed up his arm. Dolores dreams she’s got one 
in her too. She’s also receiving direct instructions from Arnold and lying to 
Ford about him during naked interviews. “He doesn’t know, I didn’t tell him 
anything”, she says out loud after their encounter. Ford, meanwhile, believes 
that Dolores is the last remaining connection to Arnold, and that he may even 
be uploaded up in her bonce. “Your mind is a walled garden, not even death can 
touch the flowers blooming in there”, he says like he’s just entered his blank 
verse into the sixth-form poetry competition. Mysterious and mysteriouser.

 Notes from the prairie
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-five-hold-on-to-your-hats-its-dolores-the-lawless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ebab116265f1504eab3b85ea5a6f73c8b0736d8%2F0_102_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20hold%20on%20to%20your%20hats!%20It's%20Dolores%20the%20lawless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-five-hold-on-to-your-hats-its-dolores-the-lawless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20five%20%E2%80%93%20hold%20on%20to%20your%20hats%21%20It%27s%20Dolores%20the%20lawless&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-five-hold-on-to-your-hats-its-dolores-the-lawless%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ebab116265f1504eab3b85ea5a6f73c8b0736d8%2F0_102_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Logan, the little dirtbag we all know and loathe. Photograph: HBO 
 William and Logan finally fall out this week with William leaving his cynical 
brother-in-law to the mercy of the Confederados. But before the pair split, 
they share the following exchange, which made me laugh, though not for the 
right reasons.

“You feel bad because you killed,” Logan screams. “But there’s no such thing 
as heroes or villains, it’s just one big circle jerk!”

 “I think that philosophy says more about you than it does about the world”, 
replies William coolly. Though I think philosophy might be stretching it a bit.

 Logan’s confederate beating, and his Yankee strangling, make me wonder once 
again what limits there are on violence in Westworld. I can imagine that, had 
William not interceded, the host would have stopped throttling Logan before he 
blacked out. But what if a confederate smash across the chops accidentally 
caused an embolism? Or a heart attack? Surely no amount of insurance could 
cover that?

 With the new city added to the map this week I’m starting to believe that 
Westworld is less of a park and more of an actual nation state. This town, full 
of gold-painted prostitutes and gratuitous orgy scenes, is not even on the 
fringes of the park – you’ve got to go to war to find that. Covering the lot 
would definitely be an ask for a weekend away.

 Questions for next week

 What does Arnold look like? Is Arnold all of us? Are we all Arnold?

Could Dolores turn out to be a bad guy like whatserface in Ex Machina?


What ever happened to sweary narrative guy? I miss that guy!


Is an EVP a good position to have in a company or a makey-uppy one?

 