
Spoiler alert: this blog is published after Westworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> airs on HBO in the US on 
Sunday night. Do not read unless you have watched episode 10, which airs in the 
UK on Sky Atlantic on Tuesday at 9pm.

Thank you for the loops. For the rolling cans of milk. For the muttonchops and 
breeches, the coffins packed with nitroglycerine and the fields littered with 
corpses. Thank you for the 3D tablets, the cottages in the woods, the 
high-speed elevators and the drill-bits up the nose. Thank you for the 
narratives and the reveries, the updates and the flashbacks. Thank you, 
finally, forWestworld <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld>. It 
was a great little park, but now it’s undergoing some repairs.

The series that has had them all talking ends with everyone doing a runner. 
The Delos board and assorted VIPs had gathered in the park’s original homestead 
expecting to hear about Ford’s final narrative. Instead, they are fleeing a 
homicidal Dolores. A Dolores who has finally attained consciousness, a Dolores 
who’s realised that she’s Wyatt. She is the embodiment of “those who are to 
come” – not hosts and not guests, but sentient robots ready to assume their 
dominion. And if that requires murdering every human within eyeshot, then so be 
it.

Around Dolores are assembled the central characters in the drama. The Man in 
Black is watching as a robot army advances from the brush. They are the 
reanimated hosts and the park’s Natives. Combined, they form a true Ghost 
Nation. The Man in Black watches them creep forward with a smile. At last, he 
has an opponent who can hit back. Teddy is watching the violence aghast. He 
thought he’d saved the woman he loved, but it turned out he was just a plot 
device. Bernard is there too, conscious of what is happening (perhaps even 
fully conscious) but unable to affect what is going on. Finally, lying on the 
floor with a hole in his head, is the man responsible for it all: Ford.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwestworld-finale-recap-robot-army-assemble%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9107bedf3f7817260d3869b0e1c870bc3c74e031%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20robot%20army%2C%20assemble!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwestworld-finale-recap-robot-army-assemble%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20robot%20army%2C%20assemble%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwestworld-finale-recap-robot-army-assemble%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9107bedf3f7817260d3869b0e1c870bc3c74e031%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Teddy watches the violence aghast. Photograph: HBO 
Ford is not dead. Like all of us will some day (if you listen to certain 
technological adventurists), he lives on in the cloud. Dolores may have been 
Arnold’s invention, programmed to kill her fellow hosts to stop what he thought 
would be the barbarity of the park. But once she had killed Arnold at his own 
instruction, Dolores came under the influence of Ford. Ford adapted this Alice 
to his own Wonderland and used her to act out his nefarious plans. It was Ford 
who planted the pistols to trigger Dolores’ insurrection, it was his voice in 
her head. Finally it was he who programmed Dolores to kill him like she had 
Arnold. And live on like Arnold too. As Beethoven found eternity through his 
music, so Ford will find it in a robot whose consciousness is tempered by his 
own.

****
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwestworld-finale-recap-robot-army-assemble%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8be1f038a2ea3c5b8930e9e249d0454fd0d54d6%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20robot%20army%2C%20assemble!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwestworld-finale-recap-robot-army-assemble%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20robot%20army%2C%20assemble%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwestworld-finale-recap-robot-army-assemble%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8be1f038a2ea3c5b8930e9e249d0454fd0d54d6%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Visiting the Ghost Nation … Dolores and the Man in Black. Photograph: HBO 
That’s my reading of the final scenes, at least. What it means for the park I 
don’t know. What will the fully conscious robots with an urge for killing 
humans do next? Will they enter the real world and claim that as their own? Or 
will they be content with turning Westworld into their own Bot-topia?

Either way it seems likely the robot uprising will face opposition. Not just 
from poor benighted Teddy, or a Bernard still loyal to the man he was built to 
resemble, but from Maeve, the hooker with a heart. Her own rebellion against 
the humans came to an end in the Delos train station. Prompted by memories of a 
daughter she knows was not her own, she chooses to stay in the park rather than 
leave. She may be foul-mouthed and hard-nosed but Maeve is motivated by love, 
not hate. As such she stands against Ford’s scheme. But at the same time her 
rebellion turns out to have been pre-programmed – perhaps even by Ford. Curious 
and curiouser.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwestworld-finale-recap-robot-army-assemble%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa05ba5463ed2d9f9969f12c8ac0f1e1a00f1b684%2F0_104_5401_3242%2F5401.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20robot%20army%2C%20assemble!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwestworld-finale-recap-robot-army-assemble%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20finale%20recap%20%E2%80%93%20robot%20army%2C%20assemble%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fwestworld-finale-recap-robot-army-assemble%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa05ba5463ed2d9f9969f12c8ac0f1e1a00f1b684%2F0_104_5401_3242%2F5401.jpg>
 Hooker with a heart … Maeve’s own rebellion against the humans must come to an 
end. Photograph: HBO 
***** 

Ahead of the Wild West red wedding, other twists were revealed, including the 
most open secret since Jim and Pam got it together in the US Office. Yes, 
William became the Man in Black. The story goes that, driven by his passion for 
a Dolores who goes missing, the young William got a taste for killing. When he 
eventually finds Dolores, at the start of her loop, William realises he didn’t 
love her that much after all. Certainly not as much as he does killing. 
Westworld is a game, just like real life, he decides. He invests in the park, 
saving it from collapse, and goes on to unravel its puzzles in the hope they 
might give his life some meaning. Thirty-plus years later and he’s still 
looking. Which, if nothing else, suggests introspection is a long-winded 
process.

We will see William again in the second season. As for his brother-in-law 
Logan, we cannot be sure. The world’s biggest arse is sent to the edge of the 
park on a horse, buck-naked. William doesn’t care what happens to him, but 
surely someone from guest welfare would eventually pick Logan up and wrap a 
towel around his nether regions. These humans do feel shame you know.

*****

A quick roundup of the other survivors finds Charlotte Hale having got her 
wish – Ford is no longer director of the park. On the other hand she could be 
gunned down any minute by Dolores. Lee Sizemore is standing in an empty cold 
store wondering what happened to a platoon of decommissioned hosts. It seems 
unlikely he’ll get his promotion. Sylvester is not dead, which is in itself a 
miracle, while Felix has been anointed by Maeve as “a terrible human being” 
which is a compliment. Hector Escaton is shooting security guards with his 
future gun. Ashley is still lost on the reservation and is perhaps a rebel 
himself by now.

And that, I think, is that. Westworld has been a big hit for HBO; it has 
dominated the conversation the past couple of months in the way few dramas do. 
With its combination of puzzles, red herrings, and hints at some kind of 
intellectual underpinning it’s shown itself to be perfectly suited for TV in 
2016. That it’s also painted a rather bleak and cynical picture of humans and 
their ways of behaviour is something for another day. I’d like to thank you for 
joining me on this path and it’s a path that leads back to you. There’ve been 
lots of comments under this blog and lots of enthusiastic engagement. Thank you 
for that. I’ll see you around in the Mariposa some time.
 