
Spoiler alert: this blog is published after Westworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> airs on HBO in the US on 
Sunday night. Do not read unless you have watched episode seven, which airs in 
the UK on Sky Atlantic on Tuesday at 9pm.


Bernard you naughty little bot! Yes, everybody’s favourite bespectacled 
technologist has been revealed to be a host, and Ford’s ultimate inside man. 
Bernard’s cover was so deephe didn’t even know he was a host. Not that he had 
time to dwell upon the revelation: as soon as Ford told him who his real dad 
was, Bernard was ordered to murder his lover. And being a dutiful bot deep 
down, he did exactly that.

This was the twist many had been expecting and to say it was unfortunate would 
not be an understatement. Not just because Theresa is dead. Not just because 
she was the second female character of the week to be bludgeoned by a bloke. 
But because (barring a refurb in the lab) we are saying goodbye to Sidse Babett 
Knudsen, the best actor in this drama. Her character may have mainly been 
limited to barking corporate speak, but Knudsen managed to inject a bit of 
humanity into every line. For a case in point, look at the moment when – during 
an obtuse argument about the data leak – an apparently human Bernard asks 
Theresa if she is ok. He utters the line and she looks back at him. For a 
moment, the corporate badass dissolves and a woman appears just grateful for a 
genuine human interaction, her eyes glistening. It lasts just a couple of 
seconds, but it’s more moving than the entire confession of love between 
William and Dolores. She will be missed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-seven-its-ford-vs-the-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff976aea8ae8289c3c716c1a913367bcefe779ee9%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20Ford%20vs%20the%20board!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-seven-its-ford-vs-the-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20Ford%20vs%20the%20board%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-seven-its-ford-vs-the-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff976aea8ae8289c3c716c1a913367bcefe779ee9%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Who will stand against Ford? Photograph: HBO 
With the act of killing Theresa, Ford has declared war with the Delos board. 
Through their representative Charlotte Hale, the board were seeking to bring 
Ford to heel, to curtail his expansive new storyline and discover why his hosts 
were suddenly bearing grudges. To achieve this aim, they even sacked Bernard as 
a means of showing Ford his time was up. Now, Ford has had the most senior 
executive in the park killed. Ms Hale might be next, but either way a coup has 
been staged inWestworld <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> 
and it’s been led not by a robot but a human being.

Who will stand against Ford? His most likely adversary would now appear to be 
Maeve. Yes, Ford insists that all the hosts are his creatures. Yes he does like 
to show that he can make them perform the mannequin challenge with a click of 
his fingers. But the new “woke” Maeve may be more difficult to control than 
your average host. This is a host with an “apperception” of 55. A host who 
already has some humans under her control, in the form of cartoon cat duo Felix 
and Sylvester. Her next step is to bust her way out of the park and into the 
real world, where she might cause some real damage. In a nice touch, she 
expresses this desire to her dorkish retinue while looking all Napoleon-ish in 
a half-worn lab coat she has picked up to cover her otherwise naked body. Hosts 
don’t feel shame or cold, Ford once observed. Well, it seems this one does.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-seven-its-ford-vs-the-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bd97bb8ea10fd73257247ec02965593b505e464%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20Ford%20vs%20the%20board!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-seven-its-ford-vs-the-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20Ford%20vs%20the%20board%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-seven-its-ford-vs-the-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bd97bb8ea10fd73257247ec02965593b505e464%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Napoleon-ish … hosts don’t feel shame or cold, Ford once observed. Well, it 
seems this one does. Photograph: HBO 
Out where the mountains meet the sea, we have two more likely rebels: William 
and Dolores. Having made love on a train and survived an ambush by machine 
gun-wieldingconfederados, the couple have said no to war, ditched Lawrence and 
decided to head into a canyon from where no guest has ever returned. Could this 
path lead to the outside world? (Don’t forget that Teddy and the Man in Black 
are also heading somewhere unknown).

Finally in our list of grudge-bearing hosts, there’s Clementine. Maeve’s 
partner in moral crime is summoned from the Miraposa to take part in a sadistic 
show-and-tell for the benefit of Bernard and Ford. Under Theresa’s instruction, 
she is violently beaten by another host (though one designed to look human). 
She is then reset before the same activity is undertaken again, only with very 
different results: this time Clementine bashes her assailant’s head in. Sadly 
for Clem a life of cage-fighting does not await. Instead she is sent to the lab 
where Sylvester starts drilling into her brain. The aim is to reset her 
entirely, to make her the malleable host that Delos demands. But perhaps, given 
that Sylvester has now been co-opted under Maeve’s command, this may not come 
to pass.

Notes from the prairie

A quick word about violence. As mentioned above we see two female characters 
left in a bloody mess this week. One beating we see in unflinching detail. A 
lot of you have noted as the series has progressed that rough shagging and 
violence against women is something of an HBO house style. I wanted to add my 
voice to those who consider this to be unsettling and unnecessary. I believe 
the Clementine scene was gratuitous. It told the viewer nothing we didn’t 
already know (Elsie had made the point about grudges with reference to Walter 
in episode three). Neither did it serve any purpose with regards to the 
characters. Yes the big emotional punch came with Clementine getting “revenge” 
on her assailant. But, let’s face it, we were still being asked to cheer a 
woman indulging in brutal violence, an act which in itself is depressing. 
Ultimately, however, this revenge also served to justify in dramatic terms a 
scene in which the camera lingers on a powerful man beating a woman. I’m not 
sure that’s justification enough.

In lighter news, we have finally seen the outside world! In photos Bernard 
shows Hector (who is later chained to Ms Hale’s bed to show it’s not just men 
who like rough sex) we see lab technicians, bullet trains and a neon cityscape 
that could be any megalopolis IRL 2016. Will we see this city again soon?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-seven-its-ford-vs-the-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46f895e6c13de488c4ac63f7efece76ba9eeeb15%2F0_0_5368_3840%2F5368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20it's%20Ford%20vs%20the%20board!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-seven-its-ford-vs-the-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Westworld%20recap%3A%20episode%20seven%20%E2%80%93%20it%27s%20Ford%20vs%20the%20board%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fwestworld-recap-episode-seven-its-ford-vs-the-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46f895e6c13de488c4ac63f7efece76ba9eeeb15%2F0_0_5368_3840%2F5368.jpg>
 More likely rebels … William and Dolores. Photograph: HBO 
As much as I think the William is MiB storyline shouldn’t work (chronological 
inconsistencies, you see) I’m beginning to wonder if it might not happen all 
the same. As we watch William declare his love for Dolores, we also see him 
ditch the woman he previously claimed to love. As much as his decision could be 
explained away by William being “truly alive”, it’s also a bit weaselly. Then 
he confesses he quite liked hurting Logan. What’s next: a change in wardrobe 
and a complete hole where a conscience should be?

Questions

How does Ford go about covering up Theresa’s death?

What do the board do next?

Sylvester says Maeve’s skin couldn’t leave Westworld. Do you think he means it 
literally?

There’s another Alice in Wonderland reference from Bernard this week. The 
first came when he was interrogating Dolores, now it’s in his memory of sitting 
with his dying son Charlie. Any Lewis Carroll fans able to suggest whether this 
book relates to Westworld in a grander sense?
 