
In her much-anthologised story The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas, the great 
novelist Ursula le Guin describes what seems at first to be an almost idyllic 
land.

The people of Omelas live by the sea, where they enjoy “a boundless and 
generous contentment” in a wealthy and prosperous society. There’s just one 
catch. Underneath a public building in Omelas sits a whimpering child, 
permanently imprisoned in a tiny room and deprived of all comfort and pleasure.

Self-immolation: desperate protests against Australia's detention regime
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seekers-set-themselves-alight-nauru>
Everyone in Omelas knows that the child’s there. But they also know that 
“their happiness, the beauty of their city, the tenderness of their 
friendships, the health of their children, the wisdom of their scholars, the 
skill of their makers, even the abundance of their harvest and the kindly 
weathers of their skies, depend wholly on this child’s abominable misery.”

Le Guin explains that, when young people in Omelas learn of the child, they’re 
invariably sickened by what’s been done to it.

But the elders of the city explain the necessity.

If the child were brought up into the sunlight out of that vile place, if it 
were cleaned and fed and comforted, that would be a good thing, indeed; but if 
it were done, in that day and hour all the prosperity and beauty and delight of 
Omelas would wither and be destroyed. Those are the terms. To exchange all the 
goodness and grace of every life in Omelas for that single, small improvement: 
to throw away the happiness of thousands for the chance of the happiness of 
one: that would be to let guilt within the walls indeed. The terms are strict 
and absolute; there may not even be a kind word spoken to the child.

And, by and large, the citizens of Omelas come to perceive “the terrible 
justice of reality, and to accept it.”

In Australia, we don’t have a room in which the innocent suffer. Rather, we 
have camps. One of them is in Nauru.

Does that sound at all familiar?

In Australia, we don’t have a room in which the innocent suffer. Rather, we 
have camps. One of them is in Nauru – and it’s there thatOmid Masoumali burned 
himself to death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/asylum-seekers-set-themselves-alight-nauru>
.

Omid had broken no law. It’s perfectly legal to claim asylum. Besides, he’d 
already been assessed as a legitimate refugee – that is, the relevant officials 
had agreed that this young man faced a well-founded fear of persecution or 
death in his native Iran.

But the Australian government insists that no boat-borne asylum seekers will 
settle in Australia. As a result, Masoumali remained in limbo. If he returned 
to Iran, he faced risk of being killed – and no other country would take him.

Masoumali had been in detention for three years. According to  
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-05-02/omid-masoumali-without-proper-medical-care-for-hours,-says-wife/7374884>
his wife, after his suicide attempt he received no morphine for 10 hours – and 
it took 24 hours for him to be airlifted to Brisbane, where he died.

Why did he deserve such punishment? What fault had he committed, other than to 
flee a tyrannical regime that brutalised him and then seek assistance from a 
wealthy nation?

No one from the Liberal party or the Labor party can answer those questions. 
In fact they don’t even try.

Instead, politicians and their apologists make the same argument as the rulers 
of Omelas. The borders must be secured, the people smugglers must be deterred – 
and that means no sympathy can be permitted for Masoumali or any of the other 
detainees engaged in self-harm inNauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru>
 or Manus.

“Obviously nobody wants to see these scenes,” said immigration minister Peter 
Dutton, “nobody wants to see people harming themselves. But …”

In that “but”, you can hear the code of Omelas, a land where not even a kind 
word can be spoken to the sacrificial child.

Le Guin intended her story as a cautionary tale. How did we end up with two 
political parties using it as an instruction manual?

Many in the liberal intelligentsia – particularly Labor supporters – blame the 
voters. Australians, we are told, demand the exclusion of refugees. As a 
result, the Labor party must embrace the harshest possible policies or risk 
electoral annihilation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fwhats-the-end-game-for-australias-border-policy-a-world-of-walled-city-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11aec61e15fd947c90e71510fb13314ab69374d7%2F53_0_4168_2791%2F4168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What's%20the%20end%20game%20for%20Australia's%20border%20policy%20%E2%80%93%20a%20world%20of%20walled%20city-states%3F%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fwhats-the-end-game-for-australias-border-policy-a-world-of-walled-city-states%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%27s%20the%20end%20game%20for%20Australia%27s%20border%20policy%20%E2%80%93%20a%20world%20of%20walled%20city-states%3F%20%7C%20Jeff%20Sparrow&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fwhats-the-end-game-for-australias-border-policy-a-world-of-walled-city-states%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11aec61e15fd947c90e71510fb13314ab69374d7%2F53_0_4168_2791%2F4168.jpg>
 Protestors at a vigil in honour of Omid Masoumali in front of the immigration 
building in, Melbourne, Australia, 5 May 2016. Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
Even on face value, the argument doesn’t make sense.

We all know that there are lots of issues on which politicians ignore public 
opinion. Voters consistently hate privatisations, for instance – but that 
doesn’t mean they don’t happen. The war in Afghanistan was unpopular for years 
but both Labor prime ministers Julia Gillard and Kevin Rudd insisted they would 
stay the course.

But let’s leave that aside and look at the figures on asylum seekers.

It’s certainly true that many voters lack any automatic sympathy for refugees. 
In November last year, Essential Report 
<https://www.monash.edu/mapping-population/public-opinion/surveys/inventory-of-surveys/asylum>
 surveyed people as to whether they thought the federal government was too 
tough or too soft on asylum seekers. About a quarter of respondents thought it 
was “too tough”, 31% thought it was “taking the right approach” and 29% thought 
it was “too soft”.

The result was in line with past surveys – except that the proportion opting 
for “too soft” had increased from 18% in July 2014 to 29% in November 2015, 
during a period in which the Abbott government had substantially toughened 
Australia’s border regime.

Yet the same report also included data on a more significant question. When 
investigators asked people to nominate the three most important issues 
determining vote allocations, “treatment of asylum seekers” ranked only 11th, 
selected as one of the three most important issues by 8% of respondents. The 
highest ranked issues were: “management of the economy” (47%), “Australia’s 
health system” (46%), and “jobs and protection of local industries” (39%).

These results, too, have been consistent for a long time.

In other words, voters might not want to help refugees – but nor are they 
obsessed with punishing them.

As Peter Lewis and Jackie Woods write 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-07-09/lewis-woods-talk-tough,-but-don't-expect-a-flood-of-votes/5583056>
:

Despite the heat and headlines generated by boat arrivals and asylum seeker 
policy, our research over many years has shown that Australians don’t identify 
border protection as an issue thatinfluences their vote 
<http://essentialvision.com.au/most-important-election-issues-3>, listing it 
well behind stalwarts like health and the economy. The issue, however, does 
feed into a general perception about government values, strength and competence.

That last sentence is key.

Australians care most about good economic conditions and decent healthcare. 
But these are difficult outcomes for governments to deliver. It’s much simpler 
to crack down on refugees than it is to, say, provide jobs for all those who 
want them or to cut hospital waiting times.

“Border protection was always a symbolic political issue,” argue Lewis and 
Woods elsewhere 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-01-28/lewis-woods-boats-and-votes-don't-go-hand-in-hand/6051624>
, “a proxy for immigration, terrorism and too much traffic in Western Sydney. 
It was about government taking a stand and protecting the nation from the 
outside world.”

The consensus on border security has, in other words, been driven by 
politicians, not because the issue’s difficult but precisely because it’s easy. 
You might not be able to create work in the western suburbs. You can, however, 
rail about people smugglers – and by so doing perhaps appeal to voters 
primarily concerned about the high unemployment for which you have no fix.

How would a desperately poor developing nation manage Australia’s detention 
centre?

It’s this toxic bipartisanship that has brought us to le Guin’s Omelas.

After a decade or more of the major parties marching in lockstep, the most 
ludicrous policy decisions often escape scrutiny, simply because there’s no 
real force capable of holding the government of the day to account over asylum 
seeker policy.

Take, for instance, Kevin Rudd’s decision to open a detention centre on Manus 
Island. The initial announcement of thePapua New Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea> solution contained within 
it all the seeds of the policy’s eventual collapse. How would a desperately 
poor developing nation manage Australia’s detention centre? More importantly, 
why would it want to, other than to reap the benefits of the hastily-arranged 
payola? Where were the refugees ultimately going to be settled?

Note that the PNG high court’s recent decision unanimously found that the 
centre had always been illegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/papua-new-guinea-court-rules-detention-asylum-seekers-manus-unconstitutional>
 – that is, the facility was a violation of the constitution from its very 
inception.

How was this not apparent back in 2013?

The problem’s not just the way that specific absurdities like Manus escape 
scrutiny. It’s also the normalisation of the reactionary fantasy upon which the 
entire policy framework rests. The bipartisan commitment to offshore processing 
assumes that refugees arriving by boat constitute an almost existential threat, 
so much so that they must be deterred at all costs. HenceManus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island>. Hence Nauru.

But if that argument’s true for wealthy Australia, it’s surely equally true 
for other countries. If refugees arriving by boat are so toxic that none can be 
settled on the Australian mainland, why would any other nations put their hands 
up to resettle these people? How, exactly, are the unfortunates currently 
languishing in Nauru ever going to be released?

More generally, by definition, Australian deterrence only works if what’s 
dished out to asylum seekers on our borders is significantly harsher than what 
they encounter elsewhere. How long’s that going to be the case? If the boats 
are genuinely being turned back, why shouldn’t we expect other countries to 
adopt the same approach, ratcheting up the deterrence they enforce? What’s the 
end game – a world of walled city-states, each entirely impervious to 
outsiders? How is this possibly a long-term solution to international 
population flows?

In his endless self-justifications in Quadrant magazine, former prime minister 
Tony Abbott claims “stopping the boats” as the great achievement of his 
administration. But counting that as a success is only possible if you ignore 
the consequences of an Australian policy fostering illiberalism and 
authoritarianism throughout the region. Australia’s obsession with “stopping 
the boats” meant deliberating undermining effortsto hold Sri Lanka to account 
for torture 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/difficult-things-happen-tony-abbott-defends-sri-lanka/story-fn59niix-1226761423014?login=1>
.

It’s been the same everywhere. In Nauru, the detention centre has contributed 
to the diminishingrule of law on the island 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-03-15/nauru-rule-of-law-concerns-remain-unaddressed-says-nz-fm/7249416>
. In PNG,an AFP officer last year argued that the Turnbull government 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-11-24/australian-government-accused-of-ignoring-png-human-rights-abuse/6967754>
 was turning a blind eye to extra judicial killings in order to keep Manus 
Island operational, whilethe Human Rights Law Centre 
<http://hrlc.org.au/australia-should-stop-weakening-un-efforts-to-defend-human-rights-in-cambodia/>
 accused Australia of weakening criticism of Cambodia’s human rights violations 
so as to facilitate the failed attempt to resettle refugees there.

In other words, the efforts to deter boats have led directly to an 
accommodation of the kinds of cruelties that spur people to flee in boats. 
What’s being presented as a solution is, in fact, massively exacerbating the 
problem, as will be apparent in the years to come.

Surely it’s time for a new perspective.

Refugees don't self-harm because of me Peter Dutton, they self-harm because of 
you | Sarah Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/05/refugees-dont-self-harm-because-of-me-peter-dutton-they-self-harm-because-of-you>
We might start by challenging the anti-humanist prejudice that declares people 
to be a problem. So much of the current debate simply assumes that Australia’s 
permanently menaced by a heaving tide of humanity. This is nonsense. It’s often 
forgotten that, until comparatively recently, immigration was something that 
most developed nations welcomed – think, for instance, of the Assisted Passage 
Migration Scheme by which the Chifley government attracted British migrants in 
the years after the second world war.

If we started talking about refugees as assets rather than liabilities, where 
might the discussion go then? Most economists agree that immigrants don’t take 
jobs, that, on the contrary, they stimulate an economy by generating demand. If 
the anti-refugee sentiment is fuelled by anxieties about jobs and the health 
system, what would happen if we discussed immigration in the context of a 
massive works project, one that might provide work for new arrivals even as it 
created the infrastructure to help support them?

In the current climate, that might sound hopelessly idealistic. But it’s much 
less utopian than the fantasy that the status quo depends upon. Displaced 
people are moving all over the planet – and they will continue to move, no 
matter how cruelly they’re treated.

Le Guin’s story concludes by noting that not everyone in Omelas accepts the 
suffering of the tortured child. Some people, she tells us, abandon the whole 
compact on which the city’s based: “They leave Omelas, they walk ahead into the 
darkness, and they do not come back.”

Surely it’s time that we did the same. 
 