
When a parent insists their child has problems, despite evidence to the 
contrary, my heart sinks. The NHS is designed to support and empower, but 
cannot help those who feel there is something wrong when evidence points to 
normal development. We spend a lot of time explaining the normal range to such 
parents. Help is available for those who need it, and that’s how it should be.

Our concern is to meet the child’s needs. A pushy parent may slowly be eroding 
their child’s emotional resilience through such focused scrutiny and criticism. 
Some have extraordinarily high expectations. The mum who wants her daughter 
talking “normally” aged three, because she “sounds like a little girl”. She 
wants therapy for her child on the NHS. However tactfully we say, “She sounds 
like a little girl because sheis a little girl,” the desire for therapy will 
not diminish.

What I’m really thinking: the 60-plus dater
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/12/what-im-really-thinking-60-plus-dater>
It’s sad that our professional opinion is disregarded, and after a while our 
own confidence erodes. Sometimes a parent’s concerns are so out of range that 
it becomes a safeguarding issue. The fact that there is an issue doesn’t always 
mean that our role is to sort it: “lisping” at age four is normal, and 
releasing a tongue tie does not automatically lead to better speech. Some 
diagnoses mean a child may sadly always struggle. The media supports a 
perfectionist and complaining culture, which assumes that if a parent wants 
something, something will be done. Our obligation is to provide the best level 
of care. Sometimes we explain it in the same way you can’t make hair grow 
quicker by pulling it; we just have to wait.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking at mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
 