
One New York morning in 1992, the bankers on Chase Manhattan’s emerging 
markets desk were told by their boss, Jorge Jasson, that a new hire was joining 
the team. “I remember that it was a surprise to most of us that he suddenly 
joined the group,” recalls Marcelo Blanco, then a junior on the desk. “One day 
he showed up and Jorge said: ‘This guy is good,’” says Blanco, “‘off-the-charts 
good.’”

The new kid was Sajid Javid <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sajid-javid>
, soon to be the star man in the bank’s high-stakes bond adventures in Latin 
America, and now at the commanding heights of the British government as 
business secretary, and touted as a future Tory leader.

Yesterday, it fell to Javid to announce the new government’s assault on the 
unions –the most significant crackdown on the rights of organised labour since 
1985 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/15/trade-unions-conservative-offensive-decades-strikes-labour>
. The proposals, including the requirement that 40% of union members back a 
strike, are the kind of pro-market reforms Javid came into politics for. This 
week, he alsosignalled his willingness to face down London’s black-cab drivers 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/business/article4498073.ece>, saying that 
Britain should welcome companies such as Uber.

If this is just a start, Javid could be the man who completes the Thatcherite 
deregulation of the British economy – and no one on the left can accuse him of 
applying market ideology from a textbook. As a tour through the business 
secretary’s two decades in finance shows, everything Javid believes about 
liberalising old-fashioned economies was very much learned on the job.

Biggest crackdown on trade unions for 30 years launched by Conservatives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/15/trade-unions-conservative-offensive-decades-strikes-labour>
Javid has the best backstory of any senior Conservative. His father came to 
Britain with only a pound and worked his way to being a bus driver; as a 
student at Exeter University, young Javid loved Margaret Thatcher but he 
presciently opposed Britain’s membership of the ERM.A profile of Javid when he 
was promoted to culture secretary 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/conservative/10757640/Sajid-Javid-the-man-who-thinks-big.html>
 said that “Javid has, reluctantly, grown used to telling this story – or, at 
least, parts of it,” coached, according to the article’s author, Fraser Nelson, 
“by Osborne’s formidable Treasury team”. Sensibly, he has said much less about 
what he actually did in finance, other than widely reported briefings about his 
fast promotions. The full story is one of glittering achievements – and close 
proximity to major controversies.

The often-quoted line about his early years in finance is that he became the 
youngest vice-president in Chase’s history at age 25 (the Conservative party 
website goes further andclaims he was 24 
<https://www.conservatives.com/OurTeam/Members_of_Parliament/Javid_Sajid>). 
When I read the line toJasson 
<http://www.interenergy.com/interenergy-team/15-team/33-jorge-jasson>, he 
laughs. “No, no, no. I don’t know, I would be surprised. I’m not saying it is 
not true, but it doesn’t ring a bell.”

Blanco – now on the boards of several major Argentinian firms, with parallel 
ambitions to be a finance minister himself – was the desk’s head of sales when 
Javid turned up fresh from London and university in 1991. Blanco soon realised 
that his new colleague was very serious for his age. “Sajid was honestly like a 
priest in a suit,” says Blanco. “Everything that you see in those movies, [such 
as] the Wolf of Wall Street – he was far away from that. He was disciplined as 
they come – very methodical, spotless.”

The bank’s emerging markets group took up half a floor in the 250-metre-high 
One Chase Manhattan Plaza 
<https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/99/One_Chase_Manhattan_Plaza.jpg>
 building in downtown Manhattan. “We all worked on the trading floor with open 
seating and adjoining desks, so everyone knew everyone,” says a US-based 
economist who worked in the desk’s research department and asked not to be 
named. “We would all share take-in for dinner. We worked crazy long hours but 
we were young men and we all thrived on it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsajid-javid-what-thatcherite-union-buster-learned-from-wall-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436981186590%2Fd95e9bdd-d112-4661-9cad-f01f00773437-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20Thatcherite%20union%20buster%20Sajid%20Javid%20learned%20on%20Wall%20Street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsajid-javid-what-thatcherite-union-buster-learned-from-wall-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20Thatcherite%20union%20buster%20Sajid%20Javid%20learned%20on%20Wall%20Street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsajid-javid-what-thatcherite-union-buster-learned-from-wall-street%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436981186590%2Fd95e9bdd-d112-4661-9cad-f01f00773437-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Chase Manhattan’s New York headquarters. Photograph: Spencer Platt/Getty Images
“When we used to work for Jorge Jasson, it was a no-bullshit situation,” says 
Blanco. “You will spend the time – that is the way you made a name for 
yourself. It was a very hardcore group of professionals.”

Jasson told the Guardian earlier this year that the young man he picked up 
from the London office was “very creative, very energetic, and a very likable 
guy”. He says he was impressed by his drive, “without being somebody who would 
come across as aggressively ambitious – which is something that is very common 
in the industry”.

The desk was international. One banker was a Chinese immigrant whose parents 
owned a liquor store on Times Square. Many were Argentine and Mexican. In 
London, Javid felt his ethnicity and comprehensive school education held him 
back – noting that his only job offers came from foreign banks, not British 
ones such as Rothschild, whose first interview question was which school he 
went to. At Chase, his difference was appreciated. When he asked the HR manager 
why the bank had hired him, they reportedly replied: “Because you don’t wear 
green wellies and because you’ve got hunger in your belly.” “It brought a good 
chemistry to that team,” says Blanco. “He brought a different perspective.”

Javid found himself at an interesting juncture in the history of Wall Street – 
and of Latin America. Mexico had just reached a US-led accord to restructure 
its debt after a decade in default. Chase was one of a handful of US banks that 
had loaned Latin American companies a lot of money, and when the Mexican 
government started fixing its problems, the loans were restructured into 
corporate bonds and sold to whichever US investors had the nerve to take them 
on.

The Tories, trade unions and British democracy under threat | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/17/the-tories-trade-unions-and-british-democracy-under-threat>
Javid’s main role was structuring and selling the bonds – working out how best 
to package the debt in a way that would entice interest from pension funds and 
big institutional investors in the US. “He would actually oversell it – the 
order book he would build would be like $2.5bn, and we were only trying to get 
$700m,” says Federico Amadeo, who was in charge of originating Mexican bonds 
and is now an adviser to the Argentinian government.

“He was clearly the team leader in his group – he was just very, very clever,” 
says the US-based economist, who remembers Javid teaching him the rules of 
cricket one late night in the office.

It’s hard to calculate in retrospect how much the market was worth to Chase, 
but one report in 1995 claimed the bank held $1.5bn in Mexican securities 
alone. Then, on 19 December 1994, the desk was blindsided by a crash in the 
value of the Mexican peso, demolishing confidence in the bonds Chase had spent 
so much hard work burnishing. They called it the “Tequila crisis”.

“I will never forget it – I was at home, it was on the television and I went 
straight to the office,” recalls a member of the desk. “It was chaos. Everyone 
[the investors] assumed the Mexicans couldn’t pay and they were calling us to 
sell. Some people made their names, and some people lost their jobs over it.” 
Javid was good at “crisis situations”, says José Barrionuevo, a former IMF 
economist who was Chase’s chief economist for Latin America in the mid-90s. A 
report in the New York Times quoted estimates for the potential loss to US 
investors in Mexican bonds and stocks, not just those dealing with Chase, at 
roughly $8bn to $10bn.

Government unveils sweeping plan to tackle 'economic challenge of our age'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/10/government-plan-productivity-fixing-foundations>
A US-led bailout stabilised the market, and in their bid to persuade US 
investors to trust Mexican bonds again, Chase’s sales team were helped by a 
bright idea that several former colleagues credit – at least partially – to 
Javid. It was a dual currency bond (or “note”, in the financial parlance) that 
paid out in dollars and pesos, so that if the currency crashed again, investors 
could still be confident of receiving returns. According to Barrionuevo, 
Mexico’s then undersecretary of finance, Martin Werner (now a partner at 
Goldman Sachs), was “very, very impressed with Sajid’s ideas”. Promotion to 
vice-president soon followed.

The young bankers lived away from the financial district. The desk’s long 
hours didn’t leave much time for socialising, which was just as well. “Chase 
Manhattan Bank was not going to put up with foolishness,” says the US 
economist. They earned well, but not by the standards of pre-Lehman crash 
investment bankers. “Your base salary wasn’t enough to live extravagantly,” he 
says. One member of the desk says, after bonus, he earned in the region of half 
a million dollars in 1994/95, and almost $1m by 1998. He doesn’t know exactly 
what Javid earned, but he says of the 1998 figure, “I think Saj must have been 
a bit north of that.”

In February 1995, however, the world saw a darker side of Chase’s work in 
Latin America. The arrival of theNorth American Free Trade Agreement 
<https://ustr.gov/trade-agreements/free-trade-agreements/north-american-free-trade-agreement-nafta>
 (Nafta) in 1994 had made Mexico an even more attractive prospect to Wall 
Street, but had provoked a peasant uprising in the southern state of Chiapas, 
bordering Guatemala. The rebels,known as the Zapatistas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/mar/03/politics>, were protesting 
against – among other things – Nafta’s removal from the Mexican constitution of 
an article that guaranteed land rights to peasants who worked the fields 
together. They had taken the state’s capital, San Cristóbal De Las Casas, in 
January 1994, resulting in dozens of deaths in clashes with government forces. 
Despite a ceasefire shortly after, their charismatic leader, the mysterious
Subcomandante Marcos <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Subcomandante_Marcos>, 
embarrassed the government with communiques sent from the laptop he powered via 
the cigarette lighter of his jeep. “The people had some legitimate concerns,” 
says the US economist. “It was poverty, clear social inequity in that area of 
Mexico.”

The disastrous moment for Chase was a leaked memo to investors – written in 
January 1995. It said the president’s PRI party, which had ruled since 1929, 
“will need to consider carefully whether or not to allow opposition victories 
if fairly won at the ballot box”. It declared that a peaceful solution to the 
clash with the Zapatistas was unlikely. “While Chiapas, in our opinion, does 
not pose a fundamental threat to Mexican political stability, it is perceived 
to be so by many in the investment community,” it read. And then continued: 
“The government will need to eliminate the Zapatistas to demonstrate their 
effective control of the national territory and of security policy.”

The question of Chase’s influence over a sovereign government went around the 
world. Members of the team were used to meeting officials such as finance 
minister Guillem Ortiz, and Agustín Carstens at the Bank of Mexico. It must 
amuse Javid now, when he meets foreign finance ministers, to recall attending 
the same kind of meetings in his 20s. “Part of his job was spending a lot of 
time travelling across the region,” recalls Blanco. “I met every single 
president and finance minister in Latin America.” The US-based economist 
remembers breakfasts with Vicente Fox, later Mexico’s president, and a 
breakfast with Hugo Chávez in Caracas.

Alexander Cockburn and Ken Silverstein, the journalists to whom the memo was 
leaked, said it “should enter business histories as a rare public display of 
how the captains of capital view the democratic process”, claiming that its 
author had lobbied “every available ear” on Capitol Hill along the same lines. 
“Chase’s unusual frankness here is due to the prospect of huge losses on its 
Mexican operations,” they later wrote in Harper’s. “Under these circumstances, 
Chase issued what amounts to a call for army terror and fixed elections.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsajid-javid-what-thatcherite-union-buster-learned-from-wall-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436981384813%2F46423739-58ac-4e69-abcf-9495bbde4667-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20Thatcherite%20union%20buster%20Sajid%20Javid%20learned%20on%20Wall%20Street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsajid-javid-what-thatcherite-union-buster-learned-from-wall-street%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20Thatcherite%20union%20buster%20Sajid%20Javid%20learned%20on%20Wall%20Street&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fsajid-javid-what-thatcherite-union-buster-learned-from-wall-street%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436981384813%2F46423739-58ac-4e69-abcf-9495bbde4667-1020x612.jpeg>
 David Cameron with Javid: the business secretary has been mentioned as a 
possible future Tory party leader. Photograph: Anthony Devlin/PA 
The memo took on new significance when, weeks after it was sent, the 
government sent the army into Chiapas, in what looked like the requested “show 
of control”, prompting thousands of Indians to flee into the Lacandon rain 
forest. After the surprise offensive, many Zapatista villages were left 
abandoned and some of their former inhabitants were said to be reduced to 
drinking their own urine in temporary hideouts in the hills. The LA Times 
reported demonstrations outside Chase offices in New York and San Francisco, 
and there was violence against Chase’s retail branches in Mexico.

A spokesman for Javid says the minister had “zero involvement” with the memo. 
Jasson describes it as “a faux pas by a guy who got carried away”. That guy was
Riordan Roett, a leading expert on the continent 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Riordan_Roett>, who the bank maintained was a 
consultant whose memo did “in no way represent the views of Chase”. The 
US-based economist says that Roett personally assembled and ran the desk’s 
research team in New York. “I think we have all grown from that era, from the 
idea that top-down leadership is better,” he says of the memo’s anti-democratic 
tone. “The instinct was: we don’t want these leftists coming in.” Roett, who is 
now aprofessor at Johns Hopkins University 
<https://www.sais-jhu.edu/riordan-roett> in Washington, replied to my email 
with the words: “Past history!”

By the time he was sent to Chase’s London office in 1997, Javid’s reputation 
was made. In 2000, he was headhunted by Deutsche Bank, who soon put him in 
charge of emerging markets worldwide. The Conservative party website says he 
went there to “help raise investment for developing countries”.

Blanco, who also moved to Deutsche Bank, says the senior staff there liked 
Javid, and regarded him as “an avoider of conflict”. As the head of the bank’s 
emerging markets structuring, he wasn’t known for generating business with 
clients, but was an “internal thinker”, who was extremely adept at navigating 
the bank’s “political waters”. Given what happened next, some would say his 
smartest manoeuvre was the moment he decided to get out, because the waters of 
the global credit markets were about to get choppy.

In the autumn of 2006, Javid was sent to Singapore to lead Deutsche’s credit 
trading in Asia. That meant, according to the financial magazine Euromoney, 
that he was in charge of, among other things,collateralised debt obligation 
(CDOs) <https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/oct/09/glossary.cdo> – a 
financial product that was soon to get a very bad name for itself in the coming 
crisis. Earlier this year,Euromoney highlighted Javid’s role in the 
controversial pre-crash trading of CDOs 
<http://www.euromoney.com/Article/3453259/Sajid-Javid-From-risky-business-to-business-secretary.html>
. Speaking to a reporter in 2006, Javid had said of emerging-market CDOs: “As 
long as investors understand the risk/rewards of an emerging-market CDO, they 
are very appropriate.” That line is now described by a senior debt market 
reporter as “hilarious”.

The specific allegation aired in the Euromoney article is that Javid was 
“responsible for structuring an emerging-market synthetic CDO that incurred 
millions of dollars’ worth of losses for investors”. A US private equity fund 
alleged that Deutsche had “stuffed the CDO with ineligible loans that resulted 
in the 14.28% loss rate”, according to Euromoney, though the bank claimed the 
losses were due to the financial crisis and the risks had been known. The 
eventual court case was dismissed because it fell outside the five-year statute 
of limitations.

As the magazine put it: “One former Deutsche Bank colleague expressed 
amazement to Euromoney at how Javid ‘is spinning his former career’ as a sober 
investment banker as opposed to a structured credit trader at the heart of the 
business that precipitated the global financial crisis.” Javid’s spokesman says 
he does not agree with Euromoney’s description of his activities.

One of the two men Javid answered to during this pre-crash period was Rajeev 
Misra – a star man whose inventiveness devising financial products was 
legendary. He quit the bank in 2008, with the masonry of finance – not least 
complex debt products – crashing around everyone’s ears.

Misra, who is now head of finance at SoftBank 
<http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20141020005338/en/SoftBank-Names-Rajeev-Misra-Head-Strategic-Finance#.VaaAhXqHr7I>
, says down the line from Japan that Javid had “nothing to do with CDOs” while 
he worked in Asia, which doesn’t mean he wasn’t working on them before his 
foreign posting. Why else would he be answering questions from a financial 
reporter about the riskiness of CDOs in July 2006? “That’s a good question,” he 
says.

In 2009, as the crisis began laying waste to the reputations of some of 
finance’s biggest names, especially in the debt-trading world, Javid got out, 
turning his back on a salary estimated to be in the region of £3m a year. 
Through his years in finance, he had maintained his interest in politics – 
working as an aide to Rudy Giuliani’s New York mayoral campaign in 1993 and 
remembered by his colleagues for his awareness. He had stayed in touch with his 
Tory friends from Exeter, including the MPRobert Halfon 
<http://www.roberthalfon.com> and the journalist Tim Montgomerie 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tim_Montgomerie>, and when the expenses scandal 
threw up the seat of Bromsgrove the year before the 2010 general election, 
Javid decided it was his moment. He won it with ease.

In his first register of interests as a newly elected MP in 2010, Javid named 
Misra as a donor, to the tune of £5,000. Misra later gave £50,000 to the 
central party, earning his place at the table of the Leader’s Group, where very 
wealthy donors meet David Cameron and other top Tories. Misra says he donated 
again this year and does so “because [Javid] is a very smart man, and because I 
believe people like him will make a positive impact for this country – I mean 
negotiating Europe, I mean supporting business, [and] I care about Heathrow.”

Nelson, who has championed Javid in his magazine the Spectator, says the 
business secretary’s politics are forged by experience, adding that: “He knows 
a lot more about business than George Osborne, who has never held down a job 
outside politics in his life.”

“For him, the global race will not just be a cliche, it will be something that 
he can properly envisage,” says Nelson. “He will have seen in the emerging 
markets which companies do well and which don’t. It will have taught him about 
the great paradox – well-intentioned regulation can end up doing more harm than 
good.”

Nelson says the business secretary’s stance on Uber is “very Saj”, but that we 
will see his true programme when the enterprise bill is published after the 
summer recess. “It won’t be based on dogma,” he says. “To Saj, the idea of what 
the market can do, of what free enterprise can do for people who don’t come 
from rich families, that is all very real, it is his story.”

During his rise from being George Osborne’s PPS in 2011, to secretary of state 
first for culture, media and sport in 2014 and, this year, the department for 
business, an interviewer asked him about his years in finance.“I’ve been there 
on the coalface,” 
<http://www.totalpolitics.com/features/427102/sajid-javidlabour-racismand-being-and39completely-nutsand39.thtml>
 he said. No one who worked the bond markets of Latin America or the 
credit-trading desks of Deutsche seems to disagree with that. How his 19-year 
banking career would play with voters if he ran for leader is, however, harder 
to say.
 