
People assume I get bored, but I enjoy the solitude. I like the hourly walks 
through the quiet corridors and listening to the rain on the windows while 
enjoying a cup of tea. I relish finishing a good book or watching the birds in 
the car park feeding on the muffins I put out yesterday.

The tiredness is the hardest. Sometimes I have a good routine and my sleep is 
not affected. Other times, I walk into doors, zombie-like, and occasionally 
I’ve been surprised to find that I’ve actually made it home. My husband tells 
me I should find a new job, and I have been applying for some since I began 
working here. Night receptionist is the death knell for a CV: it says key 
holder, not stakeholder. It says, I live in the dark like a monster, or a kook; 
no good with the sun.

Most guests regard me the way a cow would look at you, their eyes casting me 
into irrelevance. I’m good with people, I just hate them: the stupid girls who 
will not take care of themselves; the disgusting businessmen who sit in the bar 
and speak about women like animals; the seemingly intelligent, successful 
people who will deteriorate into slobbering wrecks and expect me to sympathise. 
I don’t.

What I’m really thinking: the dental hygienist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/17/what-really-thinking-dental-hygienist>
Though my job perpetuates my hatred of people, I am still compassionate 
towards those in need. I never think twice about letting someone in from the 
cold, or giving away a free room if it is a genuine cause. But if the intercom 
goes off at 2am and I see a couple who can barely stand, I’ll more than likely 
say the hotel is full even when it isn’t, especially if I’ve just made a tea. I 
don’t like being disturbed.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking at mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
 