
Donald Trump’s choice of Georgia congressman Tom Price as health and human 
services secretary suggests his campaign rhetoric attacking Obamacare was more 
than mere bluster.


Donald Trump selects Tom Price as secretary of health and human services
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/tom-price-health-human-services-secretary-trump-administration>
In Price’s 12 years in Congress, he has been a fierce critic of Barack Obama’s 
signature healthcare legislation while championing conservative proposals, such 
as selling insurance across state lines, replacing Medicare with a system of
vouchers 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/24/us/politics/donald-trump-medicare-republicans.html?_r=0>
 and transforming Medicaid into ablock grant 
<http://www.cbpp.org/blog/proposed-medicaid-block-grant-would-add-millions-to-uninsured-and-underinsured>
. Aclose ally 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/11/meet-paul-ryans-kitchen-cabinet/451887/>
 of the House speaker, Paul Ryan, he has voted to repeal Obamacaredozens of 
times 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/11/28/502566553/trump-chooses-rep-tom-price-an-obamacare-foe-to-run-hhs>
.

Should he be confirmed by the Senate, Price would bring his conservative 
mentality –anti-abortion 
<https://www.plannedparenthoodaction.org/congressional-scorecard/#/georgia/301>,
anti-LGBT 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/lgbt-health-advocates-fear-backlash-trump/>
, anti-Obamacare – to the $1.1tn budget of the Department of Health and Human 
Services.

However, even if Price is able to re-envision health policy, some experts 
believe he risks undermining benefits to some of the president-elect’s most 
ardent supporters.

Current estimates show that 20 million Americans 
<http://www.hhs.gov/about/news/2016/03/03/20-million-people-have-gained-health-insurance-coverage-because-affordable-care-act-new-estimates>
 gained health insurance as a result of Obamacare, either through individual 
exchanges, Medicaid or by allowing older children to stay on their parents’ 
plans.

That means Republicans are “between a rock and a hard place”, according to 
ProfessorMichael Sparer 
<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1611202?query=TOC>, chair of health 
policy at Columbia University’s Mailman School of Public Health. “How could we 
simultaneously keep our promise to repeal and replace the [Affordable Care Act] 
without leading to millions of newly uninsured folks, without facing a 
political backlash because of those newly uninsured folks, and without spending 
a whole lot of money?” said Sparer, outlining what he felt was the GOP 
position. “I think that’s not easy to do.”

Some experts believe policies championed by Price could actually worsen health 
coverage for the poor and infirm, while benefiting the healthy and wealthy.

Yes, Obamacare will be more expensive, but for millions the rise can be 
mitigated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/healthcare-insurance-premiums-rise-subsidies-tax-credits-obamacare>
During his time in Congress, Price made several proposals to replace 
Obamacare. His plans have included replacing the ACA’s “individual mandate” 
with tax credits and punitive “continuous coverage” requirements, allowing 
companies to sell insurance across state lines, and making Medicaid – which was 
expanded by the Affordable Care Act – a block grant program, which would give 
states more discretion in determining who and what to cover.

Jonathan Oberlander 
<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1614438?query=TOC>, a professor at 
the University of North Carolina who studies health policy, said Price’s plan 
to repeal the “individual mandate” – the ACA requirement that people buy health 
insurance or suffer a tax penalty – was more severe than the current system; in 
a 2015 proposal, for example, Price suggested that if people do not maintain 
“continuous coverage” they be denied health insurance coverage for a 
pre-existing condition for up to 18 months after purchasing insurance,according 
to NPR 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/11/29/503720671/5-things-to-know-about-rep-tom-prices-health-care-ideas>
.

Price’s proposed subsidies for individual insurance plans are also less 
generous. Currently the average subsidy is $3,480 a year, according to the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid, the federal body that administers the 
programs. The most generous tax credit in Price’s plan is $3,000 a year.

Other proposals, such as selling insurance across state lines, could also 
disproportionately benefit the healthy, experts said. Purchasing across state 
lines could allow young people to purchase inexpensive, less comprehensive 
health plans, and leave a sicker population in highly regulated states. 
Proponents of selling insurance across state lines argue it increases 
competition.

“If you repeal the ACA and put one of those replacement plans into law, we’re 
going to go backwards,” said Oberlander. “We’re going to go back to that world 
where millions of Americans certainly couldn’t afford [insurance].”

Public programs, such as Medicaid (for the poor) and Medicare (for the 
disabled and elderly) cover about one-third of Americans. As a congressman, 
Price’s proposals have consistently looked to rein in the federal government’s 
spending on these programs. Together they make up 86% of HHS’s budget.

For example, one of Price’s 2015 proposals would have transformed Medicaid 
into a state block grant, similar to what happened to welfare through the 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program in the 1990s.

Obamacare made it illegal to deny care to the sick. Insurance companies still 
do it | Ron Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/27/obamacare-preexisting-condition-health-insurance-discrimination>
How much money states got from welfare reform was determined by what they 
spent in 1994, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a 
progressive thinktank. But in the case of Medicaid, that model would create 
winners and losers.

The 19 states that refused to expand Medicaid spend less money, meaning they 
would get less federal cash in that block grant calculation. But if legislators 
use pre-Obamacare Medicaid spending to determine block grants, that proposal 
would anger the 32 states that did expand Medicaid.

Some regions that heavily supported Trump are especially dependent on these 
programs, such as in West Virginia, where 68% of voters cast ballots for Trump 
and nearly half the population receives healthcare through a public program.

Just 40% of West Virginians are insured through employers, the third-lowest 
rate in the nation. Meanwhile, 29% of state residents are on Medicaid and 19% 
Medicare, the most in the country. Medicaid enrollment in West Virginiagrew by 
62% 
<http://kff.org/health-reform/state-indicator/total-monthly-medicaid-and-chip-enrollment/?currentTimeframe=0&selectedRows=%7B%22nested%22:%7B%22west-virginia%22:%7B%7D%7D%7D>
 after Obamacare went into force, covering an additional 230,000 people, 
according to Kaiser Family Foundation, a non-profit focused on health issues.
 