
I flinched when Alan Carr's new ad 
<http://blog.peta.org.uk/2014/04/alan-carr-be-a-little-fairy-for-animals/> for 
animal rights campaigners Peta made its debut on social media. There he was, 
smiling cheekily as he posed with a set of pink wings and a pink wand, beneath 
luminous pink text inviting us to "be a little fairy for animals". Yuck, I 
thought to myself: that'll really help along the stereotype of gay men as a 
bunch of mincing court jesters.

When the inevitable Twitter backlash came, I quietly empathised with it. 
"Anyone find the Peta ad campaign really fucking offensive?" tweeted one 
infuriated gay man. "Basically: gay men = fairies." But then Carr faced his 
detractors down with aplomb: "The most homophobia I get is from gays," he 
tweeted back, completing his riposte with a dig at their alleged 
"self-loathing". And then I felt quietly ashamed to have flinched in the first 
place. Carr's defiant response forced me to examine prejudices I share with all 
too many other gay men.

This is how I could have justified my instinctive flinch. When gay people 
appear on TV, it is invariably as one-dimensional, caricatured camp clowns, a 
kind of gay minstrel show. But Carr has never claimed to be emblematic of gay 
men. Of course we should see a wider spectrum of gay men – including, say, the 
beer-swilling, football-obsessed lad alongside the body-pumping Kylie-loving 
scene queen – but why does that mean discriminating against a funny comedian 
because he's outrageously camp? What fuelled the backlash was a sense that the 
likes of Carr invite homophobia with their loud-and-proud campness, and all gay 
men suffer as a result. It is complicity with oppression, not dissimilar to the 
woman who suggests wearing a short skirt is asking for a sexual attack.

Gay men have a big problem with camp. Gay dating websites abound with profiles 
specifying "straight-acting men only". Despite the widespread myth that 
campness is affected – that it's all for show – most gay men think camp is 
deeply unsexy. Graham Norton – another screamingly camp comedian – has said 
that campness is "a much harder thing to accept than being gay 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/10374258/Graham-Norton-Being-gay-is-easy-its-harder-to-be-camp.html>
", because it "comes with judgment all round". This anti-camp hostility partly 
comes from a desire to conform to traditional gender roles, which gay men have 
already subverted whether they want to or not. But Carr has a point: some 
anti-camp bashing is driven by the homophobia of gay men.

That homophobia remains rife among gay men is hardly surprising. They grow up 
in a society that teaches that settling down with a woman is the natural order 
of things. They hear "gay" casually bandied around as an insult, a synonym for 
crap or rubbish. They see the horror etched on the face of a straight man 
misidentified as gay – the sort of expression that comes from being wrongly 
accused of the most heinous of crimes. Gay men know that to hold hands with a 
partner in public risks stares and abuse. InThe Velvet Rage 
<http://www.alandowns.com/services>, the clinical psychologist Alan Downs talks 
of an internalised shame, too: that gay men are taught "during those tender and 
formative years of adolescence that there was something about us that was 
flawed, in essence unlovable".

No wonder gay men suffer higher rates of mental distress and suicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2011/feb/20/gay-men-depression-the-velvet-rage>
. But, if most gay men are honest with themselves, they can think of more 
subtle ways in which their own homophobia expresses itself. They may panic when 
someone asks if they have a girlfriend, knowing that an honest answer means 
coming out for the third time that week and possibly being treated differently. 
They may refer to their boyfriends in ways that strip their gender away, like 
"my other half". They may feel a sense of flattery when someone says "I'd never 
have guessed you were gay!", as if feeling reassured that their leprosy is 
barely visible. Or they may start by coming out as bisexual (fuelling a sense 
of "bi now, gay later", much to the annoyance of genuine bisexuals), hoping 
that having one foot in the straight camp might preserve a sense of normality.

There is evidence to suggest some "straight" homophobes are self-hating closet 
cases.A study in the Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 
<http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/psp/102/4/815/> suggested that some homophobic 
people were suppressing same-sex desires, backing upanother study 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20040202035152/www.apa.org/releases/homophob.html> 
which showed that prejudiced people were more likely to be aroused by gay porn. 
Even today, some gay people take "straight-acting" literally, trying to force 
relationships with opposite-sex partners, imprisoning both in the misery of 
denial.

This isn't to paint an overly bleak picture. In the UK, there's never been a 
better time to be gay: the majority of anti-gay laws have been overturned; and 
while 30 years ago half of Britons thought same-sex relations werealways wrong 
<http://www.bsa-30.natcen.ac.uk/read-the-report/personal-relationships/homosexuality.aspx>
, that figure has dropped to a fifth. Being gay can be a bit of a leveller, 
too: whether you're a millionaire or a barman, there's a unifying sense of 
being an outsider, like it or not. But homophobia is corrosive, wherever it 
comes from. Gay men may recognise it and challenge it when it comes from 
straight people. It is much harder – but still necessary – to recognise the 
homophobia that dwells within the ranks of gay men themselves.

Twitter @owenjones84 <https://twitter.com/OwenJones84>
 