
It happens every so often when someone in the office is pregnant. The mothers 
all start talking about their childbirth experiences. I smile and nod when they 
tell me I have all this to come. I am wiser than they know: I gave birth and 
gave my baby away.

A few years ago, I blurted it out. I thought I was speaking to a friend. “I 
had a baby back when I was 15 and gave him up for adoption.” Her face froze and 
I realised my error. The whispers started, and a few months later I was so 
pleased to move jobs.

At school, friends’ mothers told me quietly that I had done the right thing, 
while their daughters stared, unable to think of anything to say. My fresh 
start was university, where nobody knew. Now it’s so long ago that it barely 
feels like it happened to me. I would love to laugh about my stretch marks, to 
share my horror birth story – the one where my mother shouted at the midwife 
for calling me a slut and got asked to leave. But I can’t, because people 
expect a level of penitence that I don’t have.

What I’m really thinking: the person in therapy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/30/what-im-really-thinking-person-in-therapy>
It would be OK if I cried and blamed my parents. If I said I regretted the 
decision, but I don’t. I knew I wasn’t ready to be a mother the moment the 
doctor told me I was pregnant, and I certainly knew it when I was handed the 
angry, squalling ball of need. My parents said they would support me either way 
– they were never angry. My mother even knitted him booties. I put them on him 
as I handed him over to his mother. I knew she would be better for him than me 
– she was a real grownup while I was a child.

Maybe one day I will have children, but I wish that being someone’s birth 
mother would cease to be my secret shame. I don’t believe I did anything wrong.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking at mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
 