
Trying turdurken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2014/dec/23/why-christmas-2014-is-ruled-by-the-turducken>
 this Christmas?

The challenge set by this meaty matrouska doll is not just stomaching its 
triple meatiness – but working out what to drink with it. Each meat, on it’s 
own would be served with a separate beverage. But in this instance we need to 
meet the flavours of three meat in one glass.

Turkey, duck, chicken – there is such dissonance with everything to do with 
this dish, other than they are all fowl. So lets find harmony in the wine, 
three wines that separately will work with this dish and three wines, if you 
dare, that you can blended together for yourChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> wine compilation.

A turducken is essentially a roast, so the sauces are limited. Perhaps some 
bread sauce, maybe pan juices. I dare say heading into super spicy territory or 
tomato base land isn’t the intended smothering, so let’s keep it pretty 
straight.

Get white wine and make sure it’s aromatic. Pinot gris is the choice for this, 
full flavoured and a suggestion of sweetness to pair with the fatty saltiness 
of the birds.
Despite it’s wine snob detractors, pinot gris works with a lot of different 
foods and tends to be a great leveller of palates when in mixed company, as 
Christmas is bound to attract. Start with Brokenwood Pinot Gris from Beechworth 
($19). It’s aromatic, silky and has a lovely mouth feel. If you need bulk, try 
Winemiths 2l cask ($18), it’s very good and incredible value. For something a 
little more European, Villa Wolf ($26) from Germany will fit the bill.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fwhat-to-drink-with-your-turducken-on-christmas-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419302412111%2Fd4930e8d-35c5-4277-9106-21eddb839b8b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20to%20drink%20with%20your%20turducken%20on%20Christmas%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fwhat-to-drink-with-your-turducken-on-christmas-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20to%20drink%20with%20your%20turducken%20on%20Christmas%20Day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Faustralia-food-blog%2F2014%2Fdec%2F23%2Fwhat-to-drink-with-your-turducken-on-christmas-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F23%2F1419302412111%2Fd4930e8d-35c5-4277-9106-21eddb839b8b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Three meats means lots of scope for wine at Christmas. Photograph: Judith 
Collins / Alamy/Alamy 
Fence sitting eaters may wish to choose a pink wine as another option. Pink 
wine can be made from any red grape, and if sparkling, it can be white grapes 
with red wine added. I love the loose framework for pink wine and you’ll do 
well to explore the incredible variety of expressions. With our 
goosey-chooky-ducky dish you won’t go wrong with those made from the sangiovese 
grape. These wines offer lovely fruit expression and snappy mouthfeel, 
providing cut to the feathered flesh and great refreshment.

Pizzini from the King Valley is an icon sangiovese producer and make a rosato 
perfect for this dish. Named Rosetta ($18), if you sniffed at the thought of 
residual sugar in the first wine selection, allow this to draw in your cheeks 
and put your lifted nose firmly back in its place. This wine is like a razor. 
It’s savoury, dry and incredibly thirst quenching, bringing a tightness of 
flavour, a cranberry attack to the table. If you want more fruit, try La Linea 
Tempranillo ($21) rosé from the Adelaide Hills, and for something more budget 
friendly Yalumba Y series Sangiovese Rosé ($11) will be a terrific match.

But if turducken is the main meal and red wine hasn’t appeared on the table, 
many diners can start to get weirded out. Serve some grenache. It’s delicious 
and can be light weight and spicy. It can be a bit like a pinot and a lot like 
shiraz which gives it much needed flexibility in a crowded room. I recommend 
Cirillo Vincent Grenache ($22), nimble, juicy and succulent – perfect for 
turducken. For something with a little more weight look to d’Arenberg The 
Custodian ($18) and for something to impress and lighten your wallet, S.C. 
Pannell Grenache ($56) will do just that.

There you have it, a triplicate trio of booze for your three-way meat dish. 
Should you put them all in the same glass? Well, the answer to that is should 
you have a three in one meat roast, if it fits, why not give it a go.
 