
Making the world a better place – noble in theory, but expensive in practice 
and ambitious to sustain.

 Financing the United Nations’ sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 (SDGs), for example, will require more than the combined GDP of Africa’s 30 
biggest economies in additional funds every year. A big ask – so where should 
the money come from? Given that the funding needed is nearly 20 times last 
year’s officialinternational aid flows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/08/foreign-aid-spending-2014-least-developed-countries>
, it’s safe to say that more aid from international donors cannot continue to 
be the primary focus.

So what if we tapped into the considerable resources of the developing 
countries themselves? Often overlooked, these countries’ tax revenues, natural 
resource revenues, private domestic savings, pension funds, private equity 
markets, stock markets, and remittances, taken together, are significantly 
larger than aid flows – and are growing rapidly. If harnessed to finance 
development, these resources could enormously accelerate the rate at which the 
SDGs are achieved.

Do banks matter in developing countries?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/feb/04/do-banks-matter-financial-inclusion>
 Take sub-Saharan Africa. As a conservative estimate, at least 20-30% of the 
$2.6tn (£1.7tn)funding gap  <http://dalberg.com/blog/?p=3565>will be needed in 
this region alone. This is a massive amount – butour estimates show 
<http://www.dalberg.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/DRM_Longform_Designed_Final.pdf>
 that sub-Saharan Africa can get part of the way there, and unlock 
approximately $90bn for development per year, with just four actions: lowering 
the cost of remittances and using them as collateral for loans, banking more of 
the unbanked, and unlocking pension funds for investment in private equity. 
Taken together the four suggestions illustrate a broader point: what if the way 
we fund development propelled development itself?

Lower the cost of remittances

The international community needs to take is to lower the costs of remittances 
to 5% of the transaction value. Remittances to sub-Saharan Africa support 
families and even some nations as a dominant source of GDP. But the cost of 
sending money to the region isthe highest in the world 
<https://remittanceprices.worldbank.org/en>, with fees upwards of 10% taken 
directly from the money people want to transfer abroad.


Recognising this, the World Bank’s 5x5 Objective 
<http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/0,,contentMDK:22383199%7EpagePK:210058%7EpiPK:210062%7EtheSitePK:282885,00.html>
 aims to reduce the global average cost of remittances to 5%, which is expected 
to increase remittances to developing countries by roughly $16bn every year. If 
sub-Saharan Africa could do the same, remittances wouldincrease by $4bn per year
 
<http://blogs.worldbank.org/psd/how-can-we-cut-the-high-costs-of-remittances-to-africa>
 and provide an immediate infusion into the economy.


Life after losing remittances: Somalis share their stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jun/18/life-after-losing-remittances-somalis-share-their-stories-somalia>
Lack of competition on the sending side keeps prices high, but positive 
incentives can spur innovation, such as theLimbo Prize 
<http://leadinggroup.org/IMG/pdf/Proposal_CANADA_G20__Mechanisms_to_Reduce_the_Cost_of_International_Remittances.pdf>
currently under consideration by the Canadian government to reward companies 
that help bring down remittance costs.

Use remittances as collateral for loans

Since remittance flows are relatively stable over time, the risk of them 
fluctuating significantly or disappearing is low. This makes remittances 
reliable sources of collateral for countries; having reliable sources of 
collateral, in turn, makes it easier and cheaper to secure loans.

This isn’t a new idea. In 1996, a development bank in Ghana used future 
remittances as collateral 
<http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTDECPROSPECTS/Resources/476882-1157133580628/AfricaStudyEntireBook.pdf>
 to secure a $40m loan from the African Export-Import Bank. Since 2000, 
countries have raised approximately$15bn in external debt 
<http://publications.iom.int/bookstore/free/Diaspora_Handbook_EN_For_Web_28May2013.pdf>
 through remittance securitisation. Sub-Saharan Africa has yet to capitalise on 
this opportunity, but if it does we estimate that$4bn 
<http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTDECPROSPECTS/Resources/476882-1157133580628/AfricaStudyEntireBook.pdf>
 could be raised.

Securitising remittances, which represent a hard-currency asset, is a 
lesser-known concept – so simply getting this idea on the agenda and developing 
better information about the scale and reliability of remittance flows could 
help spur both the public and private sectors into action.

Bank the unbanked

We need to bank 50% of the income of the currently unbanked. Our estimates 
show that around $104bn of African incomes currently flow outside the formal 
banking system annually, either because people have never had a bank account or 
they do not know or trust how to use one.

Investing pension funds in private equity alone could yield roughly$29bn of 
additional funds

Drawing only half of these incomes into banks would boost total deposits by 
around $52bn per year. Banks would then have more capital available to lend, 
typically at a lower cost, to help unlock much-needed financing for small and 
medium enterprises.

 To make this work, banks need to meet customers where they are using mobile 
technology and developing stronger agency banking models. It’s been done 
before: in Tanzania, new mobile banking services helped raise the number of 
adults with access to financial services from27% in 2009 to over 50% in 2014 
<http://www.iveri.com/papers/Accessing%20the%20Unbanked%20English.pdf>.


Capitalise on pension funds


Pension funds in Africa are expected to more than double, to over $620 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/08/09/africa-investment-idUSL6N0G93WQ20130809>
bn by 2020 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/08/09/africa-investment-idUSL6N0G93WQ20130809>
, thanks to the continent’s growing formal workforce and expanding economies. 
Pension funds represent a significant but underappreciated opportunity for 
investment.

Only about 1% 
<http://empea.org/newsroom/empea-news/pension-funds-and-private-equity-unlocking-africas-potential>
 of pension funds is currently invested in private equity, despite regulation 
permitting as much as 10% in Rwanda and Kenya. Private equity can play a key 
role in providing growing businesses with expansion capital and support before 
they are ready to be publicly listed, so harnessing these funds could 
significantly stimulate new business growth.

Instead, development finance institutions and international investors 
currently dominate private equity in Africa, ensuring that a significant 
portion of any returns from growth has to be repatriated instead of helping 
build their domestic economy. Investing pension funds in private equity alone 
could yield roughly$29bn of additional funds 
<http://empea.org/newsroom/empea-news/pension-funds-and-private-equity-unlocking-africas-potential>
 to help promising enterprises get to scale.


14 tips for building a financial system from scratch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/26/14-tips-for-building-a-financial-system-from-scratch>
This could jumpstart a multiplier effect 
<http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/africa-in-focus/posts/2014/02/10-private-equity-africa-alemayehou-kimball>
: private equity driving investment in productive goods and services, and these 
investments funnelling more income back into the domestic economy. Private 
equity is still relatively new concept in sub-Saharan Africa, so pension fund 
managers and regulators need to engage more closely with private equity firms 
to build capacity on how and when to use private equity.

If undertaken together, these four actions would produce a cycle in which each 
component stimulates the next to generate more returns – and additional 
development gains. To take just one example: increased remittances would 
encourage the receiver to go to aformal bank 
<http://blogs.worldbank.org/allaboutfinance/international-remittances-and-financial-inclusion-sub-saharan-africa>
 and reap the benefits of financial inclusion. More bank deposits then mean 
more funds available for investment in the formal economy. More bank accounts, 
meanwhile, help individuals take advantage ofnewer, lower-cost remittance 
services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/apr/08/the-london-startup-rebooting-remittances>
.

Sub-Saharan Africa’s governments must recognise the enormous potential of 
these pools of capital, and make moves to harness them as a primary means of 
funding development. It is a process that could itself become development’s 
most powerful driver.

Yana Watson Kakar is the global managing partner of Dalberg 
<http://www.dalberg.com/>, Matthew MacDevette is a Dalberg consultant and James 
Mwangi is executive director of the Dalberg Group. Follow@DalbergTweet 
<https://twitter.com/DalbergTweet> on Twitter.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Use #NOunbanked 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23NOunbanked&src=typd>

 