
I have myalgic encephalomyelitis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/chronic-fatigue-syndrome>. If you think it 
is hard to say, try living with it every day.

Yes, I understand that your aunt had chronic fatigue, and that she took some 
B-vitamins and is all-better now. No, it isn’t adrenal fatigue because that 
doesn’t exist. Oh yes, how fantastic that your friend’s friend was really tired 
after a virus, but she tried acupuncture and cut out wheat and dairy from her 
diet and next week she is running the London marathon.

I don’t have what they probably had, you see, because only 5% of people 
recover from myalgic encephalomyelitis. It is sometimes called chronic fatigue 
syndrome, but that’s a bit of a misnomer. I’m not just tired. The paralysis was 
the first worry. Then all the muscle pain. Then the memory loss. Then losing 
the ability to speak without stuttering. I started to forget what words meant. 
Or who my boyfriend was. Then the fatigue came to kick me when I was down. Then 
the nausea. Then the constant, unrelenting joint pain, headaches, and flu-like 
symptoms.

What I’m really thinking: the female boxer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/30/what-really-thinking-female-boxer>
Ah yes, I know. You were so tired last weekend, you just fell asleep on the 
sofa. But were you so tired that you slept solidly for 22 hours and then spent 
an hour getting from your bedroom to the bathroom and back again before 
sleeping for another 22 hours? I thought not.

I’ve improved a lot in eight years. But I’ve been told this is as good as it 
gets. I will never recover unless medicine has a breakthrough. And I have 
accepted that, so why can’t you? I appreciate your sympathy. Your advice and 
suggestions are well meant. But please, back off.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>

 