
You may think you’re coming in “just for a clean” but it’s my job to check 
your oral cavity for lesions, your teeth forcaries 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Dental-decay/Pages/Introduction.aspx> and your 
gums forperiodontal disease 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Gum-disease/Pages/Introduction.aspx>, and to 
provide advice to get you to full oral health. Many a joke is made about 
relaxing in the chair. I call it the comfy chair; it breaks the tension. I know 
it’s not the most pleasant experience, so I try to alleviate the worry by 
explaining the emotions people feel as they lie back. After all, I am 
“exposing” your vulnerable, soft places – your belly and chest – and instinct 
prompts the nervous patient to cross their arms. Then, as I start the 
treatment, I am right there in your personal space, wearing a mask and glasses 
– another uncomfortable feeling for you.

I like my job and people mostly leave feeling better, wiser and – yes – 
cleaner. I don’t mind how bad your teeth are, it’s bloody satisfying getting a 
load of tartar off, leaving smooth enamel to rub your tongue around instead of 
rough rock. But I have feelings too; I can’t help looking at your blackheads 
and up your nose at your nasal hair (or worse). You can’t blame me: I have 
excellent lighting.

What I’m really thinking: the older runner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/03/what-im-really-thinking-the-older-runner>
I find it rather creepy when your tongue follows my instruments and irritating 
when it nudges them out of the way, and when you look me in the eye as I move 
into your vision. And why, all of a sudden, can’t you swallow your own saliva? 
But the worst thing is the disrespect some people show by not cleaning their 
teeth or by eating just before seeing me. I’d never say it, but I so want to 
ask: “Would you leave another bodily cavity in the same condition if you were 
visiting your gynaecologist for a smear test or a urologist for a prostate 
exam?” I don’t think so.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
 