
The Berlin lorry attack on Monday that killed 12 people and injured 48 others 
raises a pressing question for security services across the world: what can be 
done to stop such attacks?


The attack on Berlin’s Christmas market came six months after a 19-tonne cargo 
truck was deliberately driven into crowds celebrating Bastille Day in Nice, 
killing 86 people and injuring 484.

This seemingly new – and brutally destructive – form of terrorist attack is 
quickly becoming one that security experts fear the most: it can cause untold 
carnage and seemingly come out of nowhere. And there are obvious limits on the 
effect of practical measures.

On Wednesday, Berlin’s police chief, Klaus Kandt, argued that bollards would 
not have prevented the attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/20/berlin-christmas-market-attack-suspect-pakistan-live-coverage?page=with:block-5859377ae4b06265ff0d50a2#block-5859377ae4b06265ff0d50a2>
. With “so many potential targets” – 2,500 Christmas markets in Germany and 60 
in Berlin alone – he said it was impossible to reduce the risk to zero. But can 
they at least be made less likely? Yes, is the simplistic answer – but the 
measures to achieve that are varied, complex, and far from a panacea.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fnine-killed-in-berlin-after-truck-drives-into-christmas-market-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Berlin%20Christmas%20market%20attack%3A%20what%20we%20know%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fnine-killed-in-berlin-after-truck-drives-into-christmas-market-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Berlin%20Christmas%20market%20attack%3A%20what%20we%20know%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fnine-killed-in-berlin-after-truck-drives-into-christmas-market-video-report&media=>
Berlin Christmas market attack: what we know – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/19/nine-killed-in-berlin-after-truck-drives-into-christmas-market-video-report>
Barriers in public spaces

The primary way is to erect huge, imposing barriers around vulnerable crowded 
areas: indeed, police chiefs in Berlin said on Tuesday they would now erect new 
barriers.

In Britain, a lower-key approach has been favoured – until now, perhaps.


Ruth Reed, the head of the Royal Institute of British Architects’ (RIBA) 
planning group and its former president, said counter-terrorism officers would 
reassess the security of open spaces in the wake of the Berlin attack.

“There will be a degree of reassessment of public open space inevitably after 
Berlin. I think that will happen all over Europe, not just here,” she said. 
“The British approach has always been to put in a degree of protection. They 
may want to think about increasing it – but it can be done discreetly.”


Reed co-authored industry-leading guidance 
<https://www.architecture.com/Files/RIBAHoldings/PolicyAndInternationalRelations/Policy/CounterTerrorism/RIBADesigningforCounterTerrorism.pdf>
, published in 2010, on designing for counter-terrorism without turning the 
nation into an uninviting fortress.

The most obvious form of protection against a truck attack are large barriers, 
known in the architecture business as “anti-ramming landscape features”. The 
black barriers around the Palace of Westminster are designed to stop a lorry 
attack at high speed. Up the road in Whitehall, there are barriers but they are 
hidden from view.

All US military and governmental buildings have “crash- and attack-resistant 
bollards” outside. The US state department “anti-ram vehicle list 
<http://www.usace.army.mil/Portals/2/docs/Protection/DOD_Anti-Ram_Vehicle_Barriers_January_20141.pdf>
” lists several types of bollards to protect the perimeter of its embassies 
abroad. Some bollards are capable of stopping vehicles travelling at up to 
50mph (80km/h).


Safety measures that avoid a bunker mentality

There are also innovative ways of protecting large crowds. Arsenal’s Emirates 
Stadium, opened in 2006, has been held up as a model for how physical barriers 
can be incorporated into a building’s design. Large concrete letters spelling 
out the word Arsenal at the stadium’s main entrance also act as a barrier to 
vehicles.

Concrete benches prevent a vehicle from weaving across the forecourt, and 
giant ornate cannons, which feature on the club’s logo, form an obstacle for 
vehicles driving towards the stadium building.


“It’s not just the point of obstruction,” said Reed, who pointed out that 
measures including tight bends and restricted-width streets had been designed 
to prevent a large vehicle building speed before reaching a bollard or barrier.


“The important thing for public sanity really is that we don’t let this kind 
of anti-terrorism provision cloud our thinking because, if we develop some kind 
of bunker mentality, we’ve actually let them win,” she said.

“We want people to be able to go about their normal working and leisure times 
blissfully unaware that there is a risk that has been considered and reduced or 
eliminated. That’s the really important thing to say.

“People may feel nervous about attending crowded external places, but it might 
be worth them having a look around and thinking what is in place and usually 
there are preventative measures for vehicles.”


Will rings of steel be erected in crowded places across Britain? No, said 
Reed. “I don’t think people will be going to German markets behind walls of 
steel. I think it’s discreetly possible to introduce anti-ramming landscape 
features,” she said.

“There may be a review that increases some of it, but I suspect that if you 
look carefully at some of our crowded places generally it has been considered, 
because it has been part of police thinking for a long time in this country. 
Sadly we’re not strangers to terrorists.”

Practical limits on security

Using a vehicle to commit a terrorist atrocity is not a new tactic. Apart from 
the Bastille Day attack in Nice,Michael Adebolajo and Michael Adebowale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/19/lee-rigby-murder-michael-adebolajo-adebowale-guilty>
 used a car to run down Fusilier Lee Rigby in May 2013 before stabbing him to 
death.


In June 2007, Bilal Abdullah and Kafeel Ahmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/jul/02/terrorism.scotland> drove their 
Jeep Cherokee, loaded with propane canisters, into the glass doors of the 
Glasgow airport terminal. In the Israel-Palestine conflict, car-ramming attacks 
have become a regular feature, with Palestinian drivers running down Israeli 
soldiers and civilians.

While the security services across Europe have sophisticated systems to alert 
them to those acquiring weapons or explosives, getting your hands on a vehicle 
is easy.

In 2010, the online magazine Inspire, produced by al-Qaida in the Arabian 
Peninsula, urged jihadis to target pedestrian-only locations and ram vehicles 
into crowds in order to “achieve maximum carnage”. A 2014 propaganda video 
produced by the Islamic State encouraged the group’s French sympathisers to use 
cars to run down civilians.

In the 2007 Glasgow airport attack, the concrete bollards outside the airport 
were credited with stopping the vehicle entering the terminal, though the 
terminal doors were damaged.


The attack in Glasgow prompted a government review of the protection of 
strategic infrastructure, which recommended the installation of robust physical 
barriers as protection against vehicle bomb attacks and the creation of vehicle 
exclusion zones to keep all but authorised vehicles at a safe distance.

Prof Tahir Abbas, a senior research fellow at the Royal United Services 
Institute, said the British government had already been sensitive to the 
subject of protective security and that many important government buildings and 
public sites were already surrounded by barriers to stop vehicle attacks.


“When you have an open event, something that’s almost ad hoc such as a 
Christmas market, then the need to have greater security measures has become 
more pronounced in light of these events in Nice and now in Berlin,” he said.


“Now designers and scientists have got the technology to create aesthetically 
pleasing barriers to prevent cars from ramming into buildings,” said Abbas. “As 
part of that you have things like innocent flower pots outside buildings that 
are actually enforced with concrete and metal to prevent a truck from going 
over them. They are hidden and blended into the aesthetics of the building.”

“You try to protect yourself from any possible risk, but there will always be 
something that creeps through. With terrorism you’re always playing a game of 
catch-up in some respects and this is where lessons learned from across the 
world become important.”
 