
This summer I'll be going on a long holiday with no video games. I love 
playing Skyrim (in which I have to outwit Alduin, a dragon who is prophesied to 
destroy the world) andAssassin's Creed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/assassins-creed> on my PS3 – and I find 
it difficult to find books that can beat the thrill and the immersive power of 
video games. I do love The Hobbit but I've read that now – what other really 
brilliant fantasy books can you recommend for a 12 year-old-boy, ones that can 
really take me into their world and really thrill me like Skyrim can?

The quest at the core of any good fantasy novel should be enough to set the 
heart of any video game fan racing. While, as in a good game, the amazing 
worlds which authors create provide a fantastic magical playground for 
adventure – with scope for exactly the same kinds of terrors and triumphs to be 
navigated.

The difference is that the pace is set by the reader's curiosity rather than 
by the click of the controller and the imaginative scope of the world is more 
expansive as it depends on the combination of the writer's words and the 
reader's imagination.

Before computer games, the stories in books such Jules's Verne's nineteenth 
century classicJourney to the Centre of the Earth 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781853262876>
 offered the same pumped up excitement. In Verne's story, a young boy and two 
adults break the runic code of an Icelandic saga which leads them to the secret 
passage to the centre of the earth. Heading down it, the trio risk all in a 
subterranean world filled with terrifying creatures and people from the past.

Almost a century later, Ursula le Guin's The Wizard of Earthsea 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140304770>
 created a new fantasy playground: the richly detailed fantastical and watery 
world with its own language and mythology which provide the backdrop for the
Earthsea Quartet 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140348033>
. Ged, the hero of the story and a prototype for Harry Potter, is as heroic as 
any character in a contemporary computer game and his mission is serious: he 
has to save his own world. To do so he is sent off to School of Wizards on the 
Island of Roke where his magical powers are honed and trained. Ged learns the 
extent of his magical powers, their dangers and how to control them in a 
fabulous world packed-full of legendary creatures including dragons.

Fighting a dragon is at the heart of JRR Tolkien's epic The Fellowship of the 
Ring 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780261103573>
 trilogy, an obvious next choice for anyone who has enjoyedThe Hobbit 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007458424>
. Frodo's epic quest to get the Ring from the evil Sauron in a brilliantly 
imagined and vividly described world filled with extraordinary creatures is a 
blueprint for all subsequent fantasies.

Christopher Paulini's draws deeply from Tolkien for Inheritance Cycle, his 
quartet of titles which begins with Eragon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780552552097>
. The book's hero, Eragon, finds a mysterious stone on a mountain from which a 
dragon whom he names Saphira hatches. Drawing from a wide range of mythological 
sources,Inheritance Cycle 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780857531407>
 is action packed in a vividly created world.

Dragons and mythological creatures are not the only dangers fiction can throw 
up. Dystopian worlds provide terrifying landscapes for adventure and need 
powerful heroes to bring them back to some kind of hopeful future. While the 
messages may be more overtly political, the action is just as gripping. In 
Malorie Blackman'sNoble Conflict 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780552554626>
, Kaspar joins the Guardians to protect his world from rebels who are 
threatening to destroy it. Kaspar soon finds that the Guardians are not as 
"good" as he had been led to believe and the stories about the rebels are very 
far from the truth. Kaspar needs courage and intelligence to outwit the system 
he has always trusted in a story crackling with danger.

In The Reluctant Assassin 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141341743>
, the first in the WARP series, Eoin Colfer uses time-travel to whisk his 
orphan hero between the 19th and 21st centuries in a roller-coaster adventure 
that sees him fleeing from a terrifying assassin who is so eager to catch him.

Darren Shan's The Demonata 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007431069>
 series, starting with Lord Loss, is no holds barred in terms of the thrills, 
the blood and the daring that propel each exciting adventure. Totally gripping 
- and it is all done with words!

Read a good book lately? Join the Guardian children's books site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your reviews tochildrens.books@theguardian.com 
<mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com>! 
Enjoying books with your babies and younger children? Why not think about 
becoming one of our family reviewers and sharing the books you love? We are now 
doing this as a monthly Witness project feeding into our family review 
galleries – check out July's family reading project 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/53b4210fe4b03b90259d8437>.


Do you have a question for the Book Doctor? Email 
childrens.books@theguardian.com <mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com> or 
pose your question on Twitter @GdnchildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> using #BookDoctor.
 