
What are government bonds?

Think of them as a type of loan from investors to a government. They are 
issued by governments around the world to raise money to cover the shortfall 
they have between what they want to spend and what they have coming in from 
things such as taxes each year.Bonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bonds> can be structured in a number of 
ways, but at the simplest the government promises to pay the buyer small cash 
payments, called coupons and set at a fixed rate, usually twice a year until 
the bond matures, when the buyer also gets back the money loaned to the 
government.

Bonds are issued by the government’s debt management office 
<http://www.dmo.gov.uk/> (DMO) and can have a lifetime as short as three years 
or last for decades. The longest-dated bond issued by the UK will be paid back 
on 22 July 2068. These bonds are particularly popular with pension funds. The 
UK government’s bonds are called gilts – a gilt-edged security on which the 
government has never missed a payment.

How do you buy and sell them?

Bonds can be bought by anyone on the approved-buyers list 
<http://www.dmo.gov.uk/index.aspx?page=Gilts/Gilt_Faq#Individuals>. These days 
they are rarely bought by individuals, more often by big City investors such as 
pension funds and banks. Otherwise, once they are issued, they are traded on 
the London Stock Exchange. Once upon a time they were sold at post offices.

Why are gilts in the news?

As part of its plan to counter any economic downturn caused by the vote to 
leave the EU, theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has expanded the 
quantitative easing (QE) programme it first introduced in March 2009. QE has 
been likened to electronic money printing. The Bank is independent of the 
government and its main aim is to keep inflation under control. The Bank uses 
QE as part of this aim. The scheme works by the Bank creating new money 
electronically and using it to buy gilts back from banks and big City 
investment firms. The hope is the big financial firms then use that money to 
buy other assets such as shares or to lend to individuals and companies, so 
that more money flows around the economy. At the same time, the cost of 
borrowing falls.

What happened this week?

The Bank put QE back into action. On Monday, it bought back short-dated gilts, 
with a lifespan between three and seven years; on Tuesday, it bought back gilts 
with a maturity of 15 years or more; and on Wednesday, it bought gilts with 
timescale between the two. (It is a pattern that will be repeated weekly during 
the six-month period the Bank has allowed itself to buy £60bn of government 
bonds.) It did not get off to a smooth start.On Tuesday, the Bank was unable to 
buy as many bonds as hoped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/09/banks-post-brexit-strategy-hits-snag-as-gilt-buyback-falls-short>
, being left with a £52m shortfall for the first time since QE was enacted.

Why did the plan fail?

Not enough gilts were offered to the Bank of England. There are a number of 
possible reasons for this: it is August, a traditionally quiet month in the 
City; big pension funds want to hold on to their long-dated gilts because they 
need them to match their promises to savers; also, many in the City were not 
expecting more QE from the Bank so soon after the referendum and were caught on 
the hop by the new bond-buying.

Why Bank of England's bond-buying failure may not be just a blip | Larry 
Elliott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/10/why-the-banks-bond-buying-failure-may-not-be-just-a-blip>
Should savers be worried?

It is unusual for individuals to buy and hold gilts. But if you wanted to buy 
any now, you would find them more expensive and the returns less attractive. 
The prices are already being forced up because of the expected demand from the 
Bank of England wanting to buy them in the coming six months. This price rise 
is driving down the yield – the way the return is measured for anyone buying 
the bond at that price and holding it to maturity. In some casesthe yield has 
turned negative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/10/uk-borrowing-costs-record-lows-bank-post-brexit-plan-gilt-buybacks>
 – effectively, you are paying the government for the security of the future 
repayment. But anyone who has already bought bonds will not be affected – the 
half-yearly payments are pre-determined and the bond will still be paid back at 
maturity. Selling the bond now would ensure a capital gain – although the 
income stream would be lost.

This adds to a broader problem for savers in an era of very low interest 
rates. The Bank also cut official interest rates this month to a record low of 
0.25%, further eating into returns on people’s deposits. But as the Bank’s 
governor, Mark Carney, has implied, this may be the unavoidable price of 
keeping people in their jobs. Carney has also emphasised that the Treasury must 
play a role and economists say that could mean the end of austerity.

There has also been an impact on new retirees. Pension companies have been 
cutting the amount they will pay people who are newly retiring through annuities
 <https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/27/annuities-hit-rates-fall-brexit>
. An annuity is a product available for retirees and offers an income for life, 
bought at retirement with all or part of a person’s pension savings. The 
returns available reflect movements in interest rates, and, since the Brexit 
vote, the money markets have signalled lower long-term rates.

Is the Bank going to struggle to buy enough gilts to meet its target?

The easy answer is that it is too early to tell. The next big test comes on 
Tuesday, when the Bank goes back into the market to buy the longest-dated 
gilts. Even if it meets its goals, there is still a risk that future buybacks 
will stumble. The Bank may have to offer more money to get pension funds to 
part with some of their longer-dated bond holdings. It may also have tobuy more 
shorter-dated bonds than currently planned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/10/why-the-banks-bond-buying-failure-may-not-be-just-a-blip>
.
 