
Britain has voted to leave the EU. Some ramifications will take time to become 
apparent, but many of the implications are already becoming clear. So what does 
the Brexit vote mean for you, and where will you see the effects first?

Will my summer holiday be more expensive?

Sterling’s overnight collapse pushed it down to a low of €1.20 against the 
euro, or 15% less than the €1.42 rate enjoyed by holidaymakers last summer. 
However, it recovered slightly in mid-morning trading, pulling back to €1.25, 
meaning the one-day fall is closer to 4.5%. Against the US dollar it is down 
more, by around 6.5%

In terms of spending, that means a family who last year got through £500 while 
on holiday will this year need to find around £65 more.

More immediately, holidaymakers trying to change their money into euros are 
finding it tough; Thomas Cook has temporarily suspended some dealing over its 
online travel money website. Tesco also called a halt to travel money services 
this morning but has since resumed.

Thomas Cook has also placed a temporary £1,000 limit per customer on purchases 
of foreign currency in its High Street shops.

“We have temporarily suspended our travel money website following 
unprecedented customer demand for foreign currency overnight and this morning,” 
it said.


“We apologise to all customers affected. Our immediate priority is to ensure 
that we have enough currency in store to fulfill outstanding orders.”


Most currency commentators say that holidaymakers should in any case hold off 
from buying euros for now.

Ian Hughes, of financial researcher Consumer Intelligence, said: “We would 
strongly advise anyone planning to buy foreign currency this weekend to hold 
off. And anyone, including small business owners, who has to make foreign 
currency payments should also delay if possible.


“The margins charged by banks and payments bureaux are likely to peak over the 
weekend if they are still quoting rates. By the middle of next week it should 
have settled down, although consumers may still lose out on euros.”

As for freedom to travel, Britons will in all probability be able to enjoy 
visa-free travel to EU countries for the foreseeable future. Travellers in the 
coming months will continue to queue with EU passport holders when going to
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, but be prepared to 
switch to the “All other passports” lane when we’ve left.


Is it a bad time to buy a house?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00596f0aedf1c49ba2f4f9bf8c671f4aefcd614b%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00596f0aedf1c49ba2f4f9bf8c671f4aefcd614b%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Brexit could hit housebuilders hardest. Photograph: Ian Nicholson/PA 
This morning there are signs that nervous buyers are pulling out of 
transactions, fearing that the result may push prices down and leave them in 
instant negative equity.

One buyer, who wanted to remain anonymous, said: “I started the process of 
buying a house months ago when the possibility of Brexit seemed a bit distant 
and not of huge concern.

House price fall could follow Brexit, say experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/24/house-price-fall-could-follow-brexit-say-experts>
“Now it’s actually happened and the effect it’s already having on financial 
markets makes me hesitant about continuing with the purchase.”

Henry Pryor <https://twitter.com/HenryPryor?lang=en-gb>, a respected 
independent property market expert, took to Twitter this morning to predict 
that UK house prices will fall by 15%, with transaction volumes down by 20%, 
while at KPMG they are predicting a 5% fall in prices across the regions.



Housebuilders quickly emerged as among the most vulnerable to Brexit 
Construction companies and estate agents were among the worst hit in the first 
minutes of trading. Some London developers have inserted Brexit clauses, 
promising to refund buyers in the event of a leave vote, but others may also 
find that investors are trying to escape deals.

If sterling continues to plummet there may, however, be a buying opportunity 
for overseas investors. Peter Wetherell, a Mayfair estate agent, has predicted 
a “Brexit bubble” as buyers rush in to snap up property in London’s priciest 
neighbourhoods.

“For overseas buyers, a big drop in the value of sterling will effectively 
offset the stamp duty and tax adjustments, and make prime London property a 
lucrative investment,” he said. “Dollar-based Middle East and Asian investors 
in particular will look at short-term buying opportunities in central London.”



How will it affect my mortgage? 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9575673b07ad1bdeced2446d474db22b6311b46d%2F689_770_4927_2956%2F4927.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9575673b07ad1bdeced2446d474db22b6311b46d%2F689_770_4927_2956%2F4927.jpg>
 Mortgage payments could be affected if interest rates rise. Photograph: 
Christine Balderas/Getty Images 
All eyes were on official Bank of England movements, with governor Mark Carney 
speaking soon after David Cameron on Friday morning to reassure the markets.

He stopped short of a hike in interest rates to defend the pound, which would 
have hit millions of households on tracker-style mortgages. Around 700,000 
people are on Nationwide’s 2.5% standard variable rate, for example, and they 
would have been hit badly. If the base rate goes up by 0.5%, it will take the 
cost of a £100,000 mortgage to £474 from £449.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20how%20Britain%20voted%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20referendum%3A%20how%20Britain%20voted%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video&media=>
EU referendum: how Britain voted for Brexit – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/24/eu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video>
There was no immediate announcement on interest rates and it is just as 
possible that they could fall to provide liquidity and restore order to 
markets. Each half-point change in rates adds or subtracts around £25 a month 
to most people’s repayment mortgages. Those with interest-only mortgages see 
steeper changes – around £42 a month for every 0.5% rate change.

Already there are signs that new fixed-rate mortgage deals could drop – with 
many more coming in below 2% – in response to changes in the bond markets.

Ray Boulger, of mortgage broker John Charcol, said a fall in gilt yields on 
Friday morning would reduce the cost for lenders of longer-term funding “and 
hence open the door for even cheaper fixed-rate mortgages”.

He advised those thinking about taking out a fixed-rate mortgage to hold off 
for a week or so.


What does it mean for the price of petrol?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e4fa711728a86ba5f4f198d4799a2c83fabc0cb%2F0_202_4204_2523%2F4204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e4fa711728a86ba5f4f198d4799a2c83fabc0cb%2F0_202_4204_2523%2F4204.jpg>
 Petrol and diesel prices are expected to increase. Photograph: Nick Ansell/PA 
As with so many seismic political decisions, it’s going to hit the price at 
the pumps so get ready for the cost of petrol to rise in the next few days. 
Crude oil is priced in dollars, and once that figure is converted into today’s 
lower sterling rate, the price is likely to increase.

The AA warned on Friday morning that petrol and diesel prices were set to 
creep up as a result of the 6%-7% fall in the pound.

However, the leave vote sent crude prices falling 3.7% to $49 – offsetting the 
pound’s fall for UK drivers. Currently, unleaded petrol and diesel both cost 
around £1.11 per litre, substantially down from the £1.50 per litre seen in 
2012.

Edmund King, president of the AA, said: “Fuel prices will be the biggest 
immediate concern of drivers with the weaker pound and the chancellor’s 
prediction that leaving the EU would lead to fuel duty increases. We will 
oppose duty increases and continue to monitor the situation on behalf of our 
members.”

It may make sense to fill up this morning at garages that have not raised 
their prices. Note that fuel duty is 57.95p a litre for both petrol and diesel, 
and remains the biggest component of the price we pay. Motorists also pay 20% 
VAT on fuel.


Should I move my savings?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d459406f3d92cbf82d8a05fdba9badba54b6028%2F0_167_5107_3063%2F5107.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d459406f3d92cbf82d8a05fdba9badba54b6028%2F0_167_5107_3063%2F5107.jpg>
 The rates on cash Isas could fall. Photograph: Alamy 
Many cash Isas already pay only 1% interest or less, and could fall to 
near-invisible levels if base rate is cut in the coming weeks. Some fixed-rate 
Isa deals were on Friday morning paying rates of 2% (over three years) or 1.5% 
(fixed for two years). These will inevitably soon be withdrawn and replaced 
with worse rates.

Will the stock market freefall hurt my pension? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff22e1299b22ef722dd9cb22c9625ce31b79b0296%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff22e1299b22ef722dd9cb22c9625ce31b79b0296%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 As pensions are only around 50% invested in shares, with the rest in bonds, 
the immediate impact will not be as bad as the FTSE numbers suggest. 
Photograph: Alamy 
When the FTSE opened on Friday morning, the initial collapse was huge, wiping 
more than £100bn off the value of shares in the top 100 companies in a matter 
of minutes. Stock markets around the world have reacted with shock: the Tokyo 
market was down 7%, Hong Kong down 5% and Sydney is off 3.5%. In Europe, the 
German market dropped nearly 8%, as did the French.

If you have a “defined contribution” type of pension fund where the value is 
dependent on market movements, you’ll be worst hit. But these days pensions are 
only around 50% invested in shares, with the rest in bonds, so the immediate 
impact will not be as bad as the FTSE numbers suggest.

Financial advisers were out in force this morning telling small investors to 
keep calm and carry on. Neil Woodford, Britain’s most highly respected fund 
manager, said: “Markets are clearly shocked by the decision but, in our view, 
it is not as negative a development as the market’s initial reaction appears to 
imply.

“As I have said on a number of occasions recently, the global economic 
backdrop will continue to be challenging, regardless of our membership of the 
EU. Many of the greatest economic challenges that we face now and in the 
future, in my view, dwarf the economic issues associated with today’s outcome.”

 He added: “Nevertheless, in the near term it is likely that UK GDP will be 
lower over the next 18 months or so than if we had voted to remain. But, 
because inflation will (temporarily) be higher following the fall in the pound, 
nominal GDP could well be little changed. Growth in consumer cash flow will be 
marginally lower, principally because fuel prices will be higher but of course 
exporters will enjoy something of a windfall.”





Is my job safe? 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50d4efba369affaefa6baa02d7e4ab94addb4ed2%2F0_0_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%20Brexit%20mean%20for%20you%3F%20Holidays%2C%20homes%20and%20jobs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Fhomes-holidays-jobs-what-does-brexit-mean-for-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50d4efba369affaefa6baa02d7e4ab94addb4ed2%2F0_0_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Will Brexit lead to more opportunities in the UK for university leavers? 
Photograph: Chris Ison/PA 
It is difficult to know exactly what impact on jobs leaving the EU will have. 
Much will depend on whether a recession will be triggered by the referendum 
result, as many international financial organisations have warned, and what 
deal the UK can negotiate with EU member states.

Experts have warned that those most likely to be affected by leaving the union 
will be those employed in the service sectors that trade with the EU, and 
forecast that those working in financial services, tourism and car 
manufacturing will be major losers as these industries struggle post-Brexit.

International companies previously warned that the UK would become a less 
attractive place to set up shop if it left the EU, meaning potentially fewer 
companies will now come to Britain and offer work to UK nationals.

If a recession is on its way, there may also be fewer jobs on offer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/may/22/ask-the-experts-what-impact-would-brexit-have-on-uk-jobs>
 from UK companies. A study by PathMotion surveying HR managers and senior 
executives of 75 top UK graduate employers, released last week, revealed that 
49% of employers said they were likely to lower their intake of graduates if 
Britain left the EU.

A leave vote will almost certainly make it more difficult for Britons to get 
work overseas. As part of the EU, UK citizens are allowed to live and work 
anywhere within the 28 member states, but this will probably change now the UK 
has opted out and Brits might be required to obtain visas to live and work in 
Europe.

A key argument of the leave campaign was that a drop in immigration as a 
result of Britain leaving the EU would decrease competition, making it easier 
for Britons to find work in the UK.

The PathMotion survey bore this out, finding that if UK companies were unable 
to freely hire EU graduates as a result of Brexit, 25% of employers said they 
would be likely to increaserecruitment of British graduates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/jun/20/leave-or-remain-the-impact-brexit-would-have-on-uk-jobs>
.

However, given that many European workers are employed in minimum wage work, 
the reduction in EU immigration may mean more UK nationals in London coffee 
houses and picking carrots in Lincolnshire. Given the low wages of these jobs, 
it is a shot in the dark as to whether consumers will pay more for goods, which 
would see wages for this work increase, or whether farmers and cafe owners will 
be priced out of business.
























 