
When is a contractual bunfight not a contractual bunfight? How about when it 
involves a famous actress, a high-flying businessman, two frozen embryos and 
the New York Times?

On Thursday Nick Loeb, ex-partner of Modern Family star Sofía Vergara, 
publishedan op-ed in the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/30/opinion/sofiavergaras-ex-fiance-our-frozen-embryos-have-a-right-to-live.html?_r=1>
, pleading the case that he be allowed to take possession of two IVF embryos 
the couple created in 2013:

In 2013, Sofía and I agreed to try to use in vitro fertilization and a 
surrogate to have children. We signed a form stating that any embryos created 
through the process could be brought to term only with both parties’ consent. 
The form did not specify — as California law requires — what would happen if we 
separated. I am asking to have it voided.

Loeb’s belief is that keeping the two embryos frozen indefinitely, Vergara’s 
stated preference 
<http://www.people.com/article/sofia-vergara-responds-nick-loeb-embryo-lawsuit>
, is “tantamount to murder.” His op-ed is heavy with pro-life rhetoric, 
emphasising that he considers himself a Catholic and was deeply affected by a 
past girlfriend’s decision to have an abortion.

It’s an emotional plea, clearly crafted to present Loeb as a man concerned 
with matters of conscience and religion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fwhat-does-nick-loebs-embryo-revelation-achieve-except-to-shame-sofia-vergara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcbbb2f773fb470e885bec60b9e6f911483cb9ea%2F0_0_1799_3500%2F1799.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20does%20Nick%20Loeb's%20embryo%20revelation%20achieve%2C%20except%20to%20shame%20Sof%C3%ADa%20Vergara%3F%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Robertson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fwhat-does-nick-loebs-embryo-revelation-achieve-except-to-shame-sofia-vergara%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20does%20Nick%20Loeb%27s%20embryo%20revelation%20achieve%2C%20except%20to%20shame%20Sof%C3%ADa%20Vergara%3F%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Robertson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fwhat-does-nick-loebs-embryo-revelation-achieve-except-to-shame-sofia-vergara%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcbbb2f773fb470e885bec60b9e6f911483cb9ea%2F0_0_1799_3500%2F1799.jpg>
 ‘Loeb’s belief is that keeping the two embryos frozen indefinitely, Vergara’s 
stated preference, is “tantamount to murder”.’ Photograph: Mario Anzuoni/Reuters
The key phrase, however, is this: “We signed a form stating that any embryos 
created through the process could be brought to term only with both parties’ 
consent.”

Scraping away the calculated diction, a few problems emerge. Firstly, if Loeb 
considers himself a Catholic, why did he engage in theIVF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ivf> process in the first place?

The Church specifically forbids <http://www.scborromeo.org/ccc/para/2377.htm> 
in vitro fertilisation, and all assisted reproductive technologies that involve 
conception that takes place outside of sexual intercourse within marriage, on 
the grounds that they are “contrary to the dignity and equality that must be 
common to parents and children”.

Secondly, if Loeb and Vergara hadn’t ended their relationship, the contractual 
provision that any created embryos “could be brought to term only with both 
parties’ consent” would still be in force.

Pope Benedict “told researchers that IVF embryos have a right to life even 
before implantation 
<http://webcache.googleusercontent.com/search?q=cache:bYUceo_cjVIJ:www.popepaulvi.com/PDF/Newsletter-FCYoungWomen/FCCO-Newsletter_V4n1_Issue10.pdf+&cd=1&hl=en&ct=clnk&gl=au>
,” meaning that Loeb has again violated the Church’s teaching. If they remained 
together, but Vergara decided against implantation, the embryos would have had 
to remain frozen in perpetuity.

It seems that Loeb is perfectly willing to discard Catholic morals when it 
suits him, so what makes this occasion different? Of course, it’s possible his 
faith has changed and he’s re-committed himself to human beings’ inviolable 
dignity.

But this brings us back to the facts of the matter: the case is fundamentally 
about an agreement – a contract – not whether the embryos have a right to life.

Or as Loeb puts it, whether “one person’s desire to avoid biological 
parenthood ... outweighs another’s religious beliefs in the sanctity of life 
and desire to be a parent”.

This makes his op-ed look like it was written with motives that he’s not 
disclosing. Whatever you believe are the rights (or not) of the couple’s two 
frozen embryos, it’s clear that Loeb is airing his and Vergara’s fraught, 
private relationship issues.


No provision was made for what would happen if they split up, and Loeb has 
pulled a classic fathers’ rights move by putting pressure on Vergara. The only 
difference that reproductive technology makes is that the children to which he 
is trying to secure access haven’t been born yet.

His claim to have “wanted to keep this private, but recently the story broke 
to the world” is also questionable: if he wanted to keep it private, why is he 
writing about it in the New York Times?

Nick Loeb is the only person who knows for what reason this stunning public 
exposure has been mounted, but by downplaying the facts and glossing over his 
own ethical inconsistencies he’s made himself look more like a jilted boyfriend 
trying to punish Vergara than a father, heartsick over his unborn children.

What do his revelations achieve, except to damage Vergara’s reputation and 
cause her pain and distress? The real question this matter raises is why the 
New York Times agreed to publish such a vengeful screed. Where is the public 
interest in this case? Loeb’s decision to violate Vergara’s privacy like this 
should be roundly condemned.
 