
Not many experts thought that the “emergency” base rate cut to 0.5% on March 
5, 2009 would last for long. But seven years later savers have lostaround 
£160bn in interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/02/low-interest-rates-savers-monetary-policy>
, while the prospect of rate rises are slipping further into the distance.

In the immediate aftermath of the cut to 0.5%, rates for savers remained 
relatively high.

Our analysis shows how cash Isas <https://www.theguardian.com/money/isas> were 
offering 3%, and notice accounts 3.5%, in March 2009, and for the next couple 
of years they hovered around this level. After all, most banks and building 
societies were desperate for deposits after the great financial crash, so they 
were willing to pay far above the Bank of England base rate.

The real villain turns out to be the Funding for Lending government programme 
introduced in July 2012, which effectively provided cheap money for 
cash-strapped lenders. The effect was almost instantaneous: banks no longer 
needed to attract cash from savers, so they cut the rates on offer.

Susan Hannums of Savingschampion.co.uk says: “While the base rate hitting the 
record 0.5% was bad enough, it was Funding for Lending that had one of the 
biggest impacts. Almost overnight, best-buy rates for savers dropped like a 
stone, followed by an unprecedented number of reductions on existing rates.

“Today we’ve hit over 4,000 rate reductions for existing savers, with little 
sign of this slowing down. This means all savers would be wise to keep checking 
the rate they are getting, and to switch to improve returns when they are no 
longer competitive.

“With almost 50% of easy-access accounts paying 0.5% or less, and the 
best-paying 1.55%, it’s easy to see why so many need to switch.”

Notice accounts

Despite the Bank of England cutting rates to 0.5% in 2009, there were three 
providers offering savers 3.5% – more than twice that on the best accounts 
today. And, what’s more, they did not expect customers to lock their money away 
for years in a fixed-rate bond.

Anyone who took out Secure Trust Bank’s 60-day notice account (issue 2) has 
actually had a very good deal. Back in 2009 it paid a table-topping 3.52% on 
balances over £1,000.

Today it is closed to new customers, and when that happens banks usually let 
the rate fall to a miserable level. But to Secure Trust’s credit it continues 
to pay 1.99% to existing customers. That may not sound much, but it’s more than 
any bank is paying on notice accounts and would be at the top of our tables if 
it were available to new customers.

Seven years of low interest rates have 'cost savers up to £160bn'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/02/low-interest-rates-savers-monetary-policy>
It’s not so good news for the people attracted to the 3.5% that West Bromwich 
building society was paying on its High Income Over 65 account at the time. In 
2015, the society renamed it Monthly Income Saver, and it now pays 1.25%.

It’s the same story at FirstSave, where the 90-day notice account was paying 
3.5% in 2009. It has also been withdrawn, but pays 1.25% to savers who continue 
to keep their money there. Neither is terrible, given today’s prevailing rates, 
but not great either.

Customers might want to shift their money to today’s best notice accounts, 
which are the 1.75% deal from Secure Trust and the 1.81% from Al Rayan.

Savers who trusted ICICI Bank may be feeling more miffed. In 2009 it featured 
heavily in our best-buy tables with its internet-only HiSave account paying 
2.95% interest. But today that pays only 0.5%. Its web page still says “earn a 
high rate of interest”, which must be galling to account holders.

The same bank is paying 1.4% interest to new customers who open a HiSave Super 
Savings <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> account. Customers with the 
old HiSave account should ask to be transferred.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fsavers-lost-160bn-interest-rates-cut-best-buy-tables%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F847c1d0bfcb9cc545f189a6799f865ced1d8c5f1%2F0_352_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%E2%80%99s%20best%20for%20savers%20who%E2%80%99ve%20lost%20%C2%A3160bn%20of%20interest%20in%20seven%20years%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fsavers-lost-160bn-interest-rates-cut-best-buy-tables%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%E2%80%99s%20best%20for%20savers%20who%E2%80%99ve%20lost%20%C2%A3160bn%20of%20interest%20in%20seven%20years%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmar%2F05%2Fsavers-lost-160bn-interest-rates-cut-best-buy-tables%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F847c1d0bfcb9cc545f189a6799f865ced1d8c5f1%2F0_352_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 The Halifax still pays the best interest on a children’s account, but it is 
down from 8% to 6%. Photograph: Alamy 
Cash Isas

Nearly all the big names were battling for your Isa cash in 2009.

Top of the table for instant-access cash Isas was Marks & Spencer Money, 
paying 3.1%. Even higher was the 3.35% from Halifax if you were happy to lock 
the money away for four years. It may not have seemed much of a deal at the 
time, but compared with today’s rates it was a miracle.

The very best instant-access cash Isa, from Post Office Money, now pays just 
1.45%, while if you lock your money away with Halifax now you will get just 2%. 
Customers who took out the M&S Isa at the time now get 1.3%.

But the good news is that savers have been able to shelter far more in a cash 
Isa over the past seven years. In 2009, the maximum that could be placed in one 
was £3,600, but that has jumped to £15,240.

However their attractions will diminish from April this year, because the new 
personal savings allowance will enable account holders to earn up to £1,000 
interest tax-free if they are a 20% taxpayer, or £500 for a 40% taxpayer, 
without having to put the money in an Isa.

Instant access accounts

In 2009, the best branch-based instant-access savings account was Chelsea 
building society’s Rainy Day Savings 3, which paid 2.35% and could be opened 
with just a £10 deposit.

Now it has been withdrawn and pays 1% to account holders who have left their 
money there. But while that sounds a low amount, if you are a new customer at 
Chelsea looking for an instant-access account it’s even worse – you will earn 
just 0.5% gross.

UK's record low interest rates to continue in 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/03/uks-record-low-interest-rates-to-continue-in-2016>
Chelsea building society soon disappeared from our best-buy tables later in 
2009 when it was almost wrecked by £41m in “potentially fraudulent loans”, 
mainly from its buy-to-let mortgage book. It merged with Yorkshire building 
society in 2010 and this year will close the last remaining branches carrying 
the Chelsea name.

Meanwhile, Tesco Bank was the new kid on the block in 2009 in our best-buy 
table for its instant-access account paying 1.75% gross. Today the supermarket 
group’s instant-access account in the stores pays just 0.6% gross, although it 
does offer an internet-only account that pays 1.01%.

Children’s accounts

A scan down our best-buy table from March 2009 reveals a shockingly high 
figure. The Halifax was paying a fixed rate of 8% interest on its children’s 
regular saver account.

Some will be surprised to find that it still pays the best rate on children’s 
savings, with the same regular savings account offering 6%. But the maximum you 
can save is just £100 a month.

Current accounts



Today the best interest to be earned is often on a bank current account rather 
than a savings account.

In 2009 Abbey (remember them) was paying 5.37%, but for an introductory period 
only. Lloyds was in the best-buy table, even though it paid just 1% on its 
Classic Plus account.

Abbey, of course, was taken over by Santander, and its 123 account, paying 3% 
on balances up to £20,000, has been a huge success.

TSB, meanwhile, was carved out of Lloyds, and its Classic Plus account pays 5% 
interest – but sadly only on balances up to £2,000.
 