
There are two types of internet bank which are referred to as standalone and 
cyberbranch. 

Standalone banks operate almost exclusively on the internet. Accounts are 
opened and transactions are conducted online. Non-internet communication with 
the bank is kept to a minimum. Telephone support is usually provided, but if 
you ask for information which is available via the internet you are likely to 
be charged - quite a lot in some cases. Items such as debit cards, cheque books 
and paying in slips can be ordered online and sent to you by standard mail.

Because these banks have dramatically reduced their overheads by operating 
online, their interest rates are often better than those offered by the high 
street banks.

The services offered by these banks varies. Some offer a whole range of 
banking services, from current and savings accounts to loans. Others have a 
more limited product range.

Egg <http://www.egg.com>, Smile <http://www.smile.co.uk>, Cahoot 
<http://www.cahoot.co.uk>, Intelligent Finance <http://www.if.com> and First-E 
<http://www.firste.com> are all considered 'standalone' operations.

Cyberbranches are the online operations of existing high street banks and 
building societies. These banks offer online access as an additional service 
which supplements, rather than replaces, branch and telephone access.

As such, the products, rates and charges mirror those available through the 
traditional branch operation.

If you are an existing customer and your bank has an online operation, getting 
access should be as simple as registering for the internet service and being 
issued with an ID and password. It takes the banks around one week to process 
your registration.

The online service offered by the high street banks varies significantly. Some 
do not have an internet operation while others limit the service to viewing 
balance information. However, most have the facility to carry out simple 
banking transactions online.
 