
Belinda Ridley worked as a silver service waitress before studying for a 
degree in anthropology at Cambridge and later an MSc in development management 
at the London School of Economics.

Now she is working as a social scientist for URS, a consultancy, which 
provides a full range of engineering design and environmental consulting 
services.

Ridley spends her day researching the social impact of business projects which 
clients in the oil and gas industry wish to carry out. Recently, she was in 
Yemen where she was involved in a project to design a series of mitigation and 
management measures to help reduce the social impact of laying pipelines in 
several communities.

Ridley has been working for URS for nearly three years. In that time she has 
encouraged scores of companies to think more deeply about the social impact of 
their business activities and conduct business more ethically as a result.

Ridley sees her job as rewarding. "I like the fact that it is related to my 
two degrees and gives me an opportunity to influence business in an unusual 
way," she says.

After graduating, Ridley undertook a six-month unpaid internship, working on a 
UN research project, based at Shell headquarters in London. The research she 
conducted looked at the possible future scenario of Aids in Africa. It was 
designed to help African and international governments plan how to deal more 
effectively with the crisis.

When this opportunity failed to lead to permanent work with the UN, she looked 
at other opportunities, including attending a conference which led to good 
contacts. Ridley spoke to a panelist who mentioned URS's commitment to 
corporate social responsibility. This resulted in an interview with URS and, 
weeks later, a job.

Ridley's advice for anyone keen to pursue her line of work? "Approach people 
at senior levels in companies, find out how their corporate social 
responsibility works and if they use consultancies."
 