
Anne Perkins: ‘Keir Starmer’s calm, thoughtful argument is a welcome antidote 
to the rage of some Brexiters’

As a former lawyer and director of public prosecutions, Keir Starmer’s 
courtroom techniques are perfectly suited to making the kind ofcalm, thoughtful 
argument 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2016-12-07/debates/CA09D9B2-9634-41C8-8979-8B9CD82DBB8F/TheGovernmentSPlanForBrexit>
 that is such a welcome antidote to the rage of some Brexiters. In a shadow 
Brexit secretary, these talents are indispensable. Starmer is courteous with 
interventions; his timing is perfect; his argument clear. His tactic of asking 
all sympathetic MPs to support a Labour demand for the government to outline 
its plan for EU exit before triggering article 50 was on the brink of revealing 
the size of a cross-party alliance that is already functioning semi-openly.

The Tory backbencher Anna Soubry might have been exaggerating when she said 
she thought there might be 40 colleagues who would back the Starmer motion, but 
the government wasn’t prepared to risk it.
Article 50 atom 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=2f00ae48-ade6-4d35-ace1-1024cc0ac8d8>
Starmer had to achieve three things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/07/brexit-debate-plan-labour-pmqs-call-for-government-to-publish-its-brexit-plan-politics-live?page=with:block-5847e682e4b04a74f2780eee#block-5847e682e4b04a74f2780eee>
 simultaneously: he had to reassure his supporters that the government 
amendment, by reaffirming the March deadline, would not let it off the hook of 
producing a proper plan, while also continuing the campaign to persuade 
Brexiters that demanding a role for parliament is not the same as trying to 
overturn the result. But he also had to define what the promised government 
plan has to cover when it is finally revealed.

This was his real victory: after Wednesday night’s vote, ministers are 
committed to setting out enough detail to enable MPs to hold the government to 
account, and to ensure that the Office of Budget Responsibility can fulfil its 
statutory obligation to scrutinise the sustainability of the public finances. 
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland need to be reassured that their concerns 
will be addressed; and the plan must start to build a consensus between the 48% 
and the 52%. These are serious objectives. They are the basis for proper 
scrutiny.

The speech of the day, though, was made by another lawyer, Dominic Grieve, 
attorney general in the coalition years. It was a blistering attack on the 
“fanciful mindset” of ministers who see Europe as “a pariah entity”, and it 
savagedcolleagues who questioned 
<http://parliamentlive.tv/event/index/353f9224-e34b-4f1b-ab00-5d4c09c7a28d?in=16:31:10&out=16:38:45>
 Gina Miller’s right to bring the case now in the supreme court. “If we go on 
like this,” he said, referring to the abuse and threats levelled at Miller, “we 
will be on the road to a very bad place.”

Martin Kettle: ‘May can’t commit publicly to any Brexit strategy without 
losing some of her party’

The House of Commons is fascinating when it debates Brexit. The issue stirs 
passions, unlikely alliances and dirty dealings. Both main parties are split on 
the issue itself and on tactics. And with a small government majority, the 
prospect of defeat means ministers have to make deals, as Theresa May did on 
Wednesday’s Labour motion. No wonder she is fighting in the courts to minimise 
her exposure to MPs on Brexit. It’s all building up nicely into a new year 
parliamentary session that could give James Graham a sequel to his compelling 
play about 1970s parliamentary wheeling and dealing, This House,now back in the 
West End 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/nov/30/this-house-five-star-review-james-graham-national-theatre-garrick>
 with exquisitely good timing.


Wednesday’s debate was a taster for what we will get in 2017 if the supreme 
court throws the Brexit ball into the parliamentary arena. MPs may get involved 
in January anyway if May publishes the kind of white paper on Brexitthat she 
should. If she is in emollient mood, that might emerge from this debate. But 
don’t hold your breath. TheLabour motion 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmagenda/OP161207.pdf> only 
requires her to publish a plan before invoking article 50. There’s nothing in 
the motion about what such a plan should contain, or how long it should be 
published before article 50 is triggered. Keir Starmer set out some minimum 
conditions, but May is not bound by them in any way.


The political problem for May is that she can’t commit publicly to any Brexit 
strategy without losing the support of one wing of her party. A hard Brexit 
approach will be opposed by Anna Soubry and her allies on the Tory left; a soft 
Brexit by Jacob Rees-Mogg and his chums on the right. Either puts the 
government majority – currently 13, though it could get smallerafter Thursday’s 
Sleaford byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/sleaford-byelection-brexit-richmond>
 – at risk. The issue will have to come to a head one day – but May will put 
that off for as long as she can, in spite of Wednesday’s concession.


Giles Fraser: ‘Article 50 is unknown territory. And nothing will make it 
otherwise’

“No plan survives contact with the enemy,” said Crispin Blunt in Wednesday’s 
Commons debate on Brexit. And in a typical bit of faux Commons outrage, he was 
rounded on by members of the Labour party for describing our EU negotiating 
partners as “the enemy”. That was not what he meant, of course.

The quote was taken from a 19th-century German field marshal, Helmuth Karl 
Bernhard Graf von Moltke: “No operation extends with any certainty beyond the 
first encounter with the main body of the enemy.” In terms of Brexit 
negotiations, it means that there is no way of knowing in advance how things 
are going to turn out when article 50 is triggered. It is unknown territory. 
And nothing will make it otherwise.

But this much we do know: triggered it will be. Because the British people 
have clearly said this is what they wanted. And the Commons have now accepted 
this with a whopping majority. OK, the question asked on 23 June didn’t come 
with explanatory footnotes, so there is some room for interpretation. But the 
vote clearly requires the government to return sovereignty from Brussels. And 
even the Labour party –bar 23 rebels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/07/brexit-debate-plan-labour-pmqs-call-for-government-to-publish-its-brexit-plan-politics-live?page=with:block-58486ddee4b06a0d55b18963#block-58486ddee4b06a0d55b18963>
 – has conceded. “It was close but it was clear,” said Ed Miliband. “We are 
leaving the European Union.”

To say otherwise would have been electoral suicide for Labour. 70% of the 
party’s MPs have constituencies that voted leave, and Paul Nuttall, the new 
Ukip leader, intends to target northern Labour seats at the next election. So 
instead of open hostility to Brexit, they have been obliged to accept the 
triggering of article 50 and confine their hostility to guerrilla action. The 
idea is to pretend to accept the headline result while sabotaging the 
negotiating process, hoping the government slips up.

The government, in turn, has conceded that it will have to offer a 
back-of-a-fag-packet plan ahead of the negotiations. But don’t expect any 
detail. Keir Starmer called for an end to uncertainty. That’s unrealistic – 
these are liminal times. And there won’t be – can’t be – some smoothly managed 
exit. There was a non-militaristic way for Crispin Blunt to have said this. 
It’s an old Jewish proverb: man plans, God laughs.
 