
I can tell a lot about somebody’s upbringing when they ask what I do. While 
most just nod, working-class people tend to look a little confused, and the 
upper class ask if I’m “like a nanny for poor people”. I do everything a nanny 
would do, only I’m a teenager, completely unqualified, and paid much less than 
the minimum wage. And I don’t speak your language very well.

Au pairs see your dirty laundry up close – literally and figuratively. One 
friend knows her host father is having an affair, another says the teenage 
daughter and mother haven’t spoken in months. Another family apparently have 
the most appalling personal hygiene. One local au pair is assumed to be 
sleeping with the father, but that seems too cliched to be true.

Sometimes I wonder what I’m still doing here. I’ve had injuries after 
tantrums, and a child screaming, “Go home, you’re ugly and evil.” Living with 
my boss is a strange dynamic. You can rave about how your au pair is part of 
the family, but I guarantee she resents you a little – and you resent her, too. 
I get on well with my host parents, but feel their frustration over little 
things, for example a spoon left on the counter. It’s a feeling I share when 
I have to cancel cinema plans for last-minute babysitting – for the third week 
running.

What I’m really thinking: the stay-at-home dad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/02/what-im-really-thinking-school-run-dad>
Other days I think I have the best job in the world. I don’t pay for 
accommodation and I live in the centre of an incredible city, in an apartment I 
could never afford. My weekends are entirely free. My host family pays for my 
travel expenses and some of my food. I’ve met amazing friends, and learned a 
lot about life – and more about cooking. I’m also sorry for breaking your ladle.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking at mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>.
 