
The modest gun control policy changes announced in a passionate speech by 
President Obama on Tuesday are not of great substantive importance. But they 
reveal important truths about the state of American politics. The 
disproportionate Republican opposition to the president’s minor executive 
actions on gun control isn’t just about the party’s opposition to any and all 
efforts to stem the tide of gun violence. Their reflexive opposition also 
reflects their refusal to cede any legitimate authority to the president.

After all, the candidates for the Republican presidential nomination didn’t 
even know what executive actions – if any – Barack Obama would take on gun 
control after his Monday meeting with the attorney general, Loretta Lynch. That 
didn’t stop them, because they knew thatthey would oppose 
<http://www.latimes.com/nation/la-na-obama-guns-20160104-story.html> whatever 
actions Obama planned to take.

Tearful Obama tightens gun control and tells idle Congress: 'We can't wait'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/05/obama-gun-control-executive-action-background-checks-licenses-gun-shows-mental-health-funding>
In light of the modesty and obvious legality of the actions that Obama 
announced on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/05/obama-gun-control-executive-action-background-checks-licenses-gun-shows-mental-health-funding>
, the Republicans’ pre-emptive reactions seem comically overwrought. But they 
do reflect two major trends in Republican thought: reflexive opposition to 
taking any measures to stop America’s epidemic of gun violence; and claims that 
standard presidential actions represent some kind of threat to American 
constitutional order.

But Obama’s executive orders are well within the established powers of the 
presidency. The fact that Congress opposes the president’s policy objectives 
does not mean that the president is exceeding his legal authority.

Obama proposed 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/01/04/fact-sheet-new-executive-actions-reduce-gun-violence-and-make-our>
 an executive order interpreting the scope of federal background checks more 
broadly, applying background checks to those who purchase firearms through a 
trust or corporation and requesting the Departments of Defense, Justice and 
Homeland Security conduct research into gun safety. Obama’s statement also said 
that his next budget will contain proposals to hire more FBI agents for 
enforcement and a $500m investment in mental health services.

These are the kinds of small steps that the president can take in the face of 
congressional inaction: slightly ramping up enforcement, directing executive 
branch officials to take certain legally authorized actions. This is combined 
with the shocking tyranny of the president making spending proposals in his 
budget. Obama’s weekend radio addressreflected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/01/obama-to-meet-with-loretta-lynch-to-discuss-epidemic-of-gun-violence>
 the modesty of the proposals: “We know that we can’t stop every act of 
violence. But what if we tried to stop even one?”

Obama's gun control plan may be watered down, but it's not flat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/05/obama-gun-control-plan-reform-background-checks>
Compare the scope of Obama’s reactions with the attacks Republicans made on 
them in advance. Amazingly,they could know 
<http://jezebel.com/g-o-p-presidential-candidates-fuss-about-obamas-push-f-1750854367>
 that Obama’s proposed executive orders would be not merely bad policy but 
illegal. “This president wants to act as if he’s a king, as if he’s a dictator,”
thundered 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/chris-christie-obama-guns_56897783e4b0b958f65bf1ef>
 notedabuser-of-executive-powers 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/11/nyregion/43-count-indictment-of-a-christie-ally-quashed.html?_r=0>
 Chris Christie. Obama is proposing to “use executive power he doesn’t have”
according to 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/10/jeb-bush-florida-felon-voting-rights-clemency>
 serialdenier of voting rights 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/10/jeb-bush-florida-felon-voting-rights-clemency>
 Jeb Bush.

Donald Trump accused Obama of attacking the second amendment. (“I believe in 
the second amendment,” Obamasaid 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/01/05/obama-announces-gun-control-plans-i-believe-in-the-second-amendment.html>
 in his speech. “How did we get to the place where people think requiring a 
comprehensive background check means taking away people’s guns?”)

Reluctant speaker of the House Paul Ryan asserted that Obama was exceeding his 
constitutional authority despite not even knowing what Obama was planning to 
do: “While we don’t yet know the details of the plan, the president is at 
minimum subverting the legislative branch, and potentially overturning its 
will.”

These complaints are all silly.

Claims that these actions violate the second amendment are implausible. Even 
as it has expanded the scope of second amendment rights, the US supreme court 
hasnever suggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/20/us-supreme-court-where-gun-control-victories-matter>
 that background checks intended to prevent violent and/or mentally unstable 
people from acquiring guns are unconstitutional. And this is sensible, because 
the idea that everyone has an absolute right to purchase any weapon is a 
crazily unworkable one, even if you believe that the second amendment protects 
the rights of law-abiding citizens to possess handguns or hunting rifles.

Obama’s proposals are, in terms of gun control policy and executive branch 
authority, ultimately of minor importance. They’re more important for what they 
reveal about the Republican party in 2016 than for their substantive content.

First, the ludicrously overwrought Republican reaction to Obama’s statement 
shows that the party continues to refuse the legitimacy of Obama’s presidency: 
in that environment, utterly ordinary and plainly legal presidential actions 
can and will be cited as examples of a tyranny. Maybe nextRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> will start arguing that Obama 
is violating the US constitution and the will of the people by delivering the 
State of the Union address rather than letting Paul Ryan do it.


And second, it illustrates that gun control is an issue – like upper-class tax 
cuts and countless others – where Republican policy can be boiled down to a 
radical one-note ideological slogan. The effectiveness of a given policy, 
cost/benefit analysis and so on are all beside the point: if a proposal places 
any restriction on the sale or possession of guns, Republicans can know in 
advance that the policies are not merely bad policy but illegal. They can 
confidently make these assertions without even knowing what the proposed 
policies are.

But in 1991, former president Ronald Reagan wrote an op-ed endorsing federal 
gun control legislation 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1991/03/29/opinion/why-i-m-for-the-brady-bill.html>; in 
2016, Obama’s proposed to do less on gun control than even Reagan wanted is 
seen by Reagan-worshipping Republicans as unconscionable tyranny. The 
Republican race to get far to Reagan’s right makes the prospect of the GOP 
obtaining unified control of the government a frightening one indeed.
 