
I see the envy in people’s eyes when I tell them where I live. My constant 
travel to countries, regions and continents far removed from the daily commute 
of suburban England. I come back, flash my suntan around, talk casually of 
dignitaries met, and post bland Facebook updates of trips to exotic places. And 
it is wonderful. But, of course, the opposite is also true: for every beach 
paradise I can also show you an isolated, gossip-ridden, Groundhog Day played 
out in suffocating humidity.

The cocktail parties, the flagged cars, the endless small talk. It’s something 
I thought would get easier but I still find it a grind. You might see me at a 
party, fixed grin, neat dress, nodding along to whatever my companion is 
saying, looking to the manor born a diplomat’s wife. But I don’t stay quiet 
because I have nothing to say, or because I am fascinated with the 
conversation. I have opinions, questions and arguments all boiling away 
constantly just under the surface, but I can’t share them. Not without risking 
offence or bad publicity, or at worst, a diplomatic incident. So it’s easier to 
nod along.

What I’m really thinking: the son of an alcoholic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/18/son-alcoholic-what-really-thinking>
I think back to my 20s when I was outspoken, independent and headstrong, all 
dramatic eyeliner and scuffed clothes. That person is still in there, but she 
only comes out behind closed doors, when we’re sure no one’s listening. It’s 
exhausting. It’s also lonely. Flying back to the UK feels increasingly alien. 
Moving constantly is a good distraction from how much I miss my friends and 
family. Meanwhile, I’ll just smile, nod and carry on making the most of my 
gilded cage.

• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com. <>
 