
When I meet the candidate, my first thought is, “Please do well.” Passing the 
one-and-a-half-hour test is not just about them acquiring a licence; it means a 
job. Having to fail a trainee is unpleasant, but the public need to be 
protected from unsuitable drivers. I’m assessing the candidates as soon as I 
meet them. Is English their first language or do I need to give instructions a 
little more carefully? Are they obviously nervous and do they need a few 
friendly words before we start? Are they a bit cocky? Often another sign of 
nerves. I want them to be as settled as possible, so they can deliver their 
best performance.

Their ability is apparent early on. Sometimes I cringe at the lack of 
awareness of problems they’re causing other road users. I don’t intervene 
unless there’s imminent danger. I once used the emergency brake to prevent a 
near collision; the trainee promptly abandoned the bus and marched off across 
fields, never to be seen again.

What I’m really thinking: the cam girl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jun/25/what-im-really-thinking-the-webcam-worker>
Even when a driver is doing well, there’s a danger of them losing 
concentration. I need to stay alert to make a fair assessment. Was that bump 
the kerb, or just a drain cover? Has the driver noticed the flashing red lights 
at the level crossing ahead, or will he try to race the barriers? Sometimes, my 
presence makes the candidate unduly hesitant in tricky situations. When I say, 
“What would you do if I wasn’t here?” it usually helps them.

About 80% of the tests are clear-cut passes or fails, making the decision 
easy. The rest are harder to call. I’m thinking, “Would I like a member of my 
family to be a passenger on your bus?”

• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
 