
I have quite strong opinions about how Christmas Day should look, funnily 
enough. I’ll be honest: there is almost no greater strain on my commitment to 
being a fun and easy-going parent than when it comes to a choice between 
decorating the tree myself so that the spacing of the fairy lights is 
aesthetically pleasing and letting my daughter go wild with enthusiastically 
home-glittered pine cones. (*Deep breaths*) Also, I am very much of the 
if-it-ain’t-broke-don’t-fix-it school of thought when it comes to all things 
festive. I have writtenbefore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/dec/25/what-the-fashion-editors-wear-on-christmas-day>
 about the black velvet party dress being the north star to my nativity scene, 
and I therefore present to you this year’s version. It’s from Topshop, and I 
bought it back in November, it’s adorable, and it’s as close to Valentino as 
you are gonna get for £85. I first wore it to a Bonfire night party, I wore it 
to a Chanel dinner – but I knew from the moment I saw it that I’d be wearing it 
today.Jess Cartner-Morley

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-were-wearing-on-christmas-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F851eed9f353c2b48bb6eac901649c38ba6824147%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20we're%20wearing%20on%20Christmas%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-were-wearing-on-christmas-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20we%27re%20wearing%20on%20Christmas%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-were-wearing-on-christmas-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F851eed9f353c2b48bb6eac901649c38ba6824147%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 Jess Cartner Morley’s Topshop dress. Photograph: Jess Cartner-Morley 
In my fantasy Christmas I’m champagne-giddy in swish pyjamas 
<http://www.net-a-porter.com/gb/en/product/605515/Sleepy_Jones/marina-cotton-poplin-pajama-shirt>
, but that won’t be an option this year. I’ll be quite heavily with child, so 
booze is off the menu, and spending big money on loungewear that won’t fit in a 
couple of months just feels loopy. Instead, I’ll wear the poshest item of 
maternity clothing I own – a needlepoint pinafore byClary & Peg 
<http://www.claryandpeg.co.uk/collections/maternity/products/pinafore> – 
layered over a black poloneck, a look that feels quite 1970smum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/21/how-to-rock-the-70s-look-dress-like-your-mum>
 and therefore very wholesome and Christmassy.Hannah Marriott
 Pinafore from Clary and Peg £115 
http://www.claryandpeg.co.uk/collections/maternity/products/pinafore 
Photograph: Clary and Peg 
Last Christmas, I wore the infamous pan-religious jumper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/nov/24/the-ultimate-christmas-jumper-that-has-a-real-message-of-peace-and-joy>
, because I thought it would be funny, but it wasn’t; so it came off by about 
1130am (it’s also itchy and hot, and my mum tends to whack an entire arboretum 
on the fire when we come home). This year, I’ll be wearing my wide-legged 
Whistles trousers, because you don’t need to wear shoes with them and they’re 
slightly too big, so I can eat what I want. Then it’s a tight men’s vest and, 
over that, my gold sequin bomber jacket which I bought from a charity shop in 
Oslo two years ago for about 250 Norwegian Krone (£19) and which cost the same 
as two slices of pizza. What it lacks in minimality it makes up for in warmth 
(it’s double lined), plus it’s one of those things you can only wear when it’s 
OK to dress like a cartoon, which is today. I occasionally wear it to work and 
when I do, invariably, colleagues offer condolences for the funeral. Ideal, 
really.Morwenna Ferrier

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-were-wearing-on-christmas-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63338e668b57d0918d9747679946151991e12c78%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20we're%20wearing%20on%20Christmas%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-were-wearing-on-christmas-day%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20we%27re%20wearing%20on%20Christmas%20day&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fdec%2F24%2Fwhat-were-wearing-on-christmas-day%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63338e668b57d0918d9747679946151991e12c78%2F0_0_2448_3264%2F2448.jpg>
 Morwenna Ferrier’s gold sequin jacket from Norway. Photograph: Morwenna Ferrier
One of the things I like most about Christmas is the fact that you dress up, 
but stay in, eat too much and watch BBC costume dramas. Such a unique occasion 
requires an interesting sartorial solution – something comfortable, a bit 
glamorous and also forgiving to spillages of gravy and red wine. This year, 
that problem is solved with this glittery jumper fromH&M 
<http://www.hm.com/gb/product/30572?article=30572-C&cm_mmc=pla-_-gb-_-ladies_cardigans_jumpers_jumpers-_-30572&cm_mmc=adwords-_-uk-_-backup-_-&gclid=CM_nqquFrskCFVKZGwodjgALjQ>
. It’s sparkly and green – two seasonal ticks that allow you to look a bit like 
a Christmas tree – and not too tight, so my Christmas dinner plate can be piled 
high. I’ll be wearing it with jeans, red lipstick (for extra Christmassyness, 
obviously) and that ultimate indoors accessory: slippers.Lauren Cochrane
 Glitter-knit jumper from H&M. Photograph: H&M  Birkenstock Arizona Blue 
Shearling sandals (which are sadly, sold out). Photograph: Birkenstock 
Christmas Day is one of those suspend-your-disbelief days (wine at noon when 
you’re not French, telling your family lame cracker jokes. Really?). Normal 
wardrobe rules do not apply, so it’s a good time to try a trend that could only 
really work on one day of the year. This year, I was hoping to wear someblue 
shearling-lined Arizona Birkenstocks 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.com/urban/catalog/productdetail.jsp?id=35616309&category=BRANDS>
 (I mean, when else?), but it turns out several people have had the same idea, 
as they are now sold out in the UK. So, in all honesty, I’ll be wearingthese 
chestnut sheepskin slippers 
<http://www.houseoffraser.co.uk/Just+Sheepskin+Torrington+moccasin+slipper/D515985,default,pd.html>
 and kidding myself that they are quite new-era Gucci. Furry slippers aresuch a 
look for Christmas 2015. Imogen Fox
 