
The Bank of Japan (BoJ) has imposed negative interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/29/bank-of-japan-shocks-markets-by-adopting-negative-interest-rates>
 on banks to encourage them to lend to businesses, instead of hoarding cash, to 
support the flagging economy and the country’s battle to break free of 
deflation.

Stock markets rebound after Japan's shock move to negative interest rates – 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jan/29/volatile-trading-bank-japan-negative-rates-live>
The Japanese central bank’s board shocked markets on Friday by imposing a 0.1% 
fee on deposits left with it to encourage lending amid increasing uncertainty 
over the state of the global economy.

How do negative interest rates work?

Instead of earning interest on money left with the BoJ, banks are charged to 
park their cash. The idea is that instead of depositing money with the central 
bank or each other, they lend it to businesses and consumers. Banks may also 
cut deposit rates paid to customers, encouraging them to spend or invest 
instead of earning low or negative returns.Japan has been plagued by deflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/22/quantitative-easing-around-the-world-lessons-from-japan-uk-and-us>
 – falling prices – for two decades, deterring consumer spending and business 
investment in the expectation that goods will become cheaper.

Bank of Japan shocks markets by adopting negative interest rates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/29/bank-of-japan-shocks-markets-by-adopting-negative-interest-rates>
Negative interest rates are an example of “unconventional” monetary policy, 
which also includesquantitative easing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/20/quantitative-easing-unconventional-monetary-policy>
 – the buying of bonds from commercial banks by central banks, leaving them 
with excess cash. The BoJ said the move to negative interest rates was intended 
to support Japanese business confidence and to signal its determination to get 
inflation moving towards the target of 2%.

The negative rate will only apply to reserves in addition to existing deposits 
and those the central bank requires banks to have with it. This is designed to 
cushion banks’ earnings so that they do not become less willing to lend. The BoJ
said, in a question and answer document 
<http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/release_2016/k160129b.pdf>, that 
interest rates and asset prices in financial markets would nevertheless be set 
on the basis of the negative rate.

Will it work?

It’s far from clear. Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>, has argued his 
unconventional policies – including negative rates – have helped the eurozone 
economy to ward off deflation. In theory the policy sounds attractive, but it 
could have unintended consequences. For example, banks could choose to pass on 
to customers the costs they incur for depositing money with the central bank 
through fees, or depositors could decide to keep their money under the mattress 
instead of in a bank.

A negative return on parking funds with the central bank might also encourage 
banks to invest in riskier assets to secure a return, potentially driving new 
asset bubbles and more pain further down the line.

In search of alternative investments, banks are likely to increase their 
purchases of government bonds. However, this has potentially serious 
consequences if banks are holding bonds to such an extent that government 
borrowing costs are artificially low. If a financial shock occurs, the banks 
and governments could find themselves so intertwined that they drag each other 
– and the economy – down.

Has it happened before?

In announcing its move, the BoJ cited examples of European central banks 
adopting negative interest rates. The main example isthe ECB’s decision to pay 
negative interest rates from June 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/european-central-bank-cuts-deposit-rates>
 in an attempt to stop the eurozone falling into a deflationary spiral.

Switzerland also adopted the measure last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2014/dec/18/swiss-negative-interest-rates-fed-stock-markets-rouble-live>
 to deter investors from buying francs, making Swiss imports uncompetitive.

Sweden and Denmark have also introduced negative deposit rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/05/negative-interest-rates-european-central-bank>
 on a temporary basis in recent years. In Denmark, the aim was to cap an 
unwanted rise in its currency, which was pushed higher when foreign money 
flooded into the country as investors looked for safety outside the 
crisis-ridden eurozone. The move to negative deposit rates did not cause 
financial meltdown, with the Danish central bank issuing plenty of advance 
warning. Nor did it lead to a noticeable change in the interest rates charged 
by banks for bank loans.
 