
I suspect we are an oddity in our cul-de-sac of neighbours, but I have never 
learned to drive, and neither has my partner. “Can I ask your reason for not 
having a car?” they ask, assuming it is the car we are choosing not to have, 
rather than the skills to drive one, and that there are green reasons, since we 
are keen walkers and have had an allotment since we were in our 20s (more than 
a decade ago now).

Family <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/family> members put pressure 
on when I became pregnant with my eldest (now eight), because they were too 
geographically removed to offer lifts. “But you’ll need to drive now, it’ll be 
impossible to manage with children.” I worried about getting to hospital during 
my first pregnancy, but a taxi there (and back with new baby on board), worked 
out fine. Yes, we are restricted to living in a city with good public 
transport, but we are fiercely independent, and using public transport has 
honed our organisational skills.

What I’m really thinking: the adult adoptee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/06/what-im-really-thinking-adult-adoptee>
“I felt awful driving past you at the bus stop,” people say. Please do not, it 
is our norm, and we generally carry a bag equipped with raincoats for turns in 
the weather and snacks for when a bus does not show. We gratefully accept lifts 
on occasion, though we will never court them.

Our children are growing up happily travelling around on foot, bus or train. 
They are fit and hardened to the elements. They have a greater relationship 
with their immediate environment than their car-driven peers. I see the 
benefits in their exposure to the diversity of people they meet walking around 
or on public transport – people whom their car driven peers may only ever wave 
to.




• Tell us what you’re really thinking – email mind@theguardian.com 
<mailto:mind@theguardian.com>
 