
Education bill scrapped after series of reversals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/27/government-drops-education-bill-after-series-of-reversals>
The government has announced it is dropping its planned education bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/27/government-drops-education-bill-after-series-of-reversals>
 in England, despite it being included in the Queen’s speech. How did that 
happen?

Five months is a long time in education policy. The “education for all” bill, 
whose provisions were unveiled by the then chancellor George Osborne in his 
March budget, was quietly ditched on Thursday after some oblique remarks ina 
written statement 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Lords/2016-10-27/HLWS224/>
 by education secretary Justine Greening. It was a miserable end for Nicky 
Morgan’s legacy as Greening’s predecessor, and the termination of the David 
Cameron-Michael Gove era of educational policy-making.

Has this got anything to do with grammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/grammarschools>?

Not directly. In fact, Greening’s statement, ostensibly announcing a new 
technical and further education bill, was blunt on that point: the current 
“Schools that work for everyone” consultation remains on track, “including 
selective places for local areas that want them”. But Labour detects signs that 
the government is having second thoughts about grammar schools, and in reality 
the consultation on selection is open until later in November, with a white 
paper to come early next year – and presumably another education bill will 
appear after that. Greening’s move is a clearing of the decks: getting rid of 
the leftovers from the Morgan regime in order to press on with grammar schools 
and other higher priorities.

What has been lost with the demise of the bill?

Morgan’s signature measure – that all state schools would be forced to become 
academies by 2022 –had already been rowed back upon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/06/government-backs-down-over-plan-to-make-all-schools-academies>
. But Greening’s non-announcement does kill off the government’s stated 
determination to convert all schools into academies, even without a time frame. 
Greening’s position is that “our focus … is on encouraging schools to convert 
voluntarily”. Among the provisions to go is one that required all schools in 
“underperforming” local authorities to become academies. Another is 
the abolition of statutory places for parent-governors on the boards of 
maintained schools.

Where does this leave local authorities and the schools they will still be 
overseeing?

The old bill would effectively have ended the role of local authorities in 
schools (other than running admissions), placing school improvement in the 
hands of regional schools commissioners. The government has already budgeted 
cuts of £600m for local authority schools services next year. Now local 
authorities have been left in limbo: they still have school-improvement 
responsibilities, a large number of mainly primary schools to oversee, and no 
money to do it with. Naturally they are hoping the government will reverse the 
cuts and allow them to fund school improvement and other educational functions.

So why did the government wait so long to drop the bill?

It took the Department for Education this long to realise how much work it has 
in front of it. It has only recently completed taking responsibility for higher 
education from the old Department for Business Innovation and Science, a merger 
that brought with it another bill to pilot through parliament. Then there was 
the existing children and social work bill and, as of Thursday, the technical 
and further education bill, meaning that the DfE had three bills on the go. On 
top of that the department has the schools consultation – including the thorny 
issue of grammar schools – to prepare. Then there’s the matter of a promised 
new schools funding formula, to replace the current byzantine system. It’s a 
complicated issue that has already been delayed, with Greening last summer 
promising a DfE response by this autumn. That’s not to mention the department’s 
daily work of pushing along academies and free schools, and a plethora of other 
issues.

Almost a third of teachers quit state sector within five years of qualifying
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/24/almost-third-of-teachers-quit-within-five-years-of-qualifying-figures>
Why are abrupt changes in policy so common at the moment?

That may have much to do with the post-Brexit change of government, with new 
ministers and leaders not committed to existing policies and able to ditch 
those that had proved to be unpopular or inconvenient – even those proposed in 
a Queen’s speech. Greening has even dropped a 2015 manifesto commitment that 
would have seen resits for children who underperformed in maths, and reading 
tests at the end of primary school. A controversial primary school spelling, 
punctuation and grammar test has also been put on hold after Greening called 
for the issue of primary school assessment to be retooled.

What other U-turns may be on the way?

The outlook for legislation allowing new grammar schools remains fraught: 
there appears to be little enthusiasm for it among Conservatives. Even if the 
SNP stays neutral, any new law could get blocked in the House of Lords. But one 
policy that could easily be dropped isforced retakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/24/new-gcse-rules-could-bring-down-pass-rate>
 for pupils who fail to gain at least a C in maths and English GCSEs – another 
Gove-era legacy that is very unpopular among head teachers.
 