
Oh, Melbourne, you little creative petri dish, you; you’ve outshone Sydney 
again.

On Tuesday, Daniel Andrews’ Labor government pledged an extra $115m 
<http://www.artshub.com.au/news-article/news/grants-and-funding/deborah-stone/115-million-new-funds-for-the-arts-251072>
 in funding for the Victorian creative industries, to be spent over the next 
four years. On the eve of the 3 May federal budget – that time of year our 
Canberra leaders now traditionally celebrate by giving the artsa good booting 
<https://www.themonthly.com.au/issue/2014/october/1412085600/steve-dow/state-arts>
 – the Victorian government has stolen the show, strengthening its claim as 
Australia’s arts mecca.

George Brandis and the arts funding crisis: one hell of a one-man show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/04/australias-arts-funding-crisis-george-brandis-one-man-show>
The Andrews government’s pledge will grow Victoria’s cultural capital through 
new talent development programs, commissions of work, provision of co-working 
spaces and the announcement of an annual creative industries summit, among a 
list of 40 initiatives.

There are two crucial lessons here. First, these policy positions were arrived 
at by a taskforce kept at arm’s length from government. The taskforce of 25 
industry professionals – including TV presenter Shaun Micallef, comedian Eddie 
Perfect, showrunner Tony Ayres, Melbourne University Press director Louise 
Adler, and Australian Centre for the Moving Image (Acmi) CEO Katrina Sedgwick –
held 21 consultation workshops over five weeks 
<https://www.thesaturdaypaper.com.au/news/politics/2015/06/13/creative-victoria-taskforce-vows-consult-widely/14341176001997>
, which approached the creative industries as a broad rubric that includes game 
development, graphic design, fashion, filmmaking, performing arts, publishing, 
architecture, advertising, media, music, comedy and craft.

Second, the emphasis was on access and inclusion for creative people and for 
audiences, rather than viewing culture as the province of elites.

By contrast, under former federal arts minister George Brandis, $104.7 million 
over four years was ripped from the independently managed Australia Council in 
2015 to be specifically placed instead in a National Program for Excellence in 
the Arts (Npea) that would sit under his ministerial control. There was next to 
no consultation prior to this move.

Brandis accused of favouritism over jazz festival backed by Sophie Mirabella
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/18/brandis-accused-of-favouritism-over-jazz-festival-backed-by-sophie-mirabella>
Artists at the lower end of the earning scale alleged Brandis was favouring 
the likes of ballet, opera and international touring orchestras, by 
quarantining funds for the major performing arts companies. He was also accused 
ofpursuing political favours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/18/brandis-accused-of-favouritism-over-jazz-festival-backed-by-sophie-mirabella>
.

When Malcolm Turnbull replaced Tony Abbott as prime minister, Brandis was 
elbowed out of the arts portfolio in favour of Mitch Fifield, who pledged to be 
more consultative, and returned $32 million to the Australia Council.

Yet with the remaining funds the Npea was simply rebranded as Catalyst, with 
Fifield announcing last week a$400,000 grant to help bring international 
artists to Australia 
<http://www.minister.communications.gov.au/mitch_fifield/news/catalyst_funds_new_international_artist_residency_in_wa#.VxbRZmNRYSk>
.

Tell us you’re dreaming, Mitch. Those funds should be for the development of 
Australian artists.

As these two vigorously contrasting approaches of the Victorian and federal 
government continue to be analysed, the NSW Baird Government’s approach to arts 
and culture has attracted less attention. In February 2015 it releasedCreate in 
NSW 
<http://www.arts.nsw.gov.au/index.php/arts-in-nsw/create-in-nsw/the-nsw-arts-and-cultural-policy-framework-create-in-nsw/>
, the state’s first arts and cultural policy framework, with an emphasis on 
“excellence, access and strength”.

Untold stories: western Sydney theatre companies put diversity at centre stage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/19/untold-stories-western-sydney-theatre-companies-put-diversity-at-centre-stage>
Last October, it announced $19 million 
<http://www.arts.nsw.gov.au/index.php/news-and-publications/news/19-million-to-enrich-nsw-arts-and-culture-2/>
 to be spread across 160 NSW arts and cultural organisations in 2016. Nineteen 
western Sydney arts and cultural organisations would get $3.4 million in 2016, 
up from $2.4 million last year. Mike Baird and his arts minister, Troy Grant, 
have pledged to “increase opportunities for people to take part in and shape 
arts and culture” over the next decade.

But in the meantime, the NSW premier’s greatest cultural contribution has been 
enforcing lockout laws that harm the city’s cultural nightlife and push more 
people –including the violent ones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/20/sydney-lockout-laws-rise-in-assaults-at-star-outweighed-by-fall-in-other-areas>
 – into casinos instead.

There is culture high, middle and low in Sydney, but it is spread out; there 
need to be ways to bring it together, ways that encourage emerging and 
mid-career artists, and help them reach audiences struggling with the expense 
of the place.

Sydney is certainly blessed by its topography; the city can offer a harbour 
setting for opera, open-air cinema and a writers’ festival, an art Biennale 
across several major sites, a city council that throws open urban creative 
spaces, and the future promise of theSydney Modern redesign of the Art Gallery 
of NSW <http://www.artgallery.nsw.gov.au/sydney-modern-project/> – if it ever 
gets funded.

Although a NSW creative industries action plan in 2013 
<http://www.industry.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0019/55234/iap_nsw_creative_industries.pdf>
 shied away from recommending budget increases – opting instead for the 
triumphalism of creative branding for the state – there have been welcome 
pledges of infrastructure funding since then. But the $202 million the Baird 
government offered last year to upgrade Sydney Opera House willneglect the 
smaller opera theatre 
<http://www.smh.com.au/nsw/nsw-state-election-2015/arts-funding-calls-for-more-for-opera-house-theatre-western-sydney-20150225-13oh15.html>
, and the $139 million for the revamped Walsh Bay arts precinct won’t help 
audiences get there without the extension of light rail.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fwhat-australia-needs-to-learn-from-victorias-arts-funding-push%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe717f66ca43ae080b7b82f8037226d7b1a252d75%2F5_0_1030_618%2F1030.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20Australia%20needs%20to%20learn%20from%20Victoria's%20arts%20funding%20push&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fwhat-australia-needs-to-learn-from-victorias-arts-funding-push%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20Australia%20needs%20to%20learn%20from%20Victoria%27s%20arts%20funding%20push&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fwhat-australia-needs-to-learn-from-victorias-arts-funding-push%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe717f66ca43ae080b7b82f8037226d7b1a252d75%2F5_0_1030_618%2F1030.jpg>
 The Turbine Hall at Cockatoo Island, one of the venues of the 20th Biennale of 
Sydney Photograph: Biennale of Sydney 
I found myself one of the elites recently, feted about on a media bus for a 
preview of the20th Sydney Biennale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/19/sydney-biennale-review-contemporary-art-meets-sci-fi-in-wide-reaching-show>
 to see the art at Cockatoo Island, the Art Gallery of NSW, the Museum of 
Contemporary Art Australia, Artspace at Woolloomooloo and Carriageworks at 
Eveleigh. At the time I wondered: why doesn’t a transport service like this 
exist for the public, every day, connecting Sydney’s cultural institutions for 
comprehensive art enjoyment?

Sydney lockouts: seven creatives give their views – and none of them are good
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/feb/20/sydney-lockouts-seven-creatives-give-their-views-and-none-of-them-are-good>
Central Melbourne has been blessed by better planning, even if the flat grid 
structure makes it a less exciting landscape. In one central area, within 
walking distance, you have Federation Square, the Australian Centre for the 
Moving Image, the National Gallery of Victoria’s two locations, the Melbourne 
Arts centre, Melbourne Recital centre, Melbourne Theatre Company and the 
Malthouse theatre. A true creative cluster.

Sydney, home of developer greed, has had much less luck. It is unfriendly to 
pedestrians and cyclists, and now dead in many pockets at night. I remember 
former Sydney Theatre Company artistic directors Cate Blanchett and Andrew 
Upton telling an audience at Sydney Town Hall a few years ago that the major 
requirement of a healthy future arts precinct at Walsh Bay is public transport. 
That hasn’t changed, save a few straggling additional buses.

You could hardly be surprised then, Sydney, to find your mojo drained by 
creative types fleeing to Melbourne, where art is allowed to experiment – even 
to fail. When those artists who migrate south have artistic triumphs, it may 
well be thanks to Victoria’s foresight and encouragement.
 