
Facebook’s (mostly) annual developer event in San Francisco has been running 
since 2007. Over that time it has morphed from an insider code-builder’s event 
to a high-profile launch event, and though the developers are still there 
Facebook’s message is now rather more well honed when it comes to translating 
their mission to the masses.

This year, chatbots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/13/facebook-army-chatbots-messenger-news-sports>
 and virtual reality grabbed the most attention, but there were many smaller 
but significant announcements too. Here’s everything you need to know from this 
year’s event.


Messenger bots
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90ea1c353d451addece671383efeab4a3b15477c%2F0_118_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20you%20missed%20at%20Facebook's%20F8%20developer%20event%20-%20at%20a%20glance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20you%20missed%20at%20Facebook%27s%20F8%20developer%20event%20-%20at%20a%20glance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90ea1c353d451addece671383efeab4a3b15477c%2F0_118_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Mr Messenger: David Marcus, Facebook vice president of messaging products, 
talks about bots. Photograph: Eric Risberg/AP 
Facebook’s Messenger app, which has 900 million active monthly users, now has 
a new platform that allows developers to build services that work inside the 
chat tool. No messing here:Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> says it is “focused on 
facilitating messages from businesses”, whether a hotel reservations systems, 
customer service or – Zuckerberg’s favorite plug of the day – 1-800-Flowers, 
which can order personalized flower delivery without leaving the Messenger app. 
Bots now include Uber and Lyft, which allow users to order cabs; Dutch airline 
KLM, which will now issue boarding passes; Hyatt hotels which will send 
reservation details; and clothing store Zulily, which will track orders.

What seems like a fiddly novelty with no clear purpose will now very quickly 
become a staple part of our internet experience, just as apps were before it 
and mobile phones before that. And Facebook has a bulging revenues book to 
demonstrate its track record in matching technology with businesses more than 
willing to pay up.

 * Facebook has a new army of chatbots – but what can you do with them?  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/13/facebook-army-chatbots-messenger-news-sports>
Mark Zuckerberg
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fmark-zuckerberg-donald-trump-comments-immigration-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mark%20Zuckerberg%20makes%20veiled%20attack%20on%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fmark-zuckerberg-donald-trump-comments-immigration-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mark%20Zuckerberg%20makes%20veiled%20attack%20on%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fmark-zuckerberg-donald-trump-comments-immigration-video&media=>
‘Fearful voices building walls’: Mark Zuckerberg makes veiled attack on Donald 
Trump. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2016/apr/12/mark-zuckerberg-donald-trump-comments-immigration-video>
Opening the event, Zuckerberg made a discreet dig at Donald Trump’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/12/mark-zuckerberg-facebook-donald-trump-f8>
 wall-building talk and stated his support for immigration as an essential part 
of attracting talent. He demonstrated how Facebook’s live video feature can 
film and broadcast video from different hardware using a drone to fly over the 
heads of the audience. He previewed the latest work on Aquila, Facebook’s 
ongoing project to use high-altitude unmanned drones to beam internet to the 
developing world, and also queued up the most significant new products, from 
Messenger’s chatbots to the Oculus touch controllers. And there was only the 
briefest of mentions to the obstacles Facebook has hit in rolling out its free, 
limited internet service around the world.


 * Facebook F8: Zuckerberg shows off chat bots, VR ... and a dig at Donald 
Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/12/mark-zuckerberg-facebook-donald-trump-f8>
 * Facebook’s ‘colonial’ Free Basics reaches 25 million people – despite 
hiccups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/12/facebook-free-basics-program-reach-f8-developer-conference>
Virtual reality gets social

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fplayer.vimeo.com%2Fvideo%2F162707492&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fplayer.vimeo.com%2Fvideo%2F162707492>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fplayer.vimeo.com%2Fvideo%2F162707492&media=>
 Facebook demonstrating its ‘social presence’ experiment. 
Facebook demonstrated how two people, in entirely different places, can 
interact in a virtual reality space, dropping themselves into a 360 degree 
image of their choice. Both characters could adopt a caricature of their 
choice, draw props for each other and take selfies – in this case “outside” the 
Houses of Parliament in London. The VR team is focused on “social presence”, 
combining the ability to interact with surroundings, and representing body 
language as well as voice.

Artificial intelligence

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a094e525af7626da6a635a12af0c4db9e27209b%2F0_131_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20you%20missed%20at%20Facebook's%20F8%20developer%20event%20-%20at%20a%20glance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20you%20missed%20at%20Facebook%27s%20F8%20developer%20event%20-%20at%20a%20glance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a094e525af7626da6a635a12af0c4db9e27209b%2F0_131_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Facebook is running 50 times more AI experiments than this time last year. 
Photograph: Stephen Lam/Reuters 
Facebook’s applied machine learning team has built what it calls an “AI 
backbone 
<https://code.facebook.com/posts/804694409665581/powering-facebook-experiences-with-ai/>
” that is used by 25% of all Facebook engineers across the company, which is 
running 50 times more AI experiments than this time last year. One of those 
projects is translation, which is used by 800 million people every month, 
Facebook says, along with photo image search, “talking pictures” – which 
recognizes natural language descriptions of photos just by analyzing the image 
– and classification of video images according to subject, which means all your 
cat videos can more efficiently be grouped together.

Facebook live video

The live video tool 
<https://media.fb.com/2016/04/12/introducing-the-facebook-live-api/> will be 
opened up to developers so they can build new applications around it. It can 
combine audio and video from different sources to add effects, can access and 
monitor comments and shares on streams and and can be integrated with other 
hardware devices to broadcast live video from a drone, for example.

Oculus touch controllers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4230732993b258eed3a2e8773d7a7429bb11eb0e%2F0_20_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20you%20missed%20at%20Facebook's%20F8%20developer%20event%20-%20at%20a%20glance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20you%20missed%20at%20Facebook%27s%20F8%20developer%20event%20-%20at%20a%20glance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4230732993b258eed3a2e8773d7a7429bb11eb0e%2F0_20_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Touch controllers for the Oculus Rift virtual reality headsets. Photograph: 
Stephen Lam/Reuters 
Facebook’s virtual reality company will launch a handset 
<https://www.oculus.com/en-us/touch/> later in 2016 that will allow the user to 
touch objects and interact with people in a virtual space. “This will allow a 
whole new layer of immersion, a whole new set of social experiences across all 
these VR platforms … experiences you can’t have with any existing platform 
today,” said Zuckerberg, announcing the new device.

Facebook 360

Facebook has built a prototype system with 17 cameras 
<https://media.fb.com/2016/04/12/facebook-360-updates/> that films high 
quality, 3D, 360 degree ‘spherical’ video. Rather than get into the camera 
business, Facebook is publishing the hardware and software details on GitHub 
later this year so that technologists can build their own 360 cameras. More 
than 20,000 videos have been filed for Facebook 360 so far.

Free Basics

Facebook’s ambitious but slightly troubled plan to provide a limited but free 
selection of apps for mobile phone users in the developing world has now 
reached 25 million users. A new simulator will allow developers to test their 
app in an environment that mimics poor connectivity, while a new demographics 
tool gives anonymized information about people using their app, including their 
region and gender.

Internet connectivity


Social networking isn’t enough, and neither is beaming internet connectivity 
from a high-altitude drone for the developing world; Facebook wants to provide 
wireless internet for underserved urban areas in the western world too. It 
announced theTerragraph 
<https://code.facebook.com/posts/1072680049445290/introducing-facebook-s-new-terrestrial-connectivity-systems-terragraph-and-project-aries/>
 project, which will provide high-speed connections at a relatively low cost . 
The 60GHz signal can’t travel long distances, but can be easily manipulated 
around buildings in dense urban areas. Terragraph is being tested at Facebook’s 
Menlo Park headquarters in California, and the nearby city of San Jose.


The second project is ARIES, a proof of concept that transmits bandwidth very 
efficiently over a relatively small amount of spectrum. Facebook wants this 
technology to be made available to the academic research community so it can be 
improved, and is also interested in developing it for use in rural areas where 
one small chunk of bandwidth has to go a long way.


Developer tools

The new “account kit 
<https://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/2016/04/12/grow-your-app-with-account-kit/>
” feature allows people to log in to apps more easily, with just an email or 
phone number, and with SMS login support for 230 countries. “Profile expression 
<https://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/2016/04/12/enabling-self-expression-with-facebooks-profile-expression-kit/>
” allows users to add videos from third party apps to their Facebook profile 
page, including Cinemagraph Pro and Vine.

Saving articles and quotes

A save button 
<https://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/2016/04/12/share-engage-and-measure-in-new-ways/>
 that lets people save stories, videos and products on online stores to their 
Facebook ‘saved’ folder. A small but significant feature that spells bad news 
for bookmarking tools like Pinboard and Pocket.

 * Added to that, a new quote sharing 
<https://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/2016/04/12/share-engage-and-measure-in-new-ways/>
 tool lets developers build apps that format quotes nicely, and allows them to 
easily highlight and share quotes from articles and web pages. 
 * 

New developer tools
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab0ad65c836b51968b42e162810a106c62a077b5%2F0_206_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20you%20missed%20at%20Facebook's%20F8%20developer%20event%20-%20at%20a%20glance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20you%20missed%20at%20Facebook%27s%20F8%20developer%20event%20-%20at%20a%20glance&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Ffacebook-f8-developer-event-key-points%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab0ad65c836b51968b42e162810a106c62a077b5%2F0_206_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Facebook vice president of platform Deb Liu on stage during at F8. Photograph: 
Stephen Lam/Reuters 
Also appearing in an app near you soon:

 * Instant Articles 
<https://media.fb.com/2016/04/12/instant-articles-now-open/>, the nicely 
formatted, faster news story pages that open inside Facebook, is now open to 
any publisher in the world. Why publish on the open web when you can publish a 
more share-friendly, cleaner bespoke article within Facebook? There is an 
answer to that: the open web.

 * New features added to the analytics tool built for Facebook Apps 
<https://developers.facebook.com/blog/post/2016/04/12/facebook-analytics-for-apps-adds-push-notifications-deeper-insights/>
. Facebook says this is already used by 450,000 apps so that developers can 
monitor the type of audience using their app. 
 * The new rights manager 
<https://media.fb.com/2016/04/12/introducing-rights-manager/> identifies video 
content and helps track copyrighted material on the site. Facebook says this 
was prioritized after feedback from publishers. A newtracking tool 
<https://media.fb.com/2016/04/12/crossposted-videos-and-insights/> allows 
publishers to track videos across different Facebook pages, and share videos 
they want to publish across multiple accounts. 
 * More features added to React Native 
<https://code.facebook.com/posts/597378980427792/react-native-a-year-in-review/>
, Facebook’s open source tool set that allow developers to build Facebook 
features like login, sharing and app analytics into their apps. 
And finally … The mysterious building 

Facebook has hired Regina Dugan, former head of the US military’s technology 
wing Darpa, who has been running the advanced technologies and projects lab at 
Google. She’ll lead up a mysterious new project called Building 8, which 
Zuckerberg said will work “building new hardware products to advance our 
mission of connecting the world” and will be infused with “hundreds of people 
and hundreds of millions of dollars”.


Dugan’s hire represents a major investment in Facebook’s more experimental 
hardware and software companies like Oculus. While Google’s moonshots at 
connectivity like Project Loon are mostly years out from real deployment, 
Facebook’s experimental projects are rolling out almost immediately.


Dugan said on her Facebook page: “Building 8 is an opportunity to do what I 
love most … tech infused with a sense of our humanity. Audacious science 
delivered at scale in products that feel almost magic. A little badass. And 
beautiful. There is much to build at Facebook … and the mission is human … 
compelling.”
 