
Even though I have never liked the sound of the N-word, and have only ever 
personally experienced it in a negative context, I could not have been more 
moved by Larry Wilmore’s use of the word in his closing remarks as host of the 
White House Correspondents Dinner on Saturday night.

Wilmore said to Barack Obama: “Yo Barry, you did it, my n---a,” pounding his 
chest and going in for the brother-love embrace. Doing so, he broke comedic 
character to tell the president, to a large extent on behalf of black America, 
how meaningful it has been for us to have seen him in office for the past eight 
years. Whether viewers agree or disagree with his policies, as Wilmore noted 
earlier in his bit – “I agree with the policy that he’s black” – the embrace 
represented a moment filled with the vulnerability, truth and power of two 
black men seeing each other in an America that devalues, profiles, incarcerates 
and kills them at a startling rate.

I was introduced to the N-word long before I had any real understanding of its 
association with blackness and black culture. Certainly, when I first heard it 
from the mouth of a white playground bully in the fourth or fifth grade, I knew 
it was not meant as a term of endearment. But as a black child adopted into a 
white family, I had never heard the word and its meaning discussed. It wasn’t 
until high school, after I’d read James Baldwin and other black writers, 
interacted with some black kids during summers out of town and listened to 
hip-hop that I came to realize that it was a word not merely complicated, but 
intensely fraught. The level of fraughtness is entirely reliant upon who says 
it and to whom.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Fbarack-obama-delivers-last-correspondents-dinner-address-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama%20delivers%20last%20correspondents'%20dinner%20address%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Fbarack-obama-delivers-last-correspondents-dinner-address-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%20delivers%20last%20correspondents%27%20dinner%20address%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F01%2Fbarack-obama-delivers-last-correspondents-dinner-address-video&media=>
Highlights from Barack Obama’s final White House Correspondents’ Dinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/may/01/barack-obama-delivers-last-correspondents-dinner-address-video>
President Obama's final White House Correspondents' dinner – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/apr/30/white-house-correspondents-dinner-live-obama-jokes-larry-wilmore-journalists>
I understood that in hip-hop culture, and among many black Americans, the 
N-word is often used playfully, lovingly. Ta-Nehisi Coatestold  
<https://soundcloud.com/anotherroundwithhebenandtracy/episode-29-whats-on-your-reparations-tab/sets>
Heben Nigatu and Tracy Clayton of BuzzFeed’s popular podcast Another Round that 
“n---a” is his favorite word in the English language. But as an adult and the 
parent of a 10-year-old son, I still don’t use it or want to hear it.

The obvious reason is that I never heard it spoken to me lovingly. The only 
context I know for that word is one in which I am being intentionally degraded 
by white people. The next time I heard it, after the playground, was in high 
school, when my boss at the local oil company called me a lazy n---er under his 
breath after I refused to clean the bathroom right after he’d used it. I was a 
receptionist, not a cleaning person. I believe the word belongs to black people 
and black culture – the agency and right to use it if and when and how we want 
to use it is important.


As much as I support and understand Wilmore’s use of it with Obama, and 
respect that Ta-Nehisi Coates finds magic in a word many people cringe at, I 
have been very clear with my son that context matters. When he hears Kendrick 
Lamar say it, or Larry Wilmore, he knows that it’s their prerogative to use the 
word, and that they are communicating a very specific, deeply rooted kind of 
affection toward one another.

He also knows that white people are never allowed to use it. While I have been 
fairly strict with him about his own usage of the word – not in our house, not 
with his boys, not even singing along with hip-hop – the exchange between 
Wilmore and Obama reminded me of a moment I witnessed and wrote about in an 
earlier book of mine called Saving the Race, which looks at the legacy of WEB 
Du Bois in a contemporary context.


I was chatting to the journalist LeAlan Jones in New York’s Union Square last 
year when, when mid-sentence, almost as if it were part of what he was saying 
to me, LeAlan looked up past my shoulder and said, “Hey, Q-Tizzy, what up?” 
Then, in this one beautiful seamless motion, LeAlan and the man he had just 
greeted exchanged the graceful palm-to-fingers slide of a familiar handshake. 
The man kept walking, and LeAlan resumed the sentence where he’d left off with 
me. A little while later, having recognized the man he’d shaken hands with, I 
asked him: “So how do you know Q-Tip?” and LeAlan said: “I don’t.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fbarack-obama-best-jokes-white-house-correspondents-dinners-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=White%20House%20correspondents%E2%80%99%20dinner%3A%20Obama%E2%80%99s%20best%20zingers%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fbarack-obama-best-jokes-white-house-correspondents-dinners-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=White%20House%20correspondents%E2%80%99%20dinner%3A%20Obama%E2%80%99s%20best%20zingers%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F29%2Fbarack-obama-best-jokes-white-house-correspondents-dinners-video&media=>
Obama’s best zingers from last seven White House dinners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/apr/29/barack-obama-best-jokes-white-house-correspondents-dinners-video>
It’s not just a familiar handshake – it’s a black handshake. It’s the physical 
embodiment of the word “n---a” and it is ours. At a time of heightened 
awareness and receptivity regarding race and black culture, it felt like Larry 
Wilmore was saying: “You can keep degrading us, keep ignoring or killing us, 
keep pretending that conversations about race will get us where we need to get, 
but you cannot take this. Not this word, not this gesture. Not our recognition 
of each other.” And it made me feel a sense of pride – a sense of black pride.
 