
Over the past few days I have been looking through some of the yellowed 
newspaper cuttings of the Barry Bennell case, snipped out from the pages of the
Crewe Chronicle, and there is one in particular to which I keep returning, from 
13 June 1998, with the headline: “We could not believe Bennell guilty – Gradi.”

It was here that Crewe Alexandra’s manager, Dario Gradi, explained how the 
football club had taken the side of Bennell rather than the 13-year-old British 
boy who triggered the police investigation by telling his parents he had been 
molested on a trip to Florida. That boy, I have subsequently discovered, broke 
down because he was scared he might get Aids.

Andy Woodward: ‘It was the softer, weaker boys he targeted’
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> 
But Crewe stood by Bennell. “Everyone at the club found it hard to believe he 
was guilty when he was first arrested,” Gradi said. “When we first found out 
what had happened, we were very supportive.”

Bennell had just been sentenced to nine years in prison for 25 offences, 
including two specimen charges of buggery, against boys aged nine to 14.

Another 22 offences against an unknown number of victims had been left on file 
because the Crown Prosecution Service decided it was better not to put boys of 
that age through the trauma of a trial. Bennell had worked in Crewe’s youth 
system for years and Detective Chief Inspector Peter Duffy, who led the 
investigation, had already been quoted by the same newspaper saying he was 
convinced there were other victims who had never come forward.

Crewe, meanwhile, had reported back for preseason training and Gradi’s only 
other quote in this article is the kind of line that, for whatever reason, I 
find myself reading over and again. “All this is now a long time ago and we 
were untouched by the court case this week,” the manager pointed out. “We are 
all just carrying on as normal.”

Perhaps, to give him the benefit of the doubt, he was just trying to put on a 
front in what must have been a pretty horrendous time for Crewe. Except I’m at 
a loss, to be honest. It isn’t easy, even as someone who is used to hearing all 
sorts of questionable comments from football managers, to discover that Crewe 
were apparently “untouched” at the centre of a sex abuse scandal, and that the 
person using those words was the man who brought Bennell to the club in the 
first place.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%20could%20be%20worse%20than%20Jimmy%20Savile%20case%2C%20says%20Andy%20Woodward%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20sexual%20abuse%20scandal%20could%20be%20worse%20than%20Jimmy%20Savile%20case%2C%20says%20Andy%20Woodward%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Ffootball-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video&media=>
Football sexual abuse scandal could be worse than Jimmy Savile case, says Andy 
Woodward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/23/football-sexual-abuse-scandal-could-be-worse-than-jimmy-savile-case-says-andy-woodward-video>
But there have been lots of things troubling me over the past week, and so 
many questions that remain unanswered now we are finally starting to learn 
about the full extent of the crimes of Bennell and others. Some of those 
questions may never be addressed properly and, all the time, there is that 
nagging sense that, when it really mattered, the sport of Andy Woodward, Steve 
Walters, Paul Stewart, David White, Chris Unsworth, Jason Dunford and Ian 
Ackley – and I dread to think how many others – looked the other way.

Second footballer reveals abuse by serial paedophile Barry Bennell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steve-walters-andy-woodward-crewe-alexandra>
Louis Theroux talked recently about his own guilt after failing to connect the 
dots about Jimmy Savile and how, when it came out that he had documented the 
life of a sexual predator, he was left trying “to figure out my own role in the 
affair and whether I was, in some way, played”. Theroux was asked by one of 
Savile’s victims in a follow-up documentary if he, too, felt he had been 
“groomed”, and no doubt there are plenty of people in football who are 
experiencing the same blur of self-doubt in the current tsunami of revelations.

With Savile, it all seems so bloody obvious now and, to a certain extent, the 
same can be said in this latest case, given the number of times since I first 
sat down with Andy Woodward – the first victim towaive his anonymity in the 
Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> – 
that I have heard people describe Bennell as a Pied Piper figure, and all the 
elements that led to Chris Muir, the late Manchester City director, once saying 
that “in the world of football he was looked upon as a fellow that wasn’t 
right”.

Norman Rowlinson, the former Crewe chairman, described Bennell as having a 
“magnetic attraction with boys”, but it wasn’t just children who were won over 
by this guy in designer gear, driving a Mercedes and talking about his 
friendship with various Chelsea first-teamers from his own days in their youth 
system. Bennell was flash: he could do tricks with a ball that left his players 
in awe, and he could be charmingly persuasive, which was probably useful for 
someone who used to have a clothes stall on Manchester’s Underground Market.

And, yes, knowing what we do now, I imagine there are plenty of us thinking we 
would not leave our own kids with someone whose house was described in court as 
a “children’s paradise” featuring arcade machines, a jukebox, a pool table and, 
most bizarre of all, what has been described as his own mini zoo. Yet, back 
then, he had the mums and dads under his spell, too.

Pictured: paedophile Barry Bennell in his time as Manchester City 
talent-spotter
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/barry-bennell> 
He even went on holiday with one set of parents. These people are victims, 
too, still living with it every single day. Not just them, either. Nobody can 
tell me, having met Hamilton Smith and seen close-up the immense distress this 
has caused him, reliving his experiences on Crewe’s board, that there are not 
good people who worked at the club, or are still there, who have suffered 
immeasurably.

All that can really be said for certain is that Gradi must have had a deep 
bond with the man he once coached in Chelsea’s junior ranks. Gradi was such a 
fan of Bennell that, I’m reliably informed, he once told the board: “He’s more 
important to this club than me.”

The manager used to have a clause in his contract that entitled him to 10% of 
the transfer fee for any player he had brought through the ranks and, when you 
think about the production line at Crewe, that is a significant amount of 
money. My information is that Gradi went to the board and offered to cut his 
share, so that Bennell could get a slice. The board accepted his request – and 
the manager sacrificed a small fortune to look after his mate.

Bennell had enough power at Crewe to bring in an assistant youth-team manager 
and became so embedded in the club that, towards the end of the 1988-89 season, 
he wrote a three-part column in the programme. It was called “The Finding of a 
Player”, and his entry for the match against York on 1 May does not, in 
hindsight, make pleasant reading. “I believe you need to know the boy a lot 
more than ‘the number six with the curly hair’,” he writes.

“I’ve been coaching for 19 years now and I think I’ve gained enough 
experience, including seven years at Manchester City, where I surfaced players 
such as Nicky Reid (Blackburn), Darron McDonough (Luton), John Sheridan 
(Leeds), Steve Kinsey (ex-Man City), Jon Hallworth and Mike Milligan (Oldham) 
and many more, plus of course the youngsters who are there now such as David 
White, Ian Brightwell, Paul Lake etc.”

Bennell, in other words, started coaching juniors in 1970, when he was 16, 
almost 25 years before he was finally locked up, and the really frightening 
thing here is that it is virtually impossible to calculate how many boys he had 
access to in that time. How many more are to come forward? How many are holding 
back because of their own circumstances? And how many were lucky enough not to 
have experienced that side of him? These boys are now men, in their 40s and 
50s. One rang me last week and said he, too, had been one of Bennell’s victims 
but that he could not speak about it publicly. He was simply unable to put his 
elderly mother – completely oblivious to what her son had endured – through all 
the upset.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffootball-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20child%20abuse%20victim%3A%20it's%20time%20for%20justice%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffootball-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20child%20abuse%20victim%3A%20it%27s%20time%20for%20justice%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffootball-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video&media=>
Football child abuse victim: it’s time for justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/nov/25/football-child-abuse-victim-steve-walters-victoria-derbyshire-video>
Others have told me how, on one trip away, Bennell somehow managed to persuade 
a zoo on the south coast to let him buy a baby puma. Bennell kept it at his 
house and, between there and his mother’s flat, also had a spider monkey, two 
Pyrenean dogs, a snake, a tarantula and a tank filled with piranhas. He would 
take the puma to Blackpool some days, letting it run wild on the beach, and 
walked it with a lead until it apparently swiped someone’s arm in Woolworths. 
The more you learn about this man, the more you realise he went by his own 
rules. And the more you hear about the time he spent with children, the more 
you wonder how he got away with everything for so long.

Football abuse: ‘I fought off Barry Bennell. Then he tried to destroy me’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/child-abuse-in-football> 
Crewe announced they are launching an independent review after Smith – the 
former director Woodward described as “one of the people at Crewe who can hold 
their head high” – told theGuardian that he did bring up suspicions about 
Bennell but that the club allowed him to continue coaching for a number of 
years.

Crewe, indeed, appear to have given Bennell some glowing testimony. A story in 
theStoke Sentinel tells how a team by the name of Stone Dominoes asked the club 
for a reference before making Bennell their head coach in 1992, around the same 
time he also started working part-time in Stoke City’s centre of excellence. 
“We wanted to make sure we were doing the right thing but nothing negative came 
back at all,” the club’s founder, Bob Bowers, said. “It was what an amazing 
coach he was, so on that basis we went ahead. We took references and he came 
back squeaky clean.” Bennell went on to offend there, too.

It all feels so deeply unsatisfactory. Yet we in the media probably have 
questions to ask of ourselves, too. Where was the outcry, in 1996, when
Dispatches provided the first in-depth reportage of Bennell’s crimes?

Why did nobody apparently go back to Manchester City to challenge their 
antiquated old directors about what, precisely, happened when a parent wrote to 
them complaining Bennell was having boys in his room late at night on trips 
away?

City say they are investigating everything, but the relevant people are all 
dead now so I’m not sure City will ever be able to give us the answers. Did 
City rumble him, as at least one of Bennell’s boys suspects, and was that the 
reason he stopped working on behalf of a First Division club and pitched up at 
Crewe? What exactly prompted Rowlinson, the chairman of Crewe from 1964 to 
1988, to ask City if they had any suspicions about Bennell? And if Rowlinson’s 
former colleagues – he died in 2006 – maintain they never heard anything to 
trouble them, how did it possibly pass them by when there was so much rumour 
and innuendo within the town, and Woodward, among others, remembers it being 
the talk of the club?

Crewe director of football Dario Gradi expresses sympathy for victims of Barry 
Bennell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/24/crewe-director-football-dario-gradi-sympathy-barry-bennell-victims>
Another article in the Crewe Chronicle catches my attention because I imagine 
it is how plenty of us feel now we know the stories of these poor young boys 
who, in some cases, were raped more times than they can possibly remember. This 
one quotes DCI Duffy on the day after Bennell – described as not showing even a 
flicker of emotion – was jailed for nine years. “I’m devastated that someone in 
the position he was in as a football coach got away with what he did for so 
long,” he says. “It is terrible that he could.”

• The NSPCC’s hotline is 0800 023 2642 and ChildLine for children and young 
people can be contacted on 0800 1111.

• The National Association for People Abused in Childhood can be contacted on 
0808 801 0331.

• In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.

TEN DAYS THAT SHOOK FOOTBALL

16 November Andy Woodward, 43, former player for Sheffield United and Bury, 
tells the Guardian he was sexually abused by convicted paedophile and former 
coach Barry Bennell while at Crewe Alexandra, when he was aged between 11 and 
15. His former manager, Neil Warnock, says he is‘sad and sickened’ to hear 
Woodward’s story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/neil-warnock-andy-woodward>.

21 November Six people come forward to speak to police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/21/crewe-alexandra-andy-woodward>
 about other incidents. Football Association sets up a helpline.

22 November Steve Walters, 44, says that he was sexually abused by Bennell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/22/steve-walters-andy-woodward-crewe-alexandra>
 while he was a player at Crewe.

23 November Paul Stewart, 52, a former England and Tottenham player, says he 
was sexually abused daily for four years as a youth player by an unnamed coach 
– not Bennell.

23 November David White, 49, a former Manchester City striker, alleges he was 
abused by Bennell in the late 1970s and early 1980s, while playing for 
Whitehill FC junior team in Manchester.Cheshire police say 11 individuals have 
now contacted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/23/cheshire-police-expand-football-sexual-abuse-inquiry-more-come-forward>
 them.

24 November An anonymous former footballer tells the Guardian he was a victim 
of George Ormond, a former Newcastle United youth coach who was jailed in 2002 
for offences against young footballers in the area. Police say they are 
investigating.

25 November Jason Dunford and Chris Unsworth come forward to say they were 
abused by Bennell as youth players. The Metropolitan police says it is now 
launching an investigation into abuse claims, bringing the number of forces 
investigating claims to four.
 