
At one point in I Am Not Your Guru 
<http://www.joeberlingerfilms.com/films/TonyRobbins>, the new Netflix 
documentary about the enormous (in multiple senses) self-help phenomenon Tony 
Robbins, a tearful woman rises to her feet, to talk about her unhappiness in 
love. We’re at Robbins’s £3,800, six-dayDate With Destiny 
<https://www.tonyrobbins.com/events/date-with-destiny/> seminar, in Florida, 
and the hyped-up audience is putty in his hands. The woman’s current 
relationship sounds OK. But no matter! Robbins tells her to switch her phone to 
speaker, call her boyfriend, and dump him right there. Which, astoundingly, she 
does. (The film is worth watching: it’s fawning, but you get to experience 
being swept up in the emotional atmospherics of a Robbins event.) Once she’d 
returned home, after the high faded, did she regret her decision? You can’t 
help wondering. Unless you’re the cosmically self-confident Robbins himself, 
that is: he doesn’t appear to give the matter a moment’s further thought.

On balance, though, the chances are she didn’t regret it. That’s the 
implication of a giant, unconventionalexperiment 
<http://www.nber.org/papers/w22487> conducted by the economist Steven Levitt, 
co-author of theFreakonomics 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/freakonomics.html> books. Levitt asked 
thousands of people who were contemplating a major life-change, like leaving a 
job or relationship, to visit a website, where a virtual coin-flip told them 
what to do. Obviously, many ignored the advice, but some didn’t. When Levitt 
followed up, six months later, he found those who had made the change were 
happier than those who hadn’t – even if their reason for changing was nothing 
more than a coin-flip. The lesson (notwithstanding various limitations to the 
project, like the self-selecting sample)? If you’re facing a dilemma, and can’t 
figure out whether to take the plunge, then all else being equal, you should. 
Few of us are immune to the“status quo bias” 
<https://www.behavioraleconomics.com/mini-encyclopedia-of-be/status-quo-bias/>: 
we prefer the way things are over the frightening unknown. So when you consult 
your gut about whether to seek a divorce, abandon your PhD, or move to Iceland, 
the answer you receive will be biased toward inertia. Correct for that, and 
your feeling of being on the fence is really an argument for action.

Why it’s healthy to take a break from your online persona | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/05/why-you-should-step-away-from-the-online-you>
Beware, though: the status quo bias is sneaky, and easily capable of making 
the safe choice look like the bold one. If it’s your custom to glide from one 
superficial relationship to the next, leaving your latest one isn’t really 
“taking the plunge”; it’s more of the same. The big change, in that case, would 
be staying. I make no apologies for mentioning, once more, the question 
suggested by the Jungian psychoanalystJames Hollis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/10/not-self-help-great-advice-life-james-hollis-what-matters-most-jung>
: does this choice enlarge me or diminish me? Go for enlargement, every time.

Ultimately, the Levitt experiment may echo that weather-beaten advice often 
attributed to Eleanor Roosevelt: “Do one thing every day that scares you.” 
Faced with two seemingly equal options, choose the scarier. Not because the 
universe will respect your courage and grant you Unlimited Power, as Robbins 
would probably tell you. But because fear is almost certainly skewing your 
judgment.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <>
 