
Roy Hodgson <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roy-hodgson> has been full 
of praise for Iceland in the knowledge their defensive organisation follows 
many principles the England manager admires.

Iceland’s joint-manager Lars Lagerback has spoken warmly about the influence 
of Hodgson in his home country, Sweden. At Halmstad in the 1970s, Hodgson 
introduced training methods that concentrated heavily on zonal defending in a 
4-4-2 system, inspiring many Swedish coaches. Lagerback has successfully 
introduced those ideas to the Icelandic national team and Hodgson’s primary 
tactical task is to find weaknesses in the type of defence he greatly admires.

Iceland’s Lars Lagerback: ‘I have played England six times and never lost’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/25/iceland-england-euro-2016-coach-lars-lagerback>
Hodgson has dismissed the idea England are taking Iceland lightly, and the 
Group F runners-up have certainly been scouted thoroughly. “We sent five people 
to Paris to watchIceland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> play 
Austria, including Gary Neville and Dave Watson plus our video scout, Andy 
Scoulding,” Hodgson said. Their main job, rather than assessing Iceland’s 
attacking threat, will have been finding defensive weaknesses to help England 
turn their dominance into clearcut chances.

Jamie Vardy and Daniel Sturridge wasted chances in the goalless draw against 
Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/20/england-slovakia-euro-2016-match-report>
 but England were also guilty of not creating enough.

England have been frustrated by opponents playing extremely deeply at Euro 2016
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>, and Iceland will provide 
another of these challenges. However, while they will concentrate on preventing 
England from finding space in behind, they are not a particularly impressive 
side defensively. They are the only team to have reached the knockout stage 
without keeping a clean sheet and Hannes Halldorsson made more saves than any 
other goalkeeper in the group stage.

Iceland’s greatest strength is the familiarity between players. The 
joint-managers, Lagerback and Heimer Hallgrimsson, used only 16 starters in the 
entire two-year qualification process for Euro 2016, and have named the same 
starting XI in all three matches at the tournament. It is in stark contrast to 
Roy Hodgson’s decision to rotate his side heavily for the third group game – 
even ifEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england> were in a 
slightly different position – and there will be no surprises on the Iceland 
teamsheet.

They will make no attempt to dominate possession in Nice. They have averaged 
35% across their three group matches and a somewhat rudimentary attacking 
approach is underlined by the fact their most frequent passing combination in 
each of those games was simple: the goalkeeper Halldorsson launching the ball 
to the centre-forward Kolbeinn Sigthorsson. Passing moves often end there: 
Sigthorsson recorded a pass completion rate of only 44%. Iceland’s most notable 
attacking weapon is the long throw of the central midfielder Aron Gunnarsson 
and it led to Jon Bodvarsson’s goal against Hungary. Otherwise, they will play 
on the counterattack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fengland-iceland-tactics-roy-hodgson-euro-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2e74cc9056989f6232ae80bc04ff8b0d5afb3f7%2F0_0_782_979%2F782.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20England%20can%20exploit%20Iceland%E2%80%99s%20weaknesses%20at%20Euro%202016%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fengland-iceland-tactics-roy-hodgson-euro-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20England%20can%20exploit%20Iceland%E2%80%99s%20weaknesses%20at%20Euro%202016%20%7C%20Michael%20Cox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fengland-iceland-tactics-roy-hodgson-euro-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb2e74cc9056989f6232ae80bc04ff8b0d5afb3f7%2F0_0_782_979%2F782.jpg>
 England have impressed when attacking down the right and they may trouble 
Iceland there. Illustration: Guardian 
Iceland sit deep in a 4-4-2 system – although they are surprisingly 
uncomfortable at defending crosses for a side who inevitably depend on aerial 
clearances. The defence play wider than you would expect, with the full-backs 
dragged out towards the flanks easily, without cover from a central defender or 
midfielder. This creates gaps in the channels for runners to exploit and 
Iceland’s first two concessions, against Portugal and Hungary, were remarkably 
similar: the left-back, Ari Skulason, was beaten by a quick-passing 
combination, allowing the right-winger to attack behind him and play a crucial 
low cutback into the box.

England’s right flank has been their most productive area at Euro 2016, with 
Kyle Walker arguably the tournament’s outstanding right-back and Nathaniel 
Clyne deputising well against Slovakia. Hodgson seems set to deploy Daniel 
Sturridge from the right of a front three, allowing the Liverpool striker to 
cut inside into goalscoring positions. It means Walker must overlap regularly 
to provide right-sided width. England should not leave him isolated on that 
flank and Dele Alli’s forward running from a right-of-centre midfield position 
could allow England to overload Iceland’s left-back zone.

Hodgson has spent most of his career creating sides who play exactly like 
Iceland, and he is fully capable of finding weaknesses in their system and 
instructing his players to attack those zones.

There is much to admire about Iceland but also clear weaknesses England must 
exploit.
 