
When I see news of a black boy being shot dead by police on a playground 
because he was holding a plastic gun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/23/cleveland-police-shoot-dead-12-year-old-boy-carrying-fake-gun>
; ora black woman being pushed to the ground with a knee at her neck, then 
ending up dead while in police custody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/21/sandra-bland-dashcam-video-arrest-released>
, I’m not wondering whether a white girl in Arizona feels discriminated against 
because she thinks all the college scholarship money goes to brown people – 
which, by the way, is statistically untrue. What I wonder is how a nation of 
complicit white Americans can live with themselves in the current climate of 
terrorism against black people in a structurally racist system.

So while I appreciate and applaud the ambition of Jose Antonio Vargas’ new MTV 
documentaryWhite People <http://www.mtv.com/shows/white-people/>, I expected 
answers to that exact question. Because even in the current browning of 
America, white is the default identity – an identity essentially cultivated at 
the expense of black people’s human dignity.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDRJnkBqwzOQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDRJnkBqwzOQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDRJnkBqwzOQ&media=>
The film aired on Wednesday night as part of MTV’s Look Different campaign 
<http://www.lookdifferent.org/>, intended to promote racially and socially 
inclusive behaviour – because we can’t seem to manage this on our own. Vargas 
addresses millennials in various pockets of America. He says: “We talk about 
race a lot in this country. But we don’t include you in the conversation.”

I would argue, first, that we actually don’t talk that much about race in this 
country – we perpetuate the social construct of race by insisting that it is 
inherent and real. That is quite different from having a conversation about 
race, which would mean an active, rigorous exchange of thoughts and ideas about 
how to dismantle its toxic and murderous byproduct, racism. And second, if by 
“we” Vargas means people of colour, or raced people, the reason we don’t 
include white people in the conversation is because, for the most part, they 
are not conversant on the subject. As the documentary showed all too well.

Journalist and filmmaker Vargas, an undocumented immigrant from the 
Phillipines, travelled across the country and spoke to young people – mostly 
white, although people of colour (black, Asian, Native American) do show up 
here and there, literally as counterpoints – about how it “feels” to be white, 
and what they think about “white privilege”.

How it feels to be white seems pretty clearly delightful, to the surprise of 
no one who is not white. In an early section of the film Dakota, a white gay 
man from the rural South who opted to go to a nearbyHBCU 
<http://colleges.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-colleges/rankings/hbcu> 
because it was affordable and an easy commute, brings home his black friends 
(Brittanee and Jazzmine) to meet his family.

Around the dinner table Dakota’s sister, Miranda, quickly offers up, fully 
high on the vapours of her own obtusity and with a small dog perched on her lap,
Real Housewives <http://www.bravotv.com/the-real-housewives-of-new-york-city>
-style, that she and her friends never talk about race, and that she has before 
crossed to the other side of the street when black people were coming toward 
her. The camera pans to Brittanee and Jazzmine, who had both earlier expressed 
excitement about meeting their friend’s family, but now realize that they have 
unwittingly laid themselves bare for a public flogging.

The segment continues with Vargas encouraging Brittanee and Jazzmine to share 
any stereotypes they may have harbored about white people – “stuck up”; “they 
might be nice in your face, but behind your back they gonna say something”.

Dakota interrupts with an observation that white people will remark on how 
“black people can get real ghetto real fast”, and adds that he, too, can get 
real ghetto real fast. Miranda takes this opportunity to snap her fingers up 
over her head, as every black girlfriend would in the limited scope of her 
imagination, and says, laying on the sass: “Hell, I can get real ghetto real 
fast too.”

Jazzmine struggles with the meaning of the word “ghetto”, and a visibly upset 
Brittanee starts to cry. Dakota comforts her in a hallway, the cameras cut and 
then we’re back at the dinner table, where Brittanee explains that in her 
experience the word has always been used in a derogatory way. Miranda, however, 
is unfazed.

The most useful “conversation” here, in my opinion, would be for Miranda to 
tell Brittanee and us, the viewers, how it feels to make a black woman cry 
while she is a guest in your home by hijacking the airspace with dismissive 
comments and racist gestures. Instead, as always, the onus is on a black person 
to hold it down in the end. The segment closes with Brittanee telling no one in 
particular, but Miranda implicitly, to “put yourself in other people’s shoes 
before you say something”. Miranda shrugs.

The film is sprinkled with data from a 2014 MTV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/mtv> survey of 14-to-24-year-olds that 
maintains that white members of this demographic largely adhere to a colorblind 
mentality. Vargas, buoyant and genuinely curious throughout, asks a group of 
young people what they think the disadvantages are of being white. One black 
woman says she doesn’t think there are any disadvantages, while a white man 
says: “That’s like asking a rich person ‘Tell me how hard it is being rich’.”

Asked how it feels to talk to a person of a different race, one white woman 
says: “I could care less what someone’s race is. I was never taught to notice 
it.” Whelp.

Vargas tells the young people that their generation will navigate an 
increasingly less white society, and have new conversations about race. How do 
young white people “feel” about that? At one point a young white man says about 
the conversations in general, “I’m feeling uncomfortable!” And Vargas says, 
“Good! Let’s all get uncomfortable together!”

But the problem is, none of the white people in White People ever really get 
uncomfortable. And that’s what needs to happen more than anything else – even 
more than the big needle-moving national “conversation” all of us in the 
struggle fantasise about, led by Ta-Nehisi Coates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/14/between-the-world-and-me-ta-nehisi-coates-review>
, the president, andAva DuVernay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/17/ava-duvernay-film-director-selma>
. White people need to feel uncomfortable, and black people, people of colour, 
need to see them sit in that discomfort – not the white tears model, but the 
paradigm shift variety.

It’s the kind of discomfort Toni Morrison invoked in a conversation with 
talkshow host Charlie Rose, in which she asked 
<http://www.upworthy.com/he-asked-her-the-wrong-question-about-racism-and-her-answer-is-flawless>
: “If I take your race away and there you are all strung out and all you’ve got 
is your little self. And what is that? What are you without racism? Are you any 
good? Are you still strong? Are you still smart? Do you still like yourself? I 
mean, these are the questions.”
 