
A ferocious roar rang out as each battleground state fell. Then came the 
chants of “Lock her up!” As the Miller Lite began to flow, the men in red 
baseball caps grew bolder. “Bitch,” several shouted at the television.

Donald Trump wins US election: Clinton to deliver concession speech – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-us-election-2016-live-reactio>
Inside a strip-mall office in Youngstown, north-eastern Ohio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio>, dozens of white working-class 
voters were celebrating an extraordinary revenge after eight years of bruising 
defeat by Barack Obama’s rainbow coalition. A rebuke of an economic system that 
had left them feeling humiliated and hopeless.

“All the media and all the pollsters just didn’t understand that the little 
people like us all over the country were quietly supportingDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>,” said John Vass, a 
66-year-old engineer and former Democrat. “And today we made our voices heard.”

Vass called up on his cellphone a photograph of his 97-year-old mother, Mary 
Ann, who lives in a nearby nursing home. “She also was a hardcore Democrat much 
of her life,” he said. “And Trump is her guy, too.”

Youngstown is one of many traditionally blue-collar Democratic bastions that 
voted for Trump on Tuesday, buoyed by the Republican nominee’s consistent 
appeals to those communities that believed they had been left behind. Early 
polling data shows that around the country the turnout for Trump of white 
non-college-educated voters was crucial in securing Trump’s victory. In 2010, 
the city was 47% white.

What appears to have made the biggest difference on the night was the turnout 
for Trump of white voters across the board – of both sexes and almost all ages 
and education levels.

Just a few hours after traipsing into their local Republican party 
headquarters fearing the worst, amid claims from some pollsters that Hillary 
Clinton had a 99% chance of victory, Trump’s loyalists were suddenly drawing up 
their wishlists for his first term in office.

Yes, the election polls were wrong. Here's why | Mona Chalabi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/polls-wrong-donald-trump-election>
“I don’t want abortion,” said Kerri Smith, a 48-year-old carer for disabled 
children and another former Democrat. Trump, who has a supreme court vacancy to 
fill, has pledged to appoint judges who would overturn Roe v Wade, the 1973 
ruling protecting a woman’s right to termination.

Robin Speece, a 61-year-old retired teacher and yet another former Democrat, 
said she was eager for Trump to repeal Obama’s signature healthcare reform. Her 
husband, who already pays $700 a month for insurance and has a $7,000 
deductible, is facing a 25% increase in his premium next year, she said.

“I am just so ecstatic,” Speece said soon after Trump’s clinched Ohio. “It 
would have meant socialism in this country if Clinton had won. The end of the 
American dream.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Highlights%20from%20Trump's%20presidential%20victory%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Highlights%20from%20Trump%27s%20presidential%20victory%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights&media=>
Highlights from Trump’s presidential victory speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/trumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights>
Youngstown’s blue-collar Democratic roots run so deep that Bruce Springsteen 
wrote a song <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4GaFUOQWi9A> about it. Everywhere 
you looked on Tuesday, however, there was another Republican newcomer 
campaigning with the zeal of a convert. They enjoyed a potluck dinner after a 
final day of knocking doors, heaping paper plates with beef stews and tearing 
off slices of pepperoni pizza dripping with cheese.

Before the results began rolling in, the room fell quiet as guests bowed their 
heads and began to pray.

“This is what freedom is all about, Lord,” said Donna Bricker, the Mahoning 
County Republican chairwoman. “But let us not cause a war afterwards depending 
on whoever wins and whoever loses.”

Gentle arguments broke out over which TV channel should be shown to the room. 
Bricker dismissed Fox News as insufficiently rightwing. Others attacked NBC, 
along with most other media outlets, as being biased against their candidate. 
“Every time Chuck Todd talks, I throw up a little in my mouth,” said one 
supporter.

Why Hillary Clinton lost the election: the economy, trust and a weak message
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/hillary-clinton-election-president-loss>
Joe Jasinski, a 72-year-old former firefighter, who said he had voted for 
Democrats as far back as Lyndon Johnson in 1964, urged Trump to prioritize 
blocking America’s acceptance of refugees from the Syrian civil war. “You can’t 
vet these people,” he said. “We need to destroy Isis, like Trump has said he 
will.”


The victory was tinged with disappointment. Despite Trump’s statewide victory, 
the Youngstown campaigners could not quite deliver a win in their own Mahoning 
County. By slashing Barack Obama’s old winning margins, however, they helped 
Trump over the finish line and illustrated the Democrats’ dire problems in Ohio.


Clinton beat Trump in Mahoning on Tuesday by just 49% to 46% – a margin of 
less than 3,500 votes. Four years ago, Obama beat Mitt Romney by more like 
35,000, finishing with 64% to the former Massachusetts governor’s 35%. Obama 
secured a very similar win over Senator John McCain in 2008.

Headline statistics show Ohio’s economy recovering steadily under Obama since 
the 2008 financial crisis and recession. Unemployment has fallen. But according 
to US census bureau data, median household income in the county is actually 
almost 15% lower now than in 2000 once inflation is taken into account. The 
proportion of Mahoning residents in poverty has risen by half since then.

Workers have been repeatedly squeezed by bosses who blame aggressive overseas 
competition. Trump, in turn, was emphatic in blaming America’s free trade 
agreements for exposing working-class people to the ravages of globalization.

Signs of decay are all over Youngstown. Factories and office blocks sit 
vacant, fronted by overgrown yards and lined by broken windows that are thick 
with grime. Tufts of grass sprout through cracks in concrete paving that is in 
dire need of replacement. Signs and shopfronts are dirty and faded.

The Republican nominee managed to tie Clinton both to the North American Free 
Trade Agreement (Nafta), which was implemented under her husband Bill after 
being signed by George HW Bush, and to the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership 
(TPP), which she once appeared to support but now opposes.

At least among his supporters in north-eastern Ohio, whose former glories in 
steelmaking and heavy industry are legend, Trump in 2016 appeared to succeed in 
casting the Democrats as the party willing to sell out American labor.

“The Democrats used to be for the working man,” said Jasinski, the retired 
firefighter. “Now they cater to the very poor, who they can keep in bondage 
with free stuff, and to the very rich in Hollywood, to keep the donations 
coming in. We in the middle have been forgotten.”

Trump has set expectations for the presidency extraordinarily high. Millions 
of people voted for his promise to achieve an improbable reversal of the 
decades-long structural decline in American manufacturing. By November 2020, 
the voters of Mahoning County will expect results.

“I want him to bring America back,” said Smith, the carer for disabled 
children. “Bring back the jobs, bring our country back.”
 