
The £100m claim faced by Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> is 
being backed by the litigation funder Bentham Europe. These funders are 
specialist investors who provide financial backing to claimants they believe to 
have a good chance of being awarded damages in a legal dispute.

Many claimants are only able to get costly or high-risk cases into court by 
using financial backing from litigation funders. In return, the investors can 
receive a conditional fee or a percentage of any eventual settlement. Funders 
often also insist on taking a leading role in managing cases.

Among the most established litigation funders is the Australian firm IMF 
Bentham. What was its European joint venture business, Bentham Ventures,is 
bankrolling large claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/jan/18/australian-litigation-funder-mass-claims-big-uk-firms>
 against thecarmaker Volkswagen 
<http://www.benthameurope.com/volkswagen-ag-overview> and Tesco 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwislYakuoXQAhWJuhQKHSSMAr0QFggjMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.benthameurope.com%2Ffiles%2Ffaqs---tesco-plc.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFxEAv7HConoabpqs9GPS-1shodqA&sig2=tF4dp_2JiNm4pdVNcn_N5w>
 – both are lawsuits being brought by shareholders after recent scandals.

Tesco faces £100m claim from investors over accounting scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/tesco-100m-pound-claim-investors-accounting-scandal>
In June, however, IMF Bentham sold its 50% stake in Bentham Ventures to its 
joint-venture partner, Elliott Management, a US hedge fund founded and run by 
Paul Singer.

Singer’s critics have described him as a “vulture capitalist 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2013/07/paul-singer-elliott-republican-fundraiser>
”, and Elliott is well-known for taking high-risk stakes in distressed 
companies, or businesses embroiled in litigation.

Singer’s appetite for investing in areas of risk and controversy has seen his 
funds buy up defaulting sovereign bonds issued by Peru,Congo-Brazzaville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/nov/15/vulture-funds-jersey-decision>
 and Argentina – investments that have attracted much criticism.


The 72-year-old has a fortune estimated at $2.2bn (£1.8bn) by Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/paul-singer/> and has been a major donor to 
Republican election campaigns in the US over many years. Most recently, he 
backedSenator Marco Rubio’s failed attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/15/marco-rubio-ends-presidential-campaign-trump-wins-florida-primary>
 to become the Republican presidential candidate.

Even though Bentham Ventures is now ultimately controlled by Elliott and has 
severed ties with IMF Bentham in Australia, it has not changed its name. The 
litigation fund is registered in the Netherlands, but many decisions are made 
from its Bentham Europe offices in London by a team led by the chief investment 
officer,Jeremy Marshall <http://www.benthameurope.com/our-team>, a British 
lawyer with more than 20 years’ litigation experience.
 