
As gender politics go, it was unquestionably a modest step, but in Bradford’s 
Carlisle business centre the development felt seismic.

For five years Haniya had been striving to secure a job in digital marketing. 
It seemed not to matter that the 28-year-old had the qualifications, the 
aptitude, the ambition. Friends watched her confidence drain away. Haniya 
considered removing her hijab, the Islamic headscarf. Burying the fact she was 
a Muslim became the final option.

In front of 50 women at the centre in Bradford’s Manningham district, Haniya 
announced she’d finally entered the workplace. “That was great news, but for 
many discrimination within the labour market, along with a lack of 
opportunities, creates a fatigue that eventually erodes self-esteem,” said Bana 
Gora, chief executive of Bradford’s Muslim Women’s Council .

Haniya had triumphed where most peers had failed. Being a Muslim woman in 
Brexit Britain offers few advantages but does guarantee membership to themost 
economically disadvantaged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/11/uk-confusion-integration-counter-terrorism-hinders-muslims>
 group in UK society. In Manningham, where the last census found three-quarters 
of its 20,000 population were Muslim, the prevailing concern is thatemboldened 
bigotry and Islamophobia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/hate-surged-after-eu-referendum-police-figures-show>
 unleashed in the wake of the Brexit vote threatens to marginalise Muslim women 
to the point that they are effectively excluded.

Seven miles from the business centre, past Bradford’s central mosque and south 
along the A651, lies the west Yorkshire market town of Birstall. Here, outside 
its library at 12:53pm on 16 June, Labour MP Jo Cox was fatally attacked by an 
extreme rightwing terrorist as the EU referendum campaign approached its finale.

Cox’s murderer Thomas Mair was sentenced to prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-found-guilty-of-jo-cox-murder>
 for the rest of his life. The 53-year-old is awhite supremacist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/britains-far-right-in-2016-fractured-unpredictable-dispirited-and-violent>
 who considers immigration anathema to British values and who hoped his crime 
would inflame multicultural tensions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbradford-muslim-women-integration-casey-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f6c7256ac68ba087da9901070b01053c5c01c49%2F4_0_2330_2912%2F2330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20do%20so%20many%20Muslim%20women%20find%20it%20hard%20to%20integrate%20in%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbradford-muslim-women-integration-casey-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20do%20so%20many%20Muslim%20women%20find%20it%20hard%20to%20integrate%20in%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fbradford-muslim-women-integration-casey-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f6c7256ac68ba087da9901070b01053c5c01c49%2F4_0_2330_2912%2F2330.jpg>
Bana Gora, right, chief executive of the Bradford Muslim Women’s Council and 
chair Selina Ullah. Photograph: Gary Calton for the Observer 
The government’s forthcoming report into integration – the first state-backed 
exploration of the issue for 15 years – arrives against a febrile backdrop. 
Conceived in July 2015, the report’s lead author,Louise Casey, 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/people/louise-casey> appreciates that the debate 
on race, the self-identity of Britain itself, has shifted dramatically since 
its inception.

Casey’s team are acutely sensitive to how the rightwing media will articulate 
its contents, particularly new Home Office research confirming that pockets of 
London, Birmingham and other cities are increasingly mono-ethnic with immigrant 
populations larger than 50%, confirming a steep rise over the last decade. 
“It’ll be seized upon by Brexiters, who’ll want to close the border, while the 
left aren’t able to talk about it,” said a source close to Casey’s review.

But the report’s main thrust remains unaltered, namely attempting to improve 
“opportunity and integration” for ethnic minorities who largely remain on the 
outside looking in. Issues of segregation and inequality remain, factors 
identified in the wake of the2001 race riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/jul/08/uk.race> that engulfed 
Manningham and prompted a Home Office report that identified parallel lives 
between ethnicities that “do not touch at any point, let alone overlap”.

Gora says things have improved vastly in the period since, but the shift of 
Islamophobic rhetoric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/12/nigel-farage-british-muslim-fifth-column-fuels-immigration-fear-ukip>
 into the mainstream has perturbed Bradford’s Muslim women.

“These are scary times, there’s a heightened fear and anxiety over what the 
future holds. The Muslim community feels it’s under a magnifying glass. The 
rhetoric in the media, constant negative messages being disseminated. It’s 
unsettling,” she said. Even in Manningham, racist attacks have happened. “We’ve 
had women with their headscarves ripped off,” said Gora nodding to Carlisle 
Road, lined with charity stores and a green-domed masjid.

Casey’s 17-month investigation across the UK, which included a visit to 
Manningham’s business centre, found that Muslim women were being squeezed 
further from mainstream society. Many had given up trying to find a job. 
Acquiring economic independence, pursuing a career, meeting new people had 
become a pipe dream for the majority. A three-tiered system of discrimination 
was discovered: being a woman, being from an ethnic minority, and finally being 
a Muslim.

In a briefing note to Casey, the Runnymede Trust said that Pakistani and 
Bangladeshi women encountered “discrimination at every stage of the recruitment 
process”.

Selina Ullah, chair of the MWC, said the cumulative rejection from prospective 
employers allied to horror stories from friends meant that many felt unable to 
land a job. “They don’t really believe they can do things, they start 
automatically screening themselves out of certain positions, subsconciously 
thinking they are not worthy. They know they’re not on a level playing field to 
start with.”

She added: “If you have a CV fit for purpose and you’ve been rejected for 
similar jobs on many occasions, it affects you. Issues of low aspirations and 
confidence combined with a degree of racism start in the education sector.” 
Various studies quantify the marginalisation of Muslim women. MPs in August 
revealed that white women are three times less likely to be unemployed (6.8%) 
than black women (17.7%).Bottom of the pile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/11/muslim-women-excluded-society-employment-communities>
 were Pakistani and Bangladeshi women (20.5%). Last year the Office for 
National Statistics found almost two-thirds of Muslim women aged 16-64 were out 
of work. By contrast 69% of British working-age women had a job. Numerous 
reasons are cited, including insufficient role models, along with cultural 
pressures on women to focus on their families rather than build careers.

Casey’s research found that in some parts of the UK, particularly Birmingham, 
even when women turn to the local mosque they can be sidelined. “Many don’t 
have a voice; when they go to volunteer at the mosques the men don’t give them 
any opportunities. They’re locked out,” said Fiyaz Mughal, director of Faith 
Matters, which contributed to the integration review. He says the recruitment 
process itself can prove a tortuous affair riddled with bias. Women recount 
illegal forms of interrogation at job interviews like being asked if they are 
married or if they will contemplate removing their headscarf. “They keep 
saying: ‘I can’t get a job, I’ve applied hundreds of times.’ Others tell us: 
‘When I turn up I get questions like would I wear that all the time?” In August 
the parliamentarywomen and equalities 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/women-and-equalities-committee/news-parliament-2015/employment-opportunities-for-muslims-in-uk-report-published-16-17/>
 committee urged ministers to introduce “name-blind recruitment” to stop 
employers dismissing names that were not white-sounding.

“There’s a subconscious bias against foreign-sounding names, names that are 
hard to read. Secondly, recruitment panels like to recruit people who look like 
themselves. If you are a Muslim woman wearing a headscarf it depends on whether 
the panel buy into it,” said Ullah. Considerable evidence indicates that a 
minority are willing to “buy into” the hijab.

On Tuesday, Bradford’s MWC will unveil a new book on the heritage of the 
hijab, noting its similarities to head coverings connected to Judaism and 
Christianity. More than 300 people have been invited to its launch at the 
city’s National Media Museum, an event designed to strengthen bonds beween the 
Abrahamic faiths. Gora hopes the book’s message might dampen hostility towards 
the hijab which has becomedeeply politicised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/14/sadiq-khan-question-to-be-asked-about-hijabs-veils-london>
 over recent years.

Mughal says women are frequently targeted in the street for wearing the 
headscarf. New police figures obtained by theObserver reveal that incidents of 
anti-Muslim hate crime are eight times higher this year in Bradford than 
Rotherham, the South Yorkshire town where the grooming scandal hasprompted 
racial tensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/17/rotherham-eight-men-convicted-of-sexually-exploiting-teenage-girls>
.

West Yorkshire police recorded 40 incidents in Bradford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bradford> between January and September, the 
highest number for any town and city in the force area. Of the 137 cases 
recorded in West Yorskhire, 60 were violence against the person and 47 
harassment.

The anti-Muslim hate crime hotline Tell Mama <http://tellmamauk.org/> recorded 
another 23 incidents in the region during that period. a new national anti-hate 
crime campaign will be unveiled in parliament with a focus on ensuring ethnic 
minority communities feel more protected. Another welcome development, 
according to Gora, is if Casey’s review helps precipitate a change in the 
language used: “There needs to be more positive language, the government’s 
rhetoric needs to be looked at. We cannot continue with this language of 
Muslims as the enemy within.”

Few are holding their breath. Critics say the principal word in Casey’s review 
– integration – is clumsy and loaded, giving the impression that unless ethnic 
minorities commit to total assimilation they have failed.

Yet in this corner of West Yorkshire there is also hope. Concerned that the 
buoyant textile industry near Bradford was employing low levels of Muslim 
women, the council introduced initiatives to entice its local Pakistani and 
Bangladeshi workforce into a sewing academy. Mark Clayton of Bradford council 
said: “Women are by far the largest group adversely affected directly by 
inequality, which can be compounded by economic, social and cultural barriers.”

It is a truth that affects most of the UK’s estimated 1.5 million Muslim 
women, a societal bias that Casey’s report hopes to start addressing.
 