
When Tribeca Film Festival founder Robert De Niro issued a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/26/robert-de-niro-autism-vaccination-tribeca-andrew-wakefield-vaxxed>
 in support of a screening of the film Vaxxed: From Cover-Up to Catastrophe, 
directed by Andrew Wakefield, shamed doctor and anti-vaccination activist, I 
was, like many, appalled. And I was pleasedwhen he pulled it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/27/robert-de-niro-pulls-vaccination-film-tribeca-vaxxed>
. Only when I thought about it from the perspective of a parent did it make 
even a minuscule amount of sense. De Niro’s 18-year-old son Elliot with his 
wife Grace Hightower is autistic.

Parents of black and biracial kids – and in particular black and biracial sons 
– talk a lot about how systemic racism affects their lives, specifically in 
regard to police violence and profiling. And we should. But we don’t talk 
enough about the link between systemic racism and the health and wellbeing of 
our kids.

The water crisis in Flint is a sobering reminder of America’s long history of 
disregard when it comes to the welfare of black bodies –I am not the first to 
note how eerily reminiscent 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/opinion/2016/01/29/flint-evokes-public-health-racism-years-past/a7TGWimWU3SrWWMQHb8B3K/story.html>
 it is of the Tuskegee Experiment in the 1970s, when hundreds of black men with 
syphilis were not told they had the disease so that US Public Health Services 
could study its progression. And that is only one example, alongside recent 
findings of high levels of lead in Newark, New Jersey,schools’ water 
<http://www.nj.com/essex/index.ssf/2016/03/newark_students_want_answers_about_lead_in_schools.html>
; the story ofHenrietta Lacks <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Henrietta_Lacks>; 
and a truly horrifying number of black people knowingly poisoned by the 
American medical establishment.

So the idea of a conspiracy between big pharma and the CDC linked specifically 
to black boys is not merely within the realm of possibility, but a haunting 
concern.

However, in this case, we are talking about a discredited, self-serving doctor 
who wasstripped of his medical license 
<http://healthland.time.com/2010/05/24/doctor-behind-vaccine-autism-link-loses-license/>
 and then joined other anti-vaccination campaigners to make a documentary under 
the guise of fostering “debate”. In 1998, Andrew Wakefield published a study 
indicating that the measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine could potentially 
cause autism. It was later determined that his research was based on doubtful 
data, but not before it ignited what has become a years-long war between 
so-called “vaxxers” and “anti-vaxxers”. The latter maintain that vaccines are 
the enemy and refuse to vaccinate their children, thereby putting hundreds of 
thousands of other kids at risk.

The film is said to include claims made by “CDC whistleblower” William H 
Thompson and scientist Brian S Hooker – claims that the CDC intentionally 
concealed evidence from a 2004 study indicating that African American boys are 
more likely to be diagnosed with autism after receiving the MMR. These claims 
and Wakefield’s have since been thoroughly debunked. A paper written by Hooker 
attempting to confirm the datawas retracted 
<http://al.com/articles/10.1186/2047-9158-3-22> by the journal that published 
it.

In fact, in 2010, the CDC reported <http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/autism/addm.html>
: “White children were more likely to be identified with autism spectrum 
disorder (ASD) than black or Hispanic children. About 1 in 63 white children, 1 
in 81 black children, and 1 in 93 Hispanic children were identified with ASD.” 
And according to the World Health Organization, there remains absolutely no 
medical evidence of causal association between the MMR vaccine and autism – in 
anyone, regardless of race or ethnicity.

For Robert De Niro <https://www.theguardian.com/film/robertdeniro> to use the 
platform of his internationally known film festival to lend credibility to a 
quack peddling toxic misinformation about autism is, among other things, a 
flagrant abuse of power and privilege – yes, white power and privilege. Even 
for a parent of a black son.

In his initial statement defending the choice to include the film, De Niro 
admitted that he had a personal stake in the film: “Grace and I have a child 
with autism and we believe it is critical that all of the issues surrounding 
the causes of autism be openly discussed and examined.” He went on to say that 
the festival was “a platform, not a judge” – as only a parent holding out every 
ounce of hope for answers to a resolutely answerless affliction would. More 
pointedly so for the parent of a boy who, while clearly sheltered and 
economically privileged, still looks like the boys of Flint and the young men 
of Tuskegee.

The fate of those black boys and men rested in the hands of a racist system 
that preys on the fear and vulnerability of their parents. Still, De Niro was 
wrong to support the film – and there was no shortage of media pushback to make 
that clear.

New Yorker staff writer and medical expert Michael Specter was quoted in the 
Los Angeles Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/entertainment/movies/moviesnow/la-et-mn-anti-vaccine-andrew-wakefield-movie-tribeca-20160322-story.html>
: “This isn’t someone who has a ‘point-of-view’. It’s comparable to Leni 
Riefenstahl making a movie about the Third Reich, or Mike Tyson making a movie 
about violence toward women. The fact that a respectable organization like the 
Tribeca Film Festival is giving Wakefield a platform is a disgraceful thing to 
do.”

Ultimately, De Niro removed the film from the festival. One would hope that it 
is more about doing the right thing for his son – and all of the other black 
boys whose bodies are viciously exposed to predatory malpractice and systemic 
injustice – than because of pressure from the media.
 