
On the first Sunday of every month, Vuyokazi Maneli dresses in a navy skirt, 
jersey and pink blouse and dons a blue beret. Then she leaves her one-bedroom, 
breeze-block house to attend a four-hour meeting with about 100 people dressed 
in similar uniforms. Like Maneli, they are all preparing for their own funerals.

 11.7 million other South Africans are expected to attend similar meetings 
this month. It may sound macabre, but with more than 100,000 burial societies 
across the country, these special savings groups for funerals are booming.

Maneli already knows that her funeral will be an expensive affair. A 
traditional black South African funeral is an indicator of the subject’s status 
in life. She must honour old traditions and be buried among her ancestors at 
her place of birth - despite the fact that it is 1,000km from the Cape Town 
community where she’s made her life.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F12%2F1444639643504%2Fbab73251-829f-4370-bdd7-52af05dcf8a8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%20belong%20to%20a%20burial%20society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%20belong%20to%20a%20burial%20society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F12%2F1444639643504%2Fbab73251-829f-4370-bdd7-52af05dcf8a8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gugulethu cemetery, Cape Town, in South Africa, where more than 11 million 
people save for their funerals with burial societies Photograph: Masixole Feni 
Being buried in a cheap pine coffin and dispensing with a marquee at the 
funeral in order to cut costs are simply not an option. “It is not done,” says 
Maneli, who’s been putting aside money for three years to cater for hundreds of 
mourners, as anyone from her Xhosa clan is welcome – there’s no such thing as 
formal invitations or RSVPs.

Chicken parties and other ways the world's poorest people raise money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/jan/29/chicken-parties-poor-raise-money>
But such funerals put huge economic pressure on families since respecting 
social and cultural expectations often means that even the poorest households 
will spend up to R20,000 (£969). That is why Maneli, who is only 46, joined a 
burial society – as an unemployed widow, she knew her funeral would be 
financially devastating for her two adult children, aged 22 and 25, if she did 
not make provision for it.


Millions of South Africans live in similar financial straits, with Statistics 
South Africa <http://www.statssa.gov.za/?page_id=737&id=1> pegging current 
unemployment rates among black people at around 40%.

In order to safeguard her children from debt – or herself if any of her 
children should die before her - Maneli pays R110 a month to a burial society 
to ensure a R18,500 payout for her funeral costs and R9,000 for the funerals of 
any of her nine nominated dependents.

 Missing a payment is always a worry - three missed payments would lead to her 
dismissal from the society with no payout. Sitting in her living room, which is 
bare of books or ornaments and contains only an old sofa and a television on a 
cheap display cabinet, she says she would sooner sell one of her meagre 
possessions than miss a payment. “I just have to pay it,” she says.


Maneli has no doubt that when she dies, her society will pay out. But, as 
essentially unregulated insurance schemes, not all burial societies treat their 
members as fairly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443611407891%2Fbbdcbd49-a1e1-4c9b-a760-3adfeafc6b1b-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%20belong%20to%20a%20burial%20society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%20belong%20to%20a%20burial%20society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443611407891%2Fbbdcbd49-a1e1-4c9b-a760-3adfeafc6b1b-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Church members at a funeral service. Photograph: Masixole Feni 
Broken promises


Sanele Qumba, a sales representative in Cape Town, was caught short by a badly 
managed burial society. He’d been a member for 10 years by the time it came for 
his aunt’s funeral, but when he filed a claim the society refused to pay out 
the full amount he was owed.

“I managed to get her body to the Eastern Cape but did not get as much as I 
was supposed to,” said Qumba. “I could see the burial society was going 
downhill. They were beginning to ask extra levies to be able to pay out for 
funerals.”

He cut his losses and joined two other burial societies, to spread the risk 
and to ensure the combined payout of R23,000 would be enough for an ox to be 
slaughtered at his funeral, as would be expected due to his status as his 
family’s eldest son.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443611586906%2F73e69f6a-aaf2-49e0-a472-97d923dcf6a0-2060x1513.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%20belong%20to%20a%20burial%20society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%20belong%20to%20a%20burial%20society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443611586906%2F73e69f6a-aaf2-49e0-a472-97d923dcf6a0-2060x1513.jpeg>
 Members of Moloi Burial Society. Photograph: Masixole Feni 
David Neves, senior researcher at the Institute for Poverty, Land and Agrarian 
Studies, believes that burial societies have stood the test of time inSouth 
Africa <https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> because, although they 
are largely unregulated, they have remained more cost-effective than formal 
providers, who predominantly view the poor as a market to be exploited.

But will the system become more formalised in South Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> in the future? One of the burial 
societies Qumba is a member of in the Eastern Cape, is underwritten by 
insurance giant Old Mutual, but it is in the minority that have formal 
recognition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443611862028%2Fcdef8cff-79e0-467b-8cae-da02fce15a00-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%20belong%20to%20a%20burial%20society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%20belong%20to%20a%20burial%20society&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2015%2Foct%2F12%2Fwhy-i-belong-to-a-burial-society-south-africa%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443611862028%2Fcdef8cff-79e0-467b-8cae-da02fce15a00-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mourners attend a funeral in Gugulethu. Photograph: Masixole feni 
Maneli believes the banks have a way to go to compete with her burial society. 
When her husband died six years ago, he was signed up to a funeral policy 
offered by one of the country’s four major banks. While the bank required 
little information to take Maneli’s money, it asked for reams of paperwork 
before it would pay out. Maneli says she was dragged through a humiliating 
process. “It was very painful. I don’t even want to talk about it.”

For her and more than 11 million South Africans, a community-driven burial 
society offers better prospects than the uncertain bureaucracy of a faceless 
corporate entity.

While having somewhere secure to save your money is one of the main advantages 
that banks pitch to new customers who are used to managing their money through 
informal institutions, Maneli does not believe her money would be safer with 
them.


“In my burial society, we all live close by and know each other. No one can 
take the money - they have nowhere to run to.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. 
 