
Here’s a story about a man with a machiavellian genius for psychological 
manipulation. (It comes fromthe US educator Alfie Kohn 
<http://www.alfiekohn.org/article/punished-rewards-article/>, so I’ll 
Britishise it here.) This man is elderly and lives near a school. Every 
afternoon a group of pupils subject him to merciless taunts as they walk home. 
So he approaches them and offers a deal: he’ll give each child £1 if they come 
back next day to taunt him further. Incredulous but excited, they agree. They 
return to mock him; he pays as promised, but tells them that the following day, 
he’ll only be able to afford to pay 25p per person. Still thrilled to be paid 
at all, the children are there again the next afternoon, whereupon the old man 
sadly explains that, henceforth, the daily reward for hurling abuse at him will 
be a mere 1p. “A penny?” The kids are scornful. For such pathetic money, it’s 
not worth the effort. They stalk off, grumbling, and never bother him again.

The truth being exploited here – that rewards can backfire – isn’t new. 
Psychologists have studied it for years, and call it the “overjustification 
effect <https://youarenotsosmart.com/2011/12/14/the-overjustification-effect/>
”. The traditional assumption was always that people worked essentially likeBF 
Skinner’s lab rats <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B._F._Skinner>: dangle an 
incentive, and you’ll train them to do what you want. But for humans, in 
certain conditions, the reward simply reinforces the belief that the task can’t 
be worth doing for itself. It locates all the pleasure in the future, when the 
reward will be bestowed, turning the present-moment doing into a grind. From 
this perspective, rewards aren’t the opposite of punishments, but basically the 
same thing: a way of pressuring people into performing activities you can’t 
rely on them wanting to do.

Find fun where you least expect it | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/14/find-fun-least-expect-it-oliver-burkeman>
This effect gets much discussed in the context of parenting and teaching 
(beware ofgiving your kids treats for doing chores 
<http://parenting.blogs.nytimes.com/2008/11/14/does-rewarding-children-backfire/?_r=0>
, or awarding gold stars for work well done); and also sometimes personal 
habits (think twice before adopting a policy of rewarding yourself for going to 
the gym or writing the next page of your novel). But it applies more widely 
than that. The latest evidence,a study published in Psychological Science 
<http://www.psychologicalscience.org/news/releases/paying-do-gooders-makes-them-less-persuasive.html>
, suggests charity fundraisers bring in less money, and come across as less 
sincere, when they’re being paid – even if they started off genuinely committed 
to the cause. Come to think of it, since most of us are obliged to work for 
money, maybe the overjustification effect is built into the economy. Does the 
very fact we’re paid for what we do mean we could never extract the maximum 
meaning from it?

Perhaps it’s not even limited to money. In his recent book The Course Of Love 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385670/>, Alain de 
Botton <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alain-de-botton> rails against the 
Romantic fantasy of relationships which has us yearning for perfect soulmates 
who just “get” us, when real partnerships are imperfect, challenging and not 
always fun. The reward backfire effect adds a whole new layer to this problem: 
if we’re constantly chasing the future moment when everything will feel 
perfect, won’t that make the daily grind seem evenmore arduous? Perhaps the 
only truly rewarding life is the one lived with no hope of reward.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 