
Every few years, a neighbourhood crime occurs – in the order of vandalism, 
say, or at most ABH – that gets sucked up to the national grid and turned from 
an isolated prank into an invitation to mass hysteria. In the 1990s, in 
Britain, it was the “spate” of “copycat” attacks said to have been inspired by 
anadvertising campaign for the soft drink Tango 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/jun/15/how-we-made-you-know-youve-been-tango-orange-man-ad>
, in which impressionable adolescents painted themselves orange and ran up to 
strangers to shout in their ears. (They didn’t.)

In New York last year, it was news of the so-called “knockout game”, a craze 
in which teenagers ran up to strangers, whacked them in the face and filmed it 
on their mobile phones. (No evidence emerged that there was anything organised 
about a few random assaults.)

Now, in the mostly southern states of America, a new legend is taking off: 
clown attacks. In the past few days, reports of incidents involving clowns have 
come in from Georgia, Mississippi and a small town in Pennsylvania, wherepolice 
issued a release 
<http://patch.com/pennsylvania/newtown-pa/suspicious-clown-sightings-under-investigation-pennsylvania-state-police>
 reporting an unspecified number of “clown sightings” and, while reassuring the 
public that no threats had been made, asked that, in the event of seeing a 
clown, residents of Huntingdon County should “use restraint and allow police to 
handle the situation”.

South Carolina clown sightings could be part of film marketing stunt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/04/south-carolina-clown-sightings-could-be-part-of-film-marketing-stunt>
The energy that went into burning witches has to go somewhere I suppose and, 
like the horror fiction they inspire, adolescents remain the quickest conductor 
of widespread public alarm. The clown trend was said to have started in
Greenville, South Carolina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/04/south-carolina-clown-sightings-could-be-part-of-film-marketing-stunt>
 earlier this year, where, as multiple news outlets reported it, “clowns have 
been allegedly luring children into the woods with cash”. Thus was an isolated 
incident of attempted child molestation turned into the beginning of an urban 
legend.

Whether or not the sightings and attacks are real, however, there is something 
genuine in these reports and that is our propensity to suspend disbelief and 
throw ourselves wholeheartedly into the business of fearing something that 
doesn’t exist. Thenews from Georgia 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/clowns-woods-girl-11-arrested-georgia-school-bringing-knife-protection-after-reported-2419996>
 this week involved the arrest of an 11-year-old girl for bringing a knife to 
protect her against the clowns. There is so much to be terrified of these days, 
perhaps the fictional bogeyman remains the safest harbour for our fears.

Home is where the art is

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Famericans-clowns-southern-state-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78c51f1f66394b0dcb7da7ddfdb8b18c79014f9d%2F0_0_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20so%20many%20Americans%20scared%20of%20criminal%20clowns%3F%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Famericans-clowns-southern-state-america%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20so%20many%20Americans%20scared%20of%20criminal%20clowns%3F%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Famericans-clowns-southern-state-america%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78c51f1f66394b0dcb7da7ddfdb8b18c79014f9d%2F0_0_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 The English Antiques Roadshow. ‘I used to watch the American version and scoff 
at how they were allowed to bring on things from the 1950s.’ Photograph: David 
Levene for the Guardian 
I went to an “estate” sale in my building this week, realising one of my 
number-one fantasies – putting a first foot on the path to the Antiques 
Roadshow. Everything in the apartment was up for grabs, from butter dishes to 
foot stools, and the pricing was thrillingly random. A terrible watercolour of 
a lady with a naked back looking demurely over one shoulder? $300. A sturdy 
leather armchair that might have gone for hundreds on eBay? $40.

In the end, I spent $50 on a framed line drawing of a bunch of people jumping 
in the air and which, I thought, looked sufficiently scratchy and abstract to 
imply an early stage in a great artist’s career. It wasn’t signed, but I’ve 
stacked it next to the oil painting of some fish I bought from a man in the 
street a while back, and am holding onto them both like lottery tickets.

I used to watch the American version of the Antiques Roadshow and scoff at how 
they were allowed to bring on things from the 1950s. When I went to the 
Tenement Museum on the Lower East Side I marvelled that the wallpaper in my old 
flat in London was probably older than the building. These days, however, it 
strikes me that shallow connections can be as meaningful as deep ones. This 
morning, when the guy in the new deli remembered my order, all of a sudden 
there it was: home.
 