
Given the coalition government’s ever-beleaguered commitments to building more 
homes, its chillaxed approach to planning red tape, and its strained rhetoric 
of British “makers” and “strivers”, you’d expect Robert Fidler to be held aloft 
as a national hero. But it hasn’t quite worked out that way.

Fidler is the farmer-turned-renegade architect who took the adage about 
Englishmen and their castles rather literally and secretly built himself a 
fortified, four-bedroom stronghold. It was declared more of a house of cards 
this week, when helost his seven-year legal battle to prevent it being 
demolished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/03/farmer-castle-home-haystack-demolition>
. Honeycrock Farm was built on green-belt land, in breach of national planning 
rules. The fact that Fidler concealed his Surrey citadel behind a 40ft 
haystack, hoping to sit out the four-year period after which it would become 
lawful, suggests that he knew it wasn’t strictly above board – either that or 
he’d totally misunderstood the Three Little Pigs. Now he has been ordered to 
tear it down. Fidler said it would be like Rembrandt ripping up a masterpiece.

Farmer loses fight to save home he hid behind hay bales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/03/farmer-castle-home-haystack-demolition>
Fidler’s home really is – or was – a castle, or at least a half-approximation 
of one. Its “turrets” are old grain silos, which the farmer plonked next to 
each other and built a sturdy-looking timber frame between, then clad the whole 
ensemble with brick, even putting crenellations around the top. The house owes 
more to its creator’s imagination than architectural orthodoxy. In contrast to 
the medieval fortifications, the opposite facade of the house is a mock Tudor 
affair: half-timbered and gabled. In the central hall is a salvaged Victorian 
stained-glass skylight. Not to everyone’s tastes – probably only to one 
person’s taste, in fact – but you’ve got to hand it to Fidler. Except not 
literally.

A victory for the rural British landscape, perhaps, but you can’t help feeling 
that the Honeycrock Farm case is a defeat for British eccentricity. We like to 
think of ourselves as a nation that embraces the peculiar and the unorthodox, 
especially when it comes to architecture, but when you look around, you start 
to wonder if it’s still true. Nowadays you can shock the nation merely by 
painting a few red stripes on your house –if it’s in Kensington, anyway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/14/candy-stripe-house-redesign-makes-kensington-neighbours-see-red>
.

You could argue that follies have traditionally been the preserve of the 
wealthy, and your average 18th-century peasant had little time for entertaining 
the erection of asummer house shaped like a pineapple 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/search-and-book/properties/pineapple-10726/>, 
or dressing up their terraced house to look like anEgyptian mausoleum 
<http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/our-landmarks/properties/egyptian-house-1-2857/>
. But in retrospect, we’re glad some people did. Those two examples are now 
popular holiday homes owned by the Landmark Trust. Architecture and frivolity 
are not the cosiest of partners, but you know you’re in Britain when you 
stumble across an absurdity like a house perched on top of a 60ft tower (
Thorpeness’s House in the Clouds 
<http://www.houseintheclouds.co.uk/index.php?pid=1>), or the Rushton Triangular 
Lodge 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/rushton-triangular-lodge/> 
(the work of a 16th-century aristo obsessed with the number three).

Now we’d rather everything conformed to a show-flat standard of hygienic 
blandness

In other disciplines, we celebrate eccentrics as the mavericks and outliers 
who achieve the breakthroughs. We used to in architecture, too, when one thinks 
of Joseph Paxton’s revolutionary Crystal Palace, or John Nash’s Brighton 
Pavilion, or the Tardis-like cabinet of curiosities built by John Soane, 
architect of the Bank of England. Now we’d rather everything conformed to a 
show-flat standard of hygienic blandness. The Department for Communities and 
Local Government would, anyway, judging by its recentStarter Homes Design guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2015/apr/02/tories-new-housing-design-guide-backs-tiny-unliveable-homes>
, whose depressingly regimented exemplars include Prince Charles’s retro-themed 
Poundbury – nice orderly streets, neoclassical and traditional details, nothing 
to frighten the horses.

And for all its celebration of self-build individualism, I’ve always suspected 
that Grand Designs is really the architectural equivalent of those pictures of 
diseased lungs on fag packets. The real message behind its tales of 
constructional overspend and under-thought seems to be, “Aren’t you glad you 
didn’t go through all this just for the sake of looking different?” Or 
“Shouldn’t you be thinking about property prices rather than design?”

There are exceptions, of course, but not that many. Like Living Architecture’s 
Balancing Barn, which appears to teeter, Italian Job-style, on the edge of a 
hill (Dutch architect, unfortunately), or their forthcoming House for Essex, a 
gingerbread oddity designed by Grayson Perry and now-defunct mavericks FAT (one 
of the few architectural practices who regularly stuck their necks out). Or 
take a trip to Yorkshire’s Forbidden Corner, a fantastical labyrinth of 
gardens, grottoes and dungeons apparently designed to get lost in. When a new 
one comes along, like Robert Fidler’s house, it’s a shame to see it torn down, 
even if there is a perfectly good reason for it. Couldn’t we let him off if he 
promises to open it to the public?
 