
Should you choose time over money, or money over time? This is one of those 
so-called dilemmas of happiness that isn’t really a dilemma at all, because the 
answer’s so painfully obvious. Circumstances mightoblige you to choose money 
over time. But if you truly, ultimately value a large bank balance over 
meaningful experiences, you’re what’s known in the psychological literature as 
a doofus. Money, after all, is just an instrument for obtaining other things, 
including time – whereas time is all we’ve got. And to make matters worse, you 
can’t save it up: if money worked like time, every new deposit into your 
account would be immediately eliminated by a transaction fee of exactly the 
same size. However much you hate your bank, it’s surely not that bad.

And yet we do choose money over time, again and again, even when basic 
material wellbeing doesn’t demand it. Partly, no doubt, that’s because even 
well-off people fear future poverty. But it’s also because the time/money 
trade-off rarely presents itself in simple ways. Suppose you’re offered a 
better-paid job that requires a longer commute (more money in return for less 
time); but then again, that extra cash could lead to more or better time in 
future, in the form of nicer holidays, or a more secure retirement. Which 
choice prioritises time, and which money? It’s hard to say.

Thankfully, a new study 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/11/opinion/sunday/what-should-you-choose-time-or-money.html>
 sheds a little light on the matter. The researchers Hal Hershfield, Cassie 
Mogilner and Uri Barnea surveyed more than 4,000 Americans to determine whether 
they valued time or money more, and how happy they were.A clear majority 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/11/opinion/sunday/what-should-you-choose-time-or-money.html>
, 64%, preferred money – but those who valued time were happier. Nor was it 
only those rich enough to not stress about money who preferred time: after they 
controlled for income, the effect remained. Older people, married people and 
parents were more likely to value time, which makes sense: older people have 
less time left, while those with spouses and kids presumably either cherish 
time with them, or feel they steal all their time. Or both.

Are your friends really your friends? | Oliver Burkeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/27/are-your-friends-really-your-friends-oliver-burkeman>
The crucial finding here is that it’s not having more time that makes you 
happier, butvaluing it more. Economists continue to argue about whether money 
buys happiness 
<https://www.brookings.edu/opinions/happy-peasants-and-miserable-millionaires-happiness-research-economics-and-public-policy/>
 – but few doubt that being comfortably off is more pleasant than struggling to 
make ends meet. This study makes a different point: it implies that even if 
you’re scraping by, and thus forced to focus on money, you’ll be happier if 
deep down you know it’s time that’s most important.

It also contains ironic good news for those of us who feel basically secure, 
moneywise, but horribly pushed for time. If you strongly wish you had more 
time, as I do, who could accuse you of not valuing it? At least my craving for 
more time shows that my priorities are in order, and maybe that means I’ll 
savour any spare time I do get. We talk about scarce time like it’s a bad 
thing. But scarcity’s what makes us treat things as precious, too.

oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com <mailto:oliver.burkeman@theguardian.com>
 