
A bishop stands before us, grappling with the thorny subject of "why Christ 
had to die." Recently promoted to the bishopric ofSherborne 
<http://www.salisburyanglican.org.uk/new/showpage.asp?page=52>, St Mary's now 
ex-vicarGraham Kings <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/graham-kings> is 
hosting theAlpha course session three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/series/alpha-male>. He's a nice bloke, but 
quite different from Toby, our normal course leader. Graham is rather 
theatrical, jumping from Bach to poetry to the Lord of the Rings, and leaping 
around the church showing us Jesus-inspired art with tumescent pride. The Alpha 
curriculum dictates that after the initial talk the leader buggers off and lets 
us get on with it. Toby normally vanishes to attend to quiet church business, 
such as feeding the vicarage gas meter. Graham retires to the piano and starts 
banging out an up-tempo version of something from the Well-Tempered Clavier. 
It's not dreadful.

We get down to the brutal beating heart of Christianity that is the 
crucifixion. Last week we addressed (but I wasunmoved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/jul/17/alpha-course-historical-jesus>
 by) the historicity of Jesus. This week's lesson depends on accepting that 
hearsay as truth: he has to have lived in order to die.

Underlying Graham's cheery demeanour, the themes that emerge from his talk are 
universally grim. He tells of how God's penalty for sin is death, introduced 
for all humankind by Adam, but that through Christ, death is defeated; Christ 
absorbs the sin of humankind and thus we are absolved; he bafflingly says you 
can "only destroy death from the inside", and illustrates this with Frodo 
taking theone ring to Mount Doom <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5teCdyG30LY>. 
He says that crucifixion is a symbol of death, and a reminder of alienation 
from God. I think ofBill Hicks saying that if JC returns to this world 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=17lNs9EFOYI>, probably the last thing he wants 
to see is a crucifix.

Maybe it's that Graham is not Toby, or that we are getting comfortable with 
the routine of pizza and God, but my fellow travellers on the Alpha course this 
week are much more vocal. I also detect that they are picking up the inherent 
morbidity inChristianity <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> as 
revealed in this session, and quiz Graham hard. Although our questions could 
sound mocking, the tone in church is sincerely inquisitive.

Steve, a thoughtful agnostic, asks how transferring sins from people onto 
someone sinless works? Graham confoundingly offers a scene fromBridge on the 
River Kwai <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=83bmsluWHZc> by way of explanation. 
Muttiah, the only one over 40, and only non-white Alpharino, follows with a 
question about why his own sins result in Jesus suffering. His intrigue stems 
from his Buddhist belief in karma. Barbara asks "If death is so bad and needs 
to be 'defeated', why does it exist in the first place?" Well, says Graham, 
that's the punishment for the Fall of Man.

"We're not free of sin" I say. "Our behaviour is not significantly more 
sin-free since Christ's death. So what was the point?" Graham explains that we 
are in a transitional period before the second coming, when the dead shall rise 
and be judged before possibly entering eternal paradise, where there is no 
death.

I'm well aware that the level of theological discourse here is rudimentary. 
But this lesson is so focussed on the fear of dying. Graham is no fire and 
brimstone bellowing preacher, but it is death nonetheless. LikeBertrand Russell 
<http://users.drew.edu/~jlenz/whynot.html>, I believe that when I die I shall 
rot, and nothing of my ego will survive. I love that my molecules will be 
consumed and my atoms will be recycled into endless forms. I am grateful that 
an indifferent universe conspired to give me life, and I believe that enjoying 
it is all the more important because my life will be short. I believe that 
should I be so vain as to wish a legacy that it will be in the behaviour of my 
children. Punishment, torture and blame are not part of my worldview, and do 
not inform my behaviour in this, the only realm. But do the motivations for 
good behaviour matter?

Muttiah needs to pee. One of the cardinal rules of Alpha at St Mary's is that 
we stop at 9.30 on the dot. This means the conversations are often cut short, 
but this week, Graham takes us to the Bull for a drink. Following his promotion 
to bishop, this is his last Alpha course in the church he has run for years, 
and he is anxious about the new job. In the pub, he drinks Belgian beer and 
occasionally swears. I like a swearing bishop. I feel confused at how someone 
so focussed on death can be quite so chirpy. I suspect the answer might come 
next week, when we discuss the story that renders death not quite as terminal 
as I believe it is: the resurrection.
 