
When I was a child, I had difficulty separating actors from the characters 
they played. You can imagine how often I was taken aback, as actors zigzagged 
across the spectrum of love, dependent on screenwriters’ whims. I grew out of 
it eventually. Well, almost. I am feeling that familiar heartbreak again, 
thanks to a young Welsh actor whose latest character leaves me vexed and 
outraged. Hello,Iwan Rheon <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3701064/> – and welcome 
to my collection of Confusing Crushes.

Why I love… Anderson .Paak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jun/04/why-i-love-anderson-paak-music-bim-adewunmi>
I first saw Rheon, 31, in the musical Spring Awakening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/feb/04/spring-awakening> back in 2009, 
but he only really made an impression on me inMisfits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/misfits>, E4’s sci-fi comedy-drama. 
He played Simon – a weird outcast in a group of already weird outsiders. Fans 
of the show get a dreamy expression when asked about Simon: his character’s 
evolution was a transformative TV experience. Much of it – from awkward and 
borderline creepy to swagger-heavy superhero – was due to Rheon’s specific 
physicality. His sloping shoulders straightened out imperceptibly over the 
weeks, his smile grew more natural, his blue eyes brightened. And let’s talk 
about those eyes! They are the eyes of agalago 
<http://www.factzoo.com/mammals/galago-bush-baby-tiny-african-primate.html>: 
big and vibrant and mesmerising. And as sadistic Ramsay Bolton in Game Of 
Thrones <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>, they 
transmit an unholy glee as he commits a series of awful crimes (rape, torture, 
murder). I have to force myself to remember him in the 2010 Channel 4 dramaI 
Don’t Care <https://vimeo.com/44093636>, all tender and a little broken. But I 
like having to work at it: it’s a reminder that he might be a great actor in 
the making.

Given the show’s propensity for killing off characters, who knows what’s next 
for Rheon? No doubt it’ll leave me bemused. I’m OK with that.
 