
“There are really only seven passages in the Bible that refer directly to 
homosexual behaviour, and none of them are associated with Jesus.”


That’s Davis Lose from the Lutheran Theological Seminary at Philadelphia 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/david-lose/what-does-the-bible-reall_b_990444.html>
. Lose goes on to contrast those handful of verses with the more than 300 
passages urging believers to care for the poor and to fight for social justice.

Compare that to the priorities of the Australian Christian Lobby, the group 
leading the attack on the Safe Schools anti-bullying program. Its website 
reveals a constant, almost obsessive, preoccupation with homosexuality and 
same-sex marriage.

Jesus, a refugee and Palestinian revolutionary, once explained (Luke 6:24-25): 
“Woe to you who are rich, for you are receiving your comfort in full. Woe to 
you who are well-fed now, for you shall be hungry. Woe to you who laugh now, 
for you shall mourn and weep.”

It’s not a sentiment reflected in ACL press releases, less concerned with 
warning the rich than fighting the queers.

That’s not to argue that the ACL isn’t Christian, so much as to suggest it 
represents Christianity rather as the Islamic State represents Islam: that is, 
it’s a particular political project, shaped as much by secular historical 
developments as by scripture.

Safe Schools LGBTI program researchers 'receiving abusive emails' after 
Christian lobby campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/24/safe-schools-lgbti-program-researchers-receiving-abusive-emails-after-christian-lobby-campaign>
Specifically, the ACL’s distinctive tradition comes not from the Holy Land but 
from the United States, where the American religious right first took shape in 
the early 1970s.

As Randall Balmer explains 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2014/05/religious-right-real-origins-107133#ixzz41POrkdi1>
 in Politico, Christian conservatism became a political force in the US at tail 
end of the civil rights era. Indeed, the religious right emerged initially to 
oppose desegregation – that is, to defend institutionalised racism against 
African Americans.

In 1971, the US government decided to withdraw tax exemptions from racially 
discriminatory schools. That included Bob Jones University, a fundamentalist 
college in South Carolina that claimed a scriptural basis for segregation. The 
university did not admit black students at all; later, it enrolled married 
black students but promised to expel any student who engaged in interracial 
dating (or who even supported an organisation that advocated interracial 
relationships).

The conservative political activist Paul Weyrich, working closely with the 
Reverend Jerry Falwell, rallied Christians in support of Bob Jones University’s 
right to receive tax breaks. Crucially, the campaign was pitched less as a 
defense of the college’s racism than as a matter of religious freedom: Weyrich 
roused a Christian constituency by warning evangelical leaders that the 
government was taking control their institutions. It was only later that 
Weyrich and Falwell redirected the anger at federal interference in Christian 
schooling into campaigns around “values” issues such as abortion and 
pornography.

The Australian Christian Lobby was founded in 1995, in fairly direct imitation 
of the Christian Coalition of America. There’s no suggestion that the ACL ever 
embraced the segregationist politics of Bob Jones. Nevertheless, you can still 
detect traces of that early history in the ACL’s persistent invocation of 
“religious freedom” when making its case against same-sex marriage.

As Ann Burlein has documented in her Lift High the Cross 
<https://www.dukeupress.edu/Lift-High-the-Cross/index-viewby=subject&categoryid=5&sort=author.html>
, by the 1990s the religious right in America had made a conscious decision to 
eschew overtly Biblical rhetoric in favour of more secular-sounding language 
about “values” and “rights”.

The ACL follows the same approach. In his study of the advertisements 
presented by anti-marriage equality groups such as the Australian Marriage 
Forum (to which the ACL is organisationally affiliated), Timothy Jonesnotes how 
campaigners 
<https://theconversation.com/what-really-lies-behind-conservative-opposition-to-same-sex-marriage-46011>
 “are attempting to hide religious and moral arguments in the Trojan horse of 
health and human rights discourse.”

You can see why. The ACL describes itself <http://www.acl.org.au/about/> as 
“rigorously non-partisan”, a not-for-profit lobby group offering “a credible 
Christian voice in the corridors of power”.

But, as Marion Maddox points out in an important article 
<http://www.researchonline.mq.edu.au/vital/access/manager/Repository/mq:31282?f0=sm_creator%3A%22Maddox%2C+Marion%22>
 in the academic journal Political Theology, many key ACL personnel have 
connections with political parties of the right: managing director Lyle Shelton 
stood for the Nationals in the Queensland state election of 2006; ACL co 
founder John Gagliardi worked as an advisor to Liberal prime minister John 
Gorton; ACL Chairman Emeritus Tony McLellan helps direct the Liberal party’s 
Menzies Research Institute.


Marriage equality v religious freedom. They are not mutually exclusive | 
Rodney Croome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/03/marriage-equality-v-religious-freedom-they-are-not-mutually-exclusive>
More importantly, the theological underpinnings of the ACL are distinctly 
fringe. Gagliardi, the ACL co-founder and its first president, lays out his 
beliefs about the relationship between Christians and secular society in a book 
entitledThe Marketplace: Our Mission 
<http://www.amazon.com.au/Marketplace-John-Lewis-Arthur-Gagliardi-ebook/dp/B004TBCD0G>
, a volume endorsed by the national chairman of the Brisbane’s Christian 
Outreach Centre, a church to which many key ACLers belong.


The Marketplace, says Maddox, is “Gagliardi’s manifesto for Christians working 
in business.”


She writes: 

[Gagliardi] uses an unusual term for such people: “kings.” Their destiny is to 
“rule and reign on the earth” in response to “the distinctive end-time call 
that is raising up a mighty army of kings. The Marketplace: Our Mission talks 
extensively about the need for Christian ‘‘kings’’ to take over designated 
‘‘spheres’’ of government, such as business, politics, media, arts and 
entertainment, church, family, and education (known as the ‘‘Seven Mountains 
strategy’’). Gagliardi […does not] advocate the use of violence to achieve 
this. On the contrary, ACL’s enthusiastic embrace of electoral process through 
such activities as meet-the-candidate forums and distribution of voter guides, 
demonstrates a high level of democratic engagement. On the other hand, the 
expectation that authority will be bestowed by market forces following a 
miraculous ‘‘transfer of wealth’’ does suggest an alternative route to normal 
democratic processes: theocracy via plutocracy. Although ACL itself does not 
refer in its public documents to any of these ideas, they are elaborated (in 
far greater detail than was possible in this brief summary) in the book by 
ACL’s founding president and explicitly endorsed by the national chairman of 
the church with which a number of ACL’s founders and present board members are 
associated.

Most Australians support same-sex marriage. Very few Australians endorse 
corporate rule by self-selected Christian kings. On the contrary, Christianity 
of any kind is a rapidly declining force throughout the country.

In his recent book Post-God Nation? the Christian writer Roy Williams says 
bluntly, “of one thing there can be little doubt: religious belief in Australia 
is at its lowest ever level.”

The fastest growing religious affiliation in the census data is “no religion”, 
climbing from 7% in 1971 to 22% in 2011. A 2013 survey revealed some 38% of 
people nominated for “no religion”, while only 53% described themselves as 
“Christian”. That “Christian” identification should be taken with a grain of 
salt, since it includes alongside the true believers all those who identify 
with the faith on cultural or historical grounds.

Today, only about 8% of Australians regularly attend services of worship and, 
of course, not all of those are Christian.

Why, then, does the ACL enjoy such a privileged position in public debate?

Partly, the organisation exploits the media’s obsession with “balance” on 
subjects deemed controversial. The ACL can be relied upon for quotable content 
enabling the “on the one hand, on the other” format employed by traditional 
journalism. Such presentations implicitly elevate the ACL to an equal stature 
with its opponents, even in contexts when the ACL speaks for almost no-one.

Furthermore, while the churches might be in decline, their core supporters 
tend to be active and dedicated. In an era in which political parties have lost 
their automatic hold on their constituency, a small cadre can exert an outsized 
influence – which is why both Kevin Rudd and John Howard took part in an 
ACL-sponsored form in 2007.

Same-sex marriage plebiscite ‘kicked issue into long grass’, boasts Christian 
lobby
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/28/same-sex-marriage-plebiscite-kicked-issue-into-long-grass-boasts-christian-lobby>
Perhaps more strikingly, in 2010 the famously atheist and unmarried Julia 
Gillardsat down with the ACL managing director Jim Wallace 
<http://www.acl.org.au/2010/08/julia-gillard-speaks-to-christians/> for an 
extended interview, in which she discussed her Baptist childhood, her 
involvement with the Salvation Army, and how her “values were formed in a 
strong family, in a family that went to church”.

Her calculation seems to have been that the Australian Christian Lobby (and 
certain socially conservative union leaders) mattered more than the 
progressives appalled by the ACL’s stances since the former could swing a bloc 
of support. As a campus politico, Gillard had stood on a gay rights platform. 
As prime minister, she declared herself a “cultural traditionalist”, whoopposed 
euthanasia and same-sex marriage on the basis of traditional values 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/julia-gillard-makes-stand-as-a-social-conservative/story-e6frfkvr-1226025095796>
. “I think for our culture, for our heritage,” she explained, “the Marriage Act 
and marriage being between a man and a woman has a special status.”

In retrospect, that all stands out as a disastrous miscalculation, a massive 
overestimation of the ACL’s influence.


Religious believers are, of course, as entitled to present their views as 
anyone else. But, according to aGalaxy Poll in 2011 
<http://www.australianmarriageequality.org/a-majority-of-christians-support-marriage-equality/>
, a majority of Christians actually support same sex marriage. ACrosby Textor 
poll 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/poll-shows-growing-support-for-samesex-marriage-20140714-3bxaj.html>
 in 2014 confirmed that – and suggested religious support had grown 
substantially.

Perhaps we could hear from those Christians for a change, rather than from the 
oddballs and reactionaries of the ACL.

 