
One of the islands that makes up Papua New Guinea is called New Ireland. But 
it seems that a much colder island far to the north might also wish to be 
called NewIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> – the island 
formerly known as Great Britain.

In the wake of the European commission’s ruling that Ireland must reclaim 
€13bn plus interest in taxes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
 from Apple, there is a good deal of excitement at the prospect of a 
post-Brexit Britain replacing its smaller neighbour in the affections of 
tax-shy global corporations. As theDaily Telegraph put it in an editorial: “If 
Ireland and the EU do not want a huge, wealth-creating firm doing business in 
their territory, Apple will be very welcome in the UK.” Welcome, that is, to 
use the UK as it has previously used Ireland – as a compliant state that will 
look the other way while vast profits pass through, untaxed.

It is, on the surface, an appealing prospect. You only have to walk around 
Dublin or Cork to see that Ireland’s tax regime has been a honeypot for all the 
hottest digital corporations – not just the long-established ones likeApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>, Microsoft and Intel but the 
entire new wave of internet behemoths: Google, Facebook, Twitter and so on. And 
the same is broadly true in other areas such as pharmaceuticals and medical 
devices. Little Ireland has a stock of US direct investment much larger than 
France and Germany combined. Ireland is the number one location worldwide for 
investment by US chemical and pharmaceutical companies and number two for IT 
companies. And no one thinks those corporations are attracted by the scenery.

For the more excitable elements among the Brexiters, the EU’s ruling on 
Apple’s tax bill thus opens up a delirious prospect. The Brussels bureaucrats 
are moving against Ireland’s vigorously pro-business taxation policies, but 
Britain, when it throws off the shackles of the EU, will be free to swoop in 
and grab the golden eggs from the Irish nest. Apple and Pfizer, Facebook and 
Google, driven by EU persecution from the emerald isle, will seek asylum in the 
New Ireland next door, where the writ of the Eurocrats does not run and the 
government knows how to treat a corporation with the respect it deserves. Could 
there be any more dramatic illustration of both the evils of the EU and the 
thrilling possibilities of Brexit?

There are, however, two small questions about this strategy. Is it possible? 
And is it desirable? The answers might perhaps curb the enthusiasm of the true 
believers.

There is, for a start, the small matter of whether, even after the EU tax 
ruling, Apple wants to leave Ireland for the UK or anywhere else. The answer 
could hardly be clearer – it doesn’t.

In an interview with Ireland’s national broadcaster RTE, chief executive Tim 
Cook was full of indignation at the very idea that Apple might have benefited 
from illegal state aid in the form of a sweetheart tax deal. “When you are 
accused of doing something that’s so foreign to your values, it brings out an 
outrage in you, that’s how we feel,” he said. He made clear that Apple will 
appeal against the €13bn ruling and that it expected the Irish government to do 
the same. Those listening out for signs of a dismay that might be exploited by 
post-Brexit Britain will have been encouraged – up to a point.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F852c75573920644ac34890975c3e497c86169681%2F1394_0_2133_2667%2F2133.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F852c75573920644ac34890975c3e497c86169681%2F1394_0_2133_2667%2F2133.jpg>
Tim Cook, chief executive officer of Apple, has said that the company will 
keep investing in Ireland. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty 
And the point at which the encouragement stopped was when Cook discussed 
Apple’s intentions. What will Apple do in benighted EU-ridden Ireland? Keep 
investing. He reaffirmed without qualification that Apple was going ahead with 
a major expansion of its campus in Cork: “We’re very committed to Ireland, have 
been for 37 years. We have a long-term romance together.”

So why on earth would Apple remain in Ireland instead of taking refuge in the 
brave new post-Brexit world of low-tax Britain? Partly because tax, even for 
greedy corporations, isn’t everything. And partly because Apple is smart enough 
to know that the kind of outrageous dodge that resulted in a tax rate in 2014 
for its Irish-based subsidiary of 0.005% is not sustainable – in Ireland, 
Britain or any other democratic society.

Though market fundamentalists find it hard to believe, even global 
corporations need social relationships. Will they exploit every possible 
loophole to maximise their profits? Yes – ruthlessly and without conscience. 
But is the ability to dodge tax the sole criterion they apply to their 
decisions to invest? No. As Cook acknowledged: “We went into Ireland in 1980. 
We didn’t go there to seek advantages on taxes – we had only 60 employees and 
very little revenue.”

This reassurance explains why public and political opinion in Ireland has been 
more ambivalent about the Apple ruling than the establishment consensus would 
suggest. The big right-of-centre parties, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil, have 
backed Apple to the hilt and tried to rally the public by warning that 
accepting the unpaid taxes would drive multinational investors away. But most 
people seem to understand that it’s not so simple. The choice between colluding 
in morally obnoxious tax avoidance on the one hand and facing economic chaos on 
the other does not ring true.

The Brexiters’ fantasy of stealing Ireland’s corporate investors relies on a 
deeply patronising attitude to Ireland. Underlying it is the notion that no 
foreign company would possibly invest in Ireland for any other reason than its 
lax attitude to taxation. But there are a lot of other reasons – a highly 
skilled and productive workforce, cultural vitality, political stability and 
(oddly enough) membership of theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> with full access to the world’s biggest 
single market. The obsession of giant corporations with avoiding tax does not 
blind them to their need for the social, political and cultural resources on 
which they draw.

This is not just a matter of theory. A crucial point easily lost in the noise 
of the EU’s Apple ruling is that the regime under which it could avoid so much 
tax has already changed. The notorious “double Irish” strategy used by Apple 
and other corporations to make themselves stateless for taxation purposes is 
being dismantled. Market fundamentalists would tell us that corporations will 
respond to this tightening of the tax regime by fleeing Ireland. Actually, 
they’ve responded by paying more tax: Ireland took in €6.9bn in corporation tax 
last year compared with €4.6bn in 2014 when the abolition of the“double Irish” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/14/ireland-abolish-double-irish-tax-scheme-apple>
 was announced.

And why was the Irish corporate tax regime made tougher? Not because of the EU 
but because of an organisation the Brexiters seem not to have heard of: the 
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). It is the OECD, 
not the EU, that has driven attempts to clean up the worst excesses of 
corporate tax avoidance. (One way of seeing the severity of the Apple ruling is 
as an attempt by the EU to regain the initiative on an issue of such global 
consequence.)

The UK is a member of the OECD and has signed up to these anti-tax avoidance 
strategies. Unless Britain wants to go completely rogue and leave the OECD as 
well as the EU, the fantasy of luring companies such as Apple with the virtual 
impunity from taxation they used to enjoy in Ireland could not be fulfilled.

So much for the possibility of becoming the New Ireland – what about the 
desirability? Would it be good for Britain if it were to try to emulate 
Ireland’s strategy of relying on foreign investment and attracting it by 
becoming, in effect, a tax haven for the largest corporations?

The key point about Ireland’s Faustian pact with global corporations is that 
it was a strategy of desperation. The country sold its soul in the 1960s 
because it had a stagnant agricultural economy. Indigenous industrial 
development was slow and weak, Ireland was an economic vassal of the UK and 
mass emigration was bleeding the country dry. Giving global corporations 
massive tax breaks wasn’t an ideological principle – it was a last resort when 
pretty much everything else had failed.

This matters in the British context because it explains why very low 
corporation taxes could operate in Ireland without creating social conflict. 
The corporate devil gave the Irish Faust a pretty good price for his soul: a 
way of moving from backwardness to modernity. But Britain has a radically 
different economic, social and political history. Transplanting a policy that 
worked for very specific reasons in Ireland into post-Brexit Britain would show 
scant regard for the nature of either country.

Ireland has had to live with the consequences of its particular choice. One of 
them is what US economist Paul Krugman recently called“leprechaun economics” 
<https://twitter.com/paulkrugman/status/752841032870551552>. Krugman coined the 
phrase in response to the news that the Irish economygrew by an incredible 26.3%
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/irish-economic-growth-revised-figures-foreign-investment-aircraft>
 in 2015. Literally incredible – the figures are massively inflated by the 
fiscal juggling of the giant corporations. Irish GDP is meaningless. There is a 
vast gulf between the real economy and the kind of hyped-up faux-economy you 
get when you turn your state into a conduit for torrents of funny money. And 
that hype is not harmless – the Celtic Tiger bubble was one of its more 
catastrophic products. It is not accidental that Ireland has the most unequal 
distribution of market income (before tax and welfare) in the developed world. 
In effect, there are two Irish economies: the foreign corporate economy that is 
highly skilled, ultra-globalised and very favourably treated by the state; and 
a weaker indigenous economy that exists in its shadow. One of the consequences 
of this extreme inequality of market income is that the state has to do an 
enormous amount of heavy lifting through the income tax and welfare systems to 
keep these divisions in check. This activist state is hardly what the British 
right expects it will get if it follows the Irish model.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61f594b72659be00ad71b3e72c5822340fbf6c3c%2F0_47_4441_2664%2F4441.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61f594b72659be00ad71b3e72c5822340fbf6c3c%2F0_47_4441_2664%2F4441.jpg>
 Steve Jobs, left, the co-founder of Apple, visiting the technology ­company’s 
new factory in Hollyhill, County Cork, in 1980. Apple has had operations in 
Ireland for 37 years. Photograph: Irish Examiner 
And here, surely, is the fatal contradiction in the notion of a post-Brexit 
Britain that will combine huge tax benefits for the corporate few with Theresa 
May’s promise of social justice for the many.

The more honest voices urging Britain to replace Ireland as the new best buddy 
of the global corporations recognise that radical cuts to corporate taxes would 
have to be matched by drastic reductions in personal taxes because otherwise 
rage at grossly unequal treatment would destabilise society and politics.Hence 
the final paradox: giving the corporations what they want on tax means not 
giving them what they need in every other respect.

The general low tax regime in this brave new Britain would be delightful for 
the likes of Apple – except when they want a terrific educational system to 
produce their smart workforce, a national health service to keep them healthy, 
a decline in social inequality to keep the political environment stable and 
lots of public investment in world-class infrastructure. And for those things 
they need big government funded by high taxes – on somebody else.

It is pure delusion to think that the smartest corporations will be drawn to a 
Britain not only outside the single European market but no longer raising 
enough tax to invest in its society, services and infrastructure. Ireland is 
discovering that the game of beggar-my-neighbour tax policies is pretty much 
up. Inside or outside the EU, Britain will have to join Ireland and the rest of
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in telling the 
corporations that, if they want to operate in civilised societies, they have to 
help pay for them.

Fintan O’Toole is a columnist with the Irish Times

FIAT 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec5ae999d94cf80ca7cc8440c0bfa94af7f303fd%2F181_0_4499_2700%2F4499.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec5ae999d94cf80ca7cc8440c0bfa94af7f303fd%2F181_0_4499_2700%2F4499.jpg>
 Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
In 2015 the European commission ruled that the Italian carmaker’s financing 
company had paid taxes on profits that had been underestimated. The commission 
found that Fiat Finance and Trade, which is based in Luxembourg and provides 
financial services, such as intra-group loans, to other Fiat group car 
companies, engaged in “many different transactions with Fiat group companies in 
Europe”.

Its investigation showed that a tax ruling by the Luxembourg authorities gave 
a selective advantage to Fiat Finance and Trade, which had allowed it to reduce 
its tax burden by between €20m and €30m since 2012. Fiat insisted its dealings 
merely amounted to a clarification of pricing rules and did not constitute 
state aid, but it was ordered to repay £25.5m.

MCDONALD’S

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b9547e1ab964e0c8aef495bfc4beb98011abe31%2F0_271_5095_3057%2F5095.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b9547e1ab964e0c8aef495bfc4beb98011abe31%2F0_271_5095_3057%2F5095.jpg>
 Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
In May, the French headquarters of the global fast-food chain was raided by 
tax officials who seized financial documents as part of an ongoing 
investigation. The company’s finances have been in the spotlight since last 
year, following claims that it struck a deal with the Luxembourg authorities to 
significantly reduce its tax bill on European sales. Following the raid, a 
spokesperson for McDonald’s said: “From 2010 to 2014, the McDonald’s companies 
paid more than €2bn just in corporate taxes in the European Union, with an 
average tax rate of almost 27%.”

AMAZON

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae4acb044b0eaae38f07fe3054680e095aab89e4%2F0_116_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae4acb044b0eaae38f07fe3054680e095aab89e4%2F0_116_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 Photograph: Reuters 
In 2013 it was revealed the online giant had paid only £10m in UK corporation 
tax, despite sales in Britain reaching £4.3bn. The commission is scrutinising 
Amazon’s 2003 tax deal with Luxembourg: Brussels believes it may have allowed 
Amazon’s European headquarters to lock in a preferentially low tax rate. 
However, Amazon says it does not receive preferential treatment from 
Luxembourg. It also insists that it is not based in the duchy – where it has 
more than 1,000 employees – primarily for tax reasons.

STARBUCKS

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d2487a09e22dbfdf8f96f64635996d1399aa36e%2F0_226_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20Apple%E2%80%99s%20low-tax%20deal%20is%20no%20blueprint%20for%20Brexit%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F03%2Fwhy-likes-of-apple-will-not-be-lured-to-brexit-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d2487a09e22dbfdf8f96f64635996d1399aa36e%2F0_226_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
The US coffee chain has said that it has not made a profit in the UK over 15 
years despite cumulative sales of £2bn. Up to 2012, it had paid corporation tax 
of only £8.6m. In 2015, the commission ruled Starbucks had to repay £22.8m of 
what were described as “illegal” tax breaks. An investigation by the commission 
showed that a tax ruling issued by the Dutch authorities in 2008 gave a 
selective advantage to Starbucks Manufacturing in the Netherlands – the 
company’s European coffee roasting operation – which enabled it to reduce its 
tax burden.

BELGIUM-LINKED MULTINATIONALS

In January, the commission concluded that selective tax advantages granted by 
Belgium under its “excess profit” tax scheme were illegal. The scheme was found 
to have benefited at least 35 multinationals, which were ordered to return 
unpaid taxes – estimated to be worth around €700m – to Belgium. Among those 
required to comply with the order were brewing giant Anheuser-Busch InBev, 
German chemicals giant BASF, and BP.

Jamie Doward
 