
The capsule claimed the life of the first astronaut to fly in it and was later 
involved in one of the worst accidents in spaceflight history. YetSoyuz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/soyuz> – which was first blasted into 
space 50 years ago – has since become the most successful craft to carry humans 
into Earth orbit. It is the workhorse spaceship on which manned missions beyond 
the atmosphere are now completely reliant.

Soyuz took the first earthlings – a cage of tortoises – to the moon in 1968, 
carried Britain’s only two astronauts, Helen Sharman and Tim Peake, into space, 
has been used for well over 100 manned space missions and has since become the 
only craft capable of ferrying astronauts to theInternational Space Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/international-space-station>. For an 
ageing piece of cold war technology, the spaceship has earned itself a 
remarkable reputation and has seen off far more complex, expensive craft such 
as the space shuttle, which was retired by Nasa five years ago.

But the future of Soyuz is in question today. Some experts believe that the 
craft will soon be replaced by cheaper spaceships now being developed in the US 
by Elon Musk and other entrepreneurs. Others expect that Soyuz will still be 
flying for years to come. “Soyuz is certainly not done yet,” said former Nasa 
engineer David Baker, editor of the UK journalSpaceflight and author of Soyuz: 
An Owner’s Workshop Manual, published by Haynes 
<https://haynes.com/en-gb/soyuz-manual>. “It could easily be in use in years to 
come.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsoyuz-space-fifty-years-old%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7d08514077b42aa11449a09231d2bd23442be37%2F0_123_3700_2219%2F3700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20Soviet%20space%20workhorse%20Soyuz%20is%20still%20going%20strong%20%E2%80%93%2050%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsoyuz-space-fifty-years-old%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20Soviet%20space%20workhorse%20Soyuz%20is%20still%20going%20strong%20%E2%80%93%2050%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsoyuz-space-fifty-years-old%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7d08514077b42aa11449a09231d2bd23442be37%2F0_123_3700_2219%2F3700.jpg>
 British astronaut Helen Sharman after a successful space flight in Soyuz. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Sharman – who flew to and from the Mir space station in 1991 in the spacecraft 
– described flying on Soyuz as an unforgettable experience. “You can feel 
things clunking into place when you push buttons on the control panel. You can 
hear valves opening and shutting. It is solid, reliable and robust. After all, 
it had to withstand conditions at the Soviet launch site in Kazakhstan where 
temperatures drop to minus 30C in winter and reach plus 30C in summer. That is 
why it is still in use today.”

The basic design for Soyuz was established in 1962 by the Soviet rocket 
engineer Sergei Korolev. The craft was intended to become the spaceship that 
would carry Soviet cosmonauts to the moon. (A separate lander would ferry one 
person to the lunar surface.) On 28 November 1966, an unmanned version was 
launched with the aim of carrying out a rendezvous with a second Soyuz to be 
launched next day. However, the craft’s systems failed within minutes of 
reaching orbit and the mission was abandoned. A follow-up mission ended in 
disaster when its launcher exploded on the launchpad, killing one person.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsoyuz-space-fifty-years-old%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29a3ed179363b3edfff7782e1c1bd6dbdadcd46d%2F948_303_2801_3501%2F2801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20Soviet%20space%20workhorse%20Soyuz%20is%20still%20going%20strong%20%E2%80%93%2050%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsoyuz-space-fifty-years-old%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20Soviet%20space%20workhorse%20Soyuz%20is%20still%20going%20strong%20%E2%80%93%2050%20years%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsoyuz-space-fifty-years-old%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29a3ed179363b3edfff7782e1c1bd6dbdadcd46d%2F948_303_2801_3501%2F2801.jpg>
 Soviet cosmonaut Vladimir Komarov died in the first manned Soyuz mission in 
1967. Photograph: SVF2/UIG via Getty Images 
The Soviets pressed ahead and in April 1967 the first manned Soyuz was 
launched but crashed on re-entry when its descent capsule’s parachute failed to 
open, killing its only crewman, Vladimir Komarov. Flights resumed 18 months 
later and Soyuz eventually entered regular service, though by then the Soviets 
were lagging behind America in the race to the moon. Nevertheless they were 
still able to come up with one startling mission using a version of Soyuz, 
called Zond 5.

“They put a small cargo of tortoises on board – as well as some seeds, worms 
and flies – and sent it to the moon,” said Doug Millard, curator of a recent 
exhibition,Cosmonauts, at the Science Museum in London. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/20/cosmonauts-birth-space-age-wiltons-music-hall>
 “It flew round the moon and headed back to Earth. The craft was recovered and 
the tortoises survived. These were the first animals to be sent to the moon, it 
transpires.”

Zond 5 flew in September 1968. After its success, cosmonaut Alexei Leonov 
pressed to follow immediately on a similar mission – to circle the moon and 
return to Earth – and so beat America which was planning its own circumlunar 
mission, Apollo 8, that December. “Leonov was refused permission and so America 
got to the moon first – though they did not land until Apollo 11 touched down 
on the lunar surface in July 1969,” added Baker. “At the end of the day, the 
Russians were just more cautious.”

After losing the race to the moon, Russia concentrated on Earth orbit missions 
and the construction of manned space stations. Soyuz became the workhorse for 
those missions though it suffered one more tragic failure when the three crew 
members on board Soyuz 11 – Georgy Dobrovolsky, Vladislav Volkov and Viktor 
Patsayev – were killed in 1971 when their capsule depressurised abruptly as 
they prepared to re-enter the atmosphere. They are the only deaths of humans to 
have occurred in space: all other spaceflight fatalities having happened inside 
Earth’s atmosphere.

Since then, Soyuz has earned itself a reputation for safety and reliability 
though its descent to Earth, said Sharman, remains a dramatic experience. “The 
G-force is five times normal gravity. You can see the part of the spaceship 
outer shell which starts to glow as it heats up as it plunges into the 
atmosphere and bits start to burn off. Then when the parachute opens you get 
jerked from side to side. It’s a lumpy and bumpy ride.”

For all its discomforts, this is the form of manned spacecraft that has 
prevailed over the decades. In the 90s, China took the model of Soyuz and used 
it to make their near-identical Shenzhou spacecraft. Then, after suffering two 
calamitous losses, the US abandoned its space shuttle – although it was a far 
more sophisticated craft that was capable of gliding to a stress-free landing 
like an airliner.

Abandoning the shuttle left Soyuz as the only means to get to and from the 
InternationalSpace <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Station – though 
some upgrades have been made over the years. “For one thing, its interior had 
to be changed to make room for American astronauts – who tend to be bigger than 
Russian cosmonauts and who were having trouble fitting in on flights to the 
space station,” said Millard.

The fact that the world now relies on one single capsule, developed in the 
1960s, to ferry astronauts into space is striking. For some it suggests that 
manned spaceflight no longer commands its former interest. “Manned space flight 
in the US has gone the same way as supersonic airliners, like Concorde,” said 
the astronomer royal, Martin Rees. “They are both examples of technology that 
were developed but have been dropped because it was found they were not needed.”

American entrepreneurs are now developing space capsules such as Boeing’s 
Starliner and SpaceX’s Dragon 2 – though it remains to see how successful they 
will be. By contrast, robot probes are becoming more sophisticated, said Rees. 
“It is robots, and not humans, that will explore the planets,” he added. “And 
the cost gap between manned and unmanned missions remains huge, so the 
practical need for manned space flight gets ever weaker with each advance made 
in robots and miniaturisation.”

How Soyuz will fare in such a future, it is hard to predict. It is incredibly 
reliable and quite sufficient for current needs to supply the International 
Space Station. New US spacecraft may undercut the Soyuz costs but as yet none 
has flown. For his part, Baker is confident of the spacecraft’s short-term 
future: “My money is on Soyuz’s still being with us for a while yet.”

HAPPY BIRTHDAY, COMRADE

A Soyuz spacecraft is made up of three separate sections: 

■ A spheroid orbital module, which provides accommodation for a crew of up to 
three.

■ A small aerodynamic descent module in which the cosmonauts return to Earth.

■ A cylindrical service module onto which the craft’s solar panels are 
attached, and which contains instruments and rocket engines.

The orbital and service modules are jettisoned when Soyuz re-enters the 
atmosphere. The descent module drifts by parachute to the ground. A few metres 
before it touches down, a small rocket is fired to cushion the landing impact.

The Soviets also developed the Soyuz rocket, also still in use today, either 
to launch Soyuz capsules or other unmanned space vehicles. The European Space 
Agency probe Venus Express was launched on a Soyuz rocket, for example. It is 
the world’s most reliable space launcher.
 