
The lesser-prized draw

First, a quiz. In 2016, what linked the Tests between England and South Africa 
in Cape Town, West Indies and Australia in Sydney, England and Sri Lanka at 
Lord’s, the first between West Indies and India at Sabina Park, the fourth 
between those same teams at Queen’s Park Oval, South Africa and New Zealand in 
Durban, and India and England at Rajkot? The answer is so obvious you may have 
overlooked it: the result. There were 47 Tests in 2016, and those seven were 
the only ones that were drawn. So few you can list them all in a single 
paragraph. Only two decades ago, in 1997, almost half of all Tests played ended 
in a draw, 21 out of 44. Now you can count them on your fingers.

Seven of 47 is just under 15%. It is not quite the smallest such number in the 
recent history of Test cricket, but is close to it. It was 15% again in 2002. 
Otherwise you have to go all the way back to 1950, when only nine Tests were 
played, to find a year in which a smaller percentage of games were drawn. It is 
no great revelation, rather a commonplace observation, that draws are becoming 
less common. But in 2016 the drop was so sharp that it demands a double take. 
Since 2002 the mean average has been 25%. The figure sometimes rose as high as 
36%, and only once dropped below 20%. A 2008 study concluded the number of draws
had reached a plateau at one quarter 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/227672327_Is_the_decline_in_the_frequency_of_draws_in_Test_match_cricket_detrimental_to_the_long_form_of_the_game>
. But it has dropped again, to one fifth in 2015, one sixth in 2016.

The rarest of all: David Warner's century before lunch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/the-rarest-of-all-david-warners-century-before-lunch>
Of those seven Tests, four were thoroughly washed out. Only 150 overs were 
possible inAustralia’s Test against West Indies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/07/draw-in-sydney-but-australia-retain-frank-worrell-trophy-after-warners-ton>
 at the SCG a year ago. Hurricane Earl stopped play between West Indies and 
India at Sabina Park, and the fourth Test of that same series was spoiled by an 
irretrievably sodden outfield, which meant the match ended up as one of the 
shortest in Test history, only 22 overs long. At Durban similar problems meant 
only 99 overs were bowled in the match between South Africa and New Zealand. 
And a fifth, England’s Test against Sri Lanka,was rained off on the fifth day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/13/england-sri-lanka-third-test-match-report>
, when Sri Lanka were 78 for 1, chasing a victory target of 362.

So there were only two straightforward draws, matches in which the teams 
simply ran out of time to reach a result, in the entire year. Both involved 
England. The first wasthat Cape Town game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/06/england-draw-south-africa-second-test>
 in which Ben Stokes and Jonny Bairstow battered 399 in three sessions and 
England then spent two-and-a-half days trying to dismiss Hashim Amla. And the 
other the match at Rajkot,which India finished six wickets down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/india-draw-england-first-test-cricket>
, and everyone was left wondering whether Alastair Cook had again waited too 
long before making his declaration. Outside of acts of God, inadequate covers, 
and England, draws really do not seem to exist in Test cricket any more. It is 
a radical change, one that poses interesting questions about the state of the 
game. Widespread worries about flat pitches, for instance, suddenly seem 
misplaced when so many matches are ending inside five days.

The shift is tied to the other major trend in Test cricket in 2016, which was 
the number of batting collapses.By Cricinfo’s count 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/review2016/content/story/1074987.html>, there were 
29 in the 47 Tests, ranging fromAustralia’s losing six wickets for 22 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/01/sri-lankas-unheralded-side-manages-what-its-most-distinguished-could-not>
 against Sri Lanka at Pallekele, to England losing all 10 for 104 against India 
in Chennai. Altogether there were 11 matches in which teams lost 10 wickets for 
under 100 runs, and 10 in which theywere bowled out for under 125 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/review2016/content/story/1075114.html>. So, until 
this December there had been only four Test matches in which a team had lost by 
an innings after scoring 400 or more in the first innings. Then it happened 
three times in three weeks, to England in Mumbai and Chennai, andPakistan in 
Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/30/mitchell-starc-leads-australia-to-dramatic-melbourne-test-win-over-pakistan>
.

Sign up to the Spin
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>
There are two issues at play here, both surely to do with the influence of 
Twenty20. One is that many modern batsmen may lack the practice, technique, or 
temperament to bat out matches. The other is that fielding teams believe more 
can be achieved in a shorter space of time. All of this is epitomised by Virat 
Kohli, the very model of a modern batsman, and his remarks both about how 
slowly his team-mate Cheteshwar Pujara was scoring during India’s tour of the 
Caribbean and England’s batting when they were trying to savethe second Test in 
Visakhapatnam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/21/india-england-second-test-day-five-match-report>
. Pujara was dropped after scoring 46 from 159 balls. England collapsed after 
an opening stand of 75 in 50 overs. On both occasions Kohli spoke about a lack 
of intent. He seems to see slow and steady batting as an anachronism.

If the reasons for the change seem clear, the consequences of it will not be 
for a while yet. Traditionally, sports economics has been underpinned by 
something called the uncertainty of outcome principle,set down by Simon 
Rottenberg in 1956 <http://eprints.whiterose.ac.uk/86817/3/WRRO_86817.pdf>. 
Rottenberg’s hypothesis was that the harder it is to predict a result, the more 
likely people are to pay to watch. Fans do not only want to know their team 
might win, they need to believe there is a chance they might lose too. A draw 
need not just be the product of a dull pitch. It can be the upshot of a contest 
between two well-matched teams and a sign that no one can be sure who has the 
edge, or will likely emerge the winner over the series.

To finish, another quiz. In 2016, what linked the Tests between Australia and 
New Zealand at Wellington, England and Sri Lanka at Headingley, West Indies and 
India in Antigua, Zimbabwe and New Zealand in Bulawayo, Australia and South 
Africa in Hobart, India and England at both Mumbai and Chennai, and Australia 
and Pakistan at the MCG? The answer is that all were won with an innings to 
spare. That’s eight altogether, one more than the number of draws. Another 
seven Tests were won by seven wickets or more, and another 10 by at least 200 
runs. That’s an awful lot of lopsided results. Crushing defeats have become a 
lot more common than close matches.

• This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. 
To subscribe,just visit this page and follow the instructions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/18/sign-up-to-the-spin>.














 