
The reports this week that ratings agency Standard & Poor’s might lower 
Australia’s credit rating highlighted that for the most part talk about 
government debt by both political parties doesn’t actually have much to do with 
the state of our economy.

When you look at talk about government debt, it’s soon obvious that no one 
actually argues it is inhibiting economic growth. All the worry is about what 
might happen in the future – will we have room for stimulus measures should the 
economy slow, and rather more abstractly, will our debt level cause the ratings 
agencies to lower our triple-A credit rating?

At the moment, Australia is one of only 10 nations to have a triple A rating 
from the three agencies of Standard & Poor’s, Fitch and Moody’s.

Scorn for Morrison's numbers triggers Standard and Poor's negative outlook
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jul/07/scorn-for-morrisons-numbers-triggers-standard-and-poors-negative-outlook>
This week came reports that S&P, which in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/jul/07/scorn-for-morrisons-numbers-triggers-standard-and-poors-negative-outlook>
 put Australia on a negative credit outlook, might use the updated budget 
figures in December’s mid-year economic and fiscal outlook as a trigger for the 
downgrade.

While there is a good chance that government revenue will be improved by the 
recent increases incoal and iron ore prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/16/scott-morrison-and-the-budget-just-got-lucky-with-the-price-of-coal>
, Treasury officials told the Senate estimates hearing this week there was a 
lot of uncertainty about how long those higher prices would remain in place.

As such, the number in the Myefo might not show much of a lowering of the 
deficit, and thus S&P might decide the path back to surplus is too slow or 
unrealistic and take away our triple-A rating.

Yet really we should ask why on Earth does such an agency have so much 
importance? S&P for example is the only one of the three major credit agencies 
to not have the US rated triple A.

It is frankly absurd to think that the US would be in any way unable to repay 
its debt given its status as the world’s largest economy with a currency that 
is far and away the most traded in the world.

But now that same agency is looking askance at our own situation, despite our 
economy growing faster than all but Luxembourg and Sweden among the 10 
economies with a triple-A rating, and with the third lowest level of gross 
government debt of those 10 as well.

The concerns of a lowering of our credit rating are both political and 
economic.

A downgrade looks bad for any government, and it was clear in Senate estimates 
this week that both sides are laying the foundations to blame each other should 
it occur.

But economically the worry is that a downgrade will raise the cost of 
borrowing for the government, which in turn would do the same for state and 
local governments and Australian corporations, given the interest rate they pay 
is linked to that of the government.

While inevitably banks would pass on these increased lending costs onto 
consumers, the reality is no one is quite sure just how much those costs would 
be – if any.

The new head of the Reserve Bank, Philip Lowe, told the house economics 
committee 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;adv=yes;db=COMMITTEES;id=committees%2Fcommrep%2F1a89abbb-5826-4eaa-8c4d-a0cc4a3fd1fd%2F0001;orderBy=date-eFirst;page=0;query=Dataset%3AcomRep;rec=14;resCount=Default>
 soon after taking over the position last month, that the effects of a ratings 
downgrade on borrowing costs are “quite small”. He suggested that rather than 
be the main game, that credit ratings were just “a useful reminder that we need 
to make sure the recurrent budget is on a good path”.

But while our government debt remains “admirable” by international standards, 
as the secretary of the treasury, John Fraser, noted this week, our levels of 
private debt are extremely high – indeed fifth-highest in the world. 
Worryingly, the IMF in its recent fiscal monitor report noted the level of this 
debt was a concern for Australia’s ongoing financial stability.

Fraser noted this aspect as well in his appearance before the Senate estimates 
committee, telling the committee that the Treasury, “are also conscious that 
credit rating agencies are focusing on household debt as well as corporate and 
government debt”.

Coalition asleep at the wheel as household debt warning gets louder | Chris 
Bowen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/coalition-asleep-at-the-wheel-as-household-debt-warning-gets-louder>
Policies to lower private debt however are much more thin on the ground than 
are the cries about the need to cut government spending to reduce government 
debt.

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, this week raised the issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/coalition-asleep-at-the-wheel-as-household-debt-warning-gets-louder>
 in an opinion piece published by Guardian Australia. He highlighted that the 
ALP’s policy on capital gains tax and negative gearing, which it took to the 
last election, was the type of policy proscribed by organisations like the IMF 
to temper our love of taking on more and more private debt.

Should S&P downgrade Australia’s credit rating, no doubt almost all commentary 
and debate will focus on government debt. But regardless of whether or not such 
a downgrade will cause interest rates for governments and companies to rise, 
private – not government – debt will remain the issue that most urgently needs 
to be addressed.
 