
One of the most hotly debated cultural topics over the past five years has 
been the place ofthe arts in formal education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/17/arts-and-culture-systematically-removed-from-uk-education-system>
. The warnings of the cultural sector, that curriculum changes and the EBacc (a 
selection of GCSE subjects that excludes the arts) would impact on the take-up 
of these subjects, are being proved correct. There has been a 21% drop in arts 
GCSEs taken in 2016, compared with 2010. And the decision last month toscrap 
A-level art history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/art-history-a-level-subject-private-schools-kenneth-clark>
 is just the latest example of a worrying political message: that in terms of 
education, art doesn’t count.

Museums love teenagers, but only if they are in uniform | Dea Birkett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/27/museums-teenagers-salford-safety>
My own education could not have been more distanced from this perspective. 
Aged 11, I left home to enrol at the Royal Ballet School, based at White Lodge 
in Richmond, London. My education took place not only in a historic royal 
palace, but also under the umbrella of one of Britain’s great cultural 
institutions.

Culture and the arts were integral to my entire education – we didn’t go so 
far as to dance our maths lessons, but I was immersed in an environment where 
art wasn’t considered a soft option for children thought to be “less academic”. 
Art was assumed to be relevant to the entire curriculum, central to an 
education that equipped me with crucial life skills: curiosity, initiative, 
creativity, perseverance, self-criticism, open-mindedness, self-confidence, 
courage and responsibility. As a dancer, these kind of transferable skills are 
essential: a dancer’s career rarely extends beyond 40.

With this background, I was intrigued by a recent project based at King’s 
College London, where I now work, to explore the impact ofsiting primary and 
nursery schools in museums 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/Cultural/-/Projects/My-Primary-School-is-at-the-Museum.aspx>
 – going beyond the usual day trips to embed lessons in these institutions over 
an extended period of up to a term.

Pupils' confidence, creativity, and social and communication skills were all 
enhanced

The project, the results of which have just been published 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/Cultural/Cultural-Institute/161107-Primary-at-Museum-Report-Stage-7-Visual-interactive.pdf>
, clearly showed that the benefits of integrating art and learning that I so 
enjoyed were shared by participating children in Swansea, South Shields and 
Liverpool. Their confidence, creativity, and social and communication skills 
were all enhanced – and teachers reported that the pupils retained more of what 
they learned.

But the benefits weren’t restricted to the children. Teachers gained 
confidence in using a wide range of resources in creative ways to deliver the 
core curriculum, and the schools felt it brought them closer to parents, 
helping promote community cohesion.

This all comes at a tough time for museums. There has been a 17% reduction in 
local authority cultural spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/13/culture-spending-councils-arts-council-england>
 since 2010, with more than 40 local museums already closed. The north of 
England has been disproportionately hit. In Kirklees, West Yorkshire, the 
council announced last month that it willclose three museums 
<http://www.examiner.co.uk/news/west-yorkshire-news/axe-falls-three-kirklees-museums-11973938>
, hard on the heels of five closures in Lancashire. Just down the road from the 
King’s College project in South Shields, Bede’s World – a celebration of 
Anglo-Saxon Northumberland and the venerable Bede – closed in February due to 
government cuts. Thankfully in this case the museum has beensaved by a charity 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-tyne-37106405>.

Take the kids to … The Tank Museum, Bovington, Dorset
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/oct/04/bovington-tank-museum-dorset-take-the-kids-to>
Imaginative partnerships could help stretched funds go further. Might museums 
be designed with school education in mind? Or might a new school, fit for 
future generations, include a museum within its boundaries? It’s tempting to 
assume pupils would be the beneficiaries of this kind of partnership, but it 
could be just as significant for the museums. By helping pupils develop 
cultural engagement from an early age, museums could secure them as visitors in 
the future.

Free museum admission – introduced by Labour and retained by the Conservatives 
– remains a popular policy, but there is work to do to increase the social, 
cultural and economic diversity of visitors. Almost 90% of those who go to 
Britain’s flagship museums are from higher social classes. Co-location of 
schools and museums could help create the culturally confident citizens of 
tomorrow, and ensure local museums are a vital resource for all members of 
their communities. Education and the arts are moving further apart, but it need 
not be like this.
 