 Big blubber ... Mark Ruffalo in You Can Count On Me. Photograph: 
Allstar/Paramount/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
 The single tear that trickles down Colin Firth's cheek in A Single Man, after 
discovering his partner has been killed in a car crash 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AGLrSZuMnqw>. Brad Pitt in Se7en, retching 
panicked tears when he finds out what's in the box 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VV3cZ0Bc68I>. Tom Cruise's twisted agony in 
Magnolia <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EseJkKZXfyI>, Will Ferrell's Glass 
Case Of Emotion <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FwXD0hCvtX4>, Leonardo DiCaprio 
inevery film he's ever been in <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p53CZtamFsU>: 
the male sob in cinema is often an angry gasp, whether accompanied by tears 
teetering on the cusp of a lower-eyelid, or streaming waterfalls. Marc 
Ruffalo's crying scene inYou Can Count On Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/mar/23/culture.reviews> comes from a 
different place however; a soft, childlike whimper by a man who's glad to be 
home.

Kenneth Lonergan's 2000 film marvels in its character's subtleties. We find 
out that Terry (Ruffalo) and his caring sister Sammy (Laura Linney) were 
orphaned as children after their parents were killed in a car crash. While 
Sammy stayed in the house she inherited in Scottsville, raising her son in the 
small town in the Catskill Mountains, her short-tempered and gormlessly 
gorgeous brother left to live a mysterious life in various locations; a life we 
know little about, other than that he was recently in prison for beating up the 
boyfriend of a stripper and that he has a too-young girlfriend called Sheila 
who owes someone a lot of money.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FWfBoo0XvGfE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FWfBoo0XvGfE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FWfBoo0XvGfE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click to view 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WfBoo0XvGfE&t=1m5s>

The short but heartbreaking scene comes 30 minutes into the film. Terry has 
travelled from Worcester to Scottsville to borrow money off his sister, but 
receives news while at home that Sheila has tried to kill herself. Sat on the 
edge of his childhood bed putting his boots back on before he gets a coach back 
to visit her, Sammy comes in to check he's OK. Terry doesn't appear to be too 
in love with "this girl" back in Worcester, but she represents what a mess his 
life has become since leaving home. "Why don't you stay a while?" Sammy asks 
softly as she sits down next to him. "I think that …" he looks up at his 
sister, mouth downturned, chin pronounced and voice crumbling "… would be a 
good idea".

It's a feeling I've experienced throughout my life; returning from London 
after months of recklessness, straight into the sanity of the small town where 
I grew up. Everything's the same but you're not: you've seen things, 
experienced life and are battered and bored by the slow pace of rural family 
existence. You have a sense of superiority because you live a faster, more 
complicated life than those you left behind. But all it takes is a simple 
question from a loved one – "Are you sure you're OK?" "Have you really been 
eating properly?" "Do you want a hot water bottle?" – and you're reduced to a 
sniveling toddler. Ruffalo's cry is such a succinct, relatable breakdown that I 
could make it into a gif and blub every time it looped for an hour.

Until this point in the film, Terry is an idiot. In fact, he continues to be 
rude and throttleable throughout. But now you realise he's a big baby who's 
scared of being a grown up and just wants his mum. Like the rest of us.

More from Why I love … <https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/why-i-love>
 