
When you’re writing a novel, everyone wants to know if you’re going to write 
about sex. If you say yes, they want to know why. It’s a difficult question to 
answer. Are you going to be like the film starlet, explaining that she took 
part in nude scenes because they were an integral part of the plot? Or should 
you adopt a quasi-academic position, claiming sex is only a physical activity 
and we shouldn’t be squeamish about it.

Blue Peter star beats top authors to Bad sex award nomination
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/17/bad-sex-awards-shortlist-blue-peter-janet-ellis>
Since my nomination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/17/bad-sex-awards-shortlist-blue-peter-janet-ellis>
 for theLiterary Review’s bad sex in fiction award 
<https://literaryreview.co.uk/bad-sex-in-fiction-award> it’s a question that’s 
occupied my mind. For me, the truth lay in between. There are many reasons why 
your characters have sex and many more why you ought to try to describe it. 
Sometimes the author steps back: a curtain falls, a door closes and a row of 
dots makes the reader do the work, but mostly you need to get into the minds, 
and bodies, of the people you’ve invented and see what happens when they get 
together with the metaphorical lights on.

When I sat down to write my first book I knew that, unless it was a Janet and 
John (ask Grandma), then it would be about adults doing what they do, and that 
might include having sex. It would be invidious to say it didn’t cross my mind 
that some people might pretend to be surprised that aformer Blue Peter presenter
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/20/marilyn-monroe-dress-happy-birthday-mr-president>
would know anything about carnal relations, much less write about them. I had 
reversed my usual instruction and invited the mummies and daddies back into the 
room, while effectively sending the children out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fblue-peter-badge-bad-sex-award-fiction-janet-ellis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea01e31431bdf63065aba3b1c576e5ef52f79c60%2F0_510_1524_1523%2F1524.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%20deserve%20a%20Blue%20Peter%20badge%20for%20my%20description%20of%20sex%20%7C%20Janet%20Ellis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fblue-peter-badge-bad-sex-award-fiction-janet-ellis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%20deserve%20a%20Blue%20Peter%20badge%20for%20my%20description%20of%20sex%20%7C%20Janet%20Ellis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fblue-peter-badge-bad-sex-award-fiction-janet-ellis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fea01e31431bdf63065aba3b1c576e5ef52f79c60%2F0_510_1524_1523%2F1524.jpg>
 Simon Groom with Goldie, Janet Ellis with Jack and Peter Duncan with George in 
the Blue Peter garden in 1983. Photograph: BBC Pictures Archives 
I didn’t set out to titillate or shock, but to have skirted around the issue 
would have been cowardly. I didn’t let imaginary hecklers get in the way of 
what I wanted to write, or worry someone who’d watched me when they were a 
child would suffer the trauma of finding out I was a grown woman after all.

Writing about writing about sex is also difficult, of course. If you’re not 
describing what happens (when you can use all the available words any which way 
you choose, in an attempt to make a very old act seem new) you’re a hostage to 
fortune. Every phrase risks alerting the double entendre police, who are eager 
to nudge each other in the ribs if anything naughty arises (see?).

The bad sex award needs a new sort of climax | Peter Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/20/bad-sex-awards-morrissey-adele-river-lea>
And looking at any sex scene out of context is awkward, too, like flinging 
open the changing room door without warning, only to discover someone 
struggling into a pair of trousers. The events leading up to congress in a 
novel are literary foreplay; the reader should trust implicitly that it won’t 
be gratuitous or designed to do anything other than enhance the narrative. If, 
when you’re telling your story, it would feel oddnot to write about sex then 
there’s no need to make a detour for the sake of prurience. It is, however, 
important that you understand your motives as well as you do your characters’. 
I don’t think you should aim for crowd-pleasing. If you have to go back and 
insert these things (oh!) it’s never going to ring true.

Although you might not be hungry when you read about food, you can’t help 
imagining – and possibly wanting – the food you love, whatever the characters 
are eating. When you read a sex scene, you’re similarly engaging with your own 
desires, even if they’re not what’s written down.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fblue-peter-badge-bad-sex-award-fiction-janet-ellis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b4371a7b2a8b318a31ced9c016938bc5cc8ce27%2F0_192_4002_2401%2F4002.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20I%20deserve%20a%20Blue%20Peter%20badge%20for%20my%20description%20of%20sex%20%7C%20Janet%20Ellis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fblue-peter-badge-bad-sex-award-fiction-janet-ellis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20I%20deserve%20a%20Blue%20Peter%20badge%20for%20my%20description%20of%20sex%20%7C%20Janet%20Ellis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fblue-peter-badge-bad-sex-award-fiction-janet-ellis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b4371a7b2a8b318a31ced9c016938bc5cc8ce27%2F0_192_4002_2401%2F4002.jpg>
 Janet Ellis with her daughter Sophie Ellis Bextor after receiving her MBE from 
the Duke of Cambridge at Buckingham Palace this month. Photograph: WPA 
Pool/Getty Images 
So I hope help was on hand for the judges of the bad sex award who have had to 
deal with tons of this stuff. The paragraphs they’ve pulled out (sorry) for the 
shortlist are scarcely erotic, and weren’t designed to be, but the cumulative 
effect must have caused some flushing at least. I take some comfort from the 
fact that if, after such an avalanche, my writing stood out like a ski pole, I 
must be doing something right.

Discussing an episode in Jon Stock’s novel Dead Spy Running, one reviewer 
likened 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/booknews/9910120/Sex-scenes-in-novels-autobiographical-or-imagined.html>
 it to a “here’s-one-I-prepared-earlier Blue Peter sex scene”. Had I failed to 
rise above expectations of how a presenter of that programme might write about 
sex? I take a deep breath. I read the passage I’d written: yes, it’s about sex. 
But I think it all comes together.

• Janet Ellis’s first novel, The Butcher’s Hook (Two Roads) 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/butcher-s-hook.html>, is out now, £7.99
 