
Like an embarrassed child trying to hide a broken lamp behind a curtain, Sajid 
Javid last Thursday, hours before the Easter break,sneaked out the news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/24/land-registry-faces-privatisation>
 that the government wants to privatise the Land Registry. Perhaps he hoped 
nobody would notice.

In vain. The growing number of people who rely on open government data to run 
businesses and understand what is happening to the country weren’t fooled at 
all. Selling the Land Registry is foolish dogma that risks creating a private 
monopoly over what should be publicly available data. It would mean squandering 
long-term income for short-term gain; putting vital information beyond reach of 
the Freedom of Information Act; and creating a future where we can’t find out 
how our country is owned without stumping up fees of unknown size.

Land Registry faces privatisation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/24/land-registry-faces-privatisation>
The idea was floated to, and blocked by, Vince Cable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jul/11/land-registry-privatisation-vetoed-vince-cable>
 in the previous administration. It’s still a bad idea. Just ask John 
Manthorpe, the former chief land registrar,who on the We own it website 
<https://weownit.org.uk/blog/why-privatising-land-registry-wrong> says: “The 
Registry’s independence from commercial or specialised interests is essential 
to the trust and reliance placed on its activities”.

The Tories’ reason for the proposed sell-off is in the second sentence of the 
foreword of the consultation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/510987/BIS-16-165-consultation-on-moving-land-registry-operations-to-the-private-sector.pdf>
: “Reducing the national debt.” It then breezily suggests that the Land 
Registry doesn’t have to be publicly owned “as long as the right protections 
are put in place, including keeping the statutory register under government 
ownership”. Instead, it could “continue to evolve into a high performing, 
innovative business, delivering for customers and the wider market in a 21st 
century, digital economy”.

It’s the usual buzzword bingo. Yet the Land Registry isn’t a burden on the 
taxpayer; it generates a profit, because everyone who buys or sells property is 
obliged to update it, and pay a fee. More importantly, it creates a record. 
“Enforcing land ownership is not just some random thing the state does, it’sthe 
core thing the state does,” Francis Irving, a programmer and activist for open 
data who co-founded the prize-winning data startup ScraperWiki, told me. “In a 
digital age especially, registry of land and boundaries is a key part of 
property ownership enforcement.”

Making land data available to everyone for free was a key change in South 
Africa after apartheid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2007/mar/08/freeourdata.southafrica>: 
it was recognised as important to make every citizen equal. So why do the 
Tories want to put price and secrecy barriers in the way of people who want to 
know about the country’s ownership?

Why do the Tories want to put barriers in the way of people who want to know 
about the country’s ownership?

Just over 10 years ago, Michael Cross and I started the Free Our Data campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2006/mar/09/education.epublic> in the 
Guardian’s Technology section, arguing that the fees being charged for access 
to non-personal government-held data – such as Ordnance Survey map data, 
Environment Agency flood, river and reservoir data, company filings, even tide 
times – were blocking the creation of a new economic sector: digital companies 
which could create value by putting different datasets together. (ScraperWiki 
is the sort of company that relies on such access.)

The proposal wasn’t initially greeted with open arms. But following Gordon 
Brown’s arrival in 2009, the ball began rolling: Tom Watson, then Cabinet 
Office minister, was an enthusiastic proponent of free data inside the 
government, and we then discovered that Sir Tim Berners-Lee, held the same 
view, which he put to Brown at a dinner. Brown agreed. It turns out that 
running a campaign gets easier when the inventor of the world wide web and the 
prime minister support the idea behind it.

The big breakthrough was in April 2010, when Ordnance Survey released a huge 
amount of data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/nov/17/ordnance-survey-maps-online>
 for free commercial reuse – an idea that would have been laughable four years 
earlier, when small web developers were fending off lawsuits over map 
screenshots. Other departments followed. Once the Environment Agency, which had 
resisted calls to make its data freely available because it was an “executive 
agency”, at arm’s length from the government, caved in, I thought the fight 
would be over. It took the 2014 floods to start getting river level data for 
free.

However the campaign’s work won’t really be done until the government stops 
having stupid ideas about privatising the data which should be publicly held. 
We’ve already suffered from Michael Fallon’s decision to sell off the 
income-generating Postcode Address File (PAF) database with Royal Mail – which 
means thegovernment had to set aside £5m 
<https://gds.blog.gov.uk/2016/03/23/an-open-address-register/> (but will need 
more) in the budget to create a “national address register”, with exactly the 
same information. PAF is now an expensive private monopoly which many 
businesses have no alternative but to rely on, .

By contrast, you can download the “price paid” data from the Land Registry 
<https://data.gov.uk/dataset/land-registry-monthly-price-paid-data> going back 
to January 1995 for free, and use it for business. That’s open data - albeit 
with a caveat: the address data is owned by Royal Mail, so there’s a fee 
payable if you try to attach addresses to the price data. Another missed chance 
by the Tories, through Fallon’s selloff. Sell the Registry off, and prices 
could rise; as a monopoly with inside knowledge it could crowd rivals out of 
the information market and refuse to license data.

The worst part? The Tories know this already. In 2014 they tried the same 
consultation. The first question was whether people thought a “more 
delivery-focused organisation at arm’s length from government” would do a 
better job for customers. Answer: 91% said no.

So who wanted privatisation? As the campaigner Owen Boswarva 
<http://owenboswarva.com/> has pointed out 
<http://mapgubbins.tumblr.com/post/91803140720/who-supports-the-privatisation-of-land-registry>
, not small businesses, legal representatives or councils. It was big companies 
such as the outsourcing firm Capita, IBM, and private equity group Silver Lake 
Europe. Are we really sure they have our best interests at heart? It’s 
certainly not clear the Tories do.
 