
Why would Rupert Murdoch pounce on Sky now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/rupert-murdochs-fox-agrees-deal-to-buy-sky>
? First, because he was only ever biding his time afterthe humiliation of the 
failed bid in 2011. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/13/rupert-murdoch-gives-up-bskyb-bid>
 As 21st Century Fox said in its formal announcement, it has long regarded its 
39% shareholding as “not a natural end position”.

Rupert Murdoch's Fox agrees deal to buy Sky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/rupert-murdochs-fox-agrees-deal-to-buy-sky>
Second, the fall in sterling after the vote for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/03/uk-stocks-rally-as-brexit-fears-fade>
 has played to Murdoch’s advantage. US bidders for UK assets start with the 
wind at their back. 21st Century earns its profits in dollars that, in sterling 
terms, are worth 15% more than they were in June.

Third, Sky’s share price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2016/jan/13/sky-shares-drop-after-sell-notes>
 has been sliding all year as the City has fretted about competition from BT, 
Netflix and Amazon. That has created an opening to put a cash offer on the 
table that is generous by conventional City yardsticks. At £10.75-a-share, Sky 
would be bagged at a valuation that was seen as recently as February but, 
critically, the price is 40% higher than this week’s share price. Cash bids at 
that level of premium tend to succeed, especially when there are no other 
bidders in town.

Sky’s independent directors have already agreed the price is fair, which puts 
21st Century Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox> in a 
stronger position than News Corporation in 2011. Back then, the independents 
said they would not accept less than 800p, but the final haggling over price 
never happened.

Could regulators still intervene and block the deal? It is possible. Since 
2011, Sky Italia and Sky Deutschland have been folded into the UK company. That 
means Brussels, which sometimes springs surprises, especially on US companies, 
could find a way to get involved.

But Murdoch will think he has little to fear from the UK end. News Corp pulled 
its bid in 2011 afterweeks of revelations about phone hacking at the News of 
the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/24/phone-hacking-scandal-timeline-trial>
 but he has split his media empire in two since then. The UK newspapers are 
housed in the company that carries the old News Corp name. This fresh offer 
comes from 21st Century Fox, the US-listed company that owns a Hollywood studio 
and the Fox TV network and had nothing to do with phone hacking in the UK.

Murdoch has also been around the track on media plurality protections. Back in 
2011,Jeremy Hunt, culture secretary at the time, wanted Sky News to be 
ringfenced to protect its editorial independence. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/mar/03/news-corp-bskyb-jeremy-hunt> 
Murdoch was willing to accept that condition at the time and would surely be 
happy to do so again. He is more interested in ensuring Sky stays in the big 
league of global media companies as AT&T prepares to buy Time Warner and the 
newcomers like Netflix and Amazon ramp up their original content.

Murdoch will also have noted there was minimal political fuss in the UK when 
his son James returned as chairman of Sky earlier this year. Outside 
shareholders in Sky protested at the first opportunity –a majority either 
opposed or abstained in October’s vote on the reappointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/13/sky-shareholders-revolt-against-james-murdoch-appointment-chairman-agm>
 – but Westminster barely seemed to notice.
 