
Many people with shares-based investments will have been feeling glum this 
week after Brexit jitters wiped tens of billions of pounds off the value of 
leading UK companies. But at least they can be happy in the knowledge that, 
over time, the stock market always does better than cash held in a savings 
account … doesn’t it?

This conventional wisdom was challenged this week after one of the UK’s 
leading financial commentators published research showing that money in 
best-buy savings accounts has beaten the stock market over most periods since 
1995. What will surprise many people is that, when it came to putting your 
money away for longer than 10 years, cash was often the runaway winner.

Paul Lewis, the presenter of BBC Radio 4’s Money Box programme, compared 
returns from a simple index tracker fund that follows the FTSE 100 index with 
cash that is moved each year into a best-buy one-year savings bond.

His analysis <http://paullewismoney.blogspot.co.uk> involved 21 years’ worth 
of data, and his headline finding was that the savings account cash produced a 
higher return than the tracker in 57% of the 192 five-year investment periods 
beginning each month from 1 January 1995 to the present. To put it another way, 
cash beat shares in 109 of the 192 five-year periods analysed, while shares 
beat cash in 83 of the five-year periods.

When Lewis looked at people who had put their money away for 10 years rather 
than five, which some might say is more realistic for stock market-based 
investments such as unit trusts, it was a dead heat: cash was the winner in 50% 
of the 132 possible investment periods, while shares topped the other 50%.

Where to put your cash while savings rates are rock-bottom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/11/where-put-cash-savings-rates-rock-bottom>
You might have imagined that for investment periods of more than 10 years, 
shares would be the hands-down winner. However, Lewis’s surprising finding was 
that for periods ranging from 11-17 years, cash came out on top.

For example, when you look at the 84 possible 14-year investment periods from 
1995, cash beat shares 96% of the time. Similarly, cash was the winner 94% of 
the time when 15-year investment periods were analysed.

However, for investment periods of 18, 19 and 20 years, shares trounced cash. 
Over the whole 21-year period the tracker outperformed cash in a savings 
account: £10,000 invested in a tracker on 1 January 1995 became £34,098 by 
December 2015 – a compound growth rate of 6% a year. Cash achieved nearly 
£6,000 less, finishing at £28,105 – a compound growth rate of 5%.

But, while you might be able to make more money investing in the stock market 
than by saving in a bank or building society account, it’s also much riskier. 
With cash you will never lose money, provided you stay within theFinancial 
Services Compensation Scheme <http://www.fscs.org.uk> limit, which is currently 
£75,000 – but that doesn’t apply to stock market investments. Over the survey 
period January 1995 to January 2016, five-year investments begun on the first 
of each month in a FTSE 100 tracker ended the period lower than they started in 
46 out of 192 periods. That’s almost a one in four chance of losing money, says 
Lewis, who published the research in his capacity as a freelance financial 
journalist.

His findings challenge the widely held view that shares outperform cash and 
many other investments over the longer term. Even official leaflets and 
websites tend to promote this idea – for example, the government’sMoney Advice 
Service 
<https://www.moneyadviceservice.org.uk/en/articles/should-i-save-or-invest> 
website states that “the stock market tends to do better than cash over time”.

Lewis says: “I have long suspected the merits of cash were underplayed by 
traditional research, which compares poor cash rates with often exaggerated 
gains on investments in shares.” He says cash is not right for everyone in all 
circumstances. “But for a cautious person investing for periods of up to 20 
years, this indicates that well-managed, active cash beat a FTSE 100 tracker 
more often than not. And, unlike a shares investment, it can never lose anyone 
money.”

For a cautious person investing for periods of up to 20 years, active cash 
beat a FTSE 100 tracker more often than not

If you are the sort of risk-averse person who has in the past opted to forgo 
potentially higher returns offered by stocks in favour of boring but safe 
savings accounts, Lewis’s findings may leave you feeling vindicated. But there 
are caveats.

In his analysis, cash is represented by best-buy one-year savings bonds – a 
type of deposit account offered by most banks and building societies. Lewis 
assumes that on each anniversary of the investment the bond is cashed in and 
then reinvested in the current best-buy one-year bond. However, responding to 
his findings, investment firm Hargreaves Lansdown says that, while in theory we 
should all be continually moving our cash from best-buy to best-buy, “in 
practice this is difficult to achieve and requires an unrelenting drive and 
efficiency which few of us possess”.

Hargreaves Lansdown also points out that index tracker fund charges have come 
down significantly in recent years. It’s now possible to buy a tracker from a 
company such as Fidelity with an ongoing charge of as little as 0.06%.

The tracker fund used in Lewis’s analysis is a real one – HSBC’s FTSE 100 
Index fund – and the gains or losses are after all charges, with dividends 
reinvested along the way. This fund was chosen because it was a “typical” 
tracker, ie not cheap and not expensive, and just the sort of fund that might 
have been picked by an unskilled investor in 1995 (unusually, 21 years’ worth 
of data was available for this fund, as it was launched in 1994). The fund’s 
current ongoing charge is 0.18%, though in the past it would have been higher.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fcash-trumps-shares-for-top-returns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa924bf0438d243d8cdcdaa24583e2796819baec1%2F0_135_4239_2544%2F4239.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20cash%20trumps%20shares%20if%20you%20want%20top%20returns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fcash-trumps-shares-for-top-returns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20cash%20trumps%20shares%20if%20you%20want%20top%20returns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Fcash-trumps-shares-for-top-returns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa924bf0438d243d8cdcdaa24583e2796819baec1%2F0_135_4239_2544%2F4239.jpg>
 ‘I have long suspected the merits of cash were underplayed by traditional 
research,’ says Paul Lewis. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
It’s also worth pointing out that savings rates have come down a lot since 
1995. At the start of that year the Bank of England base rate was north of 6%, 
and it went above 7% for some of 1997-98, but it has been at 0.5% for more than 
seven years. Currently, the best rate you can get on a one-year fixed-rate 
savings bond is 1.8%, from the online-only German player Fidor Bank. Charter
Savings <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> Bank and RCI Bank are 
paying 1.66% and 1.65% respectively.

Meanwhile, some critics will say that the vast majority of investors’ money is 
held in active funds, and that some active fund managers have delivered 
market-beating returns. It’s also worth noting that Lewis’s results do not take 
account of inflation, while no deduction is made for tax on interest or 
dividends.

Nevertheless, the findings challenge the view that putting money in a savings 
account is the poor relation of investing in shares. Lewis says that, from one 
to 20 years, cash wins in 55.7% of 2,520 periods analysed, while shares win in 
44.3%. “This research gives different results to every other study of shares v 
cash. They universally state that shares do better than cash over every 
long-term period,” he says.

Saving rates plummet 

Cash might have often beaten shares in the past, but whether it will continue 
to do so looks questionable when savings rates continue to plummet from already 
low levels.

Financial data website Moneyfacts.co.uk this week declared the savings market 
“under siege,” with providers slashing their rates, even though the Bank of 
England base rate has been static at 0.5% since March 2009.

In May, the website recorded 18 savings rate rises and 156 cuts, with deals 
falling by as much as 2%. According to Moneyfacts, the average easy-access cash 
Isa rate has fallen by 0.11% in six months to just 0.98%, the first time on 
record it has fallen below 1%.

On 1 June, Nationwide became the latest big-name provider to cut rates on many 
of its accounts. Flexclusive Isa rates have been cut to 1.2%, the e-Isa rate 
chopped from 0.75% to 0.5%, and the e-Savings rate cut from 0.45% to 0.25%. 
However, Nationwide also upped the rates on a few accounts, including its Easy 
Access Isa and Instant Access Isa, both of which now pay 0.5% – up from 0.25% 
and an average of 0.37% respectively.

Also this week, Tesco Bank upped the rate on its Internet Saver easy access 
account, which now pays a variable 1.27%, including a 0.52% bonus for 12 months.
 