
The claim

The influential Conservative MP Sarah Wollaston has defected to the remain 
camp because of it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/dr-sarah-wollaston-defects-vote-leave-remain-campaign>
; the UK Statistics Authorityno longer says it is potentially misleading,  
<https://www.statisticsauthority.gov.uk/news/uk-statistics-authority-statement-on-the-use-of-official-statistics-on-contributions-to-the-european-union/>
but misleading plain and simple; and for the respected Institute for Fiscal 
Studies,it is “absurd” 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/b2858ec6-21aa-11e6-9d4d-c11776a5124d.html#axzz4BAegkt7l>
.

But still the Vote Leave campaign stands by the claim, splashed in large 
letters across their battlebus: “We send the EU £350m a week.”


In the face of a concerted attack, Boris Johnson has defended it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-sturgeon-accuses-johnson-of-telling-350m-whopper>
. John Redwood has done the same, albeit with some embarrassment,on the BBC 
Radio 4 Today programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-live-wollaston-remain-vote-leave-sturgeon-johnson?page=with:block-57590870e4b01a5ff948b045#block-57590870e4b01a5ff948b045>
. Michael Goveargued it on Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/eu-referendum-michael-gove-agrees-to-audit-of-vote-leave-350m-claim>
, and Vote Leave’svideos 
<https://m.facebook.com/story.php?story_fbid=597834887060106&id=505084413001821>
 and officialcampaign briefing 
<http://www.voteleavetakecontrol.org/briefing_cost> continue to use the figure.

Who is right?

The real problem is the word “send”, which Vote Leave seems to have difficulty 
understanding. According to theOxford English Dictionary 
<http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/send>, the verb means to 
“cause to go or be taken to a particular destination; arrange for the delivery 
of”.

Assuming we accept that definition, then it is simply and very demonstrably 
not true to say that Britain “sends” £350m a week to the EU. That amount of 
money does not leave (and has never left) Britain each week, nor does it arrive 
in Brussels.

The sum of £350m a week is based on the Treasury’s estimation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/483344/EU_finances_2015_final_web_09122015.pdf#page=18>
 of the gross amount the UK contributed to the EU last year, which was £17.8bn, 
or £342m a week.

This annual figure is purely hypothetical, however, because since Margaret 
Thatcher negotiated Britain’s rebate in 1984, the UK has been required to pay 
significantly less than the 1% of national GDP that member states are normally 
expected to pay into the EU’s collective budget.

The same Treasury figures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/483344/EU_finances_2015_final_web_09122015.pdf#page=18>
 clearly show Britain’s EU budget rebate last year was £4.9bn. Deduct that from 
£17.8bn and you get £12.9bn – or £248m a week. This is the sum now recognised by
the independent fact-checking organisation Full Facts 
<https://fullfact.org/europe/our-eu-membership-fee-55-million/>.

Plus, as Prof Ian Begg of the London School of Economics notes 
<http://ukandeu.ac.uk/so-how-much-does-britain-pay-the-eu/>, the rebate is 
deductedbefore any payment is made, so it is simply wrong – and arguably, given 
the fuss that has been made about the question, deliberately untruthful – to 
say Britain “sends the EU £350m a week”. The Treasury actually remits just over 
£100m less a week.

The remain camp further argues – although Vote Leave could rebut this more 
easily – that even the lesser weekly sum of £248m does not fairly reflect the 
cost to the UK of EU membership, because it ignores EU spending on the UK.


Why I am wrong about Brexit, and you are too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2016/may/23/why-i-am-wrong-about-brexit>
Last year, the Treasury estimated these receipts from Brussels 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/483344/EU_finances_2015_final_web_09122015.pdf#page=18>
 at £4.4bn, money spent mainly in the private sector but also distributed by 
public bodies, to farmers andpoorer parts of the UK 
<http://chrome-extension//oemmndcbldboiebfnladdacbdfmadadm/http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/information/cohesion-policy-achievement-and-future-investment/factsheet/united_kingdom_en.pdf>
, such as Cornwall and south Wales.

As pointed out by InFacts 
<http://infacts.org/mythbusts/uk-doesnt-send-brussels-55m-day/>, which aims to 
make “the fact-based case for remain”, the EU also injects money directly into 
the UK’s private sector, for example, for scientific research through 
programmes such asHorizon2020 <https://ec.europa.eu/programmes/horizon2020/>. 
The most recent figure for this, from 2013, is £1.4bn.

Deduct both the rebate (£4.9bn), which is never actually paid, and the money 
that is paid but sent back (£5.8bn), from the gross £17.8bn annual “membership 
fee” and you arrive at a net figure of £7.1bn. This equates to £136m a week, 
less than 40% of the amount splashed on the battlebus.

Vote Leave has also tried to justify the £350m figure by saying the British 
rebate may change in future – but the UK has a veto over that happening. And in 
any case, its claim that “We send ...” is written in the present tense.


It is also misleading of Vote Leave to suggest – as it does in the second half 
of that battlebus slogan, “Let’s fund our NHS instead” – that whatever amount 
Britain saves on its “membership fees” by leaving the EU would be available to 
spend on public services. Unless a future Westminster government decides to 
stop spending money on British farmers, scientific research and the country’s 
poorer regions, it plainly would not.

Verdict

The leave camp might just about have been able to get away with saying that 
the UK sends £248m a week to Brussels (which at least takes account of the 
rebate). It can argue all it likes that £350m is a “gross figure”. But it 
cannot, in all conscience, get away with the use of the word “send”.

Wollaston, the IFS, the UK Statistics Authority, Nicola Sturgeon, Amber Rudd 
and Angela Eagle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/eu-referendum-sturgeon-accuses-johnson-of-telling-350m-whopper>
 are right: Vote Leave’s claim that Britain sends £350m a week to Brussels is a 
lie.

 