
Generally speaking, I love being surprised. It’s an increasingly hard thing to 
do, because the world is so predictable and my cynicism is a hard shell to 
breach. But sometimes along comes a breath of fresh air that cracks it just a 
little, before coaxing it wide open.

The most recent fragrant breeze? Her name is Michaela Coel 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm3948190/>, 28, a one-woman powerhouse. I first saw 
her in the raucous, incredibly filthy and funny award-winning E4 sitcom she 
created and starred in,Chewing Gum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/06/chewing-gum-michaela-coel>
. But that’s just her highest-profile gig. Her talent is multi-pronged: she’sa 
Royal Television Society award-winning actor 
<https://rts.org.uk/tags/michaela-coel>, talented spoken-word artist 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p03kwcl1> and a playwright (Chewing 
Gum’s first life was as a one-woman stage show called Chewing Gum Dreams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/19/chewing-gum-dreams-theatre-review>
). Last month she won a Bafta,crowning her as TV’s breakthrough star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/30/baftas-2016-therell-be-no-diversity-row-but-poldark-and-downton-abbey-fans-will-be-angry>
.

Coel is fearless. No joke is too risque, no comedic situation too outrageous 
to explore in pursuit of the funny. She has this great face – big eyes, wide 
smile – that she can make into whatever shape she wants, and leaves the 
audience leaning in to hear what she’s saying. It was especially delightful to 
watch hercall out (and then forgive) a previous detractor on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/MichaelaCoel/status/725285672894996480> when he 
congratulated her on her Bafta win, thereby gracefully winning the internet. 
Her very presence on British telly, in a landscape that doesn’t normally allow 
dark-skinned black girls to shine so brightly, is thrilling. 

Why I love… Jon Bernthal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/09/why-i-love-jon-bernthal-bim-adewunmi>
Next she will star in Charlie Brooker’s new Black Mirror 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-04-22/michaela-coel-says-black-mirror-role-is-the-most-amazing-part-ive-ever-played>
, and is writing series two of Chewing Gum. She’s thriving. That’s the best, 
most welcome surprise.
 