
Imagine the world was facing upheaval on a scale not seen during modern 
civilization, a change that would imperil the world’s great cities by the 
rising seas and snuff out species at at the fastest rate since the dinosaurs 
disappeared. Then imagine you were a journalist, had repeated chances to ask 
the next president of the United States about this and decided to not do so.

The apparent failure of the media during the presidential election has been 
multifaceted and fiercely debated. But the absence of climate change as a 
leading topic in the election ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is perhaps the single 
greatest rebuke to the idea that power should be held to account for the 
benefit of this and future generations.

This failure was most apparent during the presidential debates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/19/where-is-climate-change-in-the-trump-v-clinton-presidential-debates>
, where four-and-a-half hours of television saw not one moderator question 
pitched to Trump or Hillary Clinton on climate change. It was left toKen Bone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2016/nov/08/2016-presidential-campaign-unlikely-heroes>
, he of the red sweater and brief internet fame, to come closest with a 
question about coal mining.

The mind-boggling consequences of unchecked climate change, which is 
essentially what Trump proposes by denying the problem exists, dwarfed every 
other issue – yes, including emails – discussed during the debates. And yet it 
wasn’t raised. It was the equivalent of getting an exclusive interview with 
Churchill and Roosevelt in 1942 and not asking them about the war.

Climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/science/scienceofclimatechange> 
was also missing in broader coverage of the election, especially on cable TV, 
where slow-moving scientific emergencies don’t make good fodder for breathless 
horse-race journalism. The public were periodically warned that the seas are 
eating away America’s east coast and that no it’s not just you, it really is 
warm this year, but climate change was treated as a side issue rather than 
being central to every economic, energy and foreign policy question the country 
is grappling with.

 Kerry Emanuel, a leading climate scientist, said: “This is the great issue of 
our time and we are skirting around it. I’m just baffled by it.”

To be fair, many Americans also skirt around climate change too, even if they 
are concerned about it. Nearly two-thirds of Americans say that climate change 
is at least somewhat important to them personally,according to the Yale Program 
on Climate Communication 
<http://climatecommunication.yale.edu/publications/climate-spiral-silence-america/>
, although few people talk about the issue with family or friends.

 Americans are broadly in favor of developing clean sources of energy but 
there’s a clear political divide about how to approach climate change.Polling 
by the Pew Research Center 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/10/10/clinton-trump-supporters-worlds-apart-on-views-of-climate-change-and-its-scientists/>
 shows half of Clinton’s supporters cared about climate change a great deal, 
compared with 15% of Trump supporters.

 Maybe now that the reality of the next four years of president Trump is 
sinking in, a more considered view of the problems America faces will take 
hold. Maybe people will realize it’s important that we’ve left it to the very 
last minute to cut greenhouse gas emissions and that failure to do this will 
probably risk theirproperty 
<http://www.cnsnews.com/news/article/joe-setyon/zillow-claims-rising-sea-levels-could-submerge-19-million-us-homes-2100>
,prosperity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/04/climate-change-will-blow-a-25tn-hole-in-global-financial-assets-study-warns>
 andnational security <http://www.defense.gov/News/Article/Article/612710>. 

Maybe the spread of disease and the rising seas will be grasped as something 
to be urgently remedied before tropical mosquitos advance further and south 
Florida is inundated.

 There is much detail to work out, both on the impacts of climate change and 
how Trump’s policies will influence them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/11/trump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change>
. The president-elect has promised to withdraw the US from the Paris climate 
deal, to scrap the Clean Power Plan, slash funding for renewable energy and 
somehow attempt to reboot the ailing coal industry.

 How far he will go with this agenda, and indeed how invested he personally is 
in it beyond outlandish tweeted conspiracies, is still unclear. Exiting the 
Paris accord will require a three-year notice period but as the agreement is 
non-binding beyond its over-arching goal of avoiding dangerous global warming, 
Trump could simply drop any attempt to cut emissions and sit it out as other 
countries try to suppress their panic as to what to do now that the US isn’t a 
climate leader anymore.

 Trump wants to accelerate domestic oil, coal and gas production to achieve 
“complete American energy independence” but this goal is contradictory and 
barely feasible given the unfavorable economics facing coal and oil in 
particular.

 The new president also wants to roll back the Environmental Protection Agency 
while having “crystal clear” water and clean air. He has spoken admiringly of 
America’s natural beauty but has surrounded himself with fossil fuel 
billionaires and lobbyists who want to split open public lands for their 
enrichment. Republicans largely support this stance but at the same time they 
don’t want a public enraged by degraded national parks or another Flint water 
crisis, for example.

 Untangling these contradictions and what they mean for the US, and the 
planet, will arguably form the most important legacy left by a Trump 
presidency. It’s up to the media to start helping do this.
 