
One of the best new shows on US TV this autumn is Pamela Adlon’s Better Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/14/pamela-adlon-better-things-how-louis-cks-sidekick-became-the-star>
, a comedy drama co-written and produced with her long-time collaboratorLouis CK
 <https://louisck.net/>, and closely based on Adlon’s life as a jobbing actor 
and single mother of three girls in LA.

It has, on the basis of the first few episodes, been universally praised for 
its honesty about single parenting, primarily the mess, chaos and public 
meltdowns, all of which feels refreshingly true and a long way from slicker 
juggernauts such asModern Family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/sep/23/modern-family-sitcom>
. There is, however, one interesting omission, and that is the depiction of a 
nanny.

Adlon’s fictional family isn’t rich, but it is affluent in a way that makes it 
impossible to believe that, with three kids and a working mother, her character 
doesn’t have daily babysitting help. A million miles away on E!, meanwhile, 
Keeping Up with the Kardashians rumbles into what feels like its 90th year (but 
is only its ninth), still peddling the notion of 
no-intimacy-too-great-to-put-on-TV, with the exception of, as someone pointed 
out inNew York magazine 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/09/why-doesnt-keeping-up-with-the-kardashians-show-nannies.html>
 – you guessed it – acknowledging the presence of the family nannies.

That these two shows are at polar opposites of the social and celebrity scale 
indicates how widespread and enduring the taboo around admitting to certain – 
or any – kinds of childcare still is. Part of the problem, I suspect, is the 
word “nanny”, with its lingering Edwardian overtones and image of women in silk 
dressing gowns addressing their children once a day when they’re brought down 
from the nursery. In 2016, when most households can’t exist on a single income 
and when in cities like London and New York daycare for two kids is more 
expensive than a nanny, this is clearly ludicrous.

But it is also a prejudice rooted in undying assumptions about what women 
should be doing with their time, which is watching the children. It seems 
likely that both Adlon and the Kardashians, dissimilar as they are, paint 
childcare out of the picture because it is considered unseemly but, even if 
they have other reasons, it’s surely not because it’s too small an issue to 
merit notice.

For huge numbers of parents, single or otherwise, a large part of one’s daily 
drama is finding, keeping, freaking out at the cost of and then weeping with 
gratitude over the people who look after your kids while you work. You can’t 
tell a modern story of parenting without them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnanny-keeping-up-with-the-kardashians-better-things-childcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F766fb8cd8706382e519a9d7e06d27f17b554a88b%2F540_0_2189_2888%2F2189.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20taboo%20about%20having%20a%20nanny%3F%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnanny-keeping-up-with-the-kardashians-better-things-childcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20taboo%20about%20having%20a%20nanny%3F%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnanny-keeping-up-with-the-kardashians-better-things-childcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F766fb8cd8706382e519a9d7e06d27f17b554a88b%2F540_0_2189_2888%2F2189.jpg>
 Ann Coulter on the Comedy Central Roast of Rob Lowe. Photograph: 
Latour/Variety/REX/Shutterstock 
It’s a dog-eat-dog world


The surprising thing about Ann Coulter’s much-discussed appearance on Comedy 
Central’s “roast” of Rob Lowe 
<http://edition.cnn.com/videos/cnnmoney/2016/09/06/rob-lowe-roast-cnnmoney.cnn> 
was not how vicious it was, but how, with the right treatment, even the most 
unsympathetic character can inspire pity. If the jokes had been funny, or 
clever, or remotely well told, it might have been satisfying to see Coulter 
destroyed. Instead, there was Jimmy Carr calling her “one of the most 
repugnant, hateful, hatchet-faced bitches alive 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/08/29/snl-star-calls-ann-coulter-a-racist-c-nt.html>
”, and “a truckstop transvestite whore”. Apparently, the way to nail a 
rightwing commentator with abhorrent views is to attack her from further on the 
right.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnanny-keeping-up-with-the-kardashians-better-things-childcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc1714ab5cb267956cd7d1f9923e42e4f136f3a1%2F960_0_1710_2334%2F1710.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20the%20taboo%20about%20having%20a%20nanny%3F%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnanny-keeping-up-with-the-kardashians-better-things-childcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20the%20taboo%20about%20having%20a%20nanny%3F%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnanny-keeping-up-with-the-kardashians-better-things-childcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc1714ab5cb267956cd7d1f9923e42e4f136f3a1%2F960_0_1710_2334%2F1710.jpg>
 Nathan’s has rolled out its hot-dog food carts in New York. Photograph: Andrew 
Kelly/REUTERS 
And talking of edible dogs …


You get your kicks where you can in a city as expensive as New York and at the 
moment the cheapest thrill in town is the hot dog. For years, the city’s most 
basic culinary unit was relegated to the botulism-ridden carts from which only 
tourists ate. NowNathan’s <http://www.nathansfamous.com/>, the famous hot dog 
franchise with its home in Coney Island, has rolled out food carts in the city 
and Burger King has put hot dogs on its menu.

You don’t even have to eat one; there is some small drop of joy to be had just 
from saying the words “Whopper Dog” and considering the hours of corporate 
debate that went into coming up with the name.
 