
Britain has apparently gone mad for ukuleles. An extraordinary resurgence in 
the popularity of the instrument 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/music/music-news/8546077/Ukuleles-back-in-fashion-as-comedy-instrument-sales-grow.html>
 must surely revive memories of that extraordinary figure in British pop 
history, George Formby. (To be exact, Formby played the banjo-ukulele.) It's 
easy to assume that Formby was a marginal comedy figure comparable to, say, 
Peter Glaze on the BBC children's TV show Crackerjack. Actually, Formby was 
massive, the highest-earning comedian in British cinema from the mid-30s to the 
mid-40s, and just before the war, the biggest British star in any genre. How 
did he do it?

He just looked so weird. Something in the posture required to play the ukulele 
– shoulders hunched, elbows akimbo – probably encouraged a perky grinning 
manner: it's probably impossible to play the ukukele in any other way. Maybe if 
Jimi Hendrix had played the ukulele, he would have ended up grinning, winking 
and screeching: "Mother!"

Of course, Formby has admirers today, notably Frank Skinner, who learned to 
play the ukulele as a homage to Formby. 
<http://www.georgeformby.co.uk/news/conventions/2010/march/maphp.html>

And yet, for me, nothing demonstrates the truth of LP Hartley's line about the 
past being another country like the popularity of Formby. Watching a clip of 
him play makes the past seem like another planet, another solar system. He had 
a kind of Norman Wisdom-ish comedy presence, or perhaps something like Lou 
Costello.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSz4e76Uw5eM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSz4e76Uw5eM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FSz4e76Uw5eM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Here he is, singing I'm Shy from Spare a Copper (1940).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_ZYFXUg4aLc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_ZYFXUg4aLc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F_ZYFXUg4aLc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Here, from Off the Dole (1935), he sings his double-entendre classic With My 
Little Ukulele in My Hand, a set-piece that involves the slightly baffling 
spectacle of well-dressed extras gathering around Formby and supportively 
beaming.

Surely then, as now, audiences would have suspected that these posh folk in 
real life would not have gone within a mile of the working-class Formby. Be 
that as it may, in this clip, the camera retreats so that one gentleman, to the 
left of the screen, is shown making odd and unfortunate hand gestures to the 
rhythm of the music.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQvNh40ZIRa0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQvNh40ZIRa0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQvNh40ZIRa0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Formby is also known for the song With My Little Stick of Blackpool Rock, 
showing how dedicated he was to 
"I'm-holding-my-penis-and-I'm-clearly-masturbating-in-public" material, and his 
face makes him look like an illustration from a Victorian medical textbook 
warning of the dangers of onanism. Like the Julian and Sandy routines from 
Round the Horne, Formby's routines repudiate any notion that officially 
sanctioned comedy from the pre-Goon era was clean as a whistle. Far from it. It 
was absolutely filthy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9NAi6feAMOs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9NAi6feAMOs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F9NAi6feAMOs%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Formby's was an unspun, unmanaged, un-genetically-modified popularity; he swam 
up into the cinema screen from the music hall: a vernacular phenomenon far from 
Hollywood or The X Factor – but to my eye exotic and strange, nonetheless. 
Though not forgotten by any means, Formby is now a recondite taste. For 
example, the recent box-office phenomenon TT3D, about the bike-racing TT event 
on the Isle of Man, didn't mention Formby's contribution to this genre, No 
Limit.

Well, perhaps the nation's addiction to ukuleles will trigger a new interest 
in George Formby. This strange, gurning figure will rise again in the public 
mind.
 