
William Christenberry, who has died aged 80, was a pioneer of American colour 
photography. His richly hued images of the vernacular architecture of the deep 
south – wooden churches, shacks and dilapidated houses – were all made in Hale 
County, Alabama, south of the city of Tuscaloosa, where Christenberry was born 
and raised. Their cumulative power comes from the strong sense of place they 
evoke, as well as their evocation of a rural world that, even as he was 
chronicling it back in the 1950s and 60s, was already fading into history.

His biggest influence was the great social documentary photographer Walker 
Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/dec/03/walker-evans-documentary-photography-great-depression-gallery>
, who had photographed the people and places of Hale County in 1936, the year 
Christenberry was born. On his regular visits to Hale County throughout his 
working life, Christenberry sought out many of the same buildings that Evans 
had photographed, and the colour images he made of them were, in turn, a 
pivotal influence on the work of his friend and fellow southernerWilliam 
Eggleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/08/made-in-memphis-william-eggleston>
.

A quiet and reserved individual, Christenberry took his first photographs on a 
humble box Brownie that had been given to him and his sister as a joint 
Christmas present in 1944. The resulting rolls of film were processed in the 
local drugstore and initially were used as reference material for his 
paintings. It would take several decades for him to be recognised, alongside 
the even more reticentSaul Leiter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/15/made-in-manhattan-how-saul-leiter-found-beauty-in-gothams-glass-and-grime>
, as a quiet, but influential, master of the medium.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwilliam-christenberry-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6e4765341de13d7446c213553117a9f2d825629%2F0_0_1152_895%2F1152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=William%20Christenberry%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwilliam-christenberry-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=William%20Christenberry%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwilliam-christenberry-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6e4765341de13d7446c213553117a9f2d825629%2F0_0_1152_895%2F1152.jpg>
 Red Building in Forest, Hale County, Alabama, 1983. Photograph: William 
Christenberry/© William Christenberry; courtesy Pace/MacGill Gallery, New York 
and Hemphill Fine Arts, Washington, DC 
His father William Sr, worked in Tuscaloosa delivering bread and selling dairy 
products. His mother, Ruby, was a tax assessor and textile maker. Christenberry 
attended the University of Alabama, where he studied for a BA then MA in 
painting and sculpture, falling under the spell ofRobert Rauschenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/29/robert-rauschenberg-review-tate-modern>
’s work. Throughout his working life as an artist, Christenberry also created 
assemblages and collages using found materials, and collected weatherbeaten 
signage from old storefronts and chapels, sometimes from the same ones that he 
and Evans had photographed. For Christenberry, photography was not a separate 
activity but, as he put it, “part and parcel of the whole”.

William Christenberry by William Christenberry – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/01/william-christenberry-photography-review>
In 1960, on the advice of a tutor, the painter Melville Price, Christenberry 
moved to New York, where he had a succession of jobs, including clothing 
salesman, security guard, custodian of a church and filing clerk at the picture 
department ofTime-Life Books <https://www.britannica.com/topic/Time-Life-Books>
. It was there he introduced himself to Walker Evans, who was then working as a 
photo editor at Fortune magazine. The two became friends and Evans got him a 
job in the photo archives there. When Christenberry showed Evans a selection of 
photographs that he had made on his Brownie, the older photographer said: 
“Young man, this little camera has become a perfect extension of your eye, and 
I suggest that you take these seriously.” As Christenberry later recalled, “At 
the time I was about as interested in photography as I was in physics – zero. 
But that’s how it began.”

Christenberry had started photographing in and around Hale County in 1958. One 
of the poorest areas in the American south, it exerted a strong hold on his 
creative imagination throughout his life. “This is and always will be where my 
heart is,” hetold an interviewer in 2005 
<https://www.questia.com/library/journal/1G1-140790664/the-muse-of-place-and-time-an-interview-with-william>
. “It is what I care about. Everything I want to say through my work comes out 
of my feelings about that place – its positive aspects and its negative 
aspects.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwilliam-christenberry-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6f0d792ffaed51916bb402fed29572d8ad7f60e%2F0_0_1152_903%2F1152.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=William%20Christenberry%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwilliam-christenberry-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=William%20Christenberry%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwilliam-christenberry-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6f0d792ffaed51916bb402fed29572d8ad7f60e%2F0_0_1152_903%2F1152.jpg>
 Green Warehouse, 1978. Photograph: William Christenberry/© William 
Christenberry; courtesy Pace/MacGill Gallery, New York and Hemphill Fine Arts, 
Washington, DC 
In 1973, when the University of Alabama hosted an exhibition of Evans’s 
photographs of Hale County from the 1930s, Evans insisted that Christenberry 
travel there with him for the opening. Around this time, Christenberry had 
begun to gain recognition for his own photography and, in 1976, he had a show 
at theCorcoran in Washington DC <http://corcoran.org/gallerytour/>. By then, 
the likes of Eggleston andStephen Shore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jul/09/stephen-shore-america-colour-photography-1970s>
 had revolutionised colour photography, which had been viewed with deep 
suspicion by the photography establishment, signalling a shift away from black 
and white. In fact, Eggleston, the most dramatic US colourist, made the move 
after Christenberry had showed him his images of Hale County.

Like his photographs, the other artworks Christenberry made – collages, 
paintings and small, formally exact models of vernacular structures that he 
called “dream buildings” – tended towards the quietly haunting. The exception 
was the controversial “Klan room” installation, made over several decades, 
which comprised GI Joe dolls dressed in white Ku Klux Klan robes and hoods, 
often posed aggressively in ominous settings. The curator Walter Hopps 
described it as “an exorcism of racism”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwilliam-christenberry-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F071defb7e5b5b6df184f551377edcb3149246bc1%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=William%20Christenberry%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwilliam-christenberry-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=William%20Christenberry%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fwilliam-christenberry-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F071defb7e5b5b6df184f551377edcb3149246bc1%2F0_400_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 William Christenberry holds his first Brownie camera in 2015. Photograph: The 
Washington Post/Getty Images 
Christenberry first became fascinated with the Klan in 1960, when, out of 
curiosity, he attempted to enter a KKK rally in Tuscaloosa courthouse only to 
come face to face with a lone hooded figure guarding the entrance. He recalled 
later: “I have never seen anything more frightening than those eyes glaring 
through those eyehole slits. I stopped dead in my tracks and didn’t go any 
further.”

In 1963, Christenberry began work on the Klan room in Memphis, where he was 
teaching at the university and where he and Eggleston became close friends. He 
was helped by Eggelston’s wife, Rosa, who sewed the miniature Klan robes. By 
1968, he had created a tableau of 200 dolls alongside crosses, guns and 
coffins, and in the same year he relocated to Washington DC to teach at the 
Corcoran School of the Arts and Design, where he stayed for four decades. In 
1979, the entire installation save for one doll was stolen from his studio by 
an unknown thief. He remade the piece and it was eventually shown as part of a 
survey of his work at theSmithsonian American Art Museum 
<http://americanart.si.edu/exhibitions/archive/2006/christenberry/> in 2006, 
entitled Passing Time: The Art of William Christenberry. However, the Klan room 
has remained relatively un-exhibited due to its controversial subject matter.

Myth, Manners and Memory: Photographers of the American South | Photography 
review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/oct/03/myth-manners-and-memory-review>
Christenberry was awarded a Guggenheim fellowship in 1984 and his work is 
owned by many public institutions, including the Museum of Modern Art and the 
Whitney in New York, theMenil Collection in Houston <https://www.menil.org/> 
and the Stedelijk Museum Amsterdam. Currently,Pace/MacGill Gallery 
<http://www.pacemacgill.com/show_installation.php?item=159> in New York is 
showing William Christenberry: Summer | Winter.

Christenberry returned every year to Hale County to chronicle the changes 
there on an 8x10 camera, latterly reverting to using his original box Brownie. 
“I don’t want my work thought about in terms of nostalgia,” he said. “It is 
about place and sense of place. I only make pictures when I go home. I am not 
looking back longing for the past, but at the beauty of time and the passage of 
time.”

He is survived by his wife, Sandra (nee Deane), whom he married in 1967, their 
three children, Emlyn, William and Kate, and five grandchildren.

• William Andrew Christenberry, photographer and artist, born 5 November 1936; 
died 28 November 2016
 