
The decision to ban smoking in all prisons in Wales and four prisons in 
England from January 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/29/prison-smoking-ban-begins-2016-despite-fears-unrest>
 by the prisons minister, Andrew Selous, reminds me of the lengths to which 
some people in jail will go just to get a smoke.

Begging, borrowing and stealing are the usual methods for those with limited 
means. Some plum jobs may also provide a supply. A man I knew once in a 
high-security prison begged staff incessantly to give him the job of picking up 
the litter fellow prisoners routinely flung out of their cell windows. As there 
was no in-cell sanitary provision, the majority of the ejected detritus 
consisted of “shit parcels” – excrement prodded into socks, stuffed in jam jars 
or matchboxes, or wrapped neatly in newspapers. The perk for whoever 
volunteered to pick up the human waste was the rich pickings of discarded 
cigarette butts.

“Dog-end Dave” would poke about happily until his barrow was full of faeces 
and his pockets were full of smokables. As a non-smoking prisoner, I could 
never understand what would drive anyone to lower themselves to such depths 
just for a fix of nicotine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fsmoking-ban-prisons-riots-desperate-measures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443617529333%2Fa98eabc5-8551-4d2f-b2b1-260a7be88c33-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Will%20the%20smoking%20ban%20in%20prisons%20lead%20to%20riots%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fsmoking-ban-prisons-riots-desperate-measures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Will%20the%20smoking%20ban%20in%20prisons%20lead%20to%20riots%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fshortcuts%2F2015%2Fsep%2F30%2Fsmoking-ban-prisons-riots-desperate-measures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F30%2F1443617529333%2Fa98eabc5-8551-4d2f-b2b1-260a7be88c33-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Smoking in prison: ‘a little comfort and relief’. Photograph: Alamy 
But the stresses and strains of incarceration have to be experienced to be 
appreciated. Instances of prisoners smoking shredded banana skin or orange 
peel, or pages of the Bible, were not uncommon. Being crammed together with 
many hundreds of strangers with varying levels of dysfunction while trying to 
figure out your own failings creates a particular brand of desperation that can 
feel like hell on earth. I guess a smoke for some, at whatever cost, must just 
bring a little comfort and some much-needed relief.

I used to wonder what effect passive smoking might have on my health. But so 
long as I never had to share a cell with a smoker, I never begrudged tobacco 
lovers their vice.

There has been talk of riots in our prisons if smoking is banned across the 
entire system. That never happened inthe Isle of Man prison, where smoking was 
banned in 2008 <http://ash.org.uk/files/documents/ASH_740.pdf>, or Guernsey, 
where it was banned in 2013 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-guernsey-20874316>. But in fairness, 
the justice secretary Michael Gove has stated that people are sent to prison“as 
punishment, not for punishment.” 
<http://news.sky.com/story/1561210/ban-on-smoking-in-prisons-to-start-next-year>
 It does seem inherently punitive to deny prisoners one of the smallest 
freedoms left on a wing or a landing or in a cell.The Prison Reform Trust 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-34395034> is calling for “proper support while 
people give up – not just smoking cessation aids, but increased vigilance for 
signs of distress that could easily turn into self-harm or worse”. I agree. 
Anything less would be inhumane.
 