
Guardian Travel’s monthly readers’ photography competition is an opportunity 
for you to share your journeys around the world, and for us to showcase your 
work in a monthly online gallery.

The winner of each month’s competition (who must be a UK resident) will 
receive a £200 voucher to be redeemed against anExodus Travels 
<https://www.exodus.co.uk/> holiday.

The overall 2017 winner will win a 16-night Discover Costa Rica holiday for 
two with Exodus Travels 
<https://www.exodus.co.uk/costa-rica-holidays/wildlife/discover-costa-rica/wuc-86197?flights=1>
, worth £2,519pp. The tropical climate of Costa Rica supports ecosystems from 
jungle to cloud forest and mangrove swamp. This trip brings travellers into 
contact with animals from howler monkeys to caiman and sloths, plus a huge 
array of birds. Included are 14 nights in eco-friendly lodges and hotels, 
travel by minibus – sometimes on dirt roads – and by boat, some meals, all 
transport and activities, plus flights from London.
 Red-eyed tree frog in Costa Rica. Photograph: Megan Lorenz/Rex Features 
ENTER OUR JANUARY COMPETITION HERE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2017/jan/13/readers-travel-photo-competition-january-send-us-your-pictures>

• The prize is: two places on Exodus Travels’ Discover Costa Rica trip, 
including flights from any London airport.


• The prize is subject to availability and travel must be taken before 31 
December 2018

• The winner and guest must travel on the same itinerary.

• Prize is non-transferable and there are no cash alternatives.

• Winner and guests are responsible for ensuring that they have valid travel 
documents and adequate insurance.

• Unless stated otherwise the prize excludes airport transfers , food, drink, 
spending money and any other costs.

• Bookings are subject to availability.

You will need to enter your shots via GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/>. Photographer Paul Goldstein will judge the 
monthly entries and the overall winner.

And don’t forget to read the full terms and conditions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2017/jan/13/guardian-travel-readers-photography-competition-2017-terms-and-conditions>

See all the winning shots from our 2016 competition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2016/dec/24/readers-travel-photography-competition-2016-the-winners-in-pictures>
 