
Twenty years ago the launch of a new version of Windows merited midnight store 
openings and a seven-figure payment to use a Rolling Stones song in ads 
celebrating the new Start menu. Early on Wednesday the release ofWindows 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows-10> happened silently, with 
millions of computers around the world updated over the internet.

Windows 10 review – final version of Windows might be Microsoft's best ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/29/microsoft-windows-10-review>
Windows 10’s biggest new feature? It’s free if you download it within the next 
year, and will install on machines running Windows 7 or Windows 8. Its second 
biggest feature? It isn’tWindows 8, which was released in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/oct/25/windows-8-review> and 
created widespread puzzlement by submerging the traditional desktop interface 
beneath big, bright “tiles” and getting rid of the familiar, popular start menu.


That puzzlement soon turned to anger, forcing the ejection of the man who had 
led Windows 8’s development,Steve Sinofsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2012/nov/13/windows-chief-steve-sinofsky-microsoft>
, and the introduction of Windows 8.1, which, while it didn’t bring the Start 
menu, did at least let you start off in desktop mode.

Now, Microsoft breezily says 
<http://blogs.windows.com/bloggingwindows/2015/07/19/familiarity-in-windows-10/>
, “the familiar Start menu is back”, as though it had been on holiday rather 
than unceremoniously dumped.

Despite the lack of flourish and giant ads, a lot still rides on the success 
of Windows 10 forMicrosoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> 
and its chief executive of 17 months, Satya Nadella . Along with the Office 
productivity suite and software for web servers, it is still one of the three 
main sources of revenue and income for the company.

Windows’ biggest problem is that it isn’t a contender for mobile phone use, 
which now outstrips PC use. About 2 billion people worldwide have Apple iPhones 
or smartphones running Google’sAndroid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> software, easily outnumbering 
the 1.5bn PCs in use.

The computing and internet world once revolved around the PC; now it’s the 
mobile, where Microsoft’s efforts have only garnered about 80 million users of 
itsWindows <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/windows> Phone software, 
almost all on cheap handsets.

Nadella has set a target of getting Windows 10 running on a billion “devices” 
within three years. With PC sales running at about 300m per year, that’s not 
quite as ambitious as it initially sounds, but making it free to consumers – 
businesses and PC makers still have to pay – will help.

Windows 10: more Microsoft apps are coming to Android and iPhone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/15/windows-10-microsoft-apps-android-iphone>
The question is whether it will make any difference in the longer term. 

Benedict Evans of the venture capital company Andreessen Horowitz noted in a 
blog post <http://ben-evans.com/benedictevans/2015/7/8/capitulation>: “The apps 
that people want on smartphones are not being written for desktop Windows 
anyway. Uber doesn’t have a desktop Windows app, and neither does Instacart, 
Pinterest or Instagram. The apps and services that consumers care about are 
either smartphone-only or address the desktop using the web. The smartphone is 
the sun and everything else orbits it.”


Windows 10 will continue to be updated gradually; Microsoft says it’s the last 
“big hit” release, and that future upgrades will be piecemeal, pushed over the 
internet.

Other new features of Windows 10 include:

 * Edge, a new browser to replace the 20-year-old Internet Explorer

 * Cortana, a voice-driven “assistant” that can set up tasks and do searches 
(like Google’s voice search or Apple’s Siri)

 * Compatibility with Hololens, for a future when we’re all using virtual 
reality headsets

 * Automatic window management, for when you have multiple windows open in 
different apps

 * Continuum, which will scale the interface up or down - you can plug a 
Windows tablet into a keyboard and it will behave like a desktop PC; unplug it, 
and it’s all big swipe-y tiles again.

 * Improved mail, calendar and photo apps

One caution: Windows 10 is a 6GB download, and will happen automatically if 
you opted for automatic updates (as you should for security). If you have 
limited broadband capacity, it could use it up quickly.

 