
A fund from investment giant Fidelity is offering an annual income of around 
7% – or 14 times the interest paid on the average easy access account.Shares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/shares> in Royal Dutch Shell, Legal & 
General and HSBC are all expected to pay dividends worth 7% or more. Is now the 
time to take on more risk and put at least some of your savings into funds and 
shares?

Savers will, quite rightly, be nervous – most would be much happier if 
accounts were paying 4% or 5% interest rather than risking the swings and 
roundabouts of markets. It is a dilemma that financial adviser Brian Dennehy, 
of Dennehy Weller, acknowledges: “In a world of very low interest rates, many 
will find themselves in income-generating stock market funds through lack of 
choice, rather than due to a huge enthusiasm.”

Savers need to adjust their mental approach, he says. “This means not 
obsessing about the day-to-day moves of the capital value, rather focussing on 
the lack of volatility and relative predictability of the income.”

Related: Investment funds: the winners and the losers after Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/02/investment-funds-winners-losers-brexit-eu-referendum>

But where do you start? Your choice comes down to buying individual shares or 
buying into a fund. Individual shares are riskier as if the company collapses 
all your money is wiped out. Funds typically have 50 to 60 different shares, so 
if one goes down the impact is much less.

There is, though, a bewildering choice of hundreds of different “equity 
income” funds. The Fidelity one, paying 7%, is a bit of an outlier. Dennehy 
reckons savers should expect 3.5%-4% from funds that have a long record of 
consistently paying out, year after year. He recommendsJ O Hambro UK Equity 
Income, paying 4.4%; Artemis Income (3.8%); and BlackRock UK Income (4.0%). 
Each has grown its income in at least eight of the past 10 years.

At advisers Chelsea Financial Services, Darius McDermott says: “At the lower 
end of the income scale we likeRathbone Income. It yields 3.4% at the moment 
but it is very consistent and has only cut its dividend once in 20 years.

“At the higher end we like Fidelity Enhanced Income. It uses covered call 
options to boost income. This means the managers give up a bit of growth 
potential to get a higher level of income. At the moment it is yielding 7%.”

But what is the likelihood of funds having to chop their income payouts, 
particularly if there’s a post-Brexit recession? “There were concerns towards 
the end of last year that the UK’s biggest companies were going to struggle,” 
McDermott says. “Brexit has helped many of them, though, because the pound has 
fallen and they have most of their costs in sterling and revenues in dollars. 
So profits are boosted and they are better able to pay dividends.”

Savers have no choice but to up the risk spectrum if they want a decent income

The investment director of Britain’s biggest advisers, Mark Dampier of 
Hargreaves Lansdown, says savers have no choice but to go up the risk spectrum 
if they want a decent income. He has been a lifelong believer in equity income 
funds, not just for paying income but for the capital growth they can also 
offer. He says someone who put £10,000 into a popular equity income fund in 
2002 would have received an income of £360 a year later, equal to 3.6%. 
Fourteen years later, the £10,000 has turned into more than £19,000, and the 
income is £780 a year, equal to 7.8% on the original investment.

Dampier also tips the Artemis and J O Hambro funds, as well as Marlborough 
Multi Cap Income, Threadneedle Equity Income and Jupiter Asian Income. He says 
that the renowned investor Neil Woodford is likely to launch a new equity 
income fund in the next few months with a greater leaning towards income than 
his current funds.

But don’t just look at funds: there are also investment trusts that look 
interesting. “They have the unique ability to squirrel away some of the income 
they receive each year and when times get tough the investment company can use 
this saved income to boost their dividends,” says Annabel Brodie-Smith of the 
Association of Investment Companies. “There are 20 investment companies which 
have increased their dividends every year for over 20 years – so-called 
‘dividend heroes’ – with theCity of London Investment Trust increasing their 
dividends for an impressive 50 years.”

Also consider index funds, which track the performance of a particular market 
and can pay an income, too. They are generally much cheaper to buy and own that 
conventional trusts.Vanguard’s UK Equity Income Index fund is a good place to 
start.

If you want to do your own research on funds there are plenty of sites worth 
consulting: Trustnet.com <https://www.trustnet.com/> and Morningstar.co.uk 
<http://www.morningstar.co.uk/uk/> let you search for prices and performance 
data.FundCalibre.com <http://www.fundcalibre.com/> lists lots of “elite” funds. 
When you have made your choice, you then have to actually buy it. There are now 
lots of online investment platforms that allow you to keep your funds (and 
individual shares) in one place, buying and selling units when you want, such 
as Hargreaves Lansdown, Fidelity and Bestinvest. Which is best for you will 
depend on how much you want to invest.


Small investors can download the “Come and have a go” Lang Cat report, which 
contains a guide for people who know little about investing as well as 
sophisticated traders, without charge atLangcatfinancial.com 
<http://langcatfinancial.com/>. It looks at service, support, size, products 
and online facilities at the platforms, as well as costs and charges.
 