
The US supreme court <https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-supreme-court> 
decided three important cases on Thursday, and it’s clear that the eight-person 
court created by the unexpected death of Antonin Scalia continues to affect its 
decisions in unpredictable ways.

In a case about the fourth amendment – involving the concept of unreasonable 
search and seizure – a majority of justices ruled in favor of allowing 
warrantless Breathalyzer tests, because the court’s conservatives got the 
necessary support from the the liberal wing for the second time in a week.

In an affirmative action case, the liberal wing scored a surprising victory 
despite the absence of a Democratic nominee to replace Scalia. And on a major 
immigration case, the eight-person court failed to resolve a crucial issue, 
leaving the lives of substantial numbers of people in limbo.

Birchfield v North Dakota: warrantless Breathalyzer tests do not violate the 
fourth amendment

In the second major fourth amendment case of the week, the court partially 
upheld South Dakota’s “implied consent” law, which made it a criminal offense 
for someone lawfully arrested for suspicion of driving while under the 
influence to refuse a blood or Breathalyzer test. The court’smajority opinion 
<http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/15pdf/14-1468_8n59.pdf>, written by 
Justice Samuel Alito, held that the fourth amendment allows the state to 
criminalize refusing to take a Breathalyzer test but that a warrant was 
generally required for more physically invasive blood tests. Alito and the 
court’s remaining Republican nominees were joined by two Democratic 
appointments, justices Stephen Breyer and Elena Kagan.

There were dissents from both directions. It’s not easy to get to Justice 
Alito’s right on a fourth amendment case, but Clarence Thomas did it, arguing 
that the state can also criminalize the refusal of someone arrested for drunk 
driving to take a blood test.

Of greater interest is the fact that Sonia Sotomayor, President Obama’s first 
nominee to the supreme court, continues to be a leader on fourth amendment 
rights. Earlier this week, Justice Breyer joined the court’s four Republican 
nominees to allow evidence collected after an illegal search to be allowed to 
count against defendants. Sotomayorwrote a brilliant dissent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/sonia-sotomayor-truth-illegal-traffic-stops-supreme-court>
 demonstrating how the court’s approach undermined the fourth amendment in ways 
that will disproportionately affect people of color.

Today’s case is a closer one, because of the unique issues presented by 
driving while intoxicated, and the fact that the police generally have more 
leeway when conducting searches related to a legal arrest.


Still, Sotomayor argues, the court’s continuing watering-down of warrant 
requirements is disturbing. Sotomayor’s dissent in Birchfield (joined by 
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg) does not dispute that there may be some cases in 
which it is impossible for police to obtain a warrant, and therefore a 
warrantless search may be reasonable. But in most cases, they write, it is 
possible for the police to obtain a warrant before conducting a breath test – 
and allowing the police to categorically skip the step is subversive of fourth 
amendment rights. “[M]ere convenience in investigating drunk driving,” 
Sotomayor observes, “cannot itself justify an exception to the warrant 
requirement.”


Fisher v University of Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/23/us-supreme-court-upholds-affirmative-action-university-of-texas>
: a surprising affirmative action victory

Abigail Fisher was rejected by the University of Texas’s flagship campus in 
2008. Since then, she has been waging a long legal fight arguing that UT’s 
admissions system, which includes a form of affirmative action, was 
unconstitutional. Her case hadalready come 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fisher_v._University_of_Texas_(2013)> to the 
supreme court – which sent it back to the lower courts – in 2013. Justice Elena 
Kagan had to recuse herself from this year’s case because she had been involved 
in the previous round while working in the Obama administration. Sidelining one 
of the liberal justices seemed to bode ill for UT, because none the four 
Republican nominees had ever voted to sustain an affirmative action program – 
and without Kagan, they were a majority.

But for the first time, Justice Kennedy found an affirmative action program 
that he believed satisfied constitutional standards.His opinion 
<http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/15pdf/14-981_4g15.pdf> is hardly a 
ringing endorsement of the practice: “The Court’s affirmance of the 
University’s admissions policy today does not necessarily mean the University 
may rely on that same policy without refinement,” wrote Kennedy.

But the court’s holding that formally race-neutral measures (such as UT’s 
guarantee of admission to anyone who finishes in the top 10% of their high 
school class) are not always sufficient to achieve a critical mass of racial 
diversity is important, as is its finding that racial classifications intended 
to make institutions more racially diverse are not constitutionally comparable 
to racial classifications designed to uphold exclusionary racial hierarchies. 
It’s appropriate, Kennedy wrote, for states to be given some leeway on the 
former but not the latter.

United States v Texas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jun/23/supreme-court-blocks-obama-immigration-plan>
: opting not to decide on immigration still counts as making a choice

One of the most important cases to come before the court this term concerns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/19/obama-deportation-order-immigration-policy-republican-party>
 President Obama’s Deferred Action to Parents of Americans and Lawful Permanent 
Residents (Dapa) program. A conservative three-judge panel on the fifth circuit 
court of appeals issued a stay preventing Obama’s executive order, which defers 
deportations for certain certain classes of undocumented immigrants, from going 
into effect. With presumptive Republican nominee Donald Trump making 
anti-immigration demagoguery a crucial part of his campaign, the importance of 
the issue can hardly be overstated.

While it might be tempting to think that the increasing salience of 
immigration would sway Chief Justice Roberts and compel him to join the court’s 
liberal wing and allow the program to at least temporarily go into effect, 
sophisticated court observerswere skeptical 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/brianne-j-gorod/john-robertss-past-and-im_b_9636322.html>
 that Roberts would be affected by the political tumult. In this case, they 
were right. The court issued a one-line opinion stating that the fifth circuit 
was “affirmed by an equally divided Court”.

Dapa was designed to remove a group of undocumented immigrants that were 
almost certainly not going to be deported anyway – parents of legal US 
residents or citizens – from limbo. The federal courts, alas, have restored 
that limbo, and this will almost certainly continue until the elections in 
November.

How the supreme court ultimately resolves the issue, therefore, will be 
determined by who wins in November and, hence, gets to name Scalia’s 
replacement.
 