
Today, the supreme court issued an opinion 
<http://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/15pdf/14-915_1bn2.pdf> with a single 
sentence: “the judgment is affirmed by an equally divided court”. In this case, 
however, “short” doesn’t mean “unimportant”. The ruling has the effect of 
thwarting a major judicial attack on public sector unions, and also shows how 
the unexpected death of Antonin Scalia is already beginning to transform the 
American legal and political landscape.

Today’s ruling was in Friedrichs v California Teachers Association 
<http://www.scotusblog.com/case-files/cases/friedrichs-v-california-teachers-association/>
, a case that could have severely weakened public sector unions. Under existing 
law, public sector unions could not collect mandatory dues for workers they 
represent for political purposes, but could collect them for conducting union 
business such as negotiating and representing workers in disputes with 
management. The justification for “agency shops” is clear: it prevents free 
riding. If workers did not have to pay dues to pay for basic union business, 
they would get the benefits of union representation without having to share the 
costs. This would have the effect of undermining unions over time.

The argument made by the plaintiffs in Friedrichs was that compulsory dues 
even for basic union business violated the first amendment rights of workers. 
They sought to have the court overrule longstanding precedent and hold that all 
public sector agency shops violate the free speech and association rights of 
workers. The effects of the courts adopting this argument would be devastating 
for public sector unions.

The court heard oral arguments in January, and they left little doubt 
<http://theweek.com/articles/598791/might-end-organized-labor> that a bare 
majority of the court was going to side against the unions. The Roberts court 
had been slowly using strained first amendment arguments to chip away at the 
ability to public sector unions to organize, and it was clear that they were 
poised to deliver the big blow.

But on 13 February, Justice Antonin Scalia died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/14/antonin-scalia-supreme-court-legacy-opinions-partisan-america>
 while vacationing at a Texas ranch. By leaving the supreme court with eight 
members – four each appointed by Democratic and Republican presidents – 
Scalia’s deathinevitably affected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/16/us-supreme-court-cases-antonin-scalia-death-impact-abortion-voting-rights>
 a number of cases the court had not yet decided. Friedrichs is the first major 
case in point. Scalia, who was certain to side against the unions, is no longer 
on the court to cast the deciding vote.

In the case of a tie at the supreme court, the lower court judgment is 
affirmed. In this case, the ninth circuit court of appeals ruled that agency 
shops do not violate the first amendment. The supreme court’s deadlock means 
that this decision stands. Workers represented by public sector unions will not 
be able to benefit from union representation without bearing their share of the 
collective cost.

Today’s decision, first of all, underscores the importance of the elections in 
November. There are many areas of the law where the difference between a swing 
vote on the supreme court appointed by Republican and Democratic president is 
huge. This case is a classic example. Virtually any justice nominated by a 
Democratic president would reject the argument that the first amendment forbids 
public sector agency shops, and almost any Republican-nominated judge would 
accept it. And it’s not just the presidential election that matters, either. If 
Democrats maintain control of the White House and recapture the Senate, 
President Clinton or Sanders will almost certainly be able to name Scalia’s 
replacement. If a Democratic president faces off with a Republican-controlled 
Senate, though,all bets are off. 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/129944/end-supreme-court-know>

In addition, today’s case is about a broader political war. The Republican 
attack on public sector unions, in both state legislatures and the courts, is 
in large measure an attack on a major Democratic constituency. Making it more 
difficult for public sector workers to organize helps to produce 
self-perpetuating majorities at the state level, particularly combined with 
Republican vote suppression efforts. The at least temporary loss of the 
Republican supreme court majority, however, has made these efforts more 
difficult. And if the next median vote on the supreme court is selected by a 
Democratic president, the red tide at the state level might start to recede.
 