
There is life is the old cartel yet, it seems. A year ago, obituaries were 
being written for Opec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/30/oil-iran-saudi-arabia-russia-venezuela-nigeria-libya>
when, despite much bullish talk, it couldn’t agree any production cuts. Now the 
14 members – soon to be reduced to 13 as Indonesia sits out for a while –have 
agreed that 1.2m barrels a day will be removed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/oil-price-opec-cut-in-output-saudi-arabia-deal-market>
, a reduction in Opec’s volumes of about 4.5%. It’s a “historic moment”, says 
the organisation.

In a sense, it is. Opec hasn’t managed such a display of unity since 2008. 
Regional rivalsSaudi Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> and 
Iran have found a way to share the burden of lower production, which is a 
significant development if it lasts. The oil price rose 8% to $50 a barrel.

But it is usually wise to take Opec’s grand statements with a pinch of salt. 
There are several reasons to do so this time. First, the deal depends on 
non-Opec members removing 600,000 barrels a day of their own production. 
Russia, saidOpec <https://www.theguardian.com/business/opec>, is good for half 
that tally. But enforcing compliance, which is Opec’s traditional problem, is 
harder when you are attempting to corral non-members. Relying on Russia could 
be a slippery game.

Oil price surges as Opec agrees first cut in output since 2008
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/oil-price-opec-cut-in-output-saudi-arabia-deal-market>
Second, the supposed display of strength requires context. It has happened 
only because Opec’s previous “keep pumping” strategy, dictated by the Saudis, 
failed. The aim was to bring the US shale oil industry to its knees. Instead, 
the US industry cut costs and learned to live with $50 a barrel. A sub-$40 
price, if sustained over many years, could have worked. But the Saudis, facing 
an enormous budget deficit, have blinked first.

Third, what matters now is how long the new quotas stay in place. If the oil 
price climbs upwards towards $60, happy harmony is possible – the production 
cuts would have worked. But there is no fundamental shortage of oil supplies in 
the world, at least at the global economy’s current rate of growth. If the 
price slips back towards $40, Opec’s internal political squabbles will return. 
Judge the deal six or nine months from now. The cartel is alive, but we don’t 
know how hard it can still kick.

Brexit: lost in transition

Mark Carney is right. It matters that the UK is “effectively the investment 
banker for Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/mark-carney-european-economies-face-hit-if-cut-off-from-city-of-london>
.” Continental firms would suffer if the eurozone tries to upend the City of 
London at the moment of Brexit. An orderly transition, in the negotiating 
jargon, is in everybody’s interests.

It could hardly be otherwise when you consider the statistics in the Bank of 
England’s annualfinancial stability report 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/fsr/2016/nov.aspx>. Banks 
located in the UK are involved in over half the debt and equity issuance by 
non-UK borrowers in the European Union. Over three-quarters of the EU’s trading 
in foreign exchange and over-the-counter interest rate derivatives takes place 
in the UK. Financial activity of that size does not shift easily, if at all.

It’s not as if Italian banks, for example, are remotely equipped to deal with 
a sudden increase in demand to underwrite risk derivatives. The danger in 
sudden rupture is that the cost of capital for big corporate borrowers rises 
across the eurozone, which would be a almighty own-goal by the EU 27. Energy 
costs are higher in Europe in the US. Why impose higher financial costs on top?

One suspects even those eurozone politicians who are irate about Brexit, when 
pressed in private, would accept the need for a smooth transition that covers 
banks’ passporting rights and so on. The tricky part is making it happen. A 
safe transition period for the European banking and financial system might have 
to last half a decade. The political rhetoric, on both sides, is a very long 
way from that position.

Bad year at the office for RBS

Another year, another wooden spoon for Royal Bank of Scotland. And this time 
it wasa fail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/rbs-fails-bank-of-england-stress-test>
, rather than a scrappy pass, in the Bank of England’sannual stress tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/rbs-fails-bank-of-england-stress-test>
 on banks. The tests were stiffer this time and RBS can rustle up the required 
£2bn in capital by cutting costs and shedding more assets, so it would be wrong 
to conclude that there is any fresh crisis. It is still, for the most part, the 
old crisis.

The biggest element is the looming fine for mis-selling mortgage securities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/rbs-may-fined-more-than-12bn-settle-us-mis-selling-scandal>
 in the US in the pre-crash years. The fine could be anywhere between $4bn and 
$14bn. Nobody knows, but an extreme outcome, in either direction, would 
obviously make a big difference to the bank’s capital position. Why is RBS 
still waiting to be walloped? Because the US authorities move shockingly slowly 
and never explain why.
 