
For a party defending a 25,000 majority, the Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> are keeping a very low 
profile in Thursday’s Witney byelection. But then, it is not quite clear which 
Conservative party is campaigning here: the pro-European, socially liberal 
party of David Cameron, or the inward-looking, xenophobic small-c conservative 
Brexiteering party of Theresa May.

When Cameron resigned as Witney’s MP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/12/david-cameron-to-stand-down-as-mp-for-witney>
 – only a few weeks after insisting heplanned to stay 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36643132> at least until 
2020 – he muttered about not wanting to get in his successor’s way. The 
immediate speculation was that he was furious that his successor wanted to 
bring back grammar schools.

But there are plenty of grounds for supposing that there is a much more 
fundamental rift between himself and May.He told friends 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/12/david-cameron-resigns-as-mp-for-witney/>
 that he didn’t want to be anotherTed Heath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jul/18/guardianobituaries.conservatives>
, the party leader deposed in 1975 who sat on the Tory backbenches for 20 years 
– the embodiment of opposition to Margaret Thatcher. Former Liberal Democrat 
leader Nick Clegg,campaigning in Witney last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/11/witney-byelection-hard-brexit-may-be-key-issue-in-camerons-former-constituency>
, said he thought Cameron would be “mortified” by the way his successor trashed 
his record.

A left united in Witney could have changed Theresa May’s Britain | Anne Perkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/left-united-witney-theresa-mays-britain-byelection-lib-dems-labour>
Cameron himself has been conspicuously absent from the field of battle since 
he triggered the contest in September. Until this weekend.

On Saturday, he and May, ignoring the convention that prime ministers don’t 
campaign in byelections,descended on the constituency 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/721596/Theresa-May-David-Cameron-Jeremy-Corbyn-Witney-by-election-campaign>
. The pair were duly pictured leafletting together, with the fresh-faced 
candidate Robert Courts between them.

Jeremy Corbyn was in Witney on Saturday too, and on Tuesday the Lib Dem 
leader, Tim Farron, is paying his fourth visit to the Oxfordshire town even 
though – in his 15 years as Witney’s MP – Cameron quadrupled his majority and 
ended up with 60% of the vote. “He was very good at taking up local issues,” a 
Lib Dem admitted on Witney High Street.


Yet Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and Lib Dems agree 
that the Tory vote is soft. I watched a woman approach a Tory canvasser for a 
leaflet, and hand it back angrily when she learned that Courts was a Brexiteer.


In June, Witney was that rare thing, a rural remain constituency, voting 54% 
to 46%to stay in the European Union 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/politics/eu_referendum/results/local/w>. The 
constituency is a good test ofthe Lib Dem pitch to be the voice of the 
<http://www.libdems.org.uk/speech_following_referendum> remainers. 

The party has done well in the past: in 2005, the last time the candidate, Liz 
Leffman <http://www.libdems.org.uk/liz-leffman>, stood, she came second, with 
23% of the vote. At the 2001 general election, the first that Cameron fought, 
Labour and Lib Dems between them polled more votes than the man who became 
prime minister. There is a solid non-Tory vote here. The question is whether 
the Lib Dems can persuade enough people to prioritise Brexit over the cuts that 
many voters blame them for.


As well as Farron, Clegg and Paddy Ashdown have both been campaigning as if 
the seat is winnable. Ashdown talks of the great Lib Dem assault on Tory 
majorities in the late 1980s and early 90s. To win Witney, Leffman needs a 
swing of 27%, on a par with the best of those days. This seems about as likely 
as snow on polling day. But she is buoyant.


“There’s a huge momentum building for me, especially since the Tory party 
conference, even among leavers. They didn’t likeTheresa May’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/the-guardian-view-on-theresa-mays-conference-speech-actions-not-words-will-decide>
. I meet people who say they voted out so that parliament could be sovereign – 
not to take a hard line on immigrants and leave the single market.”


There is anger about Brexit. But even in west Oxfordshire’s prosperous 
Cotswold villages and largely well-heeled market towns there is much, much more 
anger about the cuts.


Voters are furious that one of the GP surgeries, the privately contracted Deer 
Park in Witney, is closing after no other private provider made a viable bid. 
The entire family of a GP from another Witney surgery, Dr Oliver Boland, is out 
on the stump for the Labour candidate. “Virgin Care [which ran Deer Park] 
proved no more efficient than our NHS surgeries,” he said. “GP funding is down 
to 8% of the NHS budget. It is so shortsighted. It will just cost hospitals 
more.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwitney-byelection-labour-and-lib-dems-hope-to-cash-in-on-tory-divisions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2651c784b3a77bc5988bf9576bed2818db7d9239%2F0_85_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Witney%20byelection%3A%20Labour%20and%20Lib%20Dems%20hope%20to%20cash%20in%20on%20Tory%20divisions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwitney-byelection-labour-and-lib-dems-hope-to-cash-in-on-tory-divisions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Witney%20byelection%3A%20Labour%20and%20Lib%20Dems%20hope%20to%20cash%20in%20on%20Tory%20divisions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Fwitney-byelection-labour-and-lib-dems-hope-to-cash-in-on-tory-divisions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2651c784b3a77bc5988bf9576bed2818db7d9239%2F0_85_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Even in Oxfordshire’s prosperous Cotswold villages and largely well-heeled 
market towns there is anger about the cuts. Photograph: Sam Frost 
It is not only GP surgeries. Voters are anxious about downgraded local 
hospitals in Chipping Norton, reduced services in Witney and thelocal maternity 
unit 
<http://www.witneygazette.co.uk/news/14714079.Health_bosses_to_decide_plans_for_Horton_maternity_unit/>
, just outside the constituency, which has lost its obstetrician. The nearest 
major hospital, the John Radcliffe in Oxford, can take an hour or more by car 
when traffic on the notorious A40 is bad. Buses are slow and unreliable, and 
more rural services are being cut.


That is fertile territory for Labour. The candidate, Duncan Enright 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-oxfordshire-36220568>, is a well-known 
local councillor who came second in 2015, when the Lib Dems trailed in fourth, 
behind Ukip. But this is not Corbyn territory, and Enright wasamong 600 
councillors 
<http://labourlist.org/2016/06/over-500-councillors-tell-corbyn-time-to-step-down/>
 who called for him to resign after the Brexit vote.

I’m standing in Witney because Britain can do better than the Tories | Larry 
Sanders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/18/witney-britain-david-bernie-sanders-green-party-byelection>
On Saturday morning, Corbyn’s visit was crowded but not packed. While some 
fans eagerly queued for half an hour for selfies with the leader, others who 
had come from from Oxford to help felt they were wasting time that would be 
better spent out on the doorstep.


“Corbyn brings some people in and he drives some people away,” said one 
canvasser, but the most common refrain on the doorstep was “Labour? Not while 
Jeremy Corbyn’s leader.”


Enright is tactful. “Our membership [of the Witney CLP] was always quite good, 
around 500. But now it’s 1,200 and yes, they come and work for us in about the 
same proportion as the original members.”

Enright may be less optimistic than Leffman (or perhaps more realistic) but he 
claims Labour campaigning, particularly roundMay’s proposal to bring back 
grammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
, which he argues will destroy the whole local secondary school ecology, is 
bringing support from all the other parties.


“We’ve had an ex-Lib Dem councillor, and Greens; even Bob Hayward, who was 
chairman of [David Cameron’s] Chipping Norton branch of the local Tory party,
has defected to us 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/former-head-david-camerons-local-9010872>
.”


As for the referendum result, Enright thinks the constituency has accepted it. 
“The majority will go with the decision and go for the next thing – the best 
Brexit possible,” he said.

Three months after the EU referendum, politics is still in a state of 
bewilderment.

The result, when it comes early on Friday, will be judged by whether May’s 
abrasive approach to Brexit is endorsed. Corbyn needs to stay second to prove 
that he’s not the electoral liability that his critics fear he is. And the Lib 
Dems need to come second to show they’re a party in recovery. Witney, they 
hope, is a stepping stone to Richmond, where, if Heathrow gets a third runway, 
Zac Goldsmith will force a byelection. And it’s not so long sincethere was a 
Lib Dem MP there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/13/vince-cable-rules-out-standing-as-mp-again>
.

 