
One of the best things about turning 40, and then 41, was realising that I 
didn’t have to do things I used to think were obligatory. It turns out this is 
a huge category, from replying promptly to text messages, to maintaining 
relationships with people I don’t really like, and – a new revelation – 
participating in events rather than watching them on TV.

Women's March on Washington barred from Lincoln Memorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/womens-march-on-washington-lincoln-memorial>
This came to me a few weeks ago when friends asked if I was planning on going 
to thewomen’s march 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/anti-trump-protests-new-york-portland-shooting>
, the huge anti-Trump rally taking place in Washington DC on 21 January. My 
initial response was: of course I’m going, I’ll get an overnight babysitter, 
it’s a historic event and a symbolic gesture and something I’ll one day tell my 
children about.

Then I thought: what is it exactly I’ll tell them? I revived a lot of 
miserable memories of Glastonbury. I thought about the hell of the annual 
Halloween parade in downtown Manhattan and some old, grim experiences at the 
Notting Hill carnival. Mostly, I thought about being atBarack Obama’s 
inauguration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/21/obama-inauguration-no-more-fake-optimism>
; not at the ceremony itself, but the back of the crowd approximately three 
miles away, in frigid DC weather and surrounded by thousands of other 
scuffling, freezing, depressed-looking people, trying to squeeze a sense of 
occasion from what felt like being at the back of a demo.

Very occasionally, crowds can be electrifying – the spontaneous gathering in 
Times Square on the night ofObama’s election victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/05/uselections20084> was one. But 
from experience, I suspect that unless I camp overnight to get a good spot at 
the front, the women’s march on Washington will be less a wonderful, uplifting 
celebration of womanhood, than five hours of shouting, “What did she say?” to 
the woman standing next to me and a lot of anxiety about where to go to the 
toilet.

And where once I would’ve lied and made up an excuse, it felt good to be old 
enough to say, “No, I hate crowds. I’m staying home to watch it on TV.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fwomen-march-washington-part-of-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9729538ce0491f7b66ba2d241d8b0f507836978e%2F0_613_3478_2087%2F3478.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Women%E2%80%99s%20march%20on%20Washington%3F%20I%E2%80%99d%20rather%20not%20be%20part%20of%20history%2C%20thanks%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fwomen-march-washington-part-of-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Women%E2%80%99s%20march%20on%20Washington%3F%20I%E2%80%99d%20rather%20not%20be%20part%20of%20history%2C%20thanks%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fwomen-march-washington-part-of-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9729538ce0491f7b66ba2d241d8b0f507836978e%2F0_613_3478_2087%2F3478.jpg>
 Edna O’Brien, pictured in 1964. ‘The Country Girls is brilliant and seems as 
fresh as any modern coming-of-age novel.’ Photograph: Evening Standard/Getty 
Images 
Why Edna still shocks


When I was in my teens, my mother would urge novels she’d read in her youth on 
me with the caveat, “They might be terribly dated by now.” Some I read, but 
then came the phase when anything she recommended was tainted and to be avoided 
like the plague. This passed. But for some reason I remained suspicious ofEdna 
O’Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/10/edna-obrien-ireland-outcast-to-literary-darling>
, whose first novel,The Country Girls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/apr/05/featuresreviews.guardianreview3>
, was beloved by my mother and which I used to think sounded horribly boring. 
Then last week I found an old copy on my shelf and started to read it, and of 
course it’s brilliant in a way that makes its late-1940s setting seem as fresh 
as any modern coming-of-age novel.

There is one exception to this. The heroine, Caithleen, is expelled from her 
convent for writing a tame note implying sexual relations between a nun and a 
priest, an act she considers so lewd she hesitates to share it with the reader. 
At the same time, she is, at 14, being wooed by a married man decades older 
than her, which the author presents as a thrilling but more or less 
straightforward love interest.

You couldn’t do that today without calling it grooming, which I suspect the 
author would see as a piece of fussy editorialising with no place in fiction. 
It’s interesting; it simultaneously dates the novel, which was banned in 
Ireland on first publication, and preserves something of its original shock 
value.

Machine moments 


When I was a baby, my mother would park me in front of the washing machine to 
watch the socks go round for minutes at a time. My kids watch the vacuum 
cleaner; I think they think it’s a pet. Some people worry about the day their 
children will stop believing in Father Christmas; I worry about the day mine 
figure out theRoomba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/15/roomba-robot-vacuum-poopocalypse-facebook-post>
 doesn’t have agency and I lose those precious few moments to read another 
paragraph or glance up at the crowds on TV.
 