
On Wednesday, the US supreme court heard oral arguments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/mar/02/supreme-court-abortion-law-texas> 
in the most important abortion rights case to appear before it in more than two 
decades.

House Bill 2, the Texas anti-abortion law being challenged in Whole Woman’s 
Health v Hellerstedt,would require 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/16/us-supreme-court-make-abortion-deciding-factor-2016-presidential-election>
 most of the abortion clinics in the state to close. Passed by legislators who 
arenot necessarily familiar 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/3/1/11139022/samantha-bee-abortion-texas> with even 
the most basic facts of how abortions work, it represents the state of the art 
in using alleged protections of women’s health to deny them access to a safe 
medical procedure.

Abortion opponents' real victory isn't just closing clinics, but blocking new 
ones | Robin Marty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/24/abortion-opponents-bloomberg-report-closing-clinics-blocking-new-ones>
Were the case to be upheld, Roe v Wade would essentially be overruled, whether 
the court did so explicitly or not. WithAntonin Scalia’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/14/antonin-scalia-supreme-court-legacy-opinions-partisan-america>
, though, the court lost a conservative vote, and HB2 will likely not be 
upheld. It is likely, however, that the fate of the Texas law and the 
reproductive rights of American women will have to wait until after the 
presidential election in November to be decided.

In 1992, a Republican-dominated supreme court unexpectedly upheld Roe by 
deciding, in Planned Parenthood v Casey, that bans on pre-viability abortion 
were unconstitutional, and regulations of pre-viability abortion were 
constitutional only if they did not constitute an “undue burden” on a woman’s 
right to choose.

As subsequently applied, however, the “undue burden” standard has given 
considerable latitude <http://prospect.org/article/source-our-abortion-woes> to 
states like Texas, which has enacted various regulations that make it difficult 
to impossible for many women to obtain safe abortions. Supporters of 
reproductive rights are hoping that the envelope has finally been pushed too 
far.

Those hopes just got more attainable with the death of Scalia. It requires 
five votes to create precedent, and the four Democratic appointees on the court 
are virtually certain to rule the challenged provisions of HB2 
unconstitutional. The question instead is whether there might be five votes to 
give Roe back its teeth and stop the pincer attack on reproductive freedom in 
state legislatures.

Scalia’s absence was felt immediately at oral argument. Texas solicitor 
general Scott Keller surely wished he had Scalia there to bail him out as he 
lamely attempted to defend his state’s law. Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg and 
Sonia Sotomayor in particular mercilessly shredded Keller’s arguments, 
forcefully exposing Texas’s justifications as a sham.

Why would you trust a teen to raise a kid, but not to have an abortion? | 
Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/04/why-would-you-trust-a-teen-to-raise-a-kid-but-not-to-have-an-abortion>
Justice Ginsburg went right after one of the most obvious contradictions in 
Texas’s justifications. When Ginsburg asked how many women would be over 100 
miles from the nearest abortion clinic, Keller asserted that El Paso did not 
count in the equation because women in that metro area would be less than 100 
miles from a clinic in Saint Teresa, New Mexico.

As Ginsburg pointed out, however, this severely undermines the argument that 
these clinic restrictions are about protecting women’s health, because New 
Mexico does not impose similar burdens on its abortion clinics. “If that’s all 
right for the the women in the El Paso area,” asked Ginsburg, “why isn’t it 
right for the rest of the women in Texas?”

In subsequent exchanges, the Democrat-appointed justices went hard after 
Keller’s attempt to defend the draconian restrictions as health protections. 
Why, asked Ginsburg, are women who elect to have pill-induced abortions 
required to have them in a surgical medical facility? Keller did not have a 
good answer. Justice Stephen Breyer asked if there was any case before the law 
was enacted where a woman who suffered medical complications from an abortion 
could not get admitted to a hospital. Keller did not have one.

The bottom line, as Ginsburg later summarized it, is that the Texas statute 
puts very substantial burdens on women in exchange for no actual benefits. 
Early-stage abortions, Ginsburg noted, are “among the most safe, the least-risk 
procedures. So what was the problem that the legislature was responding to that 
it needed to improve the facilities for women’s health?” Texas does not place 
similar requirements on procedures that are far more dangerous. The reason is 
that the law is not designed to protect the health of women, but to stop women 
from getting abortions.

Keller didn’t have Scalia, but he did have justice Samuel Alito to try to help 
him. Alito has been providing states a roadmap to dismantle abortion rights 
piece bypiecesince he was a circuit court judge 
<http://prospect.org/article/chipping-away>, and he did so again on Wednesday.

The case, however, will ultimately turn on the views of a justice who was 
relatively quiet at oral argument. Justice Anthony Kennedy mostly sat out the 
debates about the substance of the Texas statute. Since 1992, Kennedy has not 
found any abortion regulation to be unconstitutional, and it’s unclear if Texas 
has finally pushed him too far. In a telling early question, he asked Stephanie 
Toti, the lawyer representing the Texas clinic, if it would be “A) proper, and 
B) helpful, for this court to remand for further findings on clinic capacity”. 
Kennedy seemed to be looking for a way to send the issue back to the lower 
courts, putting off his decision.

The most likely outcome, therefore, is probably that the court will not 
actually decide the issue. Kicking the case back to the fifth circuit would buy 
the court some time, perhaps in the hope that the next time the supreme court 
hears the issue it will have a full complement of personnel.

This should make the stakes of the election in November very clear. Not only 
the presidential election, but the closely contested Senate elections, will 
likely decide whether the reproductive freedom of American women will continue 
to receive constitutional protection.
 