
 A young woman entering the job market today can expect to do an average of 
four years more work than her male peers over her working lifetime, according 
to a report.

 Time spent by women around the world on paid and unpaid labour amounts to an 
extra month for every year of work.

The charity ActionAid <https://www.actionaid.org.uk/> will present the report, 
Not Ready, Still Waiting, at the United Nations general assembly 
<http://www.un.org/en/ga/> on Thursday.


 Highlighting the global burden of unpaid care work on women, the report finds 
that a woman living in the UK can expect to do two and a half years more labour 
than her male peers over her working life.

The report warns that the burden of unpaid care work limits women’s 
opportunities to pursue income-generating options, to have their voices heard 
in decision-making and political activities, and for rest and leisure.

To redress the balance, ActionAid is calling for governments – especially in 
developing countries where women are more likely to be affected – to deliver 
quality public care services, pass equal pay and family-friendly workplace 
legislation and agree minimum living wages, among other solutions.


Funding for women’s rights groups in poor countries falls by more than half
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/08/funding-womens-rights-groups-poor-countries-falls-awid-forum-brazil>
 “We do not mean to suggest that all unpaid work, including unpaid care work, 
should be remunerated, or to ascribe a monetary value to unpaid care, which 
includes what we believe to be intrinsically invaluable activities, such as 
loving and nurturing children and family,” said Girish Menon, chief executive 
of ActionAid UK.

“Rather, ActionAid believes women’s unpaid work should be recognised, reduced 
and redistributed – between women and men, and between the household and the 
state.

“Women’s labour – in and outside the home – is vital to sustainable 
development and for the wellbeing of society. Without the subsidy it provides, 
the world economy would not function. Yet it is undervalued and for the most 
part invisible.”

 Launched to coincide with a meeting of the UN high-level panel for women’s 
economic empowerment 
<https://www.empowerwomen.org/en/who-we-are/initiatives/sg-high-level-panel-on-womens-economic-empowerment>
 at the general assembly, the report highlights that not enough progress has 
been made on launching policies to tackle inequality since theUN sustainable 
development goals were agreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/live/2015/sep/25/un-sustainable-development-summit-2015-goals-sdgs-united-nations-general-assembly-70th-session-new-york-live>
 one year ago.

At a global gathering of feminists, one thing is clear: it's where you live 
that counts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/17/global-forum-feminists-where-you-live-that-counts-association-womens-rights-development-conference-brazil>
 Unpaid care work includes all activities involved in maintaining a household 
and caring for others in the home and community – for example, cooking, 
cleaning, collecting water and firewood in rural areas, taking care of the ill 
and elderly, participating in community work, working in family enterprises and 
volunteering.

 The report argues that women will continue to experience inequality unless 
their “vastly disproportionate levels of unpaid care work are recognised, 
reduced and redistributed”.

 Using analysis of 217 developed and developing countries, ActionAid analysed 
women’s total unpaid hours of work compared with men’s. It found that, 
worldwide, women’s average additional hours of unpaid work over the global life 
expectancy for women (69 years) came to an estimated 23 working years.

The estimate does not reflect the fact that in many developing countries, life 
expectancies, and thus working lives, are often much shorter for people living 
in poverty, particularly women.
 