
The Passion and Power of Female Friendship: Discussing the Wonder Women in 
Young Adult Literature

Louise Rennison  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/01/louise-rennison-death-young-women-books>
passed away this week, leaving behind her a much-loved series of novels that 
centred around boys and thongs, but also (crucially) around the complexity, 
brilliance and joy of female friendships.
It’s pertinent, then, that Dr Ginette Carpenter, an academic, avid Young Adult 
(YA) reader andBuffy the Vampire Slayer 
<http://time.com/3722132/buffy-debut-1997/> enthusiast, will be chairing a 
discussion between YA authors Holly Bourne and Eve Ainsworth on the importance 
of positive female friendships. The writers will be chatting about the 
characters that have inspired them to put pen to paper, teen role models and 
how YA is able to offer much more than just sparkly vampires.

6 March, HOME

Badass Women on the Walls

Browse the headlines from when Manchester-born Ellen Wilkinson 
<http://manchesterhistory.net/ardwick/home/Ellen.html> was a Labour MP and 
you’ll find no shortage of references to her fashion sense and bright auburn 
hair when she was elected in Middlesbrough East.
Look further in the archives, however, and you’ll discover that Wilkinson 
campaigned for women’s pensions, the NHS, and co-wrote the Labour manifesto. 
It’s these often forgotten achievements of women — who, as organiser Beth 
Knowles puts it, “kicked up a fuss and won” — that the Badass Women on the 
Walls event will be celebrating.
Highlighting the tales of badly behaved women who are too often left off the 
history syllabus, the event will give attendees the chance to learn about some 
of the lesser discussed women of our past. They’ll then work alongside talented 
female northern artists to create collages, sketches and stickwomen based on 
their lives.

6 March, People’s History Museum

Campaigners, Conductors and Canaries

We are all familiar with the tales of heroism that form the narrative 
surrounding the soldiers of World War One – but what about the smaller, more 
every day, acts of bravery undertaken by those at home or in the hospitals?

The pleasingly named Campaigners, Conductors and Canaries talk delves into the 
lives of the women from Salford andManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> who were risking their lives in 
munitions factories, (wo)manning the trams and caring for refugees.

The talk, delivered by Naomi Lewis, also briefly looks at that first 
victorious vote, recalling the woman who refused to follow her husband’s 
political lead in 1918 – “I have not gone for your man,” the woman was reported 
as saying, “so there!” A true northern lass, if ever there was one.

8 March, Salford Museum and Art Gallery


Being Childfree with Kate Fox 

It’s 2016 and yet not only are there still cries of “women aren’t funny!” but 
also those who take the view that anyone who actually chooses to go “childfree” 
isunicorn rare 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/lifestyle/2013/07/why-happily-childless-woman-seen-unicorn-society>
. Fortunately we’ve been blessed with Kate Fox, whose stand-up routines 
continue to prove the naysayers wrong. In Being Childfree, Fox will be tackling 
just exactly what “childfree” means, whether the word is having a zeitgeist 
moment, and whether or not even the menopause will stop people telling her that 
she’ll “change her mind”.

11 March, 70 Oxford Street

Sugar and Spice

African drumming, laughter yoga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2003/mar/25/lifeandhealth.medicineandhealth>
 and a Sunday morning jog; the final weekend of Wonder Women really does have 
it all. This is the tenth annual Sugar & Spice celebration for the LGBT 
Foundation, inviting lesbian and bisexual women to talk, craft, and bellydance 
in good company.

The two days are bursting with learning, brunching and inspirational playlist 
making, all focused around the theme of “Women Out Loud”, Sugar and Spice is 
the place to be whether you want to discuss Owenite feminism or get a manicure.

12 and 13 March, LGBT Foundation and various venues

For the full Wonder Women programme, see Creative Tourist 
<http://www.creativetourist.com/festivals-and-events/wonderwomen/>
 