
There are many new gems around London, not least the Swiss Re centre, but I 
still think the city's greatest buildings are those around Broadgate conceived 
and constructed by Stuart Lipton in the 1980s. I was involved in the 
development of this area, and Lipton's complex regenerated a bit of London that 
desperately needed it. Before Broadgate, the City of London was sterile at 
street level. The old commercial buildings by Lloyds are just slabs of 
concrete: people went into them, and when they came out they went straight 
home. Lipton is passionate about using open spaces well: he put an ice rink at 
the centre of Broadgate for use in winter, a croquet area and cafes for the 
summer. The area now hums with activity.

He established what is now the norm for city developments. In the proposals 
for British Land's new building to replace the old Lloyds one, two storeys are 
designated for use by the public. Paternoster Square will take on its own 
character, as will the space around the Swiss Re building. All this 
architectural activity is so exciting. It is a complete contrast to the 
buildings constructed after the second world war. The old Paternoster Square 
was typical: ghastly, monolithic constructions without definition or character. 
Prince Charles once said that more damage was done to London by developers than 
by the war, and I agree. The buildings from 1955-1970 demonstrate exactly what 
was so awful about British architecture. And what a glorious change has taken 
place since then.

Â· The Lord Mayor initiated the New City Architecture exhibition, which is at 
Finsbury Avenue Square, EC2, until July 2. Details:newcityarchitecture.com 
<http://www.newcityarchitecture.com>
 