

Swedish film director Ingmar Bergman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ingmarbergman> with his son Daniel and wife 
Kibi Laretai. Photograph: Lennart Nilsson/AFP

Long before the end, Ingmar Bergman 
<http://film.theguardian.com/bergman/0,,2137802,00.html> elected to live on a 
small island off the coast of Sweden. It was a way of saying he was alone with 
his work and his lovers - and probably no one knew the loneliness better than 
the lovers, and the children, who saw how he put their smiles, their eyes, 
their meals, their untidy beds on the screen.

They had to live with his ruthless, chilly and obsessive use of their smiles, 
their faces and their youth. It was not unkind, but it was not kind either, in 
the way of reassurance or loyalty. It told everyone that everything changes, 
yet remains the same. So he would live on an island and then perhaps the 
foolish film festivals of the world would stop asking him to come and be 
honoured. Didn't the film festivals know that making the films was the only 
thing that kept him alive or anywhere near calm?

The way in which Bergman's work and Bergman's pain were in equation struck me 
very early on and almost by chance. In 1957, he madeWild Strawberries 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=3O01zxTTrQY> in which a great man, a professor, 
is actually going to a kind of film festival to be honored for his career. His 
name is Isak Borg, played by Victor Sjostrom (the pioneering figure in the 
Swedish film industry and Bergman's mentor). But as he travels toward his 
honorary degree, so Borg dreams and remembers and feels shocked by the private 
failure of his life. We can see that he is a cold man attracted to the warmth 
of others - and I think Bergman saw himself the same way.

Wild Strawberries 
<http://film.theguardian.com/Century_Of_Films/Story/0,,56897,00.html> is a 
great film, struggling to reconcile inward failure and outward success. I 
realised that it was the same "story" as a film I had seen just two years 
earlier, whose black-and-white photography had moved me in the same way. That 
film was Orson Welles'Citizen Kane 
<http://film.theguardian.com/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian/0,,55489,00.html>
, in which an old man dies and has his last thoughts filled by the same grim 
debate: was I wretched in all my glory? Maybe all great films say the same 
thing.

No doubt the obituaries 
<http://film.theguardian.com/bergman/story/0,,2137813,00.html> will all mention 
the way in which Bergmaninspired and influenced Woody Allen 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/film/2007/07/bergmans_number_one_fan_woody.html> 
- but that "praise" is so trivial. Allen is an Osric to Bergman's Hamlet. 
Bergman was the film-maker who saw the resemblance between the medieval dance 
of death and the modern waiting for apocalypse. But that tension was only the 
larger projection of a very small, ordinary anxiety: will love last or betray 
itself?

In fact, the director who strikes me as a more direct descendent is Andrei 
Tarkovsky <http://film.theguardian.com/Century_Of_Films/Story/0,,147448,00.html>
 - the latter's The Sacrifice is as true a Bergman film as Liv Ullmann's 
Faithless. But every great director, every one committed to the work, and 
prepared to live on an island as opposed to the Beverly Hills Hotel, has surely 
found themselves making their own variant of a Bergman film.

Cast an eye back over the great Bergman pictures 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/film/2007/07/ingmar_bergmans_greatest_scene.html>
, from Sawdust and Tinsel to Fanny and Alexander, from Cries and Whispers to 
Smiles of a Summer Night, and this is how you know them - there is hardly a 
special effect in the entire canon. Save one: the human face in joy and terror, 
lost or in flux. For Bergman, the face was always the same, always constant and 
always fresh.

Read more about Ingmar Bergman's life and works here. 
<http://film.theguardian.com/bergman/0,,2137802,00.html>
 