
Woody Allen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen> is 80. Time is 
finite and he knows it. Every day the industrious same: wake, work, weights, 
treadmill, work, clarinet, work, supper, TV, sleep. Except today and tomorrow 
and Thursday, when he’ll do something futile.

“I never thought there was any point doing press,” he says. “I don’t think 
anybody ever reads an interview and says: ‘Hey, I want to see that movie!’” He 
smiles benignly, tip-to-toe in peanut-butter beige. Allen no longer reads 
anything about himself (except, maybe, one article, of which more later). This 
is the boring bit of film-making. This and the gags of the financiers.

Yet for someone who feels that way, he sure pulls the hours. At Cannes, he 
even carried on regardless of the publication ofa piece by his son, Ronan Farrow
 <http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/my-father-woody-allen-danger-892572>, 
resurfacing an allegation of abuse by Allen of Ronan’s sister, Dylan. When I 
speak to him again three months later, in the final stages of prep onhis 48th 
film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/07/justin-timberlake-kate-winslet-woody-allen-film>
 (Kate Winslet, Justin Timberlake, 1950s, fairground), he’s friendly on the 
phone, in no special hurry to hang up.

Why bother? A shrug and a grin. “Well, the publicity people think it’s 
important. So I do it to be nice. But I don’t think – and I tell them this – 
that it matters. And they say: ‘Just keep it quiet and do it.’ I don’t want to 
be someone who takes the money but refuses to help.”

Late-stage Woody Allen, then (or lateish – his mother lived to 95 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2002/01/29/classified/paid-notice-deaths-konigsberg-nettie.html>
, his father to 100 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2001/01/11/nyregion/martin-konigsberg-100-woody-allen-s-father.html>
) is the same as the kid scribbling so many jokes on the subway to school he
out-earned both parents by the age of 17 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/26/woody-allen-blue-jasmine-tantrums>
. He forever frames things in transactional terms: the need to keep the deal, 
fulfil the contract, offer value.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fwoody-allen-cafe-society-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Woody%20Allen%20on%20Caf%C3%A9%20Society%3A%20'We%20buy%20%24100%20worth%20of%20lottery%20tickets%20a%20week'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fwoody-allen-cafe-society-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Woody%20Allen%20on%20Caf%C3%A9%20Society%3A%20%27We%20buy%20%24100%20worth%20of%20lottery%20tickets%20a%20week%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fwoody-allen-cafe-society-video-interview&media=>
Woody Allen on Café Society: ‘We buy $100 worth of lottery tickets a week’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/aug/31/woody-allen-cafe-society-video-interview>
That TV series he’s made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/15/woody-allen-agreeing-to-make-amazon-tv-series-was-a-catastrophic-mistake>
? “Amazon badgered and badgered me for two years, sweetening the pot until I 
could not afford to turn it down.” They drove an easy bargain for the resulting 
show,Crisis in Six Scenes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bNLUUfFLlQ0>: six 
half-hour episodes was fine; shoot wherever you like; any period; any stars; 
don’t show us the script, just call when you’re done. Not that he was ever 
going to abscond to Vegas andsnort the lot 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UHTcjZzSlAM>. “I’m responsible. I’m not going 
to take their money and waste it. It was a good bet – I’ve made things before.”

Allen’s hope for his new film is similarly modest. “My intention was people 
would pay their money and have some kind of human experience.”Café Society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/cafe-society> repays investment. It’s by far 
his best sinceBlue Jasmine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/blue-jasmine>: 
sharp, funny and moving – especially on how people hold each other to ransom in 
relationships.

Our Woody-substitute this time is Jesse Eisenberg, who heads off from 
hard-scrabble Brooklyn to seek his fortune in Hollywood. It’s the 1930s: movie 
stars are gods, the studios rule and his uncle, Steve Carell, is a playmaker 
agent who asks his secretary – and secret mistress – to show Bobby round town. 
Eisenberg andKristen Stewart <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kristen-stewart> 
peer up at the gated mansions. You have to pity people who need a big house to 
feel important, she says. He’s not so sure.

Amazon badgered and badgered me for two years, sweetening the pot until I 
could not afford to turn it down

Allen neither. “I’m not one of those people who has knee-jerk antipathy to 
wealth. I like to look at rich people. I enjoy taking a tour of a very wealthy 
estate.” It helps explain his homing instinct to Cannes; cue an Allenish 
anecdote about going on a surprisingly rocky yacht.

No, he wouldn’t want to be richer, he says, though it emerges he does spend 
$100 a week on lottery tickets. But winning wouldn’t change much: “I’ve talked 
this over with my wife. We would still go on living in the same house, I would 
go on working, I don’t want a boat, I don’t want a plane.”

So why do it? He seems stumped. “The odds are bigger than astronomical. You’d 
have a better chance of shuffling a deck of cards and naming them all in row. 
I’ve never got more than two numbers. I’d probably shoot myself if I got five 
and missed by one. That would really be a killer – but I don’t have that 
problem.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e25a6e5d92d90be2727e359485790bd841c78bf%2F0_202_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Woody%20Allen%3A%20'There%20are%20traumas%20in%20life%20that%20weaken%20us.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20has%20happened%20to%20me'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Woody%20Allen%3A%20%27There%20are%20traumas%20in%20life%20that%20weaken%20us.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20has%20happened%20to%20me%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e25a6e5d92d90be2727e359485790bd841c78bf%2F0_202_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
 Allen on the set of Café Society with Jesse Eisenberg and Kristen Stewart. 
Photograph: Steve Sands/GC Images 
Don’t be fooled by Café Society’s tourist-bait take on Tinseltown. Don’t get 
blinded by its goggle-eyes at the glimpse of bling. It may look lush, but a 
good 60% of that rose-tint is jaundice. The movie biz, says someone, is 
“boring, nasty, dog-eat-dog”. Hollywood, remarks Allen’s narrator, is “a town 
run on ego” – plain and simple,no leavening punchline 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/07/11/cafe-society-and-life-animated-reviews>
.

But then, he says today, cheerfully spooling out the doominess, where isn’t? 
“I’m sure every business is full of phonies and people that don’t return phone 
calls and play the big shot. I’m sure it exists on Wall Street and in London 
and Rome, but Hollywood always gets the rap because there it’s so obvious. 
You’re dealing with one diva after another.”

He doesn’t think other towns are more fuelled by, say, sex or money or art? He 
twiddles his hearing aid to check he’s heard right. “Sexis the ultimate end. 
The ambition isso that they can fulfil their sexual drives; that’s what 
everybody is going for. This is what animals are. People are in a kind of 
meaningless jumble to recreate, and nobody knows why. The same woman who says, 
‘People are terrible, life is awful, it’s sad, it’s short, nasty and 
meaningless’ still wants to have a couple of children. It defies any intellect. 
It’s strictly emotional.”

Like all Allen’s work, Cafe Society is consumed by how we cope with mortality. 
Its directorfamously said 
<http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/1066-i-don-t-want-to-achieve-immortality-through-my-work-i>
 he’d like to achieve immortality through not dying, rather than his movies; 
his film has a Jewish gangster becoming Catholic on death row in search of 
consolation (just asWoody failed to in Hannah and her Sisters 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G4use18Z9Lc>). Isn’t this the world’s most 
urgent issue, I ask. If people could only accept death was the end, the likes 
of Isis would have more of a recruitment problem.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbNLUUfFLlQ0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbNLUUfFLlQ0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DbNLUUfFLlQ0&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Crisis in Six Scenes 
“I couldn’t speak for all suicide bombers,” he says mildly, fishing out the 
remote control for his hearing aid again, which forever makes you think he is 
trying to unlock a car. “But without a firm faith in an afterlife, many of them 
would not do those things. They do believe when they blow themselves up that 
there’s going to be positive payoff. That it isn’t simply going to be what it 
is, though some of them might be willing to do it anyhow, to consider it a 
noble sacrifice for a noble cause. They’re misguided, in my opinion.” He 
smiles. “But they don’t agree with me.”

What would he die for? Only his family, he thinks. Had he been 15 years older, 
he wouldn’t have felt compelled to actively serve in the war. “I can’t see 
myself in a ditch somewhere in the rain at night fighting in a jungle off the 
coast of Japan. I don’t think I’d hold up very well. I get annoyed when the air 
conditioning doesn’t work.”

Has he noticed any recent rise in antisemitism? Well, not personally, he says, 
sitting up a bit. But friends have. “It doesn’t surprise me. It’s in the nature 
of people to have someone to scapegoat. If there were no Jews in the world they 
would take it out on blacks. If no blacks, they’d move over to Catholics. No 
Catholics? Something else. Finally, if everyone is exactly the same, the 
left-handed people would start killing the right-handed people. You just need 
an other [on whom] to vent your hostility and frustration.”

He shrugs. “Hopefully, the wave will ebb and people will realise that’s not 
the problem and focus more on what the problems are. But the world is full of 
intolerance and prejudice. Freud said there would always be antisemitism 
because people are a sorry lot. And theyare a sorry lot.” He twinkles through 
the specs, left eye a little awry these days, like a Woody Allen action doll 
that’s been dropped. He’s tiny. Some stars are shorter than you expect; he 
seems, literally, still inside the TV.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F223bda0638e0a204cf6c0c4c0335eb65073e53b0%2F0_110_2022_2021%2F2022.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Woody%20Allen%3A%20'There%20are%20traumas%20in%20life%20that%20weaken%20us.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20has%20happened%20to%20me'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Woody%20Allen%3A%20%27There%20are%20traumas%20in%20life%20that%20weaken%20us.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20has%20happened%20to%20me%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F223bda0638e0a204cf6c0c4c0335eb65073e53b0%2F0_110_2022_2021%2F2022.jpg>
 Allen and Mia Farrow in 1989. Photograph: Ron Galella/WireImage 
Allen has long been resigned to life’s deep bleakness. He is the wise-cracking 
nihilist, jokes provoked by the need not to leap. Yet some cynicism seems to be 
distilling. While previous films left characters wrestling guilt, this last one 
metes out justice with a wallop. When he talks about the world being “full of 
terrified people walking round suffering tremendously”, it carries more charge 
than the old patter.

I suggest he’s getting tougher as he gets older. He chuckles and says the 
opposite is true. “I don’t believe in the Nietzschean notion that what doesn’t 
destroy you makes you stronger. You see these soldiers come back with PTSD; 
they’ve been to war and seen death and experienced these existential crises one 
after the other. There are traumas in life that weaken us for the future. And 
that’s what’s happened to me. The various slings and arrows of life have not 
strengthened me. I think I’m weaker. I think there are things I couldn’t take 
now that I would have been able to take when I was younger.”

It was in 1992 that everything changed. Allen left Mia Farrow for her adopted 
daughter, Soon-Yi Previn, then 21 – Farrow found out afterdiscovering intimate 
photos <http://www.vanityfair.com/magazine/1992/11/farrow199211>. Then followed 
a custody battle for their three children, Moses, Dylan and Ronan, then the
claim of molestation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/13/woody-allen-juicy-scandal> of 
Dylan, aged seven.Credible evidence 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1993/05/04/nyregion/doctor-cites-inconsistencies-in-dylan-farrow-s-statements.html>
 wasn’t found and the charge was not pursued. Yet the media trial continues. At 
Cannes came the grenade ofRonan’s Hollywood Reporter piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/11/ronan-farrow-condemns-media-woody-allen-allegations>
, attacking the festival for its celebration, stars for collaboration and the 
press for perceived cowardice. The next day, reporters raised it. Allen’s
response remained the same 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/12/woody-allen-ronan-farrow-cannes-cafe-society-film>
: he hadn’t read the piece, the law had been plain, and he hadsaid all he was 
going to 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/02/09/opinion/sunday/woody-allen-speaks-out.html?_r=0>
.

I get harassed all the time. But it doesn't affect me and I just have no 
interest in it

Last week, he reiterates his position. “I have no interest in all of that. I 
find that all tabloid stupidity. That situation had been thoroughly, thoroughly 
investigated up and down the line by New York social services in a14-month 
investigation 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1993/10/26/nyregion/agency-drops-abuse-inquiry-in-allen-case.html>
. It had been investigated by Yale and conclusions were clear and I have no 
interest in that whole situation. I get harassed all the time on it. But it 
doesn’t affect me and I just have no interest in it.”

He sounds weary, sad, flat. He’s not used the word “harassed” in relation to 
the case before; today he uses it twice, the second time directing me toan 
article rebutting Ronan 
<https://ronanfarrowletter.wordpress.com/2016/05/30/hard-questions-for-ronan-farrow-an-open-letter/>
 (“probably the best thing written on this since the whole harassment started … 
mature and not vitriolic and decent”). Which suggests that he may read some 
press, and that he is affected by it.

The opposite would be impossible. Even dismissed allegations can smear a career
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/13/woody-allen-polanski-cosby-dangerous-cannes-ronan-farrow>
. And while he andMoses are now reconciled 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/dylan-farrows-brother-moses-mia-farrow-woody-allen/story?id=22377303>
, Allen is estranged from Dylan and Ronan, despite a judgerejecting the 
application 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/01/27/the-woody-allen-allegations-not-so-fast.html>
 that his adoptive parenthood of the former two be revoked (meanwhileMia has 
hinted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/02/woody-allen-son-ronan-frank-sinatra-mia-farrow>
 Ronan is actually Frank Sinatra’s son). Has the whole thing altered his view 
of the world? “No, no,” he chuckles. “It confirmed all my misanthropic 
feelings.”

Allen’s strategy, then, is to throw up his hands and stop his ears. He may 
have an iPhone, but it’s strictly for calls, jazz and the weather app. And this 
determined detachment would help explain why, as the web rakes over the 
details, 24 years on, Allen remains remarkably frank, even blithe, discussing 
his private life.

Of his wife and the daughters (Bechet, 17 and Manzie, 16) they adopted soon 
after their wedding in 1997, he speaks often, fondly – and oddly off-message. 
Of parenting, he tells me: “You can count on them until adolescence. You’re 
king in the house and you’re much needed and much loved and depended on. Once 
they start to come into their adulthood they start to feel their oats, then, 
all of a sudden, it’s a different story.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d93f0d942c8cc654335f4e584849ebf5b0cc0aa%2F0_204_2292_1375%2F2292.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Woody%20Allen%3A%20'There%20are%20traumas%20in%20life%20that%20weaken%20us.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20has%20happened%20to%20me'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Woody%20Allen%3A%20%27There%20are%20traumas%20in%20life%20that%20weaken%20us.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20has%20happened%20to%20me%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d93f0d942c8cc654335f4e584849ebf5b0cc0aa%2F0_204_2292_1375%2F2292.jpg>
 With his wife Soon-Yi in Cannes in 2015. Photograph: Pascal Le Segretain/Getty 
Images 
Relationships, he says, again unguarded, “are not my strong point in life. 
I’ve always been dependent on the generosity of the woman; nothing I could do 
ever seduced them.” That was the case with Diane Keaton, with whom he is still 
close: “She had come to the conclusion she liked me. It was always the other 
person who decided.”

He happily chats about how nice meals often end in spousal rows, but says that 
it is because of Soon-Yi that the man once defined by his psychoanalysis hasn’t 
seen a shrink in years. “I don’t have to any more. I’m functioning OK. I’m in a 
happy marriage. I haven’t needed that support.”

Do others come to him for advice? He reels at the idea. “I don’t have that 
many friends. I lead a very isolated life. I come home and I’m with my family. 
I go to dinner with a few friends and, every once in a while, they’ll ask for 
advice, but it’s never existential.”

And, after dinner, he heads home, turns on the TV for 20 minutes “and I’m 
asleep”. Never a comedy – he has never seen anything in the same genre as his 
Amazon show – and if not news, baseball, which “always interests me much more 
than any kind of show”. But the New York teamshave struck out this season 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/>, so he has resorted to the Olympics, with 
moderate rewards.

“I don’t find it that thrilling to watch people swim up and back across a 
pool. I need a more complex sport – something that has got a different 
narrative to it than just a sudden burst of speed or a quick jump. And I watch 
any sports. I can watch timber sports – two guys sawing down a tree in a 
contest.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a3f3ac975e526a9fe0a74646aca4af2e07f44a%2F302_5_1586_1981%2F1586.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Woody%20Allen%3A%20'There%20are%20traumas%20in%20life%20that%20weaken%20us.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20has%20happened%20to%20me'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Woody%20Allen%3A%20%27There%20are%20traumas%20in%20life%20that%20weaken%20us.%20That%E2%80%99s%20what%20has%20happened%20to%20me%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F25%2Fwoody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9a3f3ac975e526a9fe0a74646aca4af2e07f44a%2F302_5_1586_1981%2F1586.jpg>
 In athletic form on the tennis court in 1977. Photograph: Media 
Press/Rex/Shutterstock 
That’s one of the few he has yet to try: the young Woody was surprisingly 
sporty and his loss of athletic ability is his chief regret about ageing. “I’ve 
been very lucky. I’m in good health – at least I think I am. Dementia hasn’t 
set in yet to any noticeable degree. Everything is fine, but I’m always 
consumed with sorrow that I can’t get out on a baseball field and play it the 
way I could. That, for me, is the most poignant.”

“I’d like to race against Usain Bolt,” he adds wistfully. “But I’m not sure 
how well I’d do. I was always a very fast runner. But it’s possible that while 
I’m still running, he would be doing his post-race interview.”

Late-stage Woody Allen, then, is a man who gets through by playing ball, even 
if the sport is stacked against him. By disregarding the results and declining 
to dwell. “You’re probably happier in life if you can forget things,” he 
advises.

And yet, there may be a coda. Allen doesn’t permit himself the “indulgence of 
nostalgia”, but, “sometimes, when I’m alone, I think maybe it would be a nice 
life to stop making movies and write maybe an autobiography”. It might be 
“pleasant” to relive his childhood, like he does when he reminisces with his 
sister,Letty <http://nypost.com/2011/10/16/woody-and-his-sister/>.

Yet writing a memoir would also require resurfacing less happy events, right? 
Putting them on paper. Well, yes. “I would have to go through the many regrets 
in my life and the many turbulences. But that’s OK. It’s conflict and 
excitement. It would be nice to write that out.”

• Café Society <https://www.theguardian.com/film/caf--society> opens in the UK 
on 2 September and Crisis in Six Scenes begins on Amazon Prime on 30 September.

• This article was amended on 26 August. The original misheard “feel their 
oats” as “field their oats”. This has been corrected.
 