
Last week, the Fair Work Commission forbade unionists from saying mean things 
about contractors undercutting sacked workers at the Carlton and United 
Breweries site in Abbotsford, Melbourne.

Specifically, the commission’s order prohibited certain union officials 
<https://www.fwc.gov.au/documents/awardsandorders/html/pr584404.htm> from 
“call[ing] out … using offensive or insulting names including ‘scab’, ‘dog’, 
‘fuckwit’, ‘cunt’ [or] ‘rat’” to those now labouring at thebrewery in place of 
staff locked out some months ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/30/dont-let-the-election-distract-you-from-whats-happening-to-workers>
.

In recent times, we’ve heard a great deal about the importance of being able 
to to insult and offend whomsoever we choose, with Cory Bernardi managing to 
coralalmost every Coalition backbench senator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/cory-bernardis-racial-discrimination-revolt-supported-by-up-to-20-senators>
 behind his crusade to protect that glorious liberty from the Racial 
Discrimination Act.

Cory Bernardi is more dangerous than One Nation – his party is in power | 
Jason Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/forget-one-nation-cory-bernardi-is-the-politician-to-watch>
“This sort of taking offence at everything has gone too far within our 
society,” Eric Abetz told the press, as he signed his name to Bernardi’s motion.

You’d think, then, that the senators would be aghast about the nanny state 
imposing its delicate sensibilities in, of all places, a brewery, especially 
through a ban far more direct and immediate than any order yet enforced through 
the RDA.

Let’s remember, while Andrew Bolt might have been dragged to court under the 
legislation, the guilty finding against him didn’t result in jail or a fine. 
His columns weren’t declared illegal, they weren’t withdrawn and Bolt wasn’t 
even made to apologise.

A few sentences were appended clarifying factually incorrect claims. That was 
it.

Gallileo, he ain’t.

Everyone knows that, had a judge decreed that Bolt couldn’t write or say 
particular words, white conservative tears would have flowed into a deluge of 
Biblical proportions, a great ocean of salty outrage and self-pity.

But that hypocrisy’s typical of the so-called free speech debate in Australia, 
where there’s almost an inverse proportion between the severity of censorship 
and the degree of outrage of the so-called libertarians.

You could not find, for instance, a more draconian violation of speech rights 
than that underpinning the offshore detention of asylum seekers. The 
immigration department flatly refuses to release basic information about its 
activities; journalists lack access to camps in which staff face two years jail 
for speaking out about what they see; refugees remain detained for years 
without charge in isolated facilities with little contact with the outside 
world.

Yet, almost without exception, the senators campaigning for freedom 
enthusiastically support a refugee policy that couldn’t exist without 
censorship.

There’s an especial irony to the indifference shown by the free speech 
warriors to the CUB case, since the ban imposed on the word “scab” actually 
illustrates a genuine problem with the sorts of legislation that our freedom 
senators hate.

The legal system (almost by definition) simultaneously abstracts and 
individualises behaviour it seeks to criminalise, stripping it from the context 
from which it derives meaning. As a result, there’s a long history of measures 
passed by those seeking to deter racism or sexism and then being hijacked by 
the privileged to use against the oppressed (much as David Leyonhjelm’s seeking 
to do with hisstunt prosecution of Fairfax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/15/david-leyonhjelm-racial-discrimination-complaint-angry-white-male-fairfax-18c>
).

We can see something similar taking place in Abbottsford, where the 
commission’s ruling derives from amendments introduced into the Fair Work Act 
by the Gillard government in 2013 to combat workplace bullying.

As workplace relations minister Bill Shorten championed the changes 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/workplace-bullies-face-10000-fine-in-gillard-plan/story-fncynjr2-1226658053191>
, saying they’d help combat toxic work environments.

Instead, as the Australian Financial Review notes 
<http://www.afr.com/news/economy/employment/labors-bullying-laws-turned-on-union-pickets-20160823-gqzcav>
, the laws have given bosses an important new weapon against trade unions. The 
article cites employment lawyer Stephen Jauncey, who thinks employers could now 
use the amendments to combat “community protests” – even if strikers aren’t 
involved and the protests don’t involve obstructions, assault or trespass. 
Industrial relations barrister Stuart Wood, QC, seems equally bullish.

“There’s a need for quick, effective and cheap remedies [to end pickets] and 
this is a good example of someone being creative and innovative in achieving 
that,” he says.

How did measures intended to protect workers become a weapon against them?

Again, the problem’s one of context.

The Fair Work Commission describes “belittling or humiliating comments” as an 
example of bullying.

Is it belittling to call someone a scab? The novelist Jack London certainly 
thought so <http://www.iamll1005.org/definition_of_a_scab.htm>. He wrote:

After God had finished the rattlesnake, the toad, the vampire, He had some 
awful substance left with which He made a scab. A scab is a two-legged animal 
with a cork-screw soul, a water-logged brain, a combination backbone of jelly 
and glue. Where others have hearts, he carries a tumor of rotten principles. 
When a scab comes down the street, men turn their backs and angels weep in 
heaven, and the Devil shuts the gates of Hell to keep him out. No man has a 
right to scab so long as there is a pool of water to drown his carcass in, or a 
rope long enough to hang his body with.

Not exactly a compliment, then. 

But in another passage 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/past/issues/04jan/london.htm>, London explained why 
scabs had earned such opprobrium.

To strike at a man’s food and shelter is to strike at his life, and in a 
society organized on a tooth-and-nail basis, such an act … [is] menacing and 
terrible. It is for this reason that a laborer is so fiercely hostile to 
another laborer who offers to work for less pay or longer hours … To sell his 
day’s work for two dollars instead of two dollars and a half means that he, his 
wife, and his children will not have so good a roof over their heads, such warm 
clothes on their backs, such substantial food in their stomachs.

That’s a pretty good summation of what’s taking place in Abbottsford, where 55 
workers have been sacked – and then invited to apply for their old jobs on 
terms that, in some cases, amount to pay cut of 65%.

In the face of union protests, a contract company called Programmed has 
engaged temporary employees to keep the brewery operating. Those individuals 
are behaving precisely as London describes: they’re driving down others’ wages 
and conditions for their own benefit.

No doubt it’s unpleasant (even humiliating) for the contractors to hear 
themselves described as “scabs” (or “dogs”, “fuckwits”, etc). But the truth 
doesn’t change according to how someone feels about it.

The Fair Work Act defines “bullying” as behaviour that’s “unreasonable”. Is it 
unreasonable to dissuade strikebreakers from destroying hard-won awards? 
Certainly, CUB management thinks so but one suspects that most of us, if we 
were confronting the prospect of either unemployment or a massive pay cut, 
would form a different opinion.

But the legislation doesn’t make such distinctions, enabling a contractor 
seeking to pulverise working conditions to get an order restraining the union 
in the name of “health and safety”.

Don't let the election distract you from what's happening to workers | Van 
Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/30/dont-let-the-election-distract-you-from-whats-happening-to-workers>
There’s one other point worth noting about the CUB case. In comments to the 
Financial Review, ETU state secretary Troy Gray explains that “this dispute is 
not going to turn on whether you can call a ‘scab’ a ‘scab’.”

In the real world, censorship cases are almost never solely to do with 
censorship. It’s far more common that the people being silenced are menaced in 
a variety of other ways as well.

The detainees in Nauru and Manus Island, for instance, want to have their 
voices heard. But much more than that, they want to be resettled.

In the same way, the unionists at Abbottsford are being censored. But, as Troy 
Gray says, that’s only a minor part of what’s at stake.

Again, the comparison with Bernardi and his ilk could not be greater. Could 
you imagine the yelps of anguish and outrage were the wages of all parliament’s 
senators were suddenly cut by, oh I don’t know, 65%?

But, of course, that’s not on the agenda. For the campaign against section 18C 
is being pushed by the most privileged people in the nation, a crew who invoke 
high principles only to obscure how little skin they have in the game.
 