
1) A result for the ages

Some things, like a grown adult in a suit happily gamboling around town on a 
child's scooter, force you to stop, stare and rub your eyes in disbelief. You 
just do not expect to see it, just as you do not expect to flick through the 
results pages and find yourself confronted by the news that Armenia, who lost 
1-0 at home to Malta last Friday and recently drew 1-1 in Luxembourg, won 4-0 
in Denmark. The victory will probably not be enough for Armenia to qualify for 
next summer'sWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>
 given that they are fourth in Group B, three points behind the Czech Republic 
and four behind Bulgaria, but it will still go down as one of their greatest 
ever nights.

Lest we forget, Denmark were good enough to beat Holland at Euro 2012 and, 
with a bit more luck, could have qualified for the last eight at Germany's 
expense. Yet they were humiliated on Tuesday night. "It's the worst night of my 
footballing life," Denmark's coach, Morten Olsen, said. "It's incomprehensible 
that we couldn't perform better, but it's 100% my fault." The newspaper, Ekstra 
Bladet, was less generous in its assessment, telling six players to "change 
sport" and givingAndreas Bjelland, Christian Eriksen, Simon Kjaer, Simon 
Poulsen and Dennis Rommedahl 0/6 
<http://ekstrabladet.dk/sport/fodbold/landsholdsfodbold/vm2014/article2007811.ece>
 for their part in one of the most embarrassing defeats in Denmark's history. 
Eriksen, the paper said, will be staying at Ajax if there are many more 
performances as wretched as this one. Kjaer was "completely hopeless" and 
Poulsen a "disaster".

Denmark started badly, a mistake from Kjaer allowing Yura Movsisyan to score 
after 27 seconds, and it got worse from there. After 19 minutes, Aras Ozbiliz 
doubled Armenia's lead, before Movsisyan, who plays for Spartak Moscow, scored 
his second after an hour, and with nine minutes left Shakhtar Donetsk's Henrikh 
Mkhitaryan showedwhy Liverpool are after him 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jun/03/liverpool-henrik-mkhitaryan-shakhtar-donetsk>
 with a fine solo effort. The Danish fans still left in the stadium greeted the 
goal with ironic applause.

2) Mascherano sees red

Anything André Bikey can do, Javier Mascherano can do better. Bikey was sent 
off in Cameroon's win over Ghana in an Africa Cup of Nations semi-final for 
pushing a medic, missing the final as a consequence, andnow Mascherano has 
emulated him 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jun/12/javier-mascherano-sent-off-buggy-driver>
, earning a bizarre red card for kicking a medic during Argentina's draw with 
Ecuador in Quito. There were four minutes remaining when Mascherano, who had 
suffered an injury, was being taken off the pitch on a buggy and suddenly all 
hell broke loose. Television replays showed that water was squirted in 
Mascherano's direction and his response was to kick the shoulder of the man 
driving the buggy, before reacting with incredulity when he was sent off and 
pulling out his best lemme-at-him-lemme-at-him routine as his team-mate, 
Ezequiel Lavezzi, held him back. Mascherano apologised afterwards, although 
this is not the first time he's made a show of himself – who could forget his 
tantrum when he wassent off for dissent 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2008/mar/24/newsstory.sport10> when 
Liverpool lost to Manchester United in 2008?

3) Cameron shines in midfield

One of the most pressing issues Mark Hughes faces at Stoke is to rejuvenate a 
midfield that was painfully drab and lumpen under Tony Pulis, who was 
ultimately unable to construct a team that could offer anything beyond huff and 
puff. It is unlikely that Hughes, or anyone for that matter, will have been 
looking at Geoff Cameron as the answer to that particular problem. Indeed, the 
reaction was slightly apprehensive when Cameron was named in central midfield 
forthe USA's match against Panama 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jun/12/world-cup-qualifier-usa-panama-live>
 but he confounded those low expectations with a composed display and even 
played a hand in Eddie Johnson's goal. Perhaps he has been wasted at full-back.

4) South Korea close to booking their place

The stage had been set for Uzbekistan to qualify for the World Cup for the 
first time,eight years after they were controversially denied a place at the 
2006 finals 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/blog/2013/jun/11/world-cup-2014-uzbekistan>
, and to do so they had to win away in South Korea. Yet while Uzbekistan were 
hoping to make history, South Korea knew they would be closer to qualifying for 
their eighth consecutive tournament if they won and Akmal Shorakhmedov's 
first-half own goal was enough for them. It was a bad night for Uzbekistan, who 
slumped to third place after Iran beat Lebanon, a victory which ended Qatar's 
hopes of a trip to Brazil next year. Still, full steam ahead for 2022.

5) Cavani makes up for Suárez's absence

It has been a surprise to see Uruguay struggle to the extent that it remains a 
possibility that the Copa América champions might not qualify but it seems that 
they are finally getting their act together after their 1-0 victory in 
Venezuela. The win moved them into fifth place, which would put them into an 
intercontinental play-off, and above Venezuela on goal difference, although 
they are five points adrift of Chile. However, they could take encouragement 
from winning without the suspended Luis Suárez. Edinson Cavani,who could join 
Chelsea from Napoli this summer 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/jun/10/edinson-cavani-jose-mourinho-chelsea>
, ensured Suárez's absence was not felt by scoring the only goal after 28 
minutes.

• THIS ARTICLE HAS BEEN AMENDED TO NOTE THAT SOUTH KOREA HAVE NOT YET QUALIFIED
 