
Group B Armenia v Denmark

Three months ago the Armenians stunned Morten Olsen's side in Copenhagen, 
winning 4-0 and blowing Group B wide open. Henrikh Mkhitaryan scored a 
brilliant goal and was outstanding throughout.

Can he repeat the trick to see Armenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/armenia> (population of around three 
million) pull three points clear of the Danes and possibly leapfrog Bulgaria 
and the Czech Republic into second place behind Italy? Well, Olsen certainly 
does not hope so. "I am changing four or five players from that game to this 
one and we will be prepared for everything they throw at us."

 P W D L F A Pts

Italy 7 5 2 0 13 4 17

Bulgaria 7 2 4 1 11 5 10

Czech Republic 7 2 3 2 7 6 9

Armenia 7 3 0 4 8 9 9

Denmark 7 2 3 2 8 10 9

Malta 7 1 0 6 3 16 3

Group D Romania v Turkey

Holland are the runaway leaders in this group, leaving it to Romania, Hungary 
and Turkey to scrap it out for second place.

It has been a tumultuous few months for Turkey. The Abdullah Avci era ended 
with the national side slipping into fourth place after dropping points to 
Hungary and a 1-0 home defeat against Romania. The Turkish Football Federation 
decided enough was enough and recalled the current Galatasaray manager, Fatih 
Terim, for his third stint at the helm of the national side.

The appointment was well received by the players. Arda Turan summed up the 
mood felt in the camp by saying: "The greatest manager in Turkish football 
history has returned to guide us." Terim led his side to a 5-0 win over Andorra 
and while beating one of Europe's minnows is hardly anything to get too excited 
about, the win helped restore some confidence.

Turkey have to defeat Romania away from home if they are to pull off a mini 
miracle and reach the play-off stages for World Cup 2014. Terim is fully aware 
of the task at hand: "We are going to do absolutely everything to win, we have 
nothing to lose, if you have lost everything you fear nothing."

Romania are coming off the back of a convincing 3-0 victory over Hungary and 
go into the game against Turkey in second position. Despite his side being full 
of confidence Romania's manager Victor Piturca will be taking no chances 
against Turkey. "Fatih Terim is always capable of pulling off a miracle, we 
have to be very careful."

Preview written by www.turkish-football.com <http://www.turkish-football.com/>
. Follow them on Twitterhere <https://twitter.com/Turkish_Futbol>. 

 P W D L F A Pts

Holland 7 6 1 0 22 4 19 

Romania 7 4 1 2 13 10 13 

Hungary 7 3 2 2 13 11 11 

Turkey 7 3 1 3 12 7 10 

Estonia 7 2 1 4 5 11 7 

Andorra 7 0 0 7 0 22 0

Group E Iceland v Albania

Iceland's chances of finishing second are well and truly alive after their own 
"Miracle of Berne" last Friday when they came back from 4-1 to draw 4-4 with 
the group leaders, Switzerland. Eidur Gudjohnsen, now 34 and playing for Club 
Brugge in Belgium, said it was "one of the most unbelievable matches" of his 
career – and he has been through a few things on the football pitch.

Johann Berg Gudmundsson was the hero with a hat-trick – in a collapse the 
Switzerland player Stephan Lichtsteiner labelled "stupid" – and he will look to 
add to his tally againstAlbania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> 
on Tuesday night.

Iceland, managed by the former Sweden coach Lars Lagerback, and Albania are 
level on 10 points, one point behind second-placed Norway. Albania's hopes of 
reaching Brazil were dented by Friday's 1-0 defeat by Slovenia but, as their 
coach, the former Serie A journeyman Gianni De Biasi, said after the game: 
"It's lucky we won't play [the Slovenia goalkeeper] Samir Handanovic every 
game."

 P W D L F A Pts

Switzerland 7 4 3 0 12 5 15

Norway 7 3 2 2 9 7 11

Albania 7 3 1 3 7 7 10

Iceland 7 3 1 3 12 13 10

Slovenia 7 3 0 4 9 10 9

Cyprus 7 1 1 5 4 11 4

Group F Russia v Israel

It would be extraordinary if Russia and Fabio Capello missed out on second 
place as well but that could well happen should they lose to Israel in St 
Petersburg. Capello is on a reported £7m a year – and turned down an offer to 
manage Paris St-Germain in the summer – but still his team lost 1-0 in Northern 
Ireland and are now only three points ahead of third-placedIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/israel>.

True, they are still only two points behind the leaders Portugal, who have 
played a game more, and Capello said on Monday that he still hopes to qualify 
as group winner while the Israel captain, Yossi Benayoun, said he believes his 
side can repeat the shock victory of five years ago, when a late goal saw 
Israel win 1-0. "Back then the game was only important forRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/russia>, this time it is important for 
both of us. Hopefully we can repeat that result this week."

 P W D L F A Pts

Portugal 8 5 2 1 16 8 17

Russia 7 5 0 2 12 3 15

Israel 7 3 3 1 16 9 12

Northern Ireland 7 1 3 3 6 11 6

Azerbaijan 8 0 5 3 4 10 5

Luxembourg 7 0 3 4 4 17 3

Group I Belarus v France

France find themselves in second place, three points behind the group leaders, 
Spain, and with a tricky game in Gomel coming up. Didier Deschamps' team have 
won only three of their six games and scoring, in particular, has been a 
problem with Karim Benzema going a remarkable 20 hours and 26 minutes without 
finding the net for club and country.

The Real Madrid forward was taken off after an hour in the 0–0 draw against 
Georgia on Friday but Deschamps defended his players over the weekend, saying: 
"I don't have any miracle solutions but we shouldn't beat ourselves up either. 
We just need to keep persevering to reverse this tendency."

Belarus are unlikely to be able to catch France but a win could open the door 
for third-placed Finland, who play Georgia. It is still unlikely but it still 
could come down to a France v Finland decider in the last game. That would be a 
nervous 90 minutes for Deschamps and his goal-shy forwards.

 P W D L F A Pts

Spain 6 4 2 0 10 2 14

France 6 3 2 1 8 4 11

Finland 6 1 3 2 4 6 6

Georgia 6 1 2 3 3 7 5

Belarus 6 1 1 4 4 10 4
 