
Renewed fears about the eurozone hit world markets on Monday morning, ramping 
up the cost of insuring Greek and Italian debt and sending share prices 
tumbling.

Ratings agencies delivered damaging judgments on both Greece and Italy's debt 
positions late last week and over the weekend, with political uncertainty in 
Spain adding to worries.

The euro fell one and a half cents against the dollar overnight as investors 
piled out of the currency. That triggered a fall in the price of oil, which is 
denominated in dollars and tends to fall when the dollar rises, because demand 
is hit by the fall in global buyers' purchasing power. Brent oil futures were 
down by $3 a barrel, or almost 3%, to $109.

Greek prime minister George Papandreou is to discuss emergency measures to cut 
his country's deficit on Monday with his cabinet. The latest selloff in world 
markets was prompted by theFitch downgrade of Greek debt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marketforceslive/2011/may/20/ftse-falls-on-greek-woes>
 to a negative outlook on Friday. The cost of insuring Greek debt rose again 
this morning on the back of the sell-off, with five-year credit default swaps 
(CDS) on Greek debt rising 50 basis points to 1390, according to data provider 
Markit.

Over the weekend Standard & Poor's downgraded Italy's credit rating outlook to 
negative, on the basis that political issues could impact its deficit reduction 
plans. Five year CDS on Italian government debt rose 15 basis points to 176, 
Markit said.

In Spain the losses suffered by the ruling Socialist party in the country's 
local elections has further undermined confidence in the country's austerity 
measures.

The weakness in the eurozone prompted markets to fall across the world. The 
Japanese Nikkei fell 1.5% overnight, and the FTSE 100 fell by more than 100 
points to 5847.47, a drop of 1.7%. The Dow Jones industrial average in the US 
is expected to show a fall of around 100 points, 1%, when it opens later.
 