
The final of The X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor> failed to arrest its 
disappointing recent ratings as the BBC’s Strictly Come Dancing drew 4.5 
million more viewers than the long-running ITV singing contest.

The Strictly semi-final, in which sports presenter Ore Oduba topped the 
leaderboard, attracted 46.5% of viewers, with 10 million tuning in and 10.9 
million at its peak.

The X Factor, which will remain on our screens until at least 2019 after ITV 
signed a new three-year deal withSimon Cowell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/simoncowell>, had hoped that its grandstand 
finale including performances from Kylie Minogue and Little Mix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/10/x-factor-promises-grandstand-finale-amid-plummeting-ratings>
 would help it fight back in the ratings against Strictly.

The ITV <https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv> show, in which boy band 5 
After Midnight were knocked out of the running, got an audience of 5.5 million, 
giving it a 27% share of viewers, peaking at 6.2 million.

The figures were The X Factor’s lowest for a Saturday night final programme – 
Matt Terry and Saara Aalto will battle it out in the second half of the final 
on Sunday night – 400,000 below last year’s final, the previous low. In 2014, 
8.4 million tuned in to the Saturday edition of the final. Saturday’s audience 
was also down on a week ago, when 5.8 million tuned in to watch the semi-final.

It continues a pattern of declining ratings for the show, which is in its 12th 
year, which also threatens the prospects of successful acts post X Factor. Last 
year’s winner, Louisa Johnson, who was the show’s youngest champion, had the 
lowest chart entry for a winner’s single to date, a far cry from the major 
chart success enjoyed by the likes ofOne Direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/one-direction> and Leona Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/leonalewis>. 

Unlike in previous years, when the finalists covered existing hits as their 
prospective first single, each act this year has had their own track written 
especially for them by Ed Sheeran, with all profits going to charity.

But this overhaul and other changes initiated by Cowell have failed to prevent 
it losing out to Strictly throughout the series. It also recorded its lowest 
launch ratings in 10 years.

ITV pointed out that 38% of 16- to 34-year-olds tuned in on Saturday, making 
it the most watched programme of the night for that desirable demographic, it 
said.

But Planet Earth II has secured a larger proportion of the sought-after 
16-to-34 audience than Cowell’s talent show. Faced by questions about the 
declining performance of the channel’s defining programmes in recent years, ITV 
has previously highlighted the fact that a large proportion of Strictly’s 
audience are aged over 55.

 