
In news as surprising as reports that Fozzie Bear probably has a Miles Davis 
poster on his bedroom wall, we can reveal that Xena Warrior Princess is gay. Or 
at least she will be when the series gets a reboot later this year.

In a recent Tumblr Q&A 
<http://okbjgm.tumblr.com/post/140591060316/do-you-think-the-fans-reaction-to-lexas-death>
, the screenwriter and executive producer Javier Grillo-Marxuach, who is 
working with Rob Tapert and Sam “Spiderman” Raimi to bring Xena back to our 
screens, wrote: “There is no reason to bring back Xena if it is not there for 
the purpose of fully exploring a relationship that could only be shown 
subtextually in first-run syndication in the 1990s.”

The relationship to which he is alluding is the leather-studded 
“companionship” between Xena (played, much to the delight of New Zealanders 
everywhere, by Lucy Lawless) and Gabrielle (played by Renee O’Connor). It might 
have taken over 20 years to get there, but the girls are finally ready to make 
it official. This, explained Grillo-Marxauch, is because the show “will also 
express my view of the world – which is only further informed by what is 
happening right now – and is not too difficult to know what that is if you do 
some digging”. Unlike in 1995, gay marriage is now on the statute books or at 
least high on the news agenda in most countries where Xena will be syndicated. 
Star Wars: The Force Awakens and Mad Max: Fury Road have shown that 
multi-million dollar global franchises can bear the weight of speaking female 
characters. So a gay female lead character isn’t just a fun idea, but a viable 
proposition.

Of course, gay women are hardly a rarity in sci-fi, both on our screens and 
watching from our sofas. Gillian Anderson has had a huge gay following since 
she strode on to our televisions as Special Agent Dana Scully back in 1993; in 
1995 Jadzia Dax in Deep Space Nine had her first lesbian kiss (albeit in a 
wormhole between thealpha and gamma quadrants 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galactic_quadrant_%28Star_Trek%29> of the 
galaxy); Admiral Helena Cain, played by heartthrob Michelle Forbes had a 
girlfriend in Battlestar Galactica and, more recently, Doctor Who’s Madame 
Vastra and Jenny Flint shared the show’s first lesbian kiss (yes, one of them 
is a lizard-woman but it still counts).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fxena-lesbian-warrior-princess-have-the-rules-of-tv-just-been-rewritten%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5579cf624a2e68c3c5c7795ed82ec9aaded02365%2F0_0_3449_3875%2F3449.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Xena%3A%20Lesbian%20Warrior%20Princess%20%E2%80%93%20have%20the%20rules%20of%20TV%20just%20been%20rewritten%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fxena-lesbian-warrior-princess-have-the-rules-of-tv-just-been-rewritten%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Xena%3A%20Lesbian%20Warrior%20Princess%20%E2%80%93%20have%20the%20rules%20of%20TV%20just%20been%20rewritten%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fxena-lesbian-warrior-princess-have-the-rules-of-tv-just-been-rewritten%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5579cf624a2e68c3c5c7795ed82ec9aaded02365%2F0_0_3449_3875%2F3449.jpg>
 ‘The lesbian gaze often overlaps with the heterosexual male one’ … Xena in 
action. Photograph: Channel 5 
Television <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> producers have 
always been happy to include lesbian storylines in their shows, with the minor 
proviso that any relationship between women is either happening in another 
galaxy far far away, or that any sapphic antics take place in actual space, or 
that one of the women is wearing a rubber reptile costume. Just like socialism, 
multiculturalism, feminism and most other isms you care to mention, lesbian 
relationships have often been found in popular culture disguised through the 
alien, zero-gravity, intergalactic lens of science fiction because that is the 
easiest way to sneak them into public consciousness. And, for the thousands of 
young women and girls who have rewound and rewatched those few fleeting moments 
of lesbian lizard kissing or space admiral affection, sci-fi has acted as a 
catalyst – helping them to place their sexuality in a recognisable cultural 
context.

When it comes to Xena, there is also the obvious plus that the lesbian gaze 
often overlaps with the heterosexual male gaze. So, for male screenwriters, 
producers and directors, it isn’t a huge leap of imagination to create a 
character that appeals to a lesbian audience. To put it bluntly, you put a 
woman in a leather-strapped shiny-tit shield, send her jogging over a hill – 
and literally everybody’s happy.

So, while the makers of Xena: Warrior Princess should be applauded for finally 
writing an overt gay relationship, is it really breaking new ground? Or is the 
reboot just pulling at some low-hanging fruit? Well, to quote the show’s 
opening, “In a time <http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/InAWorld> of 
ancient Gods, Warlords and Kings, a land in turmoil cried out for a hero ... 
She was Xena.” So, you know, fingers crossed.
 