
The idea that one of America’s most talismanic businesses – and the world’s 
biggest company by market value – might one day come to rely on China for its 
growth would have seemed strange just a decade ago. But foriPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> maker Apple, what happens on 
the other side of the world is suddenly crucial to its future.

Speaking to analysts last week as the company released its fourth-quarter 
earnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/26/apple-iphone-sales-slowdown-2007-drop-holiday>
, chief executive Tim Cook couldn’t assuage concerns. While proclaiming the 
“best results ever” in greater China, with revenues up 14% to more than $18bn, 
he also admitted that “we began to see some signs of economic softness [there] 
earlier this month, most notably in Hong Kong.” The shares, already down from 
$130 last May to $100, clattered down another few dollars.

Cook emphasised that he remained “confident about the long-term potential of 
the China market”. There again, on previous occasions Cook has been equally 
confident about the long-term future of the iPad – and its sales have now 
fallen for eight quarters in row.

Now Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> faces three key 
challenges in the Chinese market, the world’s largest for smartphones: the 
economic headwinds and falling share prices cutting into consumer spending and 
confidence; the saturated market; and the intensifying competition from far 
cheaper homegrown rivals.

China’s phone market, which accounted for a third of all smartphone sales 
worldwide in 2015, is already slowing as the number of first-time phone buyers 
declines and people delay replacement purchases. A year ago, phones were being 
replaced on average after just 13 months; now that period is lengthening. 
According to Woody Oh, an analyst at research group Strategy Analytics, total 
Chinese smartphone sales in October-December actually fell by 4%, to 118m; 
Apple sold 15.5m phones there, up from 13.5m a year before, while its worldwide 
sales remained flat at 74.4m.

But that was only enough to make Apple the third-biggest supplier behind local 
firms Huawei (pronounced “Hoo-wah-way”) andXiaomi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/xiaomi> (“she-yow-mee”), which each 
sold nearly 18m units. And just behind Apple were two more local rivals, Vivo 
and Oppo.

All of the rivals offer much cheaper products, running Android software 
(without Google’s services inside China; with them outside) and they have seen 
scorching growth in 2015.

Huawei principally builds telecoms network equipment, but has been solidly 
expanding its handset business. Almost half of the 108m it turned out in 2015 
were exported. Xiaomi had aimed for 100m in total, but slow first-half sales 
cut that to 70m for the year, of which 90% were sold in China. Oppo, meanwhile, 
has grown by 67% in the year, shifting 50m units worldwide.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fapple-xiaomi-vivo-oppo-challengers-leading-charge-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f4d12ad2aa565038a6a5c92013d4b6c6b2fe96a%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Xiaomi%2C%20Vivo%20and%20Oppo%3A%20the%20challengers%20leading%20China%E2%80%99s%20charge%20against%20Apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fapple-xiaomi-vivo-oppo-challengers-leading-charge-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Xiaomi%2C%20Vivo%20and%20Oppo%3A%20the%20challengers%20leading%20China%E2%80%99s%20charge%20against%20Apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fapple-xiaomi-vivo-oppo-challengers-leading-charge-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3f4d12ad2aa565038a6a5c92013d4b6c6b2fe96a%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Shops advertising the iPhone 6S in Shenzhen. Photograph: Bobby Yip/Reuters 
The absence of Samsung, the world’s most prolific smartphone maker, from 
China’s top five may seem surprising. But it has been hurt more than Apple by 
low-cost rivals in the past two years; Xiaomi pushed it from the top spot in 
2014, and the local competition has eaten away at its sales.

Now, though, those rivals are trying to take a bigger bite out of Apple. But 
they are coming up against the power of its brand – which, so far, remains 
highly aspirational in China.

Unlike phone makers using Google’s Android, Apple – which writes its own iOS 
software – remains able to command premium pricing, and more.

The dollar’s strength means that in China an entry-level iPhone 6S 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone-6s> that in the US costs $649 is 
priced at the equivalent of $833. And this in a country where the mean income 
is 56,339 yuan – about £6,000 or $8,500. The cheapest iPhone thus costs more 
than a month’s wages; in the west, that used to be the measure of how much to 
spend on a diamond engagement ring.

Yet it is a price people have been willing to pay, specifically because it is 
expensive. TheFT’s Jonathan Margolis recalled last week 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/705a5f38-c0fa-11e5-9fdb-87b8d15baec2.html> how “when 
I used a nice Android [phone] in the company of a friend in Shanghai, she 
advised me that I looked ‘like a poor man from the country’.” For urban 
dwellers, having an iPhone, or a phone easily mistaken for an iPhone, is still 
a status symbol.

In addition, Apple has better distribution than smaller rivals through deals 
with China Mobile, the world’s largest telecoms player, and the two other 
networks. “Apple has worked hard to extend its retailer coverage across China, 
while Apple Music and other localised services have refreshed the iOS ecosystem 
for Chinese consumers,” notes Oh.

Neil Shah at Counterpoint Research, another analysis firm, says that Xiaomi 
has had great success attracting first-time customers in the under-$150 
segment, where it competes with local rivals such as Lenovo. But at the upgrade 
stage it loses customers, who shift to Huawei, Oppo – and Apple. “Almost half 
of the iPhones that we sold in China last quarter were to people who were 
buying their first iPhone,” Cook told analysts – suggesting about 7m successes 
in getting people to lay out money.

However that willingness to buy Apple’s product will be sorely tested this 
year as China’s economy struggles.

Cook’s revenue guidance already implies a fall in sales against the year 
before. Having pushed Samsung aside, local rivals will be looking to complete a 
clean sweep of the bestselling phones this time next year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fapple-xiaomi-vivo-oppo-challengers-leading-charge-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8f74ca1fba46bb40b8632bfc967228dc1cb36e9%2F0_107_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Xiaomi%2C%20Vivo%20and%20Oppo%3A%20the%20challengers%20leading%20China%E2%80%99s%20charge%20against%20Apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fapple-xiaomi-vivo-oppo-challengers-leading-charge-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Xiaomi%2C%20Vivo%20and%20Oppo%3A%20the%20challengers%20leading%20China%E2%80%99s%20charge%20against%20Apple&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjan%2F30%2Fapple-xiaomi-vivo-oppo-challengers-leading-charge-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8f74ca1fba46bb40b8632bfc967228dc1cb36e9%2F0_107_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Samsung has fallen out of the list of China’s top five smartphone suppliers 
Photograph: Edgar Su/Reuters 
FAST-CHANGING FORTUNES

RISING STARS

Huawei A Chinese company that also makes telecoms networking equipment, it 
sold 108m smartphones in 2015. Best known for its founder’s links to the Red 
Army – which has meant its network gear has been banned from the US over spying 
suspicions. In the UK, however, BT uses Huawei equipment extensively.

ZTE Like Huawei, a Chinese company that also makes network equipment, but for 
which handsets are increasingly important: it grew 36% in 2015, to more than 
60m handsets, aiming for the low-end market. But it doesn’t publish financial 
data, so profit or loss is unknown.

Lava Indigenous to India, Lava is one of the fastest-growing companies in the 
newest fast-growth market, now that China has slowed to a crawl. Like all its 
rivals, it uses Google’s Android, but unusually has Intel chips powering the 
phones. This year it aims to expand into Mexico.

Oppo The Chinese smartphone brand shipped 50m handsets in 2015, up 67%, to 
rank among the world’s top 10. It competes with Xiaomi on price, but has had 
more success abroad in India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Australia.

FALLING STARS

HTC The Taiwanese company made the first Android phone, and was once the US’s 
largest Android supplier. But it shrank 17% in 2015 and has made losses for 
three quarters in a row. With no services business, it is being crushed by the 
competition.

Lenovo/Motorola Lenovo is the world’s biggest PC maker, and bought American 
mobile-phone pioneer Motorola in 2014, but has been unable to bring it to 
profit. It is also losing out in the fiercely competitive Chinese market to 
Huawei and Xiaomi, seeing sales fall and losses mount.

Microsoft/Nokia Microsoft bought the rump of Nokia’s phone business in 
September 2013, but has seen sales droop and been unable to find profitability. 
Sales shrank nearly 30% in 2015, according to Counterpoint.

Sony Though it makes camera sensors for everyone including Apple and Samsung, 
Sony’s phone business has lost more than $1bn in the past two years, and sales 
peaked in 2014. Management has wondered about a sale, even while scaling down 
to cut losses.

LG Korean rival to Samsung in almost every consumer electronics business, its 
premium phones are well-regarded by critics yet have sold poorly, leaving sales 
flat and profits elusive.
 