
As yellow fever spreads through Kinshasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/16/fears-of-global-yellow-fever-epidemic-grow-as-vaccine-stocks-dwindle>
 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, it is worth remembering how long 
people have been battling this disease. It is said that the capital city of the 
US might well have been Philadelphia if not for anepidemic of yellow fever in 
1793 <http://ocp.hul.harvard.edu/contagion/yellowfever.html> which drove 
members of the federal government, including George Washington, out of the city 
and towards the arguably even more pestilential climes of Washington DC.

Fighting yellow fever in the Democratic Republic of the Congo – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/aug/26/fighting-yellow-fever-in-the-democratic-republic-of-congo-in-pictures>
This was not the first time that Philadelphia had experienced an epidemic of 
yellow fever. The high temperatures and humidity of many North American and 
southern European cities supported outbreaks of this mosquito-borne disease 
until the early 20th century, but one could rely on the winter frosts to put an 
end to the devastation caused by the disease. Harder to tackle was the 
inevitable death toll among susceptible troops and workers who were moved into 
an endemic area. Efforts to construct the Panama canal were compromised by 
mortality from yellow fever until severe measures were taken to reduce the 
mosquito population.

Trying to eliminate an infectious agent by eradicating its carrier is a tall 
order unless the insect population is actually only hanging on by its 
fingertips within an essentially hostile or variable climate, or if there is a 
reasonable infrastructure to, for example, keep marshes continuously drained. 
Sadly yellow fever can happily exist without a human host, completing its 
life-cycle in monkeys in tropical forests.

A much simpler solution, therefore, is to protect the human population by 
conferring immunity through vaccination. Happily avaccine was developed by Max 
Theiler and colleagues in the 1930s <http://europepmc.org/articles/PMC2118520>.

It was probably the first “exotic” vaccine I received, at the age of 18 
months, when I was to set sail for Ethiopia with my parents in 1966. My mother 
tells me that after I had received the shot, I offered my other arm; this was 
hardly the case 10 years later when I recall running as fast as I could away 
from the surgery to avoid vaccination.

Angola's yellow fever outbreak shows funding vaccines is critical | Sam Agbo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/apr/13/angola-yellow-fever-outbreak-shows-that-funding-vaccines-is-critical>
In those days, we were obliged to submit ourselves to re-vaccination every 10 
years if we wished to preserve the right to enter certain endemic areas. The 
current edict is that protection offered by a single dose is actually lifelong: 
a very good thing indeed.

Why is yellow fever then still a problem? In particular, why has there been 
such a seriousresurgence in Angola and the DRC 
<http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMp1606997>, stretching vaccine 
supplies to the point that consideration is being given to reducing the dose in 
order to cover more people – oreven to offering doses of lower efficacy to 
larger numbers of individuals 
<http://biorxiv.org/content/early/2016/07/25/053421> in an effort to halt 
transmission through an overall increase in protection?

The usual suspects – climate change, deforestation – are partly to blame, but 
somewhat paradoxically so is the lack of yellow fever in these areas, due to 
previous intervention efforts. This has led to large numbers of non-immune 
adults, who never had the chance to build up any natural resistance to the 
disease, and are therefore ripe to fuel a new epidemic.

It can be a formidable task to deliver simple, effective healthcare in 
particular economic settings

The worst situation that we can create is a sort of halfway house where the 
risk of infection is reduced so that many people remain unexposed to yellow 
fever, and yet the likelihood of recreating the conditions for the disease to 
prevail remains high. That this can happen despite the best efforts of the 
World Health Organisation and other partners in the otherwise highly successful 
yellow fever initiative highlights how formidable a task it can be to deliver 
simple, effective healthcare in particular economic settings.

The yellow fever vaccine has now been introduced in routine infant 
immunisation programmes in the majority of regions at risk inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and the Americas, and emergency 
campaigns in response to epidemic threats have been largely successful. But 
pockets of vulnerability remain, and it appears that the current stockpile is 
not sufficient to deal with possible outbreaks occurring in these areas.

One can only hope that the issues raised – namely what is actually the minimum 
effective dose, how best to administer possibly partially efficacious doses to 
reduce the burden of disease, and how to improve vaccine yield – will better 
prepare us in our ongoing battle with this very old enemy.
 