
I’m running a randomised controlled trial on pocket money with my own 
children: the oldest, eight, has the benefit of modern technology (more on this 
later), the youngest, six, relies on my remembering to pay her. In practice, 
this means the oldest gets £10 a month and the youngest gets nothing. After a 
period of accumulation the youngest vents her outrage and gets a lump sum. She 
immediately loses it. Our main hope is that she mislays it somewhere in the 
house where it can reenter the slipstream of the family’s economy.

My findings are as follows: miniature bank accounts are brilliant, but not 
necessarily educational. I useOsper <https://osper.com/>, which is an account 
for eight-pluses that comes with a card they can use in a cash machine or on 
the internet. I don’t know if you can stick it behind the bar because we 
haven’t tried it. I have a £10 monthly standing order and can add one-off 
amounts online. I can also invite other people to put money on it, which I 
never do, because it’s the financial equivalent of asking them to look at 
pictures of your child and wax lyrical about its cuteness. So far, Osper has 
taught the big ’un that money, with automating top-ups and nobody ever spending 
it, accumulates as effortlessly as wet leaves in a drain. It also taught him 
that getting money out of a cashpoint with his own pin is mind-bendingly 
exciting.

Do you need financial therapy?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/05/do-you-need-financial-therapy> 
Neither of these is a particularly useful lesson. Indeed, as a lesson in 
reality, pocket money only makes sense if it replicates in principle the real 
world – that is, you make them work and then they buy their own stuff. The way 
I’m doing it for the eight-year-old – all accumulation, no effort, no spending 
– is more like preparing him for being a tight landlord or some other rentier. 
However, the fact that I don’t make either of them perform chores for money is 
deliberate: I don’t want to monetise household tasks. Once there’s a price tag 
on one, why do any of them for free?

In other words, I eschew systems in favour of randomness. A quarter of 
children interviewed in a survey byZiffit <https://www.ziffit.com/> (a kind of 
selling interface for books and games, like a posh eBay) said they learned 
about the value of money from their grandparents, presumably because a quarter 
of British parents are a lot like me and incapable of teaching anybody anything 
about anything. But many aren’t: while nearly a third of children get no pocket 
money, a fifth of parents give their children £5 each a week, and two-fifths 
give their kids £10 or more. There must be some kind of system there, or it 
would just be like throwing cash into the wind.

Paul Treanor, e-commerce director of Ziffit, has three children aged seven, 
five and two. The two-year-old, naturally, can whistle for it. The 
seven-year-old gets £2 a week, the five-year-old £1.50. He doesn’t pay it into 
an account because, he says, “I don’t think they’re there yet. They need to see 
the money physically.” Here’s where the life lessons come in: “Anything they’ve 
saved after three months, I will match it. I think it’s really important that 
they understand the power of accumulation. Pocket money teaches you about 
choices and restraining yourself and the rewards you can get from that.” He 
doesn’t have set chores, preferring to hold the pocket money as leverage for 
good behaviour. “But you don’t want to box them in too much, you don’t want 
little soldiers.” No danger of that, I hear a nation’s parents moaning.

While Treanor has his sophisticated aim of teaching deferred gratification, 
most parents just want children to learn the value of money so that they’re not 
constantly asking for a pony or a Learjet. I personally think they understand 
on their own what the relative value is between things, and make unreasonable 
demands just to punch out space for when they have a demand they think is 
reasonable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fteach-kids-about-money-pockey-money-savings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde4db835fa5a966fdaa30afe23141b50410873ca%2F0_0_724_483%2F724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Yes%20we%20should%20teach%20our%20kids%20about%20money%2C%20but%20how%20exactly%20escapes%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fteach-kids-about-money-pockey-money-savings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Yes%20we%20should%20teach%20our%20kids%20about%20money%2C%20but%20how%20exactly%20escapes%20me&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjan%2F12%2Fteach-kids-about-money-pockey-money-savings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde4db835fa5a966fdaa30afe23141b50410873ca%2F0_0_724_483%2F724.jpg>
 Next stop the sweet shop? Photograph: Dan Pangbourne/plainpicture/Image Source 
Assuming, though, that this is a concept you can impart, you have to decide 
what you think the value of money actually is. Bruce Davis, a financial 
entrepreneur who part-invented peer-to-peer lending and now runs the crowdfunder
Abundance <https://www.abundanceinvestment.com/>, has five children ranging 
right across the spectrum of financial irresponsibility, from eight years old 
to 23. “We tend to start with kids talking about saving,” he says, “because 
it’s part of a broader moral lesson about how you should be with money: you 
should conserve it, you shouldn’t spend it too much, you save up to get what 
you want. Then that gets completely exploded when they get a credit card. It’s 
a bit like teaching sex education through the world of the Muppets. There’s no 
real solid information – it’s just a set of nice stories.”

Indeed, to extend this analogy with sex education, we teach complete 
abstinence until the age of 16, then complete licence, and try to attach a 
moral component to that when all that has changed in the children’s eyes 
(indeed, in the world of reality) is that they’ve had a birthday.

Felix Martin’s marvellous book Money: An Unauthorised Biography is scathing on 
our underpinning understanding of money – that it has an intrinsic value and, 
therefore, that the debtor is somehow morally bound, and inferior, to the 
creditor. He says that if we properly understood money for what it is – 
something that is socially constructed to mark indebtedness, but has no 
inherent value of its own and might as well be a giant stone or an amethyst 
(I’m paraphrasing, and you are strongly enjoined to read the book, rather than 
take it from me) – then we wouldn’t get into this complete contradiction: on 
the one hand, valorising saving as the sensible thing that ethical people do, 
while simultaneously heaping the real, tangible rewards of the world upon the 
people taking the greatest risks, never saving anything and having no ethics. 
How do you convey that to children with pocket money? It makes me think my 
randomness is actually a pretty good preparation for the life ahead.

Our children won’t use cash. All of the ways we teach saving are kind of 
irrelevant

Davis also points out the critical importance of the medium in which money is 
expressed: “Since we grew up it’s gone from being solid to being digital. Our 
children won’t use cash. All of the ways we teach saving are kind of 
irrelevant. We shouldn’t be teaching them how to add up with coins at all. We 
need to be able to teach them how to use a receipt. We have a nostalgic view of 
money that we teach our children, and then we throw them into the world of 
finance and they get lost.”

I cannot, either instantly or after cocktail hour, think of a good way to 
introduce the notion of money and its intrinsic value (or otherwise), either 
via pocket money or anything else. I did ask the children themselves what they 
thought they needed pocket money for, exactly, and the eldest said rather 
augustly, “things that our house needs”. “Like what?” “Like toys.” “How can 
this house conceivably need toys?” “We’ve got loads of Lego, but we haven’t got 
sets.” The youngest, asked how much she wanted, said a tenner a week, and when 
I asked her what she’d spend it on, replied, “I have no idea.” That’s what 
we’re dealing with, ladies and gentlemen: people who want money for no purpose 
that they can imagine, just so that they have it. Might as well give them nails.
 