
In primary campaigns, the media abhors a vacuum. It’s no fun to report on a 
race in which a prohibitive frontrunner coasts to victory.

As of now, the Democratic primary competition isn’t providing much competition 
to Hillary Clinton. Bernie Sanders is bringing a much-needed dose of economic 
leftism to the table but has also shown the coalition-building skillsone would 
expect 
<http://www.newrepublic.com/article/122432/bernie-sanderss-blind-spot-race-was-imported-scandinavia>
 of 73-year-old white guy who’s spent his political career running for office 
in a state that’s 95% white and has a smaller population than metropolitan 
Albany. And yet his ideological energy puts him far ahead the rest of the 
field, which includes a guy whose strategy for winning the Democratic 
nomination involvesgetting to the right 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/jim-webb-stands-alone-the-confederate-flag> of 
South Carolina’s Republican governor on the Confederate flag,a character from 
The Wire 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/md-politics/omalley-still-hates-the-wire-but-will-drink-beer-snap-a-selfie-with-david-simon/2014/07/22/67a08f44-11af-11e4-9285-4243a40ddc97_story.html>
, anda foppish Rhode Island Republican 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/04/those-who-reject-metric-system-miles-behind-lincoln-chafee>
.

It’s pretty hard to sell editors on multiple columns arguing that Jim Webb and 
Lincoln Chafee are serious candidates for the Democratic nomination. Which 
brings us to the inevitable next step: Joe Biden speculation. This weekend, the 
New York Times kicked it into high gear with aweakly sourced story 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/02/us/politics/joe-biden-white-house-2016-presidential-campaign.html>
 by Amy Chozick about Biden completing a run as well as a Maureen Dowdcolumn 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/02/opinion/sunday/maureen-dowd-joe-biden-in-2016-what-would-beau-do.html?_r=0>
 taking the usual cheap shots at Clinton while pushing Biden.

These stories, however, tell us more about the media’s relationship with 
Clinton than about the race. Bidenprobably isn’t running 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/plum-line/wp/2015/08/03/sorry-folks-joe-biden-is-not-running-for-president/>
, almost certainly wouldn’t win if he did and doesn’t bring any new 
perspectives to the party debate in the way Sanders’s campaign does. But he 
does have one characteristic that makes him seem more “presidential” to too 
many journalists: a penis.

To be clear, I do think the Democratic Party would benefit from an alternative 
to Clinton more viable than Sanders. And I like Biden, a happy warrior who’s 
overcome horrible personal tragedies – he is reportedly considering running 
because the son he just lost to brain cancer said while dying that he should. 
He has been effective in his role as vice president. But while the wishes of 
his late son may be a reason for him to run, they’re not a reason for 
Democratic primary voters to select an inferior candidate. A credible 
alternative to Clinton needs a rationale – an argument that you’re better on 
Clinton on policy, more electable than Clinton, or both. A Biden candidacy is a 
non-starter on both counts.

In policy terms, Biden and Clinton are virtually identical. On domestic 
policy, they’re both moderate liberals who are too close to the financial 
service sectors in their home states. On foreign policy, they’re both moderate 
liberal hawks who voted for the Iraq War. It would be harder to name two major 
politicians with more similar policy profiles. If Biden is going to enter the 
race, it’s not because he disapproves of the direction in which Clinton is 
going to lead the country.

And it’s hard to see any evidence that Biden is more electable. Clinton has 
consistently been amore popular political figure 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/162020/hillary-clinton-popular-obama-biden.aspx> 
than Biden. He’sprone to major gaffes 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/why-joe-bidens-gaffes-matter>. Hillary Clinton lost 
by a nose to a major political talent in the Democratic primaries in 2008, 
while Bidenfailed to reach 1% 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2015/08/04/why-i-m-not-ridin-with-biden.html>
 in Iowa. In 1988, Biden’s bid for the nomination was a disastersunk by 
plagiarism allegations 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/history_lesson/2008/08/the_write_stuff.html>
.

At this point, the sexism of the contingent eager for Biden to run becomes 
hard to deny. We need to find a generic white male with Hillary Clinton’s 
policy positions to head the ticket, even though his two previous primary 
campaigns were flaming wrecks on the highway? This is tantamount to putting a 
“No Girls Allowed” sign on the door of the White House.

In addition to the misogyny, there’s something else going on here: the Clinton 
rules <http://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/04/24/clinton-rules/>, the media’s 
tendency to give much more attention to spurious allegations than to proof 
showing that the allegations are untrue. In late July, a New York Times story 
initially alleged that a criminal probe had been opened into Clinton’s emails 
during her tenure as Secretary of State. The only problem is thatthe story was 
botched <http://www.newsweek.com/hillary-clinton-new-york-times-emails-357246> 
11 ways from Sunday. First, the story was changed to reflect the fact that there
wasn’t a criminal probe and then changed again to reflect the fact that the 
non-criminal probe wasn’t about Clinton. The story was bungled so badly that 
Margaret Sullivan, the public editor of the Times, has harshlycriticized 
<http://publiceditor.blogs.nytimes.com/2015/07/27/a-clinton-story-fraught-with-inaccuracies-how-it-happened-and-what-next/>
 ittwice 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/08/02/public-editor/new-york-times-hillary-clinton-coverage-public-editor.html>
.

As the Sullivan acknowledges in the newer column, this is not a one-off 
mistake. Times reporters and columnists have been smearing Hillary Clinton and 
her husbandsince the Whitewater faux-scandal 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1996/10/clinton-scandals-inc/376687/>
. For reasons I can’t explain, many mainstream outlets subject the Clintons to 
much harsher treatment than other political figures, Democratic or Republican.

The idea that we should take a Joe Biden challenge to Hillary Clinton 
seriously, even though there’s very little reason to believe that he will run 
and even less reason to think he could win, is a combination of these two 
factors. White men are taken more seriously as presidential candidates even 
when they’re objectively much weaker, and a lot of reporters really don’t like 
Hillary Clinton. Admittedly, the Clinton campaign hasn’t always dealt well with 
the press, but in light of how she and her husband have been treated, some 
measure of defensiveness is understandable. Regardless,Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> will clinch the 
nomination, but the media’s double standard is one reason why women are 
underrepresented at all levels of political office in the United States.

 * This article was corrected on 5 August 2015 to indicate that Hillary 
Clinton lost the primary in 2008, not 2012.  