
It is every orchestral player’s greatest anxiety dream. You are sitting on 
stage at the Royal Festival Hall as the Philharmonia’s Principal Conductor 
Esa-Pekka Salonen strides up to the podium. He looks you directly in the eye 
and raises his baton for the first downbeat. It is only then that you realise 
you have forgotten your instrument, or even how to play one. But this is not a 
dream – it’s real. Or virtually real. Welcome to Britain’s firstfully 
immersive, 360 degree, non-existent orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LGDLqghtM_A>.

Cyber-orchestras seem to be gaining traction at the moment, though the 
Philharmonia’s project is a very different beast from theBBC’s Virtual Orchestra
 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/p046jg6s/get-playing-7-get-playing-virtual-orchestra>
, which invited the contribution of more than 1,000 amateur musicians to the 
Last Night of the Proms via their smartphones. Instead, it pitches the viewer 
into the heart of a top-flight, professional ensemble as it performs thefinal 
movement of Sibelius’s fifth symphony 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0tuPnVzuWP8>.

You are on stage with this barrage of sound coming at you from all directions

The realism of the experience, developed by the Philharmonia in association 
with London-based VR specialistsInition <https://www.inition.co.uk>, is 
extraordinary. You sense the tension build while wandering backstage, watching 
musicians tune amid catering tables and the alien sarcophagi of the double-bass 
cases. Then there’s the intensity of the performance itself, which feels more 
like going into battle than listening to a concert. The proximity of bows and 
trombone slides is so close it’s impossible not to flinch. Finally you arrive 
at Sibelius’s great, slashing conclusion ofsix massive chords 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0tuPnVzuWP8> punctuated by silence. The 
whites-of-the-eyes perspective gives Salonen the almost-maniacal look of an 
emperor pronouncing execution.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fvirtual-reality-london-philharmonia-orchestra-esa-pekka-salonen-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56e7e22a79bd6d6689868a2cb3297d470811ba07%2F545_0_1893_2366%2F1893.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You're%20in%20the%20band%3A%20virtual%20reality's%20orchestral%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fvirtual-reality-london-philharmonia-orchestra-esa-pekka-salonen-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%27re%20in%20the%20band%3A%20virtual%20reality%27s%20orchestral%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fvirtual-reality-london-philharmonia-orchestra-esa-pekka-salonen-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56e7e22a79bd6d6689868a2cb3297d470811ba07%2F545_0_1893_2366%2F1893.jpg>
 The Virtual Orchestra at Royal Festival Hall. Photograph: Justin 
Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
The seamless, latency-free production is an indication of how far VR 
technology has developed since the initial, clunky headsets that tended to 
leave the user feeling slightly nauseous. Now that anyone with a well-specced 
smartphone has access the VR experience, orchestras are scrambling to gain a 
purchase on the new platform.

The pioneer in the US has been the LA Philharmonic, which last year launched 
theVAN Beethoven project <http://www.laphil.com/vanbeethoven> – a VR-equipped 
articulated truck that simulated the experience of sitting in theWalt Disney 
concert hall <https://i.ytimg.com/vi/tesyMHUgWBI/maxresdefault.jpg>. Both the 
Adelaide Symphony Orchestra 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LZlNCAGWtwE&feature=youtu.be> and Toronto 
Symphony Orchestra <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dvHBPqe6WHA> have 
experimented with VR performances accessible on YouTube. But in the UK, the 
Philharmonia has been leading the charge, not least due to the fact that its 
principal conductor admits to being a bit of a geek.


“Unashamedly and proudly,” Salonen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/23/esa-pekka-salonen-conductor-composer-facing-the-music>
 declares. “I’m the tech companies’ idea of a perfect victim because I buy 
everything. But it was when I tried one of the new Samsung headsets for the 
first time that the potential for orchestral music became apparent. It seems to 
me that we are at an equivalent point in history to the birth of the 
long-playing record. This is not a gimmick. It will become a significant means 
by which music is consumed within the very near future.”

The Philharmonia has been at the leading edge of new media since it was 
founded in 1945 by EMI producer Walter Legge as an in-house recording ensemble. 
In 2012 it became the first UK orchestra to developits own app 
<http://orchestra.touchpress.com>, which gave multi-camera views of the players 
alongside interactive scores and commentaries. This was followed by theUniverse 
of Sound <http://www.philharmonia.co.uk/universeofsound>, a 37-screen 
installation based on Holst’s Planets Suite, whose sequence of rooms enabled 
you to play percussion, edit the score or even take over from Salonen himself, 
using motion-capture technology to follow the conductor’s beat.

The Universe of Sound was first seen at the National Science Museum in 2012 
and has since toured the world. Until 2 October it isinstalled at the Royal 
Festival Hall as part of a two-week residency 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/festivals-series/virtual-orchestra> 
by the Philharmonia’s Virtual Orchestra.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLGDLqghtM_A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLGDLqghtM_A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLGDLqghtM_A&media=>
“To really understand how a symphony orchestra works you have to be on stage, 
among your colleagues, in front of the conductor, with this barrage of sound 
coming at you from all directions” Salonen says. “VR has arrived at the point 
where it can provide a fast-track to the heart of the symphony orchestra, 
giving the sense that there is something complex and almost magical going on.”

Yet for all the digital wizardry, there’s an aspect of orchestral playing that 
lies beyond the realm of even the most sophisticated simulation. “It’s like a 
swimming amid a giant school of fish” Salonen explains. “Science has not yet 
entirely been able to explain how the school of mackerel hangs together in such 
perfect formation. At the highest level, a symphony orchestra moves a bit like 
this. The individual players have their distinct identity, yet manage to fuse 
into a form of super-organism. It is very difficult to explain in layman’s 
terms how this happens or what a conductor does. But VR is the perfect medium 
to experience this mysterious, wordless communication in action.”

Just how quickly mainstream classical audiences will embrace the slightly 
goofy world of VR goggles remains to be seen, though the first objective of the 
digital residency at the South Bank is to entice those who might never venture 
beyond the foyers to experience a genuine, real-world performance for 
themselves. But Salonen can envisage a future in which VR enhancement becomes a 
commonplace aspect of the concert-going experience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fvirtual-reality-london-philharmonia-orchestra-esa-pekka-salonen-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed4430a010b30af80300c7720d34e62881cf8b98%2F0_0_3413_2048%2F3413.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You're%20in%20the%20band%3A%20virtual%20reality's%20orchestral%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fvirtual-reality-london-philharmonia-orchestra-esa-pekka-salonen-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%27re%20in%20the%20band%3A%20virtual%20reality%27s%20orchestral%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fvirtual-reality-london-philharmonia-orchestra-esa-pekka-salonen-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed4430a010b30af80300c7720d34e62881cf8b98%2F0_0_3413_2048%2F3413.jpg>
 The 360-degree virtual reality view of the Philharmonia Orchestra at the 
Southbank Centre. Photograph: Philharmonia Orchestra 
“It’s already happening” he says. “Composers are beginning to include aspects 
of augmented reality as a means of expression. The only things holding us back 
are the production costs and the inevitable consumer-battle to create a 
universal platform. We’re still waiting to see which of these gizmos will go 
the way ofBetamax <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Videotape_format_war> or 
become the new VHS.”


We’re still waiting to see which of these VR gizmos will go the way of Betamax 
or become the new VHS

The teething troubles that can beset VR-enhanced compositions were experienced 
recently by Paola Prestini’sambitious Hubble Cantata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/08/symphonies-in-space-orchestra-virtual-reality>
 project, which took place last month on the waterfront beside Brooklyn Bridge. 
The interplanetary journey, which fused live choral music with images beamed 
from the space telescope, was slightly compromised by the promised supply of 
Google Cardboard headsets running out. But the presence of more than 6,000 
attendees indicates the appetite for music within the virtual realm.

And having overseen the Philharmonia’s VR project from inception, Salonen is 
still impressed with its capacity to surprise. “For me, the most heart-stopping 
moment is the final sequence, in which you suddenly find yourself levitating 30 
feet above the platform of the Royal Festival Hall,” he says. “It’s something I 
occasionally feel on the podium but have never encountered in such physical 
terms – the point at which music becomes a truly out-of-body experience.”


• The Virtual Orchestra is in Royal Festival Hall foyers until 2 October. Free 
entry. Esa-Pekka Salonen conducts thePhilharmonia Orchestra at the Royal 
Festival Hall, London on 1 October in The Virtual Orchestra: Live in Concert 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/the-virtual-orchestra-live-in-98829>, 
presented by Marcus du Sautoy.
 