
The last week of August is always a time of nostalgia, when the temperature 
drops and the new school year looms and one feels obliged to sit up slightly 
straighter. In New York this year that effect has been amplified by the image 
of Winona Ryder on the sides of buses and subway walls, as she promotesStranger 
Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
, her comeback sci-fi adventure set in the 1980s, the entirety of which I 
binged in two days. If the past is a foreign country, then this week has seen 
nostalgia and homesickness collide in such a way that I’ve barely been able to 
move from the sofa.

Stranger Things review – a spooky shot of 80s nostalgia straight to your heart
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
The appeal of Stranger Things is not only in the Where’s Wally-style exercise 
of finding all the show’s meta-references to 80s TV and movies, but in 
marvelling at one’s own capacity to get sentimental about things just by virtue 
of distance. It’s one thing to get a warm glow from the sight of 
walkie-talkies, or Dungeons & Dragons, or boys with asymmetrical hair throwing 
fake karate moves at each other, and quite another to lament the passing of an 
era in which 10-year-olds could ride home alone down dark lanes or run through 
woods chased by assailants, unconstrained by the fussy demands of modern 
parenting. And yet the show triggers nostalgia for all these things.

The ultimate test of this impulse is Ryder herself, whose early movies I never 
liked and who I always thought – an opinion I knew to be 100% wrong for someone 
of my generation to hold – couldn’t act. But even Winona, in her bad wig and 
alternating two facial expressions (frowny and sad, or screamy and mad, but 
either way always on the brink of fresh tears), struck me as poignant – and by 
the end of the series I was ready to pack up and move back to 1984.

Meanwhile, homesickness for modern Britain peaked last week when I received a 
communication from the British tax authorities and, for a second, found myself 
thinking, “Oh, HMRC, how sweet and nice you are compared to your American 
equivalents, the lethal overlords of the IRS.” This is the kind of dangerous 
late-August thinking that can lead a person to buy union flag cushions or vote 
to leave the EU. Thank God it’s September.

On the magical ladder

Magical thinking is, generally, something one associates more with the 
American than the British self-image. I was in the elevator of my building this 
week with a woman and four firemen on a non-urgent call. The woman turned to 
them and, lowering her voice, said: “Is it true what they’re saying aboutZika 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zika-virus>?” There was, she said, a rumour 
going around that the authorities were suppressing news that 500 new cases of 
the Zika virus had been found in New York, something the firemen scoffed at – 
not because they thought it wasn’t true, but at the idea that they, the guys 
from Ladder 35, would be in on it if it were. It was taken as a matter of 
course that, as Don DeLillofamously wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dondelillo>, history is the “sum total of 
the things they aren’t telling us”.

Our doomed narrative
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fdefinitely-homesick-british-tax-collector-hmrc-irs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41e3af8cbf2a710d8b0b722a3ba3e5a6c3c7ae35%2F0_151_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%E2%80%99re%20definitely%20homesick%20when%20you%20miss%20the%20British%20tax%20collector%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fdefinitely-homesick-british-tax-collector-hmrc-irs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%E2%80%99re%20definitely%20homesick%20when%20you%20miss%20the%20British%20tax%20collector%20%7C%20Emma%20Brockes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fdefinitely-homesick-british-tax-collector-hmrc-irs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41e3af8cbf2a710d8b0b722a3ba3e5a6c3c7ae35%2F0_151_2800_1680%2F2800.jpg>
 L’Allegro, Il Penseroso, ed il Moderato by Mark Morris. Photograph: Tristram 
Kenton for the Guardian 
I went to the ballet at the weekend, something I don’t normally do, but to my 
surprise I enjoyed it. It was a series of pieces by theMark Morris Dance Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/markmorris>, beautifully set to Mozart as 
part of the Lincoln Center’s Mozart Festival. What interested me most, however, 
was what my brain did during the performance. The need to map a narrative on to 
even the most abstract art form is hard to resist and as the dancers flew 
across the stage, I couldn’t help thinking why are those two men arresting the 
third man? Is that woman the man’s lover or is she trying to pull him from a 
river? When they do that thing with their arms, are they pretending to be the 
falling pieces in Tetris? If we can’t find a pattern, we’re doomed.
 