 Late last year, a group of literary eminences  Melvyn Bragg, Jim Crace, Alan 
Plater, Carmen Callil, Celia Brayfield and eight others  announced a proposal 
for a National Academy of Writing, along the lines of the Royal Academy of 
Music or the Royal College of Art. They argued that there had been a huge boom 
in creative writing programmes in the last decade, but without any uniform 
standard of tuition. Depending on whether it gets serious Lottery money, this 
academy hopes to open its doors next year. If it does get off the ground, it 
will be well placed to represent the interests of all writers. So it seems 
rather odd that the harshest resistance has come from the very people who stand 
to benefit most.
The reason for this is a deep national prejudice against creative writing 
tuition. Its unnecessary, most writers here say, because writing talent is 
innate. If youre born with it, all you need to develop it is a lonely attic. 
The worst thing you can do is take a course: exposure to the conforming 
pressures of a group could kill your originality. And for what?

Even the University of East Anglia, which runs the oldest and most 
sought-after Masters course in the country, can rarely boast a publication 
rate of 20 per cent. Ian McEwan, who was Malcolm Bradburys first writing 
student 30 years ago, seems to think such courses have a limited value. When he 
was asked to comment on the national academy, he said: I think there are 
technical things to be learnt, though you might do better simply by reading 
Harold Pinters plays.

So is that it, then? Is creative writing just another American import wed be 
better off without? I dont think so  but before I explain why, let me declare 
an interest. Confession number one: I, too, am an American import. Confession 
number two: I have been teaching creative writing on and off for the past 15 
years. So yes, I do believe that you can teach someone to write. You cant do 
much with a student whos had all the originality stamped out of him, and you 
cant do much with a student who was born without an ounce of talent. But most 
students Ive had fall into neither of those categories. I never tell students 
how to write. Instead, I set them challenges and wait to see what they come 
up with. When we review the work in class, I point out the good things they do 
by accident. Then we discuss changes they might make, to make the good things 
even better. The final choice is theirs: they learn through trial and error. 
And the more they put themselves on the line, the faster their writing improves.

Martin Amis once said that a writer has to solve at least a hundred thousand 
problems on every page. One that is common to most beginners is the desire to 
condense the greatest thoughts of a lifetime into a perfect first sentence.

Another, according to Blake Morrison, is knowing  or rather, not knowing  
your audience: When people  even talented people  start to write, they cant 
really judge the effect of their writing on readers, he says. When you first 
present your work to a group, You discover that what you thought was in your 
writing isnt there.

A writing group can help you learn what you need to do to get your meaning 
across, Morrison says. And getting help with the basic tricks of the trade can 
take years off your apprenticeship: Whats amazing is how quickly people in 
writing groups do develop their own distinctive styles.Creative writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/creative-writing>, he says, is about the 
perspiration, not the inspiration  how to edit, rewrite, cut, change, and 
develop.

It is also, says Helen Dunmore, about getting students to read. Poets learn a 
lot by reading other poets, she says. But that is not to say that reading is 
better than taking a class. A student can often make an amazing leap, Dunmore 
says, if you get them to try a few technical things, or if they find a form 
that releases them.

Often, students do not know what they do well, or where their originality 
lies. They need to be told, and they need to be encouraged  as do all writers. 
Which is why writing groups are not just for beginners.

Take Jane Stevenson, who has been writing since she was a child. She started 
going to a writing group two years ago, and although she is not sure how much 
she got out of the meetings, they did make her take her work more seriously. 
The result is in the Jonathan Cape catalogue: Several Deceptions, a collection 
of novellas, comes out in May. Writing groups, Stevenson says, are useful for 
people whove coasted to a halt. There is a point beyond which it is impossible 
to push yourself.

According to Russell Celyn Jones, a British novelist with a degree from the 
University of Iowa, where creative writing tuition was invented, a workshop is 
a place where you experiment with style and voice. Its a place to fail. But 
workshops do not create schools or movements. It is just that there are 
archetypal problems that affect all writers, professional and amateur alike.

In this sense, workshops and writing groups are not American imports at all  
they simply prove good, old-fashioned editorial services. And even the most 
experienced,original, solitary authors seldom claim they could do without them.

We all hope and pray for an interventionist editor, says Jim Crace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jim-crace>. Someone who will say that 
chapter doesnt work, or youve developed an idiosyncracy. Intervention is 
always welcome. It is deeply dishonest, he says, for any writer to pretend 
that he has got where he is without help from friends and editors. But, he 
believes, writers who scorn the idea of a national academy are just that.

Its this Shelleyan thing, that writers are the unofficial legislators of the 
world. Theyve only got to write a novel and theyll change the hearts of men 
and women and alter the course of history. Once writers get published, they 
get very grand about what they do.

Another attitude Crace finds infuriating is: Im a published writer, and I 
didn't need help, so why should anybody else? Theyre saying, My route is 
the only route. They are right, Crace says, to point out that a lot of people 
dont need help, but not just because of their talent: it is also because they 
have been to the right schools and worked in the right places and are 
well-connected in literary London. And people who denigrate creative writing 
tuition tend, he says, to be middle-aged white men whose way has been paved 
for them. But heres the twist  that paving is fast disappearing. As 
publishing becomes global and cut-throat, even editors who love editing are 
having to edit less and less as they struggle to clinch the big deals that keep 
them safe in their jobs.

The closer publishing gets to the music industry, the harder it is to survive 
as a writer. Gone are the days when you could expect an editor to wait for 
years for your promise to mature. You have to go elsewhere for advice and 
support.

In the US, it is the network of creative writing programmes that provides that 
support, for writers of all ages and levels. This is not to say the American 
way of supporting writing is perfect, or one that we would want to imitate 
here. The important thing to remember is that right now, were doing next to 
nothing.

Some small groups are, it is true, working hard to find ways of protecting 
writers from the extremes of market forces. There is the Society of Authors, 
the Poetry Society and the Arvon Foundation. There are writing courses. And now 
there is this idea for a national academy. But even when these groups act 
together, they are not big or strong enough to make a difference.

These days, writers must learn to sink or swim before theyve had a chance to 
develop: if they dont write to order, or conform to a marketing category, 
theyve lost before theyve begun. If someone doesnt come up with an 
alternative, fast, the days of that Shelleyan thing are numbered  even for 
middle-aged white men.
 