
I’m having lunch with Karina Longworth in an old cinema in Notting Hill when a 
man taps her on the shoulder. “I’m sorry, but do you do You Must Remember This 
podcast?” he asks. She nods. “Oh my god, I love it!” he screams. “I’m obsessed 
with the Charles Manson series. It’s such a pleasure to meet you!”

It’s a strange kind of fame when your voice is recognisable enough for you to 
be stopped, half way through a hotdog, to discuss one of the 20th-century’s 
most notorious murderers. But it’s still a long way from the semi-celestial 
celebrity Longworth explores in her radio show, which tells the secret or 
forgotten stories of Hollywood’s first century.

The show, which sounds like a dreamy mix of film noir voiceover, 1940s gossip 
column and Pathe news broadcast, looks at the now lesser-known figures of 
Hollywood’s Golden Age; women like inventor of “the vamp” Theda Bara, whose 
agents claimed she was the daughter of an Arab sheik, born in the Sahara and 
growing up in the shadow of the Sphinx when in fact, she’d been born in 
Cincinnati, Ohio; or inventor of grunge Frances Farmer, an alcoholic communist 
committed to several mental health institutions who later became the subject of 
the Nirvana songFrances Farmer Will Have Her Revenge on Seattle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bZgtMchcOy0>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbadb11ff43a999642fa279853784bd86f0376211%2F0_340_2565_1539%2F2565.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20Must%20Remember%20This%3A%20the%20woman%20spilling%20Hollywood's%20long-held%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20Must%20Remember%20This%3A%20the%20woman%20spilling%20Hollywood%27s%20long-held%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbadb11ff43a999642fa279853784bd86f0376211%2F0_340_2565_1539%2F2565.jpg>
 Hollywood starlet Theda Bara, whose agents claimed she was the daughter of an 
Arab sheik – when in fact she was born in Cincinnati, Ohio. Photograph: 
Allstar/Fox 
There are also men like B-movie actor-turned-president Ronald Reagan, who used 
the McCarthy communist witch-hunts to propel his own career, or Val Lewton, who 
wrote a string of now-cultish horror movies includingI Walked With a Zombie 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/I_Walked_With_a_Zombie> and The Leopard Man 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Leopard_Man> after losing his job as a 
society reporter when it emerged that a story he wrote about a truckload of 
kosher chickens dying in a New York heatwave was a total fabrication.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ad06113a5fb285c9fa0afc43d261882dd43b279%2F0_0_2008_1853%2F2008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20Must%20Remember%20This%3A%20the%20woman%20spilling%20Hollywood's%20long-held%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20Must%20Remember%20This%3A%20the%20woman%20spilling%20Hollywood%27s%20long-held%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ad06113a5fb285c9fa0afc43d261882dd43b279%2F0_0_2008_1853%2F2008.jpg>
 ‘He was a master manipulator, which he learned in prison’ … notorious murderer 
Charles Manson in 1969. Photograph: AP 
Then there’s the Charles Manson mini-series. “I thought I was just going to do 
one episode,” says Longworth, who came to the figure of Manson through his 
association with Doris Day’s son Terry Melcher, the record producer and 
eventual target of Manson’s murder conspiracy. “Then I realised there was a 
really interesting story there about Hollywood decline. Manson was one of these 
characters who comes to California to become famous, but in the late 1960s, 
when Hollywood was basically falling apart.”
One of the series’ most arresting images is of Manson hiding out in the caves 
and sheds of the abandoned film set, Spahn Ranch, surrounded by the 
dirty-haired, sexually-exploited girls known as The Manson Family who he 
collected as followers in the late 1960s, after a childhood spent in various 
correctional institutions. “He was a master manipulator, which he learned in 
prison,” says Longworth. “But I think the more fascinating part of it was that 
these women, well girls really, were teenagers. They were high on drugs and 
looking for someone to tell them what to do. It’s amazing that this whole 
counter-culture, which became mainstream for a while, was about men tricking 
women, having all the sex they want, then shrugging off all responsibility.”

Longworth grew up in Los Angeles and turns up to meet me dressed in a gold 
cardigan and full skirt, like something straight out of a 1950s edition of the 
Hollywood Reporter. For her, it was completely normal to see stars like 
Madonna, Sean Penn, John Travolta and Lauren Bacall on the front page of her 
local newspaper. But it’s the stories that didn’t make the front page – that 
have been hushed up, forgotten or suppressed by the industry – that most 
interest Longworth and her millions of listeners. To find her stories, she 
reads endless old books, biographies, interviews and newspaper reports, and 
watches hours of long-forgotten movies and retrospective documentaries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4eec65e61f9607e629862625db181e2a5137eaf%2F0_0_1536_2032%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20Must%20Remember%20This%3A%20the%20woman%20spilling%20Hollywood's%20long-held%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20Must%20Remember%20This%3A%20the%20woman%20spilling%20Hollywood%27s%20long-held%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4eec65e61f9607e629862625db181e2a5137eaf%2F0_0_1536_2032%2F1536.jpg>
 ‘You can’t deny that thing she had when she got in front of a camera’ … 
Marilyn Monroe in Some Like It Hot. Photograph: Everett/REX/Shutterstock 
One of the topics that runs through the podcast is the idea of women as 
commodities. “It’s not all that different from how it is now,” says Longworth, 
“but today it’s just less obvious.” Partly, of course, because the women’s 
liberation movement of the 1960s made female sexuality more widely accepted, 
and partly because a woman’s earning power is now less strictly tied to her 
so-called “moral calibre”. I ask her about the myths of the casting couch – the 
women who slept their way to the top. “I read more stories of women who got 
involved with a powerful man but it didn’t make them a star,” she says. 
“Marilyn Monroe may have got involved with a series of men and slowly moved her 
way up, but you can’t deny that thing she had when she got in front of a 
camera. I don’t know how much using sex is a successful strategy, but it says a 
lot that people still talk about it as though it is.”

Instead of merely making an episode about the legendary aviator, director and 
millionaire eccentric Howard Hughes,Longworth uses him to talk about many of 
the age’s leading ladies with whom he was involved 
<http://www.youmustrememberthispodcast.com/episodes/?tag=howard+hughes>, from 
Katharine Hepburn to Jean Harlow. “It’s a rubric to tell the story of a lot of 
fascinating women,” says Longworth. “He arrives in Hollywood in 1925 and starts 
to disappear in the 1950s, so you can use him to tell the story of Hollywood in 
that era.” Which is precisely what she’s doing in her upcoming book, which will 
chart the love affairs of the enigmatic film-maker and pilot who once used his 
understanding of aeronautical engineering to design Jane Russell a more 
supportive bra.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe03e39692371008f4ff011068f56ce8255006b04%2F0_0_2813_3708%2F2813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20Must%20Remember%20This%3A%20the%20woman%20spilling%20Hollywood's%20long-held%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20Must%20Remember%20This%3A%20the%20woman%20spilling%20Hollywood%27s%20long-held%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe03e39692371008f4ff011068f56ce8255006b04%2F0_0_2813_3708%2F2813.jpg>
 Legendary aviator and millionaire eccentric Howard Hughes with leading lady 
Jean Harlow. Photograph: Bettmann Archive 
As well as the Manson episodes, You Must Remember This has run several other 
miniseries. There wasThe Blacklist 
<http://www.youmustrememberthispodcast.com/episodes/?category=The%20Blacklist>, 
which looked at the way several of Hollywood’s most successful stars were 
ruined by accusations of communism by the House Un-American Activities 
Committee. These included the legendary wit Dorothy Parker, the actor Humphrey 
Bogart and Charlie Chaplin, who was banished from the US in 1952 for being 
“sympathetic to the communist cause” – accusations based on little more than 
Chaplin refusing to cross picket lines in the 1940s, speaking out about the 
suffering of the Russian people in the second world war and being “prematurely 
anti-fascist”.

Then there was MGM Stories 
<http://www.youmustrememberthispodcast.com/episodes/?category=MGM%20Stories>, 
which told the stories of 15 people who worked in the studio as it went from 
silent movies to talkies, including Elizabeth Taylor (who once described her 
18-year contract as being “MGM chattel”) and the legendary “sweater girl” Lana 
Turner who burned through seven husbands and countless affairs before becoming 
embroiled in one of Hollywood’s most shocking scandals after her 14-year-old 
daughter was accused of killing Turner’s boyfriend Johnny Stompanato. AndStar 
Wars <http://www.youmustrememberthispodcast.com/episodes/?tag=star+wars> looked 
at the efforts Hollywood stars went to support the war effort – such as Bette 
Davis and John Garfield’s founding of The Hollywood Canteen, where servicemen 
could get served pie by, and even dance with, some of the era’s most famous 
actors, and where Lena Horne was drafted in as the only African-American pinup 
and therefore the only famous woman deemed appropriate to dance with black 
servicemen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F665b4d0c235047dda3024b2b716890be7b491ddf%2F0_0_4218_3211%2F4218.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=You%20Must%20Remember%20This%3A%20the%20woman%20spilling%20Hollywood's%20long-held%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=You%20Must%20Remember%20This%3A%20the%20woman%20spilling%20Hollywood%27s%20long-held%20secrets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F05%2Fyou-must-remember-this-the-woman-spilling-hollywood-secrets-marilyn-monroe-charlie-chaplin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F665b4d0c235047dda3024b2b716890be7b491ddf%2F0_0_4218_3211%2F4218.jpg>
 The only African-American pinup … Lena Horne sings for servicemen at the 
Hollywood Canteen. Photograph: Bettmann Archive 
“I’d like to do a whole series about black Hollywood,” says Longworth, who has 
already looked a little into the way major studios tried to obscure their 
stars’ ethnicity: Rita Hayworth was made to dye her hair and change her 
hairline to “cover up” her Spanish roots, while Fox Pictures changed Theodosia 
Burr Goodman’s name to Theda Bara supposedly because it was an anagram of Arab 
Death.

I ask Longworth who she would invite to her dream dinner party. The list, of 
course, is jewelled with the era’s most sparkling characters: “Dorothy Parker, 
[Gone with the Wind producer] David O Selznick, Judy Garland ... and Frank 
Sinatra. He’d be moody but he was probably fun at a party,” she says. Any 
Brits, I wonder? “Oh and Liz Taylor,” she adds quickly. “Of course Liz would be 
there.”

Listen to You Must Remember This here 
<http://www.youmustrememberthispodcast.com/>
 