
The number of young working-class households who own their own homes has 
declined by 20% sinceDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> came to power, analysis 
commissioned by Labour has found.

The figures suggest the overall number of under-35s who own their homes has 
fallen by 280,000 households since 2010, with the drop more marked among those 
who do routine or manual work, or are unemployed.

The Tories have made 'affordable housing' a meaningless term
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/07/tories-affordable-housing-meaningless-term-london>
John Healey <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-healey>, Labour’s 
shadow housing minister, reported the data before the launch of the party’s 
housing review by Peter Redfern, the chief executive of Taylor Wimpey, the 
housebuilding company.

He said it was clear that homeownership among the young is falling despite the 
government’s initiatives claiming to be making housing more affordable for 
first-time buyers – such as starter homes and help-to-buy.

Healey said homeownership is now in “freefall” because of the housing crisis, 
with young people aspiring to own a home the hardest hit. “What used to be a 
natural part of growing up is becoming a luxury for those on the highest 
salaries, or whose parents have the deepest pockets,” he said. “It would be 
Labour’s first priority in government to change that.

“The Redfern review will take a hard look at the causes of the recent decline 
in homeownership, to help bring fresh ideas to the wider public debate on how 
Britain can get to grips with this problem.”

The data shows that while the number of under-35s who are head of homes they 
own has dropped by 280,000 over five years, the number of those over 35 has 
risen by 39,000.

The biggest numerical drop is among young people in professional jobs, down 
150,000, which is 16% lower than five years ago.

However, there has been a steeper drop in working-class households headed by 
under-35s with 68,000, or 20% fewer, than in 2010.

Face it, home owners must take a hit to sort out housing | Sonia Sodha
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/28/housing-crisis-homeowners-must-accept-falling-prices>
In response to the new figures, the Department for Communities and Local 
Government said: “We want to ensure that anyone who works hard and aspires to 
own their own home has the opportunity to do so and in the last year alone we 
have already seen a 25% increase in the number of new homes built.”

Last year, data from the Office for National Statistics demonstrated that 
homeownership among the young had collapsed since 1991, when a third of Britons 
aged 16-24 who were household heads owned their own home. By 2011 that number 
had fallen to just one in ten.

Among those advising Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> on 
the Redfern review are Kate Barker, a former member of the Bank of England 
monetary policy committee, Terrie Alafat, chief executive of the Chartered 
Institute of Housing, Ian Mulheirn, director of consulting at Oxford Economics, 
Andy Gray, a former managing director of mortgages at Barclays and ex-deputy 
chair of the Council of Mortgage Lenders.

• This article was amended on 9 March 2016 to make clear that ONS statistics 
for the number of 16-24 year olds who owned their own home in 1991 and 2011 are 
for those people in that age group who were heads of household.


 