
Autumn leaves colour the wooded hills along Ohio’s State Route 82 and the blue 
signs promoting presidential candidates along the verge pop against the scarlet 
and lemon foliage. Some pollsters haveDonald Trump and Hillary Clinton in a 
statistical tie in Ohio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/18/us-election-polls-nevada-north-carolina-ohio-trump-clinton>
 but the signs in this north-eastern corner of the state suggest this is Trump 
country.


Once a Democratic stronghold in a state that can make or break a presidential 
bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/22/trump-campaign-chair-kathy-miller-resigns-ohio-racism-obama>
, Mahoning County, which encompasses the city of Youngstown and its environs, 
is lagging behind in the economic recovery. And its business leaders are keen 
to tell you why another four years of the same could cost them even more.

Nick Strimbu Inc has been trucking goods across the US from Brookfield, 12 
miles north-east of Youngstown, since 1926. Outside its headquarters, a giant 
roadside electronic sign leaves little doubt as to whom its boss isn’t backing. 
“Defeat Crooked Hillary”, the sign flashes at passing traffic, 24 hours a day. 
President Bill Strimbu’s receptionist has a sign on her door that reads 
“Hillary For Prison 2016”.

 An anti-Clinton sign along Ohio’s state route 82 
Strimbu is convinced Clinton is crooked. The Clintons left the White House 
with no money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/10/hillary-clinton-memoir-broke-after-presidency>
, he points out. “So how, in eight years, do you go, without having a steady 
job, from zero net worth to $100m? All she did with that Clinton Foundation is 
take money from foreign governments,” he says. “I’d vote for Donald Duck before 
I’d vote for her.”


Trump country: why Democratic strongholds are turning red
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/02/donald-trump-voters-ohio-pennsylvania-west-virginia-appalachia>
But Strimbu is no diehard Trump fan, either; he would have preferred Ted Cruz 
to have won the Republican presidential nomination. Faced with the unacceptable 
and the unpalatable, the trucking boss believes he can make a strong business 
case to elect Trump and a stronger one still against Clinton. And, he says, a 
lot of people across the US feel the same way, no matter what the polls say. As 
with Britain’s surprise Brexit vote to leave the European Union, he argues the 
media and the pollsters have underestimated Trump’s support and cowed Trump 
supporters into silence.

“In the Republican primary, all the counties [nearby] voted for Trump. They’re 
aligning with theRepublicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> 
now because of the failed Democratic policies in this part of the country. 
They’re sick and tired of the promises from these politicians,” he says.

Strimbu isn’t the only one shilling for Trump with his sign. The election is 
inescapable in Youngstown. Local TV and radio is dominated by ads for the 
campaigns. Both candidates have been through town several times, and it’s easy 
to see why. Between 1904 and 2004, the presidential candidate who won in Ohio 
also won the presidency 24 of 26 times.Ohio is a swing state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/21/trump-ohio-democrats-working-class-voters-anywhere-but-washington>
 and Mahoning is a swing county within a swing state.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F574ff8bb5ff116f5c7507095fc82041c94c1b5df%2F0_115_4199_2518%2F4199.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F574ff8bb5ff116f5c7507095fc82041c94c1b5df%2F0_115_4199_2518%2F4199.jpg>
 Trump campaigns In Youngstown, Ohio, in August. ‘Even though he’s not 
intellectually there on a lot of things, if he surrounds himself with the right 
people, we’re going to have this government running like a company,’ says Bill 
Strimbu. Photograph: Jeff Swensen/Getty Images 
A casual look at the economic numbers suggests things are going OK-ish in 
Ohio. Unemployment across the state has fallen dramatically under Obama 
(although here John Kasich, Ohio’s governor, a former Trump rival and a current 
critic, gets more credit) and in the state as a whole is just below the 4.9% 
national rate. In Mahoning County, unemployment is down from close to 14% in 
2010 but is still close to 6%, and that numberhas risen close to a percentage 
point 
<http://www.vindy.com/news/2016/oct/26/valleys-unemployment-rate-up--in-septemb/>
 in the last year.

But for Clinton’s opponents, this election is more about existential economics 
than macro trends. Rightly or wrongly, Democratic critics in the county 
question whether they can survive four more years of business as usual, as 
dictated from Washington by denizens of either stripe. Trump, at least, 
promises change.

“Even though he’s not intellectually there, I don’t think, on a lot of things, 
if he surrounds himself with the right people, which I’m hoping and praying he 
does, if he gets elected, we’re going to have this government running like a 
company, and that’s the way it needs to be, I think,” says Strimbu.

This was once steel country. Coal and fracking took up the slack when steel 
was outsourced. Now those industries, too, are struggling. Politicians pass 
through every four years with promises but what local business leaders want is 
action.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf7b854d9da9f096da9216dae2775806a9ec8ed2%2F0_275_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf7b854d9da9f096da9216dae2775806a9ec8ed2%2F0_275_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 The Youngstown Historical Center of Industry and Labor chronicles the rise and 
fall of the local steel industry. Photograph: Jeff Swensen for the Guardian 
Trade is one of Strimbu’s big issues and it’s an area where he says 
Republicans andDemocrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> 
deserve equal blame. Half the trucks he buys now are produced in Mexico. He has 
seen China “destroy our steel industry, our rubber industry, our textile 
industry, our electronic industries. They put the American manufacturers out of 
business with low costs, and then they take control of the market share. Then 
the pricing goes right back up, because there’s no competition any more. We 
allowed them to do it.”


Trump has pledged to end “unfair trade deals”. If Clinton is elected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/01/trump-clinton-kaine-rust-belt-pennsylvania-ohio>
, it will be business as usual, despite her newfound skepticism on trade, and 
American jobs will continue to be shipped overseas, says Strimbu.


Red tape is another bugbear. Among the examples he cites is a new rule on the 
neck size of of his drivers. Anyone with a neck over 16in has to be tested for 
sleep apnea. “Most of my guys are big,” he says. “It is crazy. The guys that 
are getting diagnosed with sleep apnea now, they have to get a CPAP machine, 
and they’re electric machines, so we’ve got to put electric converters in all 
the trucks, because they sleep in their trucks on long runs.” Trump has 
promised to slash business bureaucracy, too.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22779babc8f34de80e867124087677e4cae28fef%2F0_178_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22779babc8f34de80e867124087677e4cae28fef%2F0_178_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton visits a local bar during a campaign stop in Youngstown in 
March. Photograph: Carlos Barria/Reuters 
Strimbu is not a fan of Trump’s more controversial statements or entirely sold 
on his business record: “There’s a lot of bumps along the road,” he says. But 
the positives outweigh the negatives and he is not expecting perfection from a 
politician. “I’m a Christian man. It seems like that a lot of times in history, 
there’s a person that God uses as his tool to straighten things out. Even if 
you go back and read the Bible, a lot of the Bible stars like Moses and Saul, 
who ended up being Paul, weren’t very good people, but they were used to 
perpetuate the will of God. Because of their intervention, it happened.”


A short drive from Strimbu’s office through more wooded hills brings you to 
Warren Fabricating, a hulking industrial equipment plant that lies eerily 
silent in the early afternoon rain.


Regina “Gee Gee” Mitchell, president of War Fab, as it’s known, had to lay off 
the second shift recently. The company, started by her father 50 years ago, has 
lost its three largest accounts to bankruptcy in the last four years. “I’m 
extremely worried about the future of our country,” she says.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8aa69bfad05f567e33c47ad060b84f921e761c6%2F0_245_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8aa69bfad05f567e33c47ad060b84f921e761c6%2F0_245_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Regina Mitchell, CEO of Warren Fabricating: ‘I’m extremely worried about the 
future of our country.’ Photograph: Jeff Swensen for the Guardian 
One of War Fab’s products is a giant revolving tub used in surface coalmining. 
They cost $6m-$8m each and the company used to make four a year. It shipped two 
in 2015 and hasn’t made one this year.


“My biggest frustration is this: in 2007, before President Obama even became 
president, he ran on the platform that he was going to bankrupt the coal 
industry. He had a press conference where he literally declared war on coal. I 
do not believe in leading through punitive regulations, or punishing an 
industry into compliance with your agenda,” she says.


Mitchell believes in climate change and agrees it should be addressed but, she 
says, business should be incentivized to change. “Punishing an industry into 
bankruptcy, leaving hundreds of thousands of hard-working Americans out of 
work. That doesn’t make any sense to me,” she says. Clinton, she fears, will 
simply continue in Obama’s footsteps.


At the same time as business has slowed, War Fab’s costs have risen. The 
company’s healthcare costs increased by 14% following the introduction of 
Obama’s signature healthcare policy, the Affordable Care Act. A rule that 
covers the dependent children of insured workers up to the age of 26, touted as 
a boon for parents of college kids, has also led to the coverage of many of her 
workers’ adult offspring even though they are not in school. If those legal 
adults don’t have their own coverage, they turn to their parents’ insurance. 
The average number of dependents on War Fab’s insurance in 2012 was 2.2; in 
2016 it is almost 4.9, and some of the ensuing costs have had to be passed on 
to workers.
unemployment chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/11/unemployment-obama/> 
The Federal Reserve’s decision to dig its way out of the last recession with 
record low interest rates has also hurt War Fab. Low rates have led to a strong 
dollar and for the first time ever, the company is losing bids to Canada in 
terms of costs. “I would lose whatever to China based on the labor and 
regulation rates. I used to always win those quotes from Canada. Now all that 
work is going north,” she says.


The cost of doing business in the US has become too high even for those who 
want to, says Mitchell. During the election, Trump has been hit several times 
for using Chinese steel in his building while railing against their trading 
practices. “Well, we use Chinese steel too,” she says. “You have to to survive.”


War Fab has remodeled and reshaped its business to meet the trends and 
Mitchell is confident she can do it again. But she says the federal government 
has done precious little to help and in the meantime she is denying work to a 
community crying out for it. She says she turns away people looking for 
employment every day.


The view from Middletown: 'Trump speaks to us in a way other people don’t'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/oct/27/middletown-trump-muncie-clinton>
“I feel like there’s almost been a feeling of punishment over the last eight 
years with punitive regulations, economic policies that don’t make sense for 
American manufacturing,” she says.

Trump wasn’t Mitchell’s first choice, either. She still prefers Marco Rubio, 
the Florida senator Trump savagely knocked out of presidential primary. But she 
hasn’t been fazed by the sexist rants that have dominated coverage of the 
candidate. “I’m a woman in a male-dominated field. I’ve been in the steel 
industry for 25 years. I have dealt with men likeDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> for decades, but I have never 
let it impede my progress,” she says.

She hopes the businessman will somehow rewire a Washington that short-circuits 
at the mention of compromise. But she doesn’t sound entirely convinced and is 
worried that more gridlock in Washington will only hurt the local economy. Her 
mother is intending to spoil her ballot and write in Rubio’s name.

“My biggest fear is that it doesn’t matter who wins this election come 
November 8. If the attitude stays the same, there will be no progress in our 
great country. It might sound hokey to say this, but it’s true when we say 
united we stand and divided we fall.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7774604aefdac005e755f9bc28ce23228855fe3c%2F0_275_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7774604aefdac005e755f9bc28ce23228855fe3c%2F0_275_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Brett Conner of Freshmade 3D stands with his presidential campaign 
bobbleheads: ‘Hillary’s head is a bit more balanced.’ Photograph: Jeff Swensen 
for the Guardian 
The jewel of downtown Youngstown is the Butler Institute of American Art, the 
first museum dedicated to US artwork. In its marbled foyer last week, two 
studies of Youngstown’s future, life-sized bobbleheads of Trump and Clinton, 
stood nodding at visitors.

The models were made by Freshmade 3D, a local 3D-printing business based at 
the Youngstown Business Incubator, a part of the city’s small but growing tech 
scene.

“Hillary’s head is a bit more balanced than Trump’s,” says Brett Conner, the 
company’s chief technology office. But don’t go reading too much into that.

Obama has declared Youngstown the center for 3D-printing technology, a move 
aimed at revitalizing manufacturing in a city that still all too visibly bears 
the scars of industrial collapse. The president even gave the project a 
shout-out in his 2013 State of the Union address.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f128a3a81945c3bd0d628e9482e12d892c843f5%2F0_275_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Youngstown%2C%20Ohio%3A%20why%20voters%20are%20supporting%20Trump%20in%20a%20bellwether%20city&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F05%2Fswing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f128a3a81945c3bd0d628e9482e12d892c843f5%2F0_275_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Youngstown retains the scars of industrial collapse even as its tech scene 
grows. Photograph: Jeff Swensen for the Guardian 
There are signs of the hipsterfication often taken as a harbinger of urban 
renewal. You can buy a hot dog sprinkled with fried crickets and “spiked” 
milkshakes at Suzie’s Dogs and Drafts. Old buildings are being converted into 
lofts, and work has begun on a DoubleTree hotel, the first hotel to open 
downtown in decades.

But despite all this support, Conner is cagey about who will get his vote. 
Freshmade 3D, which usually makes less photogenic products such as specialist 
car parts, has benefited from the attention Obama (and his bobbleheads) has 
brought. At the same time he says business taxes are too high and his company 
is reliant on the welfare of – and services provided by – larger companies for 
its survival. He worries that politicians push their own agenda and don’t see 
the bigger picture.

“I can see the advantages and disadvantages to both sides,” he says. “The 
polarization has caused me to step back a little bit. Clearly, if everyone is 
so polarized then the political parties are not addressing needs.” He says he 
is trying to take a “holistic” view of the situation before he casts his ballot.

As we wrap up the interview, a crocodile of schoolchildren from United 
Elementary in nearby Hanoverton enters the foyer and comes to a stop in front 
of their nodding potential presidents. “Who are you going to vote for?” asks 
the photographer. “Trump,” they chorus.
 