
A life or a penis? This is one of the questions the jury has to consider in 
the Lorena Bobbitt trial. She is the woman who cut off her husband's penis with 
a kitchen knife. According to an American friend, people are phoning in sick 
because they can't tear themselves away from television coverage of the case. 
'You hear the word penis every 30 seconds - it's amazing.' The word Bobbitt has 
transmuted itself into a verb.

Lorena Bobbitt's defence is that she was temporarily insane when she did the 
deed which was brought about by years of physical and sexual abuse. Her lawyer 
Lisa Kemler claims 'it was his penis from which she could not escape. It had 
caused her the most pain and the most fear. You will come to one conclusion: a 
life is more valuable than a penis.'

Howard Stern, the radio host and supporter of John Wayne Bobbitt, summed up 
the opposing view when he said 'a guy's whole life is his penis.'

Well, Bobbitt's penis, now happily re-attached, has taken on a life all of its 
own. The three players in the case appear to be John Wayne, Lorena and the 
piece of severed flesh.

If Lorena had cut off his ear, for instance, would the case have attracted 
anywhere near the same sort of publicity? Of course not. But Lorena Bobbitt cut 
to the heart of the matter - male power. I don't happen to think that male 
power, or pleasure come to that, resides solely between men's legs. Men have a 
lot more going for them than their pricks. But there you are, I'm obviously a 
pussycat at heart.

Lorena Bobbitt is not my heroine, what she did was an act of desperation not 
revolution. But that doesn't mean that I can't make jokes about it, or help 
noticing the smiles on women's faces whenever this case is mentioned. Or 
underneath the smiles pick up an enormous amount of female anger.

Does that mean that under every giggle is a castrating feminist just dying to 
get out? No. It just means that a lot of women from all walks of life are 
extremely pissed off. Lorena Bobbit was a manicurist not a man-hater. Her 
husband said in court that he had not been raised to hit a woman but admitted 
he never indulged in foreplay. Just how brutish he was is up to the courts to 
decide.

All of this is unfortunately real life. Which is why trying to slot the 
characters into cyphers for various positions doesn't really work. Unless you 
accept that the dirty deed turned Lorena overnight from the classic victim into 
feminist vigilant.

Victimhood is out anyway. The new power feminism as advanced by Woolf, Roiphe 
and their kin has given an acceptable gloss to the half-crazed rantings of 
Camille Paglia. Understanding, rightly, that not all women want to be 
patronised by being talked about as victims, they are also bending over 
backwards to tell us how much they lurve men. No wonder they are having a hard 
time with this case. Although not all women are victims, sometimes I'm afraid 
some are.

They are beaten up and raped daily and it's not because they feel bad about 
themselves or have been got at by some zealous politically correct propaganda. 
The bottom line is that life for many women is made miserable by the men who 
are supposed to love them because we live in a culture that tolerates an awful 
amount of male violence.

The Zero Tolerance Campaign launched by the Association of London Authorities 
to raise awareness about domestic violence (you may have seen the posters that 
say 'Behind every successful man is a woman they put into casualty'), is 
sending out a message about women's growing lack of tolerance to such violence. 
This violence is not located in men's dicks but in their hearts and minds. I 
just hope that all those men who feel tender hearing details of the Bobbitt 
case feel as vulnerable as I do every time they read about another woman being 
mutilated in equally horrible ways.

I do not know of a single case where a self-proclaimed feminist has physically 
castrated a man. I do know that as long as men see female equality as 
essentially emasculating that we have a job to do. Part of this may entail 
liberating men from their genitals. I'm talking symbolically here. It might be 
saying not that the penis is a weapon and we will disarm you but that there 
might be more to being a man than having one. The Bobbitt case cannot be 
reduced to little Lorena versus his big thing.

John Wayne appears to be the same ape either with his penis severed or 
re-attached. The enormous symbolic power attributed to the Bobbitt appendage 
doesn't quite square up the pathetic piece of flesh found by policemen and 
deposited in a plastic bag. But then phallic symbols are always much more 
awe-inspiring than their real-life counterparts.

All women know this. Most men do too, which is why they have such a huge 
investment in them in the first place. If Lorena mistook the symbol for the 
reality and reduced the problems that she had with her husband to the existence 
of his penis, she was in a demented way reinforcing the dominant view of male 
sexuality that the penis has a life of its own, that men just can't help but 
being lead around by their dicks.

If I was a man I would resent being categorised by this 'wicked willy' view. 
Yet this idea of the uncontrollability of the male sex urge is one that we hear 
time and time again. Men just can't help acting on impulse. This time around 
nor could Mrs Bobbitt. And though we have heard a lot lately about how women 
must take responsibility for their own desires, which of course we must, we 
have heard far less about how men must do the same thing.

I don't want to reduce men in all their glory to little more than attachments 
to their penises. I want them to have as much pleasure as possible. But if that 
pleasure is at the expense of women then it's not their attachment to their 
actual penises that I want to see removed but their attachment to the power 
that having a penis may give them. To sever this connection is more complicated 
than getting out the kitchen knife. So if any of this makes men feel slightly 
anxious, let me reassure you that it's not your willies we are after. It's your 
symbolic bollocks that you really need to worry about.

Â· This article was republished as part of a special edition marking 50 Years 
of the Guardian women's page <https://www.theguardian.com/women/50years>.
 