
My So-Called Life is the show that got away. It lasted just one season - 19 
episodes - and while one would like to say it changed TV for ever, it didn't. 
If anything, its influence might be more evident in music: its unashamed teen 
self-regard, the wallowing in the intensity of one's feelings, seems to 
foreshadow the rise of emo.

The show was the brainchild of the producers of thirtysomething, and at heart 
it was that show transposed to high school. The characters were, in the main, 
stock: 15-year-old Angela Chase (Claire Danes), the bookish, sensitive 
narrator; her friends Rayanne (kooky, irresponsible, troubled) and Rickie (gay 
and Hispanic - tick those diversity boxes!); Jordan Catalano (Jared Leto), the 
dyslexic and almost silent rocker guy with whom Angela is in love; and Brian, 
the geeky boy next door who is in love with Angela.

So what makes it worth watching? Claire Danes was 15 when it was made, and 
she's revelatory, capturing the excruciating self-consciousness of the 
mid-teenage years. She's gawky and awkward one minute, graceful and funny the 
next. Maybe she was barely acting, because aside from Romeo + Juliet a couple 
of years later, she's never come close to this since. MSCL displayed a 
wonderfully deft touch. It dealt with "ishoos" - sexuality, identity, 
generational conflict - without preaching. Angela's relationship with her 
parents is utterly realistic, so truthful that different generations will draw 
differing conclusions from the same scenes. When I first saw the show, on 
Channel 4 in 1995, I could always see Angela's point of view. A decade later, I 
wished she'd listen to her mum and dad.

It wasn't perfect. One sometimes wanted to shake the characters and yell at 
them to snap out of their self-satisfaction: Wake up! But real lives in 
prosperous societies are like that: those who liked MSCL did so because it 
reflected truths in their own lives, and it can't be blamed for our smugness 
and solipsism.
 