
The absurdly long run-up to the US election has begun. This will be the first 
presidential election fought since further limits were lifted on campaign 
funding: a change brought in on the grounds of “free speech”, when the supreme 
court decided thatthe Koch brothers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jan/26/koch-brothers-889m-budget-2016-presidential-election>
not being able to say, “We own the president,” infringed their rights under the 
first amendment. Personally, I think Obama will be quite lonely once it’s all 
over, not least because he has allowed the police to kill most of the other 
black people.

Differences between the candidates are usually so slight that what the 
Democratic frontrunner thinks is pretty much just what the Republican 
frontrunner thinks on the days that he remembers to take his meds. But in 
something of a format twist,Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders> – an old-school socialist 
– has crowdfunded himself into a credible position for the Democratic 
nomination. I sincerely hope he wins, if only so that we see the first 
inauguration speech made from inside a giant, bulletproof hamster ball. The 
Democratic frontrunner is Hillary Clinton, a ruthless, steel-haired troll doll.
Hers is the face that would haunt a lot of Libyans’ nightmares, if they were 
still alive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/22/hillary-clinton-benghazi-hearing-testimony-libya-war>
. Unfortunately for her election prospects, Hillary has never quite learned to 
introduce humour or compassion into her speaking voice and on a good day sounds 
like an android trying to trick the last human out of a bunker.

At last week’s Republican debate, the candidates accused CNBC of displaying 
liberal bias 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/28/republican-debate-cnbc-media-economic-policy>
. One reading would be that the GOP candidates are now so rightwing that they 
make a giant media conglomerate look liberal. Let’s not forget that the 
essential message of a Republican candidate is a tricky sell. That you love 
America, but hate all the groups that make up America. That you love democracy, 
but hate people. Donald Trump, who at best looks like a plughole in an 
orangutan sanctuary, is probably only running for president because this 
dimension doesn’t have a Superman he can give a hard time to. His hair, looking 
like a slovenly, postcoital cat, is actually one of the least weird things 
about him. He is lacking in charm or wit and is almost ferociously 
inarticulate. The US public has identified with him strongly. It seems that the 
electorate, possibly bored with rational thought, is toying with the idea of 
cutting out the middleman and just electing one of the business class through 
sheer force of Stockholm syndrome.

The new American hero is the old Jeb Bush. Oh, no! | Jeb Lund
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/03/jeb-bush-campaign-trail-i-can-fix-it>
The old politics is dull, and what could be more exciting than electing a man 
who might declare war on the sea? His plans to builda giant wall sealing the US 
border with Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/31/border-walls-canada-mexico-republicans-walker-trump>
 are entertaining, not least because it would be interesting to see a nation as 
heavily armed as America go into cocaine withdrawal. Somehow, I always imagine 
that Trump spends the evenings with his forehead pressed against the cold glass 
of an aquarium, talking telepathically to the tormented albino squid in which 
he has hidden his soul.

Indeed, the whole Republican field offers a bracing challenge to conventional 
notions of sanity. The current poll leader isBen Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/05/quiet-rise-ben-carson-republican-presidential-race>
, a neurosurgeon who happens to be a Seventh Day Adventist and creationist. 
Creationists have often made me doubt evolution, but probably not in the way 
they think. Histaxation policy is based on Biblical tithing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/11/presidential-hopeful-ben-carson-bases-10-tax-plan-on-biblical-tithing>
, taking economic pointers from people who had a GDP of one golden calf.

Why do both parties rage against bias in what is actually a laughably servile 
media? Maybe it’s because the political class have an instinctive contempt for 
asking the public to decide anything meaningful, such as policy. So their 
campaigns have to be largely symbolic affairs about hope or hard work or 
whatever flavour of horseshit is polling well. Most campaign spending goes on 
advertising (65% of Obama’s “grassroots” campaign of 2012 was media spend) and 
advertising speaks in symbolism. Thus the parties may actually distrust any 
kind of rational inquiry, as what they’re saying doesn’t, and can’t, make any 
sense. Or maybe the reality of what they’re voting on is something nobody dare 
express. They’re voting on the exact speed of the drift toward a future of 
armies run by corporations corralling permanently travelling communities of 
cooks, cleaners and sex workers, as they underbid each other outside the 
entrances to gated communities to ensure they’re the ones let inside to service 
the fortunate. A future where the pursuit of happiness will make about as much 
sense as mounting an expedition to reach the horizon.

Of course it could be that the whole election is a bit like The X Factor, and 
they put a few lunatics in the early rounds to lure us into something we 
promised we’d never engage with again. By the end we’ll be back to two 
corporate glove puppets belting out the same tired standards. And no matter how 
bad the choice is, we’ll always have a preference. Clinton will be offering an 
expanded kill list of official enemies, secret corporate courts, and her first 
speech about Palestine will sound like it was written by the Hulk. A lot of 
otherwise rational minds will be praying for her to win.

• This article was corrected on 4 November 2015 and 5 November to clarify a 
reference to limits on campaign funding.
 