
Zac Goldsmith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/zac-goldsmith>, the Tory 
mayoral candidate for London, cast himself as on the side of the “heroes” while 
his Labour rival’s career “involved coaching people how to sue our police”.

At the launch of Goldsmith’smanifesto, which focused on green issues, housing 
and transport, the Tory MP opened a new front over law and order claiming his 
opponent would be soft on crime because he “provided cover for extremists”.

Zac Goldsmith flounders in quiz on London football teams and tube stations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/05/zac-goldsmith-fails-quiz-london-football-teams-tube-stations>
In his speech, Goldsmith said Labour’s Sadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> was a politician who had 
“given platforms, oxygen and even cover – over and over and over again – to 
those who seek to do our police and capital harm”.

He added that Khan, the Muslim son of a bus driver, “has tried to silence 
questions about his links [to extremists] by shamelessly accusing anyone who 
raises them of being Islamophobic”.

Khan, who had been a respected human rights lawyer before entering politics, 
has said that the Goldsmith camp has tried to focus voters’ minds on his faith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/02/zac-goldsmith-nasty-campaign-sadiq-khan>
, in an attempt to divide religious and ethnic groups and persuade non-Muslims 
not to vote for him.

Goldsmith has been criticised for targeting Hindu and Sikh communities with 
letters from the prime minister raising questions over the security of 
“jewellery” in their homes should Khan become mayor and pointing out that he 
had met Narendra Modi, the Indian prime minister who ran the state of Gujarat 
when it was rocked by anti-Muslim riots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fzac-goldsmith-accuses-rival-sadiq-khan-of-giving-cover-to-extremists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbc708c2624c6e687eb5c63d536e8d15a9be515f%2F0_142_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zac%20Goldsmith%20accuses%20Sadiq%20Khan%20of%20'giving%20cover%20to%20extremists'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fzac-goldsmith-accuses-rival-sadiq-khan-of-giving-cover-to-extremists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zac%20Goldsmith%20accuses%20Sadiq%20Khan%20of%20%27giving%20cover%20to%20extremists%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fzac-goldsmith-accuses-rival-sadiq-khan-of-giving-cover-to-extremists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbc708c2624c6e687eb5c63d536e8d15a9be515f%2F0_142_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Boris Johnson urged activists to ‘Back Zac’. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA 
When questioned by reporters, Goldsmith said it was legitimate to question 
Khan’s “extremist” links. “I don’t believe [Khan] is an extremist. But it is a 
matter of judgment … Not everyone in the Muslim community has provided cover 
for extremists.”

Asked about whether he would be sending letters to the Muslim community like 
those sent to Hindu families, he said that he had personally leafleted outside 
“mosques and had held mosque meetings”. He said: “I want to reach out to 
everybody.”

In a sign of increasing worries, senior Tories have recently come to 
Goldsmith’s aid after what has been viewed as a lacklustre campaign. In the 
latest polls, Khan has extended his lead among first preference votes to eight 
points over Goldsmith.

On Tuesday Boris Johnson appeared side by side with Goldsmith, telling 
cheering activists that they should “Back Zac”. The outgoing mayor warned that
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> only had 23 days to “avert the 
disaster” of Labour “lefties” retaking City Hall.


Johnson has also targeted Khan’s links with a south London imam, Sulaiman 
Ghani, saying that he had “denounced gays and called women ‘subservient’, and 
called for the release of al-Qaida terrorists”.

Theresa May, the home secretary, has said she was worried about whether Khan 
had been a “friend” of Babar Ahmad, a south Londoner who ended up in a US 
prison after admitting providing material support [in the form of two positive 
articles on a website he ran] to the Taliban government at a time when they 
were harbouring Osama bin Laden.

Khan has described the attacks as “desperate”. Yvette Cooper, a former Labour 
cabinet minister, wrote that “the Goldsmith campaign is increasingly resorting 
to disgraceful, divisive tactics as the polls show the Tories falling further 
behind. Zac Goldsmith’s dog-whistle is becoming a racist scream.”

 * This article was amended on 20 April 2016. An earlier version wrongly said 
Babar Ahmad ended up in Guantánamo Bay. He was imprisoned on the US mainland.  