
Earlier this year, during his ill-fated campaign to become mayor of London, 
Zac Goldsmith was interviewed <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vViUKsJ42ZM> at 
an event celebrating India’s Bollywood cinema. With his silver-grey hair and 
silver-grey eyes, his lofty height and patrician diffidence, he looked every 
inch like a man aching to be sitting at his favourite Mayfair eatery, but 
instead finding himself having to savour the uncertain offerings of some high 
street tandoori takeaway.

He declared himself a “Bollywood fan”, saying that he lapped up anything with 
a Bollywood theme. The interviewer then asked him about his favourite Bollywood 
films and actors. Suddenly speechless, the 41-year-old old Etonian’s baffled 
expression suggested he’d just been asked to describe Euclid’s theorem – in 
Greek.

“No, I’m not going to give you one,” he finally said. “I can’t think of a 
favourite.”

It wasn’t exactly a deciding moment in the election, but it was the most 
graphic of a series of encounters that left the impression that Goldsmith was 
not born to get down with the people. In the event, the Back Zac ticket cracked.

After a campaign targeting his Labour opponent’s Muslim background and 
connectionsso stubbornly that it was accused of racism, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/top-conservatives-condemn-zac-goldsmiths-disgusting-mayoral-campaign>
 and even Goldsmith’s sister, Jemima, said she was saddened by its tone, Sadiq 
Khan walked away with the mayoralty and Goldsmith withdrew to his Richmond Park 
constituency.

But although he is a long way from being a natural in the spotlight, Goldsmith 
was never going to disappear into the constituency rigmarole of, for example,
saving a cashpoint in Barnes 
<http://www.zacgoldsmith.com/barclays-to-retain-cashpoint-at-barnes-branch/> 
from being closed. There’s too much history and celebrity in his family, too 
much ease and speed in his progress to settle for the sleepy backwaters of life 
in a safe Tory seat.

And lo, last week, Goldsmith announced that he was resigning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/25/zac-goldsmith-quits-as-mp-over-doomed-heathrow-expansion-decision>
 his seat, thus triggering a byelection, after the government said that it was 
going ahead with the plan to build a third runway at Heathrow. He will stand as 
an independent.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fzac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zac%20Goldsmith%20resigns%20after%20government's%20go-ahead%20to%20Heathrow%20third%20runway%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fzac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zac%20Goldsmith%20resigns%20after%20government%27s%20go-ahead%20to%20Heathrow%20third%20runway%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fzac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video&media=>
Zac Goldsmith resigns after government’s go-ahead to Heathrow third runway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/25/zac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video>
Goldsmith promised last year in his campaign to hold on to the seat that he 
first won in 2010 that he would resign if the government backed the Heathrow 
expansion scheme. So he is as good as his word. But not all observers are 
impressed. Some noted that the government has a very small majority,Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is enduring a difficult 
period after the Brexit vote and the last thing she or the Tory party need is a 
byelection.

They conclude that the move is less about principle than privilege. Writing in 
theDaily Mail, the political columnist Peter Oborne suggested  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3872680/Betrayal-pure-vanity-PETER-OBORNE-says-race-shame-Tory-MP-Zac-Goldsmith-s-decision-quit-Heathrow-moral-crusade-pure-self-indulgence-rich-man-turned-dud-politician.html>
that Goldsmith represented a familiar type from London’s centres of inherited 
wealth, of “none too bright” men who lead “agreeable but empty lives”. “To put 
it brutally,” wrote Oborne, “he’s placed his own vanity above loyalty to his 
colleagues.”

Whether this is true, Goldsmith is the owner of a demeanour that doesn’t 
exactly express collegiate solidarity. Or as Oborne puts it, in 
characteristically blunt style, he “gives the impression he’s bestowing a 
favour on his fellow MPs by joining them in the Commons”.

Of course, if you’re the beneficiary of a £300m Swiss trust fund, courtesy of 
a father, James Goldsmith, who built a ruthless reputation and a billion-pound 
fortune from corporate raiding, if you’re blessed with dashing good looks and 
you’re not much intimidated, as most MPs are, by the thought of losing your 
job, then you’re probably not going to win any House of Commons popularity 
contests.

A common complaint about modern MPs is that they have never had any job 
outside politics. They leave university, become political researchers, special 
advisers and, next thing, they’re an MP deciding how the country should be run. 
But Goldsmith’s story makes that standard model of progress look like a tale of 
epic struggle and sacrifice out in the big bad world.

He was kicked out of Eton for possession of cannabis that, he insists, was not 
his. He did a crammer and then travelled around the world, staying in Ladakh in 
the Himalayas for six months, an experience that helped inspire his ecological 
thinking. In 1997, he got a job as reviews editor at theEcologist magazine, 
which just happened to be edited, owned and published by his uncle, Edward 
Goldsmith. A year later, aged 23, he became its unpaid editor-in-chief. He then 
set about turning it into a less academic magazine, upping the circulation in 
the process.

By 25, he was married with a child. His first wife was Sheherazade Bentley, 
herself the daughter of the renowned asset-stripper John Bentley and the 
Colombian actress and socialite Viviane Ventura. These were the years when 
Goldsmith developed an alternative organic image, in a multimillionaire kind of 
way.

The Tory party, itself in the middle of an image overhaul, took note and made 
him deputy chair of its quality of life policy group, which produced a whole 
mass of greenish recommendations that David Cameron bought into when in 
opposition and then largely junked in power.

By 2010, Goldsmith had been handed the safe seat of Richmond Park, near to 
where he grew up. His marriage was over, having produced three children, and 
he’d taken up with Alice Rothschild, who – deep breath – is the daughter of a 
Guinness and a Rothschild, and the sister of Goldsmith’s brother’s wife, Kate, 
who later took off with a rapper.

All very aristocratic. And, let’s face it, not your typical tale of 
Westminster bed-hopping. That’s the thing about Goldsmith. For all his 
protestations of normality or, rather, humility, he mixes and marries in an 
exclusive social circle of the ultra-wealthy.

And with that kind of wealth and influence, team-playing is a discipline for 
the drones. The political columnist Matthew Parris called Goldsmith a 
“gold-plated loose cannon” and now, as of last week, the cannonball has been 
fired.

But where, exactly, is it heading? Towards the Tory party? Heathrow? 
Goldsmith’s career? All are possible, indeed probable, destinations. With an 
opposition in terminal disarray, only an act of sabotage or an early Brexit can 
threaten the government’s comfortable lead in the polls. Fortunately for the 
Labour party, the Tories have their own self-destructive streak.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fzac-goldsmith-super-rich-charmer-now-flying-solo-heathrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55e5661ac4eda6ea29772e4b8120dded07f0e56%2F0_55_2040_1224%2F2040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zac%20Goldsmith%3A%20the%20super-rich%20charmer%20now%20flying%20solo%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fzac-goldsmith-super-rich-charmer-now-flying-solo-heathrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zac%20Goldsmith%3A%20the%20super-rich%20charmer%20now%20flying%20solo%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F29%2Fzac-goldsmith-super-rich-charmer-now-flying-solo-heathrow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55e5661ac4eda6ea29772e4b8120dded07f0e56%2F0_55_2040_1224%2F2040.jpg>
 James Goldsmith, leader of the Referendum party, the forerunner of Ukip, and 
Zac’s father. Photograph: Jacqueline Arzt/AP 
In a sense, the pickle the country and the political class now finds itself in 
started with the Goldsmith’s family’s taste for rogue individualism. It was 
Zac’s father, the billionaire, Tory supporting James Goldsmith, who in 1994 set 
up the Referendum party to campaign to get Britain out of the EU. The elder 
Goldsmith was from a Franco-German background and lived much of the time on the 
continent, but he was passionately against his fellow Britons enjoying the same 
freedom of movement.

Although the Referendum party died along with James Goldsmith in 1997, it gave 
momentum to the surviving anti-European party, Ukip. And slowly Ukip made 
enough inroads into Tory support that Cameron was panicked into calling a 
referendum. Zac has called his father “the man who saved Britain”.

The rest is history, or a shaky future, but one small footnote of the 
resulting replacement of Cameron by May is the green light for Heathrow 
expansion.

The arguments for and against that decision could fill a library, but 
Goldsmith clearly sees himself as the green hero of the hour. Just as the 
father, once a keen Tory supporter, turned his back on the party to fund an 
anti-European party, so has the son abandoned theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> to stand as an 
independent. Polls suggest that he’s the favourite to win.

“If I see something that is wrong,” Goldsmith told one interviewer during the 
mayoral campaign, “I just want to do something about it and change it. It was 
probably drilled into me as a child, although I don’t remember it being drilled 
into me as a child.”

It could be said that both Goldsmith senior and junior made principled stands, 
but equally they can be seen as acts of devil-may-care arrogance that comes 
with huge wealth. If so, the Tory party only has itself to blame. Attracted to 
the power and glamour of money, it promoted someone who was always likely to 
walk off if the decision went against him.

Byelections are funny things. They can change the conversation, the sense of 
what is possible. Just as 20 years ago James Goldsmith set in train the 
movement that did for David Cameron, so might his son trigger the start of the 
demise of his successor, Theresa May.

With its multi-generational plot, power plays and attractive cast, it’s a 
story that has all the drama of a Bollywood film. Just don’t ask Goldsmith who 
should star in it.

THE GOLDSMITH FILE


Born Frank Zacharias Robin Goldsmith, 20 January 1975 in London. His father 
was the litigious billionaire financier Sir James Goldsmith and his mother Lady 
Annabel Birley, after whom the Mayfair club Annabel’s is named.

Best of times Winning his Richmond Park seat in 2010 and then holding it five 
years later with an increased majority.

Worst of times His disastrous and lasting attempt to become Mayor of London 
earlier this year. Jeremy Corbyn dubbed it a “vile campaign”, and it resulted 
in Sadiq Khan winning with a record percentage majority.

What he says “I’ve never sought to hide who I am. I was dealt a very good hand 
and I’ve always tried to play it well.”

What others say “He was left money by his daddy, he’s never had a job other 
than a job given to him by his uncle, so what qualification has he got to do 
anything?” Sir Nigel Rudd, chairman of Heathrow.

“He is quite shy actually and sometimes he is a little bit nervous of the 
limelight, which in politics is not necessarily how you succeed.” His friend 
Tony Juniper, former director of Friends of the Earth.
 