
The Conservative mayoral candidate asked questions in parliament about cuts in 
green grants that affected solar energy companies owned by his younger brother, 
but did not declare an indirect interest.

Zac Goldsmith put down six questions 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/search/?q=solar&pid=24911> between November 2011 
and February 2012 after the government announced it would slash subsidies to 
the solar industry. Goldsmithwarned MPs that there was panic 
<http://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=2011-11-23b.381.2> in the industry 
over ministers’ plans.

His younger brother, Ben, a venture capitalist, had personally invested in one 
solar energy firm Engensa, which described the cuts as unacceptable. Ben 
Goldsmith’s investment fund, WHEB, also owned a quarter of Engensa’s software 
partner, PassivSystems, a firm valued at£40m in 2014 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/energy/10733130/PassivSystems-plans-12m-float.html>
.

Zac Goldsmith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/zac-goldsmith> also has a 
personal stake in a separate £24m investment fund run by WHEB and by 2011 his 
younger brother had donated £15,000 to his parliamentary office, according to 
the Commons’ register of members’ interests. Despite these links, the Tory MP 
did not declare his brother’s interests when intervening in the Commons.

Parliamentary rules at the time stated MPs should declare “any past, present 
or expected future financial interest, direct or indirect … when a member is 
making a speech in the House or in committee or participating in any other 
proceedings of the House”, that might “reasonably be thought by others to 
influence the speech, representation or communication in question”.


It goes on to say that the declaration should be “brief but should make 
specific reference to the nature of the interest”.

London mayor: Goldsmith embarrassed as ‘repellent’ imam’s Tory links emerge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/apr/14/london-mayor-goldsmith-attacks-backfire-as-repellent-imams-tory-links-emerge>
A spokesman for Goldsmith said he had declared his interests properly, adding 
that when the Tory MP had asked the questions in parliament, the code of 
conduct only required conflicts of interests that arose from spouses and 
partners to be identified.

The 2009 parliamentary code of conduct 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200809/cmcode/735/735.pdf>, which 
applied at the time, said MPs are “required to declare relevant indirect 
interests, for instance those of a spouse or partner, and also non-registrable 
interests of a financial nature where these are affected by the proceedings in 
question”.

Labour said it would be calling for an investigation into why the London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> mayoral candidate did not declare the 
Goldsmith family interest.

Caroline Flint, the Labour MP who was shadow energy and climate change 
secretary under Ed Miliband, said: “It seems reasonable to conclude that Zac 
Goldsmith should have declared the conflict of interest between his family’s 
personal financial involvement with this company, including his brother’s 
central role, and the companies held within its small portfolio when asking 
government ministers questions and involving himself in the writing of reports.”

She added that she would be writing to the parliamentary authorities shortly 
to demand a full investigation.

Since last year, the parliamentary rules 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmcode/1076/1076.pdf> have 
been updated to explicitly list the types of relation – “parent, child, 
grandparent, grandchild, sibling, uncle, aunt, nephew or niece of the MP or of 
a spouse, civil partner or cohabiting partner of the MP” – whose relevant 
business interests would have to be mentioned by an MP in “any proceeding of 
the House”.

On the campaign trail Zac Goldsmith, an environmentalist with a £300m personal 
fortune, has promised voters he will build a “solar revolution” in the capital 
if he becomes London mayor.

Ben Goldsmith, a banker, keeps a lower profile but has led the charge to bring 
sun-powered panels to Britain’s roofs. By 2011, the then 31-year-old venture 
capitalist had financed and taken stakes in a series of companies that used 
British and European Union public subsidies to sell solar energy systems to 
homeowners.

 The network of companies that were connected to Ben Goldsmith relied on a 
steady stream of cash from “feed-in tariffs” that paid a fixed sum for 25 years 
per kWh of solar energy produced. In October 2011, coalition ministers 
announced that these solar subsidies would be slashed by half, a move one of 
Ben Goldsmith’s firms – Engensa – said would “result in massive job losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/oct/28/solar-subsidies-cut-half>”.

A year after the government’s environmental support was slashed, Ben 
Goldsmith’s Engensa was sold to a Chinese firm.

Critics also accuse Goldsmith of political hypocrisy as he backs Britain’s 
exit from Europe despite his brother’s investments benefiting from EU funds 
that tech businesses would be denied in the event of a Brexit.

Flint said: “Given what we have learned about Zac Goldsmith and his family’s 
investments, it appears unlikely he would not understand how the European Union 
helps British companies in high-growth sectors, such as green energy, get 
access to the investment they need from across Europe. So it is hypocritical of 
him to seek to deny the same opportunities to British companies if the UK left 
the European Union.”

Who's the most cycling-friendly London mayoral candidate?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2016/apr/14/london-mayoral-election-qa-on-cycling-policy-with-the-main-candidates>
Both brothers are key movers in Tory green politics: Ben Goldsmith chairs the 
Conservative Environment Network, which promotes “decentralised, 
market-orientated solutions” to environmental issues. Zac Goldsmith is on the 
network’s steering committee.

They draw their wealth from the billion-pound inheritance of their late 
father, Sir James Goldsmith, a corporate raider turned anti-EU politician. 
According to his financial return, posted as part of his bid to be London’s 
mayor, in the two years from 2010 Zac Goldsmith made more than £1m in capital 
gains.


Ben Goldsmith has key roles in the family’s finances: he is a director of 
Cavamont Holdings, the Goldsmith’s investment holding vehicle, which was 
registered offshore in the Cayman Islands in 2005. He is central in overseeing 
the holding company’s investments – chairing its family committee.

WHEB, in which Ben Goldsmith had a stake, last year received £5m in backing 
from the state-owned British Business Bank. It also controlled Zac Goldsmith’s 
personal investments in a £24m private equity fund along with stakes held by 
the Goldsmith family’s offshore vehicle Verton Holdings.

The Tory MP recorded his investment in the private equity fund in the 
parliamentary register. He states he receives “no income and nor do I have any 
influence on the investments made”.

In February, WHEB sold up and exited from its role in managing the funds, with 
its 25% stakepurchased by German partners Alpina 
<http://www.whebgroup.com/investment-strategies/private-equity/>.


Ben Goldsmith has continued his role in green investment. He has set up a new 
fund Menhaden –raising £80m from the stockmarket last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/10/ben-goldsmith-launches-menhaden-green-investment-trust>
 – and took stakes in the WHEB funds. He did not answer questions about his 
shareholdings and business interests.


















 