
Kathryn Kellogg, a 25-year-old print shop employee, spends four hours a day on 
her lifestyle blogGoing Zero Waste <http://www.goingzerowaste.com/>. She posts 
on Instagram, engages with Facebook followers, and writes about homemade 
eyeliner and lip balm, worm composting, and shopping bulk bins – anything to 
avoid unnecessary waste. Her trash for the past year – anything that hasn’t 
been composted or recycled – fits in an 8oz jar.

Kellogg is earnest, enthusiastic, and admittedly still figuring out what it 
means to be zero waste. The aspiring actor has also weathered her fair share of 
criticism. “I’m not even that big yet and I get so much hate mail,” says 
Kellogg, who draws 10,000 unique page views a month and has 800 subscribers.

Since the launch of Going Zero Waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/waste> in March 2015, she’s been 
criticized on social media and in private messages for driving and flying, for 
not installing a grey-water system, and, no joke, for using toilet paper (she 
does have a bidet, by the way). She’s been chastised by vegans for eating eggs, 
and one visiting relative walked around Kellogg’s house pointing out anything 
made of plastic.

She’s also been called out as overly privileged, even though she lives in a 
modest two-bedroom house in Vallejo, a blue-collar city 32 miles north-east of 
San Francisco.


“They just nitpick every little thing because zero waste sounds like such an 
ultimatum,” Kellogg says. “My boyfriend thinks that I should change the term, 
but it’s there, and I don’t know what else to call it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fzero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F975c357aeee95cd36f09bd52aad07e6236a47643%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zero-waste%20bloggers%3A%20the%20millennials%20who%20can%20fit%20a%20year's%20worth%20of%20trash%20in%20a%20jar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fzero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zero-waste%20bloggers%3A%20the%20millennials%20who%20can%20fit%20a%20year%27s%20worth%20of%20trash%20in%20a%20jar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fzero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F975c357aeee95cd36f09bd52aad07e6236a47643%2F0_232_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 The amount of non-recyclable trash Kellogg says she produced in a year. 
Photograph: Andrew Burton for the Guardian 
The leaders of this zero-waste lifestyle movement are young millennial women 
like Lauren Singer ofTrash is for Tossers <http://www.trashisfortossers.com/>, 
Celia Ristow ofLitterless <http://www.litterless.co/>, and Kellogg. They all 
embrace a sleek, modern aesthetic over the crunchy, hippy stereotypes of yore.

Most of these women trace their lightning bolt moment back to Bea Johnson 
<http://www.zerowastehome.com/p/about.html>, a charismatic, 42-year-old mother 
of two from the wealthy enclave of Mill Valley, California. Outspoken, French 
and with a taste for a stark minimalist aesthetic, Johnson solidified her 
status as a zero-waste lifestyle guru in 2013 with the publication of Zero 
Waste Home: The Ultimate Guide to Reducing Your Waste.

Ariana Schwarz, 27, runs the Paris-to-Go 
<http://www.paris-to-go.com/search/label/zero-waste> zero waste blog. As a 
sustainability major, Schwarz was frustrated by the focus on theory over 
meaningful lifestyle changes. Then, her geology professor sent her a copy of a 
Sunset magazine feature about Johnson and her 16oz jar of trash. “Here was a 
woman actually living as sustainably as possible,” Schwarz says. Inspired, she 
completed a school project, living zero waste for a month, then three months, 
and then a year. “Once I realized how easy it was, it kind of stuck with me.”

These young women aim to reduce their landfill trash at a time in history 
when, on average, every American produces nearly three pounds of trash per day. 
According to the Environmental Protection Agency, 40% of US greenhouse gas 
emissions come from hauling, making, using, and throwing away stuff and food.
Food waste in the US: 40% of greenhouse gas emissions come from hauling food. 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/04/zero-waste-feature/> 
On a drizzly, grey day back at the Vallejo farmers’ market, Kellogg shows off 
zero-waste grocery shopping in action. She dumps organic strawberries from the 
plastic trays into her own jar (after asking the stand worker whether he would 
reuse the container). She uses cloth produce bags for shelled peas, kale and 
raisins. She orders cheese in reusable glass containers from a local goat 
farmer. Kellogg says she aspires be a “strong, moderate voice” for the 
zero-waste lifestyle, which she discovered after health issues pushed her 
towards a more natural lifestyle.


“Anyone can participate in waste reduction practices,” Kellogg says. “I’m from 
Arkansas; I know that I’m so fortunate to live inCalifornia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>. None of this stuff – bulk 
stores, recycling programs, municipal composting – exists back home in the 
south. But I think absolutely anyone can participate, it’s to what degree they 
can.”

Rob Greenfield, 29, wrote Dude Making a Difference about his zero-waste 
journey across the US on a bamboo bicycle. He agrees that any effort counts, 
even if it’s not as extreme as his own. He’s also one of the few male 
zero-waste bloggers around.

Once I realized how easy zero waste living was, it kind of stuck with me
Blogger Ariana Schwarz 
Greenfield admits, so far in his travels, he’s only come across female 
zero-waste bloggers. “I don’t really know why that is,” Greenfield says. “But I 
don’t feel isolated by it because it doesn’t matter to me whether my comrades 
are male or female. I find great joy and passion in my work.”

It’s no coincidence that young women are leading the movement, says Kate 
Bailey, program manager at Eco-Cycle Solutions, a not-for-profit group that 
provides recycling and composting services in Boulder, Colorado.

“Women everywhere are deeply concerned about the health effects of the growing 
amount of chemicals and toxins in our everyday lives,” Bailey says. “Women are 
also the primary purchasers in the household so they are on the frontlines of 
hyper-consumption in the US. They’re frustrated by the growing prevalence of 
single-use, disposable products, the trend to over-package everything, and the 
lack of choices when it comes to sustainable, less toxic products.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fzero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffeaac677e3d7ce76496df86e3074c64bd806380e%2F0_62_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zero-waste%20bloggers%3A%20the%20millennials%20who%20can%20fit%20a%20year's%20worth%20of%20trash%20in%20a%20jar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fzero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zero-waste%20bloggers%3A%20the%20millennials%20who%20can%20fit%20a%20year%27s%20worth%20of%20trash%20in%20a%20jar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fzero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffeaac677e3d7ce76496df86e3074c64bd806380e%2F0_62_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Kathryn Kellogg checks on her compost bin, where she uses worms to break down 
biodegradable waste. Photograph: Andrew Burton for the Guardian 
Celia Ristow, a 24-year-old tech company worker who started the blog 
Litterless, gives smartly written tips for minimizing waste when traveling, 
eating out, and in the domestic sphere. Unlike other zero-waste bloggers, she 
doesn’t track her trash in a jar. It’s misleading, Ristow says, and doesn’t 
take into account the fact that trash often accumulates in the production 
stream before products end up on store shelves.

 Ristow admits that she’ll probably never be completely zero waste, but that 
doesn’t stop her from striving to produce as little trash as possible. She 
thinks of it as a daily lifestyle choice, a way of finding no-waste solutions 
to small decisions. Refusing samples in plastic cups. Saying no to the granola 
bar in non-recyclable packaging on the snack table at work. Bringing along a 
reusable water bottle – always.

 Living in an apartment in Chicago does make taking the zero-waste route 
easier than it might be for, say, a family of six in rural Illinois. A 
composting service picks up Ristow’s food scraps each month. She buys shampoo, 
conditioner, bar soap and lotion in bulk at a local store. For clothes, she 
shops second-hand and doesn’t buy anything with packaging. Food is the easiest 
to procure, with a wealth of farmers’ markets and specialty grocery stores. She 
also takes advantage of an excellent city public transportation system.

 Though Ristow has eliminated disposable products from her daily life, she 
admits that as one of 7 billion people on the planet, those actions have a 
microscopic effect on greenhouse gas emissions, at best. But, these choices are 
also the best way she’s found to individually combat climate change and live by 
her values.

 “I can’t, and don’t want, to control what other people do,” she says. “I can 
only change my own actions. I support stores that sell bulk, zero-waste food. I 
buy from smaller companies that make sustainable, compostable, zero-waste home 
and hygiene goods. To the people around me, I’m modeling what small daily 
actions can look like.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fzero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe31c3b2f9a53044a7df73c4f760423bc3068c7a7%2F0_188_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zero-waste%20bloggers%3A%20the%20millennials%20who%20can%20fit%20a%20year's%20worth%20of%20trash%20in%20a%20jar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fzero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zero-waste%20bloggers%3A%20the%20millennials%20who%20can%20fit%20a%20year%27s%20worth%20of%20trash%20in%20a%20jar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fzero-waste-millennial-bloggers-trash-greenhouse-gas-emissions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe31c3b2f9a53044a7df73c4f760423bc3068c7a7%2F0_188_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Kathryn Kellogg at a farmers’ market in Vallejo, California. Photograph: 
Andrew Burton for the Guardian 
 Personal efforts to reduce waste should be applauded, says Dr Daniel Kammen, 
professor of energy at UC Berkeley’s Goldman School of Public Policy. “Seeing 
[zero waste] become part of the social dialogue is a wonderful first step,” he 
adds. Yet, in reality, it can be a challenge to quantify just how much 
reduction is actually happening, since “waste lurks in many corners”.

To that end, he and his students built a calculator 
<http://coolclimate.berkeley.edu/calculator> to help people track their 
personal and household waste. To make true inroads on waste, according to 
experts, we’ll need stronger pricing of waste, attention to behavior science, 
and rewards from the public and private sector for low-waste lifestyles.

In the meantime, zero-waste devotees are “first-movers” and “latter-day 
Thoreaus”, says Edward Humes, who profiled Johnson’s work in his 2012 book 
Garbology: Our Dirty Love Affair with Trash. “Their neighbors may look at them 
askance, perhaps, or as extremists,” Humes says. “The early adopters of rooftop 
solar power a few decades ago were viewed in the same way. Now they look like 
visionaries. I think the zero-waste-istas are in a similar place, showing the 
rest of us what’s possible, spreading the word. Ten years from now, they will 
seem much more mainstream.”
 