
Zero-hours contracts <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/zero-hours-contracts>
 make it harder for workers to save and present a challenge to financial 
institutions to come up with products suitable for consumers on less secure 
incomes, the City regulator has said.

The number of workers on zero-hours contracts, which do not offer a minimum 
number of hours a week,surpassed 800,000 for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/09/uk-workers-on-zero-hours-contracts-rises-above-800000>
 in the last three months of 2015. This represents about 2.1% of the UK 
workforce, according to the Office for National Statistics.

In its annual business plan, the Financial Conduct Authority highlighted 
<http://www.fca.org.uk/static/documents/corporate/business-plan-2016-17.pdf> 
the way in which employment patterns and the makeup of the workforce have 
changed, with an increase in self-employment, part-time work and temporary 
workers since theonset of the financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/13/zero-hours-contracts-low-pay-figures-rise>
 in 2008.

“There also appears to have been a rise in the number of people employed on 
‘zero-hours contracts’ in recent years,” the FCA said. “These kinds of 
employment forms may involve less secure contracts and in some cases may make 
it harder for consumers to plan and save. This is likely to change the products 
and services consumers seek to fit their new income patterns.”

Zero hours contracts mean that individuals do not have guaranteed incomes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/17/what-are-zero-hours-contracts-google-answer>
 and are more likely to be offered to young and part-time workers, women and 
those in full-time education.

The FCA said slow wage rises meant that people could become more reliant on 
debt. “Unsustainable levels of debt will make consumers more vulnerable in the 
event of a shock such as a reduction in income,” the regulator said. “This 
could quickly lead to them defaulting on their debt. It could also impact their 
long-term ability to access financial services products, or limit their credit 
options.”

It added that rules to ringfence high street operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/15/banks-rbs-hsbc-lloyds-barclays-santander-co-operative-capital-ringfencing>
 from risker investment banking could lead to more expensive mortgages. “The 
move to ringfence retail banks may, over the medium to long term, impact the 
use of securitisation and thus increase funding costs. These factors could 
therefore give rise to risks to consumers from the reduced availability, or 
increased expense, of mortgage credit,” the FCA said.

The authority said it was considering the consequences of a possible vote to 
leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/04/uk-finance-chiefs-brexit-tops-risk-list>
 the EU in the referendum on 23 June. “This includes considering the immediate 
and short-term consequences of any vote to leave the EU, such as the potential 
for increased market volatility,” it said.

The body, set up by the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition government to 
replace the Financial Services Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/mar/24/farewell-fsa-bleak-legacy-light-touch-regulator>
, set out seven priorities for the new financial year to March 2017. It will 
focus on: pensions; financial crime and preventing money laundering; wholesale 
financial markets; advice; innovation and technology; company culture and 
governance; and the treatment of existing customers.


Last year, the FCA faced protests after it dropped a formal review of culture 
in the banking sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/31/banking-culture-review-john-mcdonnell-urges-george-osborne>
, which it had promised to undertake in the business review last year.

While the regulator did not pledge to renew that study, the FCA’s chairman, 
John Griffith-Jones, said: “We identify firms’ culture and governance as one of 
our seven priorities because experience has demonstrated that poor culture and 
poor conduct are closely related. It is vital therefore that industry continues 
to work to deliver its own cultural change, thereby reducing regulatory 
infringements.”

In this year’s business plan, it promised to undertake a formal study of 
people’s prospects in retirement and develop policy to extend the senior 
managers and certification regime – the new rules designed to hold senior 
bankers to account – to all financial companies that the FCA regulates by 2018.

The plan was unveiled by the FCA’s acting chief executive, Tracey McDermott, 
who pulled out of the race for the top job, which will befilled by the deputy 
governor of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/andrew-bailey-new-fca-boss-says-he-did-not-apply-for-role>
, Andrew Bailey, in July.
 