
A ruthless streak has been restored to Manchester United’s approach after all. 
José Mourinho had seen his team’s dominance yield only draws too often of late, 
but here they did what this club used to do as a matter of course.

Just as the prospect loomed large of shedding points to a Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/crystalpalace> team most among the elite 
will consider there for the taking, class told. Their progress feels more 
serene when an unbeaten league run is extended to seven games by successive 
victories, however narrow.

This win was chiselled from the visitors’ most dominant period of play, the 
winner created by the contest’s most influential performer and scored by a 
forward who has always delighted in stamping his influence all over occasions 
such as this.

José Mourinho defends ‘clean’ Marcos Rojo after lunge at Wilfried Zaha
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/15/jose-mourinho-marcos-rojo-wilfried-zaha-manchester-united>
Paul Pogba capitalised on Yohan Cabaye’s slip two minutes from time to gain 
possession and consider his pass, sliding his delivery beyond Scott Dann and 
along the edge of the penalty area. There darted Zlatan Ibrahimovic, timing his 
diagonal run perfectly, with his finish dispatched crisply beyond the 
on-rushing Wayne Hennessey from an unkind angle and into the net.

It was an eighth goal in as many games for the Swede, whose influence on this 
side should not purely be measured in terms of that impressive tally. “I told 
him this isn’t the best place to play if you’re looking for holidays,” said 
Mourinho. “When a rich guy who has already had a phenomenal career wants 
holidays, he doesn’t come to play in England. It’s the most difficult league in 
the world, so if you come here you want to show what you can do. That’s what he 
did. It’s not just about goals. It’s about leadership and motivation, and I’m 
so happy with what he’s done. I knew his character and, at his age, he’s a 
character. A personality. Because he has the passion to play.”

He had the kind of supply-line here, largely from Pogba, for which Christian 
Benteke was pining at the other end of the pitch. The Frenchman’s understanding 
with Ibrahimovic could yet be key to United mounting that assault on the top 
four – they are six points shy of Manchester City at present – and the manner 
in which Mourinho attempted to envelope the Swede in a bear hug at the final 
whistle was indicative of that much. The manager was not inclined to hoist up 
the 35-year-old as his “best” signing but, even on a massive weekly wage, he 
can feel like a bargain when he conjures definitive moments such as these.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fcrystal-palace-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41ae9d4b97870f5cd4d971d31c943afaa6db0f8a%2F0_0_2924_1754%2F2924.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%20late%20goal%20gives%20Manchester%20United%20win%20at%20Crystal%20Palace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fcrystal-palace-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%20late%20goal%20gives%20Manchester%20United%20win%20at%20Crystal%20Palace&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fcrystal-palace-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41ae9d4b97870f5cd4d971d31c943afaa6db0f8a%2F0_0_2924_1754%2F2924.jpg>
 Paul Pogba opens the scoring moments before the half-time whistle. Photograph: 
Christopher Lee/Getty Images 
Ibrahimovic also had a hand in United’s opener, shipped in stoppage time at 
the end of the first half just as Palace had dared to believe their industry 
and endeavour might see them to the break unscathed.

Juan Mata’s free-kick was chested on to his own arm by Ibrahimovic for Pogba, 
standing marginally offside, to poke beyond Hennessey from close range. The 
hosts, their shape having been established to stifle rather than scintillate, 
were momentarily incensed before slumping back to the dressing-room as if 
resigned to their fate.

Their complaints that Marcos Rojo had received only a yellow for his latest 
two-footed lunge, this time on Wilfried Zaha, also simmered. Alan Pardew did 
well to reinvigorate them thereafter before his team benefited from their own 
dose of fortune. The equaliser was slickly constructed, the hosts more urgent 
and threatening as they chased parity. David de Gea had already done 
wonderfully well to deny James McArthur from distance, the Spaniard’s save 
stunning as he stretched out a right hand in mid-air to turn the effort round 
the post. Yet the Scot found life rather easier from closer in.

Cesc Fàbregas sweeps Chelsea past Sunderland and six points clear at top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/14/sunderland-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
United were dozing, their rearguard suddenly ragged, as Damien Delaney 
provided the cutest of flicks round Phil Jones for McArthur, momentarily 
liberated from Pogba, to collect. He scored with glee, with his team-mates 
swarming in disbelief around a tickled Delaney.

Yet Palace were unable to build on that momentum and, when United were denied 
a penalty after Joe Ledley’s handball in the area, they rallied.

Mata had a goal disallowed from Rojo’s nod back, television replays 
subsequently suggesting he was a toe offside at most, before Ibrahimovic found 
his range. “Even if this game finished 1-1, I’d have the same feeling towards 
my players,” said Mourinho. “The performances have been good for a long time, 
so the players deserve this: happiness at home, and happiness away.”

They are edging back towards the fringes of the title race. Palace, in 
contrast, are mired in a more desperate struggle at the other end. They could 
take heart from their effort and commitment, and the reality they had prised 
apart a stubborn defence, but familiar mistakes crept in.

Just as against City recently, a second-half revival went undone at the last 
by a lapse of concentration. The decision to fling on Fraizer Campbell for 
McArthur near the end, disrupting shape yet again, might also be scrutinised. 
Substitutions are not coming off at present, and there is a whiff of 
inevitability to their plight. Chelsea visit these parts on Saturday. There is 
no respite in sight.
 