
Twitter nearly gave itself an aneurysm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/02/taylor-swift-accused-racism-african-colonial-fantasy-video-wildest-dreams>
 over Taylor Swift’s latest music videoWildest Dreams 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IdneKLhsWOQ>, which had all the usual cliches 
that make its location immediately identifiable as idyllic, romanticised 
“Africa”: sunsets, wildlife, safari boots and definitely no natives. You start 
to wonder, is that all there is to this vast continent? Are Africans good for 
nothing else?

So I’ve ventured into the dark recesses of the web to discover how Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> shaped our world and gave us some of 
our favourite things. Hold on to your pith helmets.

Coffee

Italians gave it to us short and strong, Americans served it filtered then 
ratcheted up the calories by adding syrups, whipped cream and evenpumpkin 
<http://www.thekitchn.com/how-to-make-pumpkin-spice-latte-even-better-than-starbucks-cooking-lessons-from-the-kitchn-96277>
. But everyone’s favourite stimulant originates fromEthiopia, where it grows 
wild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/nov/13/coffee-not-dead-wild-ethiopia>
. It possiblydates back to the 10th century 
<http://equalexchange.coop/history-of-coffee-in-ethiopia>, when nomadic people 
would have eaten the red cherries rather than making a beverage with them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2F10-things-africa-given-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F151a19ab200efb01a22c44f1df46750d58170ecb%2F0_74_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20things%20Africa%20has%20given%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2F10-things-africa-given-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20things%20Africa%20has%20given%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2F10-things-africa-given-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F151a19ab200efb01a22c44f1df46750d58170ecb%2F0_74_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 A coffee house in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. Photograph: Karel Prinsloo/AP 
Modern art

Africa’s contemporary artists are having a bit of moment 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-22787960>, but the world still largely 
ignores the continent’s role in inspiring celebrated artists such as Picasso, 
Matisse or Kirchner. In the early 1900s the aesthetics of traditional African 
sculpture became whatthe Met Museum in New York describes 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/aima/hd_aima.htm> as “a powerful influence 
among European artists who formed an avant-garde in the development of modern 
art”.

Mathematics

The history of mathematics is so Eurocentric that most accounts of ancient 
mathematical systems seem to begin and end in Egypt. But theLebombo bone 
<http://www.taneter.org/math.html> found in Swaziland and the Ishango bone 
<http://www.math.buffalo.edu/mad/Ancient-Africa/ishango.html>, discovered on 
the border between Uganda and Zaire, both baboon fibulas, are the world’s two 
oldest mathematical objects –the former at least 35,000 years old 
<http://www.taneter.org/math.html>. The Ishango bone may be the oldest table of 
prime numbers <http://www.math.buffalo.edu/mad/Ancient-Africa/ishango.html>.

Mobile phones
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2F10-things-africa-given-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fc2913ca592080477b48e030eba53045d661f8b%2F0_0_1992_1195%2F1992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20things%20Africa%20has%20given%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2F10-things-africa-given-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20things%20Africa%20has%20given%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2F10-things-africa-given-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fc2913ca592080477b48e030eba53045d661f8b%2F0_0_1992_1195%2F1992.jpg>
 The Democratic Republic of Congo holds half of the world’s reserves of cobalt, 
used to make rechargeable batteries such as those used in mobile phones. 
Photograph: Herbert P Oczeret/EPA 
Not all of it, obvs, but in the inner workings of your most precious 
possession lie bits of the Democratic Republic of Congo in the form of the 
mineral cobalt, which is used to make rechargeable batteries. According to the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative <https://eiti.org/DRCongo>, the 
DRC “holds almost half of the world’s cobalt reserves”. And that’s not all: the 
DRC is among the world’s largest producers of cobalt, copper, diamonds,tantalum 
<http://www.lenntech.com/periodic/elements/ta.htm> and tin.

Nando’s

Six icons of Britishness that were actually created by immigrants | Oliver 
Wainwright
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/24/icons-britishness-immigrants-ritz-mini>
Yes, Nando’s <http://www.nandos.com/our-story>, “the home of the legendary 
Portuguese flame-grilled peri-peri chicken” and thecoveted black card 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/howaboutthat/11359450/Does-mythical-Nandos-black-card-actually-exist.html>
. Since its humble beginnings in Johannesburg, South Africa, in 1987, Nando’s 
blend of chicken, hot sauce and African music has spread across the globe. At 
last count there was a Nando’s on every continent except Latin America, some
1,000 restaurants in 30 countries 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/foodanddrink/restaurants/9902231/Nandos-nation-the-chicken-that-conquered-Britain.html>
. No chicken-loving nation is safe.

Ubuntu

In the face of refugee crisis, the word “ubuntu” has never been more 
important. Popularised by Archbishop Desmond Tutu and Nelson Mandela as away to 
heal post-apartheid South Africa 
<http://www.capetownmagazine.com/whats-the-deal-with/ubuntu/125_22_17348>, the 
ancient Bantu word encapsulates the idea of shared humanity: “I am, because we 
all are.” Here’s how theNew World Encyclopedia 
<http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Ubuntu_(philosophy)> defines the 
word that is also used in Uganda, Tanzania, Burundi and Zimbabwe: “It implies 
an appreciation of traditional beliefs, and a constant awareness that an 
individual’s actions today are a reflection on the past, and will have 
far-reaching consequences for the future. A person with ubuntu knows his or her 
place in the universe and is consequently able to interact gracefully with 
other individuals.”

Jazz

It’s all about the polyrhythms – two or more different rhythms happening at 
the same time – which European folk music also has but African music spread. The
Pulitizer prize-winning composer and author Gunther Schuller wrote that 
<http://www.jazzedmagazine.com/2893/articles/focus-session/the-african-origins-of-jazz/>
“every musical element – rhythm, harmony, melody, timbre, and the basic forms 
of jazz – is essentially African in background and derivation”.

But Africa didn’t only give us blue notes, it may also have given us 
Beethoven. This year, a group of musicians revived thequestion about 
Beethoven’s ethnicity 
<http://www.academia.edu/4074689/Black_Beethoven_and_the_Racial_Politics_of_Music_History>
, arguing that his piano music should be played polyrhythmically and that, as 
played by most classical pianists, theleft hand appears to have almost no rhythm
 
<http://africasacountry.com/2015/06/are-beethovens-african-origins-revealed-by-his-music/>
, no soul. Ouch.

Shea butter
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2F10-things-africa-given-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20910e12b8b657e4b3d25aba78047f28c711b9f1%2F0_301_1467_881%2F1467.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20things%20Africa%20has%20given%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2F10-things-africa-given-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20things%20Africa%20has%20given%20the%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2F10-things-africa-given-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20910e12b8b657e4b3d25aba78047f28c711b9f1%2F0_301_1467_881%2F1467.jpg>
 A woman sells shea butter at a market in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. Photograph: 
Thierry Gouegnon/Reuters 
Chances are you’ve bought soap, lip balm, skin lotion or even shaving cream 
that contains shea butter, which grows in 19 countries across the continent 
from Senegal in the west to Sudan in the east. Skincare brandL’Occitane calls it
 <http://au.loccitane.com/50-ways-to-use-pure-shea-butter,23,1,17074,164683.htm>
 “nature’s miracle beauty balm; the perfect quick fix for almost anything”. 
Cleopatra, who knew a good thing when she saw it (hello, Marc Antony!) is said 
to have used the butter, making it a veryvaluable commodity during her reign 
<https://www.lush.co.uk/shea-butter>.

Penis transplants

After performing the first heart transplant in 1967 
<http://www.sahistory.org.za/dated-event/dr-chris-barnard-performs-worlds-first-human-heart-transplant>
, South African surgeons scored another first by this year carrying out the
world’s first transplant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/13/south-africa-man-penis-transplant>
 of the male organ. The nine-hour operation in March 2015 allowed its 
21-year-old recipient to become sexually active, and he wasted no time in 
proving its efficacy. In June head surgeon André van der Merweannounced that 
the young man’s partner was pregnant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/12/penis-transplant-patient-partner-pregnant-south-africa>
.

Jollof rice

Now that Jamie Oliver has written a recipe for Jollof 
<http://www.jamieoliver.com/news-and-features/features/jamie-oliver-jollof-rice-recipe/#z5Ji8mS4aEjHCO1m.97>
, the rice dish may soon reach such dizzying heights of popularity that its 
west African origins will be forgotten. Just don’t askwhich particular country 
introduced it to the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poll/2013/feb/22/jollof-rice-who-invented>. 
Cameroon, Ghana, Nigeria, Senegal – its origins continue to behotly contested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/aug/10/jollof-rice>.
 Jollof rice, fried plantain and chicken Photograph: Alamy  