
What is public engagement? It's an increasingly unavoidable question for any 
academic, but in the arts and humanities, it's still hotly contested.

With the Research Excellence Framework's (REF) impact imperative on one side, 
and outcries over the humanities'intrinsic value 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/29/study-arts-humanites-enrichment>
 on the other, engagement debates are creating a frustrating (and 
self-fulfilling) dichotomy between the ivory tower and the "real world".

We want to start a new conversation: one that doesn't establish unhealthy and 
unnecessary binaries. One that includes a new generation of researchers working 
in a hybrid model, where research and public presence go hand in hand.

This model represents a fertile future, so here are 10 steps towards making 
public engagement work for us:

1) Tackle engagement back from the REF

Starting out in academia is a little like arriving in a Kafka-esque holiday 
resort. It's all smiles, loud shorts, ciapirinhas; then next thing you know 
you're wondering if the sand castle you just made is REFable: how will it be 
assessed by the unknown, unseen powers that be?

Confounded, we went to see the REF representative lurking in the dark 
corridors of our home institution. It turns outREFable engagement 
<http://researchwithreach.wordpress.com/2014/06/09/impact-and-the-ref-get-informed/>
 is just a reification of what are already the best moments of research: 
thinking through collaboration, sharing and shaping ideas through dialogue with 
diverse publics. So let's work from that, before getting bogged down in hollow 
rhetorics.

2) Break out of the bottleneck

Rethinking engagement is about realising that your career is not dependent 
upon scrambling up theslippery ladder from PhD to professor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/01/academic-anonymous-leaving-academia>
. Lateral connections make you employable and resilient in higher education, so 
don't blinker yourself to a career that reaches beyond the gravy train.

3) Liberate yourself from peer fear

While conservative academics break sweat at the thought of non-peer reviewed 
publication, the likes of theLondon Review of Books <http://www.lrb.co.uk/>, 
e-flux <http://www.e-flux.com/journals/>, Exeunt <http://exeuntmagazine.com/> 
andArtForum <http://artforum.com/> (plus the latter's 128k Twitter followers) 
represent a fast-growing cohort of platforms that value rigorous and critical 
thinking beyond specialist readerships. Tap into a community of wider peers by 
using these alternative outlets. Ditch the paranoia, and build up a presence in 
public debate.

4) There's no such thing as impact

We're not the first to challenge the notion of one-sided impact. It's right 
there in Newton's laws of motion: every action has an equal and opposite 
reaction. Collaboration with community groups, policy-makers, and the creative 
industries isn't just about box ticking: it'sreciprocally rewarding 
<http://theopedproject.wordpress.com/2014/06/04/hear-from-california-alums-as-a-public-intellectual-do-you-have-a-duty-to-share-your-knowledge/>
, with impact ricocheting into your work.

5) And research doesn't just happen in the library!

We can't lay sole claim to the production of challenging, cutting-edge 
research. Acknowledging that wecan learn just as much from artists 
<http://www.theatrevoice.com/11343/reasearch-with-reach-how-university-based-research-can-affect-arts-and-culture/#.U8kiFy_6oZQ>
, audiences and the subjects of our case studies is vital for reassessing the 
benefits of public engagement beyond REF point-scoring.

6) Your institution will support you 

Universities and research councils are desperate to throw money at public 
engagement 
<http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/What-We-Do/Strengthen-research-impact/Knowledge-Exchange-and-Partnerships/Pages/KE-Hubs-for-the-Creative-Economy.aspx>
, so get savvy about tapping into funding, spaces and networks. Your 
institution probably has a PR department who would love to hear about your 
work, offering media hook-ups and promotion on your behalf.

7) Digisphere isn't a dirty word

Academics like @DrKFenbyHulse <https://twitter.com/DrKFenbyHulse> and 
@philosophybites <https://twitter.com/philosophybites> make it clear there's no 
opposition between rigorous research and a lively Twitter handle. Hashtags like
#engagedacademics <https://twitter.com/search?q=engagedacademics&src=typd> and 
#twitterstorians <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23twitterstorians&src=typd> 
offer a supportive network of like-minded researchers. More broadly, social 
media unravels the traditional hierarchies haunting academia.

8) Open Access opens doors

As @melissaterras <https://twitter.com/melissaterras> found, web accessibility 
puts your research on the map for funders, readers and employers, and Tweeting 
about it cansend your citations through the roof 
<http://melissaterras.blogspot.co.uk/2011/11/what-happens-when-you-tweet-open-access.html>
. Many universities have online repositories that will protect your work in the 
public domain.

9) Pick up the pace

Take advantage of the quick turnaround of magazines and blogs. Put your name 
on your research early, garner an audience and feedback, and maximise on 
research time by developing strong articles into research papers, and research 
offcuts into blogs.

10) Think "third space"

By taking specialist-only circulation as the marker of serious research, we 
falsely associate excellence with a limited community of peers. Impact becomes 
a REFable tack-on – both demanded and derided by the institution – putting 
researchers in a double bind of job market pressures. A new community of 
engaged researchers are replacing this polarisation with a mixed model: we're 
generating a vibrant third space, an autonomous in-between, which values the 
innovation and creativity of research beyond academia.

What's emerged from our student-led research with reach project is a need for 
young academics to support each other in breaking outdated moulds.Keep in touch 
<https://groups.google.com/forum/#!overview>, voice your perspective 
<http://researchwithreach.wordpress.com/notebook/> and tap into the power of 
the critical mass. Share your ideas, don't garrison them.

Ella Parry-Davies and Penny Newell are PhD candidates at King's College London 
and co-convenors of the student-led network and training programme, research 
with reach – follow them on Twitter@EllaParryDavies 
<https://twitter.com/EllaParryDavies>and @penny_en 
<https://twitter.com/penny_en>

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. 
 