
The winner

With Oscar nominations announced this Thursday, the annual awards season is 
now in full swing, presenting the perfect opportunity for a potentially 
challenging adult drama – Steve McQueen's12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156376/12-years-a-slave> – to engage 
cinema audiences.

And so it proved, with a very healthy £2.51m opening for the gritty true story 
from just 207 cinemas, delivering a site average of £12,132.

Local distributor eOne was quick to trumpet this achievement as bigger than 
the UK opening ofSlumdog Millionaire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/126911/slumdog-millionaire> (£1.83m 
from 324 cinemas), and with a higher screen average than the debut ofThe King's 
Speech <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/137858/king-s-speech> (£8,919). 
Both those titles were massive feel-good crowdpleasers that went on to achieve 
enormous multiples of their opening numbers. Although 12 Years a Slave does 
ultimately cohere to the triumph-over-adversity template, there is perhaps more 
in the way of adversity and less of triumph than some of the broader audiences 
that embraced Danny Boyle and Tom Hooper's Oscar-winners may prefer.

In any case, it's certainly a very strong start for a film with tough subject 
matter from a director whose previous pictures (Hunger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/124579/hunger>, Shame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142860/shame>) were both resolutely 
art-house fare. Shame opened exactly two years ago with £542,000 from 114 
cinemas. Hunger kicked off in October 2008 with £136,000 from 68 venues.

The runner-up


The arrival of 12 Years a Slave pushes American Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156243/american-hustle> down to second 
place, but with a decline from the previous weekend of just 18%. After 12 days 
of wide release, David O Russell's latest has grossed an impressive £6.78m, 
which compares with £2.71m forSilver Linings Playbook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148764/silver-linings-playbook> at the 
same stage of its run. The earlier Russell film went on to reach £5.3m over the 
course of a marathon six-month theatrical session, and a similar trajectory 
would see American Hustle max out around £13m. After winning the Golden Globe 
for best comedy/musical on Sunday and picking up 10 Bafta nominations last 
week, the film would appear to have a sustained run within its grasp.

Strength in depth


For the second weekend in a row, at least seven films have taken £1m-plus at 
the UK box-office, withThe Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154178/hobbit> and Frozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155770/frozen> both still in the top 
five after a respective five and six weeks of play. Frozen has achieved six 
consecutive weekends over £1m – in 2013, onlyDespicable Me 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155771/despicable-me-2> and Les 
Miserables <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/150107/miserables> (both of 
which reached more than £40m in total) managed that feat.

With £32.8m so far, Frozen is the second-biggest-grossing film from Walt 
Disney Animation (as opposed to Disney-owned Pixar), exceeded only by The Lion 
King, which grossed £23.14m with its original 2D release, and then added 
£12.36m with the 2011 3D rerelease for a £35.5m total.

The Hobbit sequel's tally of £40.1m compares unfavourably with its 
predecessor's <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/125622/hobbit> £48.5m at 
the same stage of its run. On the positive side, it will very soon overtake Les 
Miserables (£40.8m) to become the second-biggest 2013 release, behind only 
Despicable Me 2 (£47.4m).

Considering the enduring power of so many titles in the market, distributors 
Lionsgate and eOne will be pleased that their respective mid-ranking new 
releases –The Railway Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156901/railway-man> and Delivery Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156201/delivery-man> – landed with a 
decent £1.2m and £1.1m. The happy result for the former will be a surprise for 
some.

Each year, the January-February awards corridor sees a too-crowded field lead 
to inevitable casualties, as nominations fail to materialise for a number of 
contenders. The Railway Man may have dangled itself for the consideration of 
awards voters, but their attentions so far have gone in other directions, and 
box-office might have followed the path of last year's also-rans such asHyde 
Park on Hudson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148742/hyde-park-on-hudson> and 
Hitchcock <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/150108/hitchcock>.

Clearly the premise and cast – including Colin Firth and Nicole Kidman – have 
proved much more enticing to the target audience. And given the film's appeal 
to the older demographic,The Railway Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-railway-man> should enjoy strong weekday 
box-office, and end the week higher than the sixth place achieved at the 
weekend.

The rebound


Back in Imax cinemas across the UK, Gravity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156058/gravity> saw its box-office rise 
by 31%, with Imax contributing £123,000 of the £334,000 weekend takings. The 
renewed activity follows 11 Bafta nominations for the Alfonso Cuarón space 
drama. Gravity has now pushed past £28m, and is inching towards distributor 
Warner's top 2013 title,Man of Steel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148371/man-of-steel> (£29.95m).

The stumble 

Admissions figures for 2013 are now in, and with 165.5m tickets sold, numbers 
are 4% down on 2012. Admissions are also down on the levels achieved in the 
years 2009-2011, but are up on 2005-2008. It would appear that the boost 
provided by 3D over the previous four years has now dissipated. More 
positively, UK cinema admissions remain triple the low point of the mid-1980s, 
when they dipped to 54m. And in fairness 2012, which sawSkyfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/144416/skyfall> become the first film 
to gross £100m at UK cinemas, was always going to be a tough act to follow.

The future


After a strong run where box-office was up, level or only slightly down on the 
year-ago equivalent weekend, the latest frame has seen a big dip vs 2013. The 
reason is simple: exactly a year ago, Les Miserables landed at cinemas, and 12 
Years a Slave was never going to match it. Overall, the market is 30% down on 
the same period a year ago. Cinema owners now have their hopes pinned on a 
strong hold for existing titles, plus the arrival of Martin Scorsese'sThe Wolf 
of Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155767/wolf-of-wall-street>, which has 
already notched up $78m in the US. Counter-programming against the current glut 
of awards-bait, genre titleDevil's Due 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159114/devil-s-due> offers an 
alternative.

Top 10 films

1. 12 Years a Slave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156376/12-years-a-slave>, £2,511,349 
from 207 sites (New)

2. American Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156243/american-hustle>, £1,938,805 
from 419 sites. Total: £6,779,242

3. The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/154178/hobbit>, £1,504,554 from 501 
sites. Total: £40,099,644

4. Frozen <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155770/frozen>, £1,314,153 
from 559 sites. Total: £32,756,029

5. Last Vegas <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156222/last-vegas>, 
£1,293,299 from 395 sites. Total: £4,014,308

6. The Railway Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156901/railway-man>
, £1,230,299 from 464 sites (New)

7. Delivery Man <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156201/delivery-man>, 
£1,102,433 from 372 sites (New)

8. Mandela: Long Walk to Freedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156450/mandela>, £783,624 from 519 
sites. Total: £3,051,109

9. Anchorman 2: The Legend Continues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155772/anchorman>, £755,719 from 419 
sites. Total: £13,486,950

10. Paranormal Activity: The Marked Ones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159116/paranormal-activity>, £502,235 
from 316 sites. Total: £2,576,101

Other openers

Jilla, £152,552 from 43 sites

Veeram, £62,233 from 23 sites

Dedh Ishqiya, £38,323 from 17 sites

Patron Mutlu Son Istiyor, £4,499 from 4 sites

Patiala Dreamz, £4,002 from 9 sites

The Square <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159110/square>, £3,521 from 
1 site

Kiss the Water <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155865/kiss-the-water>, 
£2,051 from 3 sites

1: Life on the Limit <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/157833/1>, £1,144 
from 1 site

Exposed: Beyond Burlesque 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/159115/exposed>, £975 from 1 site

Collider, £919 from 1 site

Bounty Killer, no figures available

Thanks to Rentrak
 