
A homework essay

Mickey Arthur's time as Australia coach was summed up by the infamous 
"homework-gate" fiasco in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/mar/11/australia-drop-four-players> as 
the team endured a miserable tour of India that saw them lose the Test series 
4-0. During the debacle, four senior players, including then vice-captain Shane 
Watson, were dropped after they failed to submit work on areas in which they 
thought Australia could improve after a terrible start to the tour. It 
signalled the beginning of the end for Arthur's time with Australia;he was 
sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jun/24/mickey-arthur-sacked-australia-ashes>
 only 16 days before the start of the Ashes in England.

A whiteboard

"Quietly seething." That was how stuff.co.nz described the All Blacks head 
coach, Steve Hansen 
<http://www.stuff.co.nz/sport/rugby/all-blacks/9400857/Steve-Hansen-quietly-seething-at-Board-gate>
, after motivational messages in his side's hotel team room were spotted and 
revealed by a Telegraph reporter ahead of their match against England in 
November. The messages gave away little to England,who lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/16/england-new-zealand-autumn-international-match-report>
, but were nonetheless a bit of an embarrassment for New Zealand. Everyone else 
might think you're the best team in the world, but it's a bit rich for you to 
say you are "the most dominant team in the history of the world" and write it 
on a wall. Still, they did go on to become the first team in the professional 
erato go through a calendar year unbeaten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/nov/24/new-zealand-unbeaten-ireland>
, so maybe they were right.

Whyteleafe's kit

When Whyteleafe arrived for their Southern Counties East League fixture 
against Canterbury City they were told their away kit was far too similar to 
that of the home team. Manager John Fowler was forced to dash around the town 
of Margate to find a new kit, knowing that the referee refused to delay the 
match beyond half-past three. Despite making it back in timethe game was still 
called off 
<http://www.kentonline.co.uk/kentonline/sport/league-rivals-left-marooned-after-7362/>
, much to Fowler's displeasure.

199kg of rose petals

The scene was set at Eden Gardens to celebrate Sachin Tendulkar's 199th and 
penultimate Test before retirement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/nov/12/sachin-tendulkar-india-retiring>
. The Cricket Association of Bengal had laid on an elaborate ceremony that 
included dropping 199kg worth of rose petals on day five. They'd even managed 
to move everything forward by one day after it looked like India would secure 
victory early. How annoyed they must have been then when the home side actually 
defeated West Indies on the third day, not the fourth, and let alone the fifth. 
This laid waste to many of the Association's plans and, in particular, the huge 
consignment of rose petals.

A tube of hair gel

Cristiano Ronaldo was furious after Sepp Blatter expressed a preference for 
Lionel Messi andmocked the Portuguese for having "more expenses for the 
hairdresser" than the Barcelona star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/oct/29/real-madrid-sepp-blatter-cristiano-ronaldo-hairdresser>
. Blatter swiftly apologised on Twitter but not before Ronaldo could post a 
reply to the video on his Facebook page. He commented: "This video shows 
clearly the respect and consideration that Fifa has for me, for my club and my 
country."

An empty stage

The stage was set but showtime was delayed as Real Madrid fans were forced to 
wait for a sighting of their new star signing Gareth Bale for almost a week 
after the podium was erected in anticipation of his arrival. In Real's defence, 
an agreement with Tottenham caused this slightly awkward delay. At Tottenham's 
insistence, Madrid agreed to let Spurs complete all their transfer business 
before the Bale deal was made official.When Bale finally arrived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2013/sep/02/gareth-bale-at-real-madrid-a-day-in-the-life>
 he declared that he would have "come here for a penny", before adding in 
Spanish: "It is a dream for me to play at Real Madrid, thank you. Thank you for 
this great welcome. Up Madrid!"

A step-ladder
 Objects of the year: a ladder Photograph: Mode/REX 
While reporting on an injury to Michael Carrick outside Wembley, Sky Sports 
News reporterNick Collins took a tumble of his own on live television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2013/aug/14/sky-sports-news-reporter-falls-over-video>
. It's not exactly clear what caused the fall but judging by the sound of the 
incident, Collins appears to have been standing on a step-ladder. Back in the 
studio, Jim White just about managed to hold it together as his colleague 
picked himself up off the floor, uninjured it seemed.

A green jacket

It was all smiles in Augusta as the famous golf club welcomed its first two 
female members after 80 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/09/augusta-condoleezza-rice-masters>
; former Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and South Carolina financier Darla 
Moore. The pair were presented with their green jackets ahead of the tournament 
in April. Rice celebrated by playing a round with Phil Mickelson, who said she 
was more interested in talking about the course while he wanted to talk about 
politics.

The Super Bowl floodlights

An abnormality, a cursed stadium and Beyoncé. These were just three 
possibilities mooted as the cause of the second-half Super Bowl blackout. After 
the star had performed her spectacular half-time show, around half the stadium
was plunged into darkness following a floodlight power cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/feb/04/roger-goodell-power-outage-denies-beyonce>
 90 seconds into the second half between the San Francisco 49ers and Baltimore 
Ravens. Fans believed that the curse from a near-by cemetery was responsible 
for the problems at the Superdome in New Orleans which took 30 minutes to 
resolve. A statement issued from the energy suppliers blamed the system 
detecting an "abnormality" and then shutting off the power. The Ravens went on 
to win 34-31.

Rainbow nails

Swedish high jumper Emma Green Tregaro showed her opposition to Russia's new 
anti-gay law at the world championships in Moscowby painting her nails in the 
colours of pride for the gay and lesbian community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/16/yelena-isinbayeva-clarifies-anti-gay-law>
. The laws didn't ban participation in gay marches but said that wearing a 
rainbow flag could be seen as propagandising and those found guilty could face 
fines. Russia has come under pressure from both the Olympic Committee and Fifa 
in recent months with the country hosting events organised by both 
organisations.

'Le Zlatan' (The Zlatan Burger)
 Objects of the year: Zlatan burger Photograph: Rex 
Swedish striker Zlatan Ibrahimovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zlatan-ibrahimovic> has been a hit with 
the fans since his move to Paris, so much so that this year a restaurant in the 
French capital named a monstrous burger after the PSG forward. "Le Zlatan", as 
the burger is known, costs €29.90 and weighs around 600g, combining mince beef 
with onions, bacon and three types of cheese. Jean-Philippe Grandin, the 
manager of Doddy's cafe, said he wanted to create "an exceptional burger, which 
really stands out from the crowd, in the image of Ibrahimovic".

A pair of Lederhosen

According to manufacturer Adidas, Bayern Munich's away kit this season has 
been modelled on Lederhosen, the brown leather shorts typically worn by 
Bavarians. The brown shorts are intended to go with the white collared top to 
look like the traditional Bavarian outfit. To complete the outfit, Adidas even 
produced a special brown jacket and hat which you can buy in the Bayern club 
shop.

Energy gel
 Objects of the year: energy gel Photograph: Alamy 
Chris Froome needed a little help towards the end of stage 18 of the Tour de 
France up Alpe d'Huezafter an attack of hypoglycaemia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/18/tour-de-france-stage-18-chris-froome>
. It is against the rules to take food from team cars in the last 20km of races 
but Froome's team-mate Richie Porte dropped back to the team car and acquired 
an energy gel for the race leader. Froome was docked 20 seconds for the illegal 
feeding but in the long run it mattered little as the Team Sky riderwon the 
Tour by more than four minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/21/chris-froome-wins-tour-de-france>
.

Set of Nike golf clubs

Rory McIlroy endured a torried year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/oct/14/rory-mcilroy-2013-golf-caroline-wozniacki>
, only securing his first win at the beginning of December. Unfortunately for 
the former world No1, his slump coincided with his switch to Nike equipment. 
Plenty of people were quick to blame this change for McIlroy's form but the 
player insisted his travails were the result of a "timing issue" with his own 
play. After securing his first victory he spoke about his optimism for 2014 
using his Nike clubs. It can only get better.

A whip
 Objects of the year: a whip Photograph: Alamy 
After several days of "will it be today", Tony McCoy finally reached his 
target of 4,000 jump racing wins with a win at Towcesterwhen Mountain Tunes won 
the Weatherbys Novice Hurdle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/07/tony-mccoy-4000-towcester-mountain-tunes>
. Back in third and struggling in the home straight, McCoy galvanised his mount 
to catch Kris Spin in the closing stages. The jockey had always wanted to reach 
the milestone in the colours of his employer JP McManus and was clearly 
delighted. "It was just amazing, it couldn't have worked out any better. To do 
it for [trainer] Jonjo [O'Neill] and the McManuses is brilliant as they've been 
so good to me."

A Zapata-style moustache
 Objects of the year: Mitchell Johnson's moustache Photograph: Getty Images 
Evoking memories of Merv Hughes and David Boon, Mitchell Johnson's facial hair 
seemed to leavethe England batting order quaking in their boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/dec/09/ashes-2013-14-mitchell-johnson-australia-england>
 in the return Ashes. The Australian left-arm seamer's handlebar moustache, 
initially grown for the Movember charity campaign, inspired the return of his 
thunderously aggressive and hostile 90mph bowling. With 23 wickets in the first 
three Ashes Tests at an average of 15, Johnson insisted that his 'tache is 
going nowhere in 2014.

A Leeds nightbus

Danny Cipriani got more than he bargained for on a pub crawl in Leeds back in 
April. The Sale Sharks fly-halfwas struck by a bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/25/danny-cipriani-hit-by-bus> 
during a team night out, leaving him with bruising and concussion. In the 
aftermath, Cipriani tweeted: "Thank you for all the well wishes. My ribs are a 
bit sore. Feel like I've been hit by a bus." The 16-venue pub crawl that 
Cipriani and his team-mates were supposedly on is known as the "Otley Run".

Silicone tape

Silicone tape hit the headlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/07/silicone-tape-ashes-hot-spot> 
after the third Ashes Test of the summer when Australian broadcaster Channel 
Nine indicated the ICC was investigating if some of England's bastmen had 
applied the tape to their bats to fool the Hot Spot technology. Kevin Pietersen 
was implicated after he was given out caught-behind in his second innings at 
Old Trafford, despite Hot Spot indicating that the ball had not made contact 
with the bat. However, the ICC denied it was investigating, Channel Nine 
insisted that the inventor of the technology Warren Brennan had advised the ICC 
of his concerns and that it was not accusing anyone of cheating. It would all 
have ended there,had Specsavers not seen the "funny" side 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/oct/02/kevin-pietersen-england-hotspot-row>
 and run an advert implying Pietersen might have tampered with his bat.They 
paid out damages in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/oct/08/kevin-pietersen-libel-damages-specsavers>
.

A tennis racquet

During a year in which Roger Federer failed to reach the final of a grandslam 
tournament for the first time since his maiden Wimbledon triumph a decade ago, 
the 17-time major winner experimented in racquet sizes over the summer. The 
Swiss attempted to modernise his equipment with a new 98-inch racquet head 
before the US Open, which saw him defeated by world No114 Federico Delbonis and
No55 Daniel Brands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/25/roger-federer-out-swiss-open>. 
After five outings, Federer returned to his 90-inch frame at Flushing Meadows,
where he lost in the fourth round to Tommy Robredo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/03/roger-federer-out-us-open>.

A shoelace
 Objects of the year: shoelaces Photograph: Alamy 
After stoking the flames by declining to walk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/dec/27/memorable-moments-2013-stuart-broad>
 on day three of the first Test at Trent Bridge despite nicking the ball, 
Stuart Broad riled the Australians once again with delaying tactics on day 
five. With Brad Haddin flaying the ball to all parts of the boundary rope and 
the victory target lessening, Broad dragged out his over to ensure it was the 
final one before lunch. With just one ball remaining he untied his shoelaces, 
took off his boot and removed the insole. England went on to win by 14 runs.

A bird's feather
 Objects of the year: white feather Photograph: Alamy 
Who would have thought something so small could upset the concentration of one 
of the world's best tennis players.During the Australian Open final at the 
start of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/27/novak-djokovic-beats-andy-murray-australian-open>
, Andy Murray had the upper hand against Novak Djokovic when a white feather 
fluttered in front of him during the second-set tie-break. Murray stopped to 
pick it up, promptly served a double fault and lost the set, going on to lose 
the final in four. Of course the Scotsmanwould get revenge later in the year at 
SW19 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/07/andy-murray-wimbledon-2013-novak-djokovic>
.

A camera

A once-in-a-liftetime moment for photographer Olivier Morin, who took the 
picture of Usain Bolt moments after his triumph in the 100m final at the World 
Championships in Moscow, against a backdrop of purple lightning.The photo 
travelled across the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/aug/12/usain-bolt-lightning-shot-olivier-morin>
 seconds after Bolt romped his way to a 9.77sec time. Morin claimed in 
retrospect that he could only take credit for "one percent" of the picture: 
"The only things I was able to control were the framing of the shot and when to 
hit the remote-controlled trigger."

A set of moulded studs

Kurtley Beale's left foot slipped as he went to take the last-minute penalty 
that would have won the first Test for Australia against the British and Irish 
Lions …and missed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2013/jun/23/lions-australia-brick-by-brick-video>
. Lions coach Warren Gatland claimed Beale's moulded studs cost the Wallabies 
victory although the player rejected the suggestion. "I have been playing in 
mouldeds all my life. There's no superstition about it. It was just unfortunate 
the grass was a bit loose under the feet," Beale said.

A high altitude tent

Mo Farah's 5,000m and 10,000m double 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/16/mo-farah-world-championships-gold>
 at the world championships in Moscow, following a similar feat at London 2012, 
had been made possible by thousands and thousands of miles, ice baths, and the 
athlete sleeping 12 hours in every 24 under an altitude tent in his hotel 
bedroom to mimic conditions that he would have during training.

Newspaper advert

When Roberto Mancini was removed from his position at Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/13/roberto-mancini-manchester-city-sacked>
, an advert appeared in the Manchester Evening News from the Italian, dedicated 
to the City fans. More than 700 fans consequently clubbed together for 
reciprocal advert to appear in La Gazzetta dello Sport, to the cost of £7,000, 
with the sentiment: "We didn't want to lose you but apparently you had to go".

A drug-testing kit

With an appointment at Buckingham Palace awaiting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/17/prince-william-andy-murray-obe-first-investiture>
, new Wimbledon champion Andy Murray was stalled on the way to picking up his 
OBE by an inopportune drug test. Murray tweeted at 8.28am on 17 October: "In 
the middle of a drug test hahaha I'm goin [sic] to be late!!!" The random drug 
testers had turned up on his doorstep at 8.20, with his taxi already booked for 
half past eight. Though Murray made it on time to meet Prince William, he said 
afterwards: "It's part of the job but when you have a day like today … it's the 
last thing you need."

A coke can

During Lance Armstong's mea culpa interview with Oprah Winfrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/18/lance-armstrong-admits-doping-oprah-winfrey>
 in January, the cyclist admitted to taking performance-enhancing drugs during 
each of his seven Tour de France wins. He went on to reveal some of the 
measures that he and his fellow cyclists went to to cheat and escape the 
authorities. The Radioactive Coke Can received significant coverage, the empty 
soda can where they would drop used syringes.

A video camera

On 2 December Tom Daley tweeted a link to a self-made video that was to change 
his life. It read: "Got something I need to say … not been an easy decision to 
make, hope you can support me! :)"In the video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2013/dec/02/tom-daley-gay-relationship-with-man-youtube-video>
, the Olympic bronze medallist diver revealed that he was in a relationship 
with a man: "Come Spring this year, my life changed, massively, when I met 
someone and they make me feel so happy, so safe and everything just feels 
great."

A hairdyer

It may only have been metaphorical but Sir Alex Ferguson's use of the 
"hairdryer" to galvanise under-performing players received such reference over 
the years that deserves mention in its own right. When Ferguson, the most 
decorated manager in the history of British football,retired in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/may/08/sir-alex-ferguson-retires-live>
, he also hung up the hairdryer after 26 years, 38 trophies and 13 Premier 
League titles. Maybe David Moyes should consider getting it back out of its box?

A lip-shaped sweet
 Objects of the year: 'Sugarpova' candies Photograph: Rex 
Sugarpova; the "premium candy line that reflects the fun, fashionable, sweet 
side of international tennis sensation Maria Sharapova". The candy line, 
created by the world No3, consists of 12 different flavours ranging from 
Flirty, to Smitten Sour, to Splashy.According to her agent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/20/maria-sharapova-name-change-sugarpova>
, the Russian seriously considered changing her last name to Sugarpova for the 
US Open, leaving officials forced to acknowledge her as such on court, but 
ultimately decided against it.
 