
The world is on track for its hottest year on record and levels of carbon 
dioxide in the atmosphere have reached new highs, further fuelling global 
warming, the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) has said.


 June marked the 14th consecutive month of record heat for land and oceans, 
the United Nations agency said 
<http://public.wmo.int/en/media/press-release/global-climate-breaks-new-records-january-june-2016>
 on Thursday. It called for the speedy implementation of a pact reached last 
December to limit climate change by shifting from fossil fuels to green energy 
by 2100.

 The average temperature in the first six months of 2016 was 1.3C warmer than 
the pre-industrial era in the late 19th century, according to Nasa.

 “This underlines more starkly than ever the need to approve and implement the 
Paris climate change agreement, and to speed up the shift to low carbon 
economies and renewable energy,” said the WMO secretary general, Petteri Taalas.

Hottest ever June marks 14th month of record-breaking temperatures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/20/june-2016-14th-consecutive-month-of-record-breaking-heat-says-us-agencies>
 Under December’s Paris agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
, nearly 200 governments agreed to limit global warming to “well below” 2C 
above pre-industrial times, while “pursuing efforts” for a ceiling of just 
1.5C. Temperatures are already nudging towards that lower limit.

 “The heat has been especially pronounced in the Arctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/07/arctic-sea-ice-crashes-to-record-low-for-june>
, resulting in a very early onset of the annual melting of the Greenland ice 
sheet and Arctic sea ice,” the WMO said.

 David Carlson, director of the WMO’s climate research programme, told a news 
briefing: “What we’ve seen for the first six months of 2016 is really quite 
alarming. We would have thought it would take several years to warm up like 
this. We don’t have as much time as we thought.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2F2016-worlds-hottest-year-on-record-un-wmo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95fe2119374a38a1b521e89dfaca5c6b08a3b2e5%2F0_0_957_712%2F957.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20set%20to%20be%20world's%20hottest%20year%20on%20record%2C%20says%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2F2016-worlds-hottest-year-on-record-un-wmo%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20set%20to%20be%20world%27s%20hottest%20year%20on%20record%2C%20says%20UN&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2F2016-worlds-hottest-year-on-record-un-wmo%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95fe2119374a38a1b521e89dfaca5c6b08a3b2e5%2F0_0_957_712%2F957.png>
 WMO/NOAA chart on year-to-date global surface temperatures in 2016 Photograph: 
WMO/NOAA 
The northern hemisphere, including the state of Alaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> in the US, Canada and Russia, has 
posted unusually warm temperatures, he said.

 The last month in which global temperatures were below the 20th-century 
average was December 1984.

 A strong El Niño 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/30/el-nino-is-over-but-it-leaves-nearly-100-million-people-short-of-food>
 weather event in the Pacific Ocean, a phenomenon associated with extreme 
droughts, storms and floods, “has now disappeared”, the WMO said in a statement.

 The El Niño event developed in 2015 and contributed to the record 
temperatures in the first half of 2016 before disappearing in May, the WMO said.

Taalas said: “Climate change, caused by heat-trapping greenhouse gases, will 
not [disappear]. This means we face more heat waves, more extreme rainfall and 
potential for higher impact tropical cyclones.”
 