
Adelaide

2015 ladder position: 7th

2016 predicted ladder range: 10-12th

Six months on from Adelaide’s 2015 finals exit, which came a week after their 
stirring, against-the-odds victory over the Bulldogs, you can still only marvel 
at what a remarkable achievement their late-season surge was. Not only did the 
Crows endure the tragic loss of their coach Phil Walsh – a man who seemed set 
on becoming far more to his players than just the guy with the clipboard 
barking orders at them – but they came out the other side being the best 
possible version of the exhilarating side he’d wanted them to be.


In comparison with such a spiritual blow, you could probably say that the 
off-season departure of midfield star Patrick Dangerfield was something that 
Crows people could eye with a renewed sense of perspective, but on a practical 
level it certainly won’t help this side’s chances in 2016.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff0c838f76fd14bcb77a6f1fea8805b14d354a4b%2F0_223_3500_2106%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20AFL%20season%20preview%3A%20Adelaide%20and%20North%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20AFL%20season%20preview%3A%20Adelaide%20and%20North%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff0c838f76fd14bcb77a6f1fea8805b14d354a4b%2F0_223_3500_2106%2F3500.jpg>
 Adelaide’s new coach Don Pyke will pursue an all-attack approach in 2016 but 
will have his hands full managing a side with defensive limitations. 
Photograph: Matt Roberts/AFL Media/Getty Images 
The Crows have now lost half a dozen top-5 players in or or at the verge of 
their prime in the last decade and that’s compromised their progress. Carrying 
an extra burden now is skipper Taylor Walker, whose free-range approach to 
ground coverage last season transformed the one-time stay-at-home spearhead 
into a Reiwoldt-esque roamer. He was superb in almost every sense a captain 
could be. On a pragmatic level, the likes of Rory Sloane and Scott Thompson 
have a lot of slack to pick up in the middle but new coach Don Pyke thinks that 
oft-injured Brad Crouch and Jarryd Lyons will step up too.

Adelaide’s talent acquisition during trade week was certainly nothing to be 
sneezed at and anyway, they were never going to be able to replace Dangerfield 
immediately. Troy Menzel played some gorgeous football as a small forward at 
Carlton but his body is the big battle. Paul Seedsman was a fan favourite at 
the Pies and an Anzac Medal winner but mostly couldn’t replicate that 
barnstorming form elsewhere. Dean Gore and Curtly Hampton could be anything or 
nothing, and the latter is off to a bad start with a six-week injury lay-off.

Into the coaching post this season comes former Eagle Pyke, who is employing a 
tactical template every bit as attacking as Walsh’s. If the Crows’ pre-season 
told us anything, it’s that this side will take every opportunity to move the 
ball quickly through the centre corridor.

That’s a change of tune in some senses though and not neccessarily playing to 
the strengths of his midfield group. To be blunt,Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> doesn’t possess a host of elite 
ball-users and the Crows finished 17th in the league last year for both kicking 
and handball efficiency, a remarkable shortcoming for a final-winning side. Its 
virtue in season’s past has been the array contested ball monsters who’ve 
rained the ball inside 50 so regularly that Walker, Josh Jenkins, Charlie 
Cameron and Eddie Betts get enough scoring chances to win games. But is this 
ageing midfield group quick and skilful enough to do thing’s Pyke’s way?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F390e30e9db4bcc57eca489e98b1c01c40f26ab9c%2F0_98_4692_2818%2F4692.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20AFL%20season%20preview%3A%20Adelaide%20and%20North%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20AFL%20season%20preview%3A%20Adelaide%20and%20North%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F390e30e9db4bcc57eca489e98b1c01c40f26ab9c%2F0_98_4692_2818%2F4692.jpg>
 Adelaide Crows captain Taylor Walker was a shining light in a difficult year 
for the club in 2015. Photograph: Julian Smith/AAP 
Our dual concern with this side in the post-Danger era is that their on-ball 
brigade is now getting long in the tooth too, even if they’ll receive 
impeccable ruck service from Sam Jacobs. Richard Douglas could sleep-walk his 
way to 25 possessions but he’s pushing 30 and due a dip at some point, while 
32-year-old Thompson can’t hang on forever at current levels of output. Nathan 
Van Berlo is waning. Brad Couch is undoubtedly valuable when he can get out 
there but that’s not often, so Sloane could cop a battering.

The other obvious problem with Pyke’s gung-ho mantra is that it’s not backed 
by high-grade team defence, so the Crows could be punished on the rebound. 
Adelaide conceded 89 points per game last year and you can’t see that improving 
out of sight straight away. Daniel Talia is a rock on the best forwards, Brodie 
Smith a reliable performer and Rory Laird an effective interceptor but is Pyke 
really banking on the likes of Kyle Cheney and Kyle Hartigan to make a massive 
leap?

You can almost guarantee that this side will score heavily at times, which 
will often cover the shortcomings elsewhere. Jenkins developed rapidly last 
year (he was a multiple goalscorer an impressive 13 times) when given space by 
Walker’s movement up field, Tom Lynch is one of the most effective leading 
targets in the league and livewires Betts and Cameron are always a handful. 
Throw Menzel in that mix and you’ve got some genuine match-up problems for 
opposition defences.

Our sense is that this Adelaide side could be every bit as loveable as it was 
in 2015 but mixed in there is the more pragmatic concern that they also could 
end up the most eye-pleasing non-finals side in the league.

North Melbourne

2015 ladder position: 8th

2016 predicted ladder range: 7-9th

In the past two seasons North Melbourne have developed a habit of making 
pundits look a bit silly, coming from miles back in the pack to reach 
consecutive preliminary finals. Last year they did so from eighth position at 
the end of the home and away season and this having never entered the top half 
of the ladder until round 17. Are you in one of those betting syndicates where 
you have to pick one winning side per week? Never useNorth Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-melbourne>.

What helped last year was the influx of recycled senior players who actually 
added something compelling to the mix of more youthful, homegrown talent. Free 
agency top-ups Nick Dal Santo, Shaun Higgins and Jarrad Waite were the best of 
them and the latter pair in particular provided far greater service in 2015 
than many expected. Higgins looked finished when he limped away from the 
Bulldogs but he was a man possessed last year, kicking 39 goals amid ten 20+ 
possession games.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85ef299f6d540d130bdcd0fb22eb7f7ffbcf9fde%2F0_70_3000_1804%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20AFL%20season%20preview%3A%20Adelaide%20and%20North%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20AFL%20season%20preview%3A%20Adelaide%20and%20North%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85ef299f6d540d130bdcd0fb22eb7f7ffbcf9fde%2F0_70_3000_1804%2F3000.jpg>
 Andrew Swallow will be a key figure in the outcome of North Melbourne’s 2016 
campaign. Photograph: Michael Dodge/Getty Images 
Waite’s 42 goals were the measurable impact, but his bone-crunching attack on 
the ball made dropping back into the hole a frightening prospect for opposition 
defenders and also gave North the nasty edge they’d often lacked. But you could 
say that his and Higgins’ combined renaissance points to a concern for Brad 
Scott’s side; it’s really now or never because they and other key players like 
Brent Harvey, Drew Petrie, Daniel Wells and Michael Firrito are nearing the end 
of the road.

And the Roos certainly can’t afford a repeat of their glacial start to the 
season in 2015, because they face arguably the toughest draw in the league, 
playing all of reigning premiers Hawthorn, flag fancies Sydney and the Western 
Bulldogs twice. North could well remain the kind of side that would be a 
nightmare match-up in the first week of the finals, but that doesn’t really 
matter if they don’t get there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd85dd18536a52b857f4e0629c765e06d6b21b150%2F0_175_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%20AFL%20season%20preview%3A%20Adelaide%20and%20North%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%20AFL%20season%20preview%3A%20Adelaide%20and%20North%20Melbourne%20%7C%20Russell%20Jackson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2F2016-afl-season-preview-adelaide-and-north-melbourne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd85dd18536a52b857f4e0629c765e06d6b21b150%2F0_175_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 North Melbourne forward Ben Brown (right) is among a host of young Roos who’ll 
need to step up and make their side less reliant on veterans. Photograph: Scott 
Barbour/Getty Images 
The strengths are clear enough; this midfield mixes it with the best for 
contested ball and they move it around well too, often sweeping from defence to 
attack to create scoring opportunities. Godly ruckman Todd Goldstein gives them 
an almost ridiculous advantage from centre bounces, from which North tend to 
attack with potency through a solid core of hard-nosed on-ballers in Andrew 
Swallow, Jack Ziebell and Ben Cunnington. But the team defence is shabby and 
the back six often flat-footed. They can defend deep, when Scott Thompson, 
Firrito and Lachie Hansen come into their own, but there’s a lack of creativity 
in other respects.

There were no major ‘outs’ for North in the off-season and the best of their 
own pick-ups was former Hawk Jed Anderson, who can kick a goal and adds some 
pace. But there are too few ready replacements for the old guard, meaning that 
any progress this year will rely on not only the lesser lights improving 
rapidly, but the likes of Petrie, Firrito, 38-year-old Brent Harvey – who 
continues to defy all odds –maintaining their impossibly high standards. We 
just can’t see it happening this year for the Roos.

In focus tomorrow: Richmond and Western Bulldogs
 