
American culture is stuck in perpetual rewind: the Clintons, the Ninja 
Turtles, Buzzfeed. Now comes a much more serious affair –Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> War 3: Revenge of the Jihadi. Like all 
horror-movie sequels, this one has a new cast but the same basic plot line, 
plus the threat of an even bloodier ending at the hands of a new masked enemy.

Audiences can shout the obvious at the protagonists – “Don’t go in the house!” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=olEbwhWDYwM> – but in the forever conflict 
that is the Middle East and North Africa in the 21st century, former anti-war 
candidates and generals don’t hear us like they did in the 20th. There is no 
turning off a war that has no end. Not that we shouldn’t try – it’s just that 
we can’t act as if we know exactly how to do it.

So it’s been grimly amusing, over the past few days, to see some conservatives 
make almost the same retroactive case against Obama 
<http://theweek.com/speedreads/index/266142/speedreads-ted-cruz-isis-is-latest-example-of-the-failures-of-the-obama-clinton-foreign-policies>
 for striking Isis in northern Iraq that they did against Bush for his 
still-radioactive hot mess across the entire country – even as they temper 
criticism of the strikes with politically required pro-war flourishes. Lindsey 
Graham warned of terrorists in the White House butfailed to offer his own plan 
for keeping them out 
<http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2014/08/10/graham-islamic-state-will-attack-on-us-soil-obama-must-stop-terror-groups-rise/>
. Hillary Clinton reverted to pre-invasion support,only to express doubt about 
continued action 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/USA-Update/2014/0810/Hillary-Clinton-joins-critics-of-Obama-s-response-to-ISIS-in-Iraq-video>
.

But right now, people are dying. People are trapped. Even if some, at last, 
are being saved 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2014/08/11/world/meast/iraq-rescue-mission/index.html?hpt=hp_t1>
.

“There is no American military solution to the larger crisis in Iraq,” the 
president said on Monday evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2014/aug/11/iraq-crisis-us-air-strikes-help-kurds-retake-territory-live-updates#block-53e9311ae4b0482ace2e4cb3>
. “The only solution is Iraqis coming together and form unified government.” (
Though his own efforts as non-military regime 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/08/11/exclusive-inside-obama-s-push-for-regime-change-in-iraq.html>
 change show that the president is alsoapparently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/11/us-plot-oust-iraqi-pm-nouri-al-maliki-iraq>
 in favor of Americans coming together and forming Iraq’s unified government.)

Well, here’s a solution we can start working on back home: hold the 
administration and the military accountable in real time, because there is no 
such thing as a limited military engagement anymore. If the price of freedom is 
constant vigilance, the price of constant war is constant investigation, 
perpetual skepticism.

War critics and advocates alike need to skip the backward-looking 
fault-finding and point-scoring and do someforward-looking fault-finding 
instead. These are some domestic steps Congress could take right now:

1. Demand a real authorization of the use of military force.

Ted Cruz’s stopped clock has the right time on this 
<http://time.com/3096874/republicans-iraq-isis-obama-cruz-santorum-huckabee-jindal/>
, as doesRand Paul’s 
<http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2014/02/05/rand_paul_is_right_end_the_iraq_war>
. What used to be a Code Pink-ish position is now, if not mainstream, then at 
least talked about on both sides of the stream. The idea that the president 
needs toregularly ask permission to continue military engagement is such a good 
idea that even Obama agrees with it! Officially,his administration backs the 
repeal of the 2002 AUMF 
<http://blogs.rollcall.com/white-house/obama-has-authority-to-bomb-iraq-without-congress-because-aumf-never-expired/?dcz=>
. Practically, it has rolled right along, telling Congress,“He didn’t feel he 
had any need for authority from us.” 
<http://www.cnn.com/2014/06/18/politics/us-iraq/> 

The idea of regular review of military action is actually a part of the War 
Powers Act <http://www.loc.gov/law/help/war-powers.php> (remember that!?) – it 
specifies a report every 60 days. You should expect one any day now.

2. Present your own plan – earlier rather than later.

Calling for Obama to have a plan for what unfolds next is great, but it took 
four years for Congressional Democrats to present “A Responsible Plan to End 
the War in Iraq 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Responsible_Plan_to_End_the_War_in_Iraq>”. Of 
course, trying to plan an invasion years inadvance doesn’t work, either: The 
GOP platform in 2003 called for the “liberation” of Iraq ... though that wasn’t 
really a plan so much as wishful thinking.

That you can be both too late and too soon in one’s strategy speaks to the 
importance of settling into the reality of action as it happens. It’s arguable 
the combination of the GOP’s premature optimism about the invasion and the 
Democrat’s premature optimism about withdrawal that created the fractured 
political environment for Isis’s surge forward, after all.

Perhaps the answer is to avoid the temptation to think your own favored 
solution is one that will lead to hearts and flowers and happy endings. (Ahem 
coughMcCaincoughCheneycough)

3. Make all military and foreign aid as transparent as possible.

Last year, Tea Party representatives and Oxfam lobbied together in favor of a 
bill legislating such transparency; it had bipartisan co-sponsors in Senators 
Marco Rubio and Ben Cardin. The bill went beyond the administration’s voluntary 
releases about humanitarian aid – it codified that policy,and it required 
transparency about “security assistance”.

Security assistance accounts for $25bn of our $48bn foreign aid budget 
<http://www.propublica.org/article/obama-administration-pushed-to-keep-military-aid-out-of-transparency-effort>
, and includes direct military aid (like buying fighter jets) and equipping 
local police. Now, it was hardly an attempt to make the CIA live-tweet its 
actions;the bill sought to allow lawmakers and voter evaluate what actions 
involving “the use of force” might 
<http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/up-front/posts/2013/07/10-foreign-aid-transparency-accountability-act-ingram>
 already have been taken.The administration successfully opposed it 
<http://www.propublica.org/article/military-gets-a-partial-pass-on-foreign-aid-transparency-push>
.

4. Enforce standards on contractors who do our dirty work.

Candidate Obama 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/promises/obameter/promise/160/clarify-legal-status-for-defense-contractor-person/>
 promised to extend the Military Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Enforcement Act 
tocivilians 
<http://bigstory.ap.org/article/congress-grapples-gap-scofflaw-contractors>; 
President Obama has yet to. This is a question of policing both behavior and 
costs, andacknowledging the reality of an outsourced war 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/Opinion/2013/0319/A-lesson-from-Iraq-war-How-to-outsource-war-to-private-contractors>
. It shouldn’t be easy to send a for-hire replacement army. On the financial 
side,the Department of Defense spends almost three times as much when it hires 
a civilian to do the same job that could be done by military personnel 
<http://pogoblog.typepad.com/pogo/2012/11/dod-contractors-cost-nearly-3-times-more-than-dod-civilians.html>
.

For anyone skeptical about Obama’s promise that boots won’t be back on the 
ground, the boots for hire still might be.

5. Admit that we’re going to be at war for a very, very long time.

The worst mistakes in modern warfare seem to be made when we mistake the least 
wrong action with the best action. It’s politics that push people from cautious 
endorsement to blinding enthusiasm; realism means planning for less violence, 
but perhaps not peace.

It’s time to put aside your philosophical reasoning about the moral quality of 
Obama’s decision to begin bombing Iraq. Not because “politics stops at the 
water’s edge”, exactly, but because once we start the war machine – and Obama 
has surely turned the key – you need to know how to steer it more than stop it.
 