
Job: founder and chairman, Brunswick Group
Age: 54
Industry: public relations
Staff: 470
Worth: £90m
2009 ranking: 82

Alan Parker is the godfather of modern financial public relations 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1583898/PR-king-Alan-Parker-the-No-10-favourite.html>
. The founder and chairman of the City's biggest PR firm, Brunswick, Parker was 
in an enviable position come the general election, being close to both David 
Cameron and Gordon Brown.

His Brunswick Group straddles the world of politics, commerce and the media, 
shaping the nation's perception of big business and its corporate leaders. But
not even Brunswick <http://www.markborkowski.com/pr-and-responsibility/> 
managed to save the battered reputation of its client BP in arguably its 
biggest test to date.

"He is one of the great communicators, he makes the world go round," said one 
of our panellists. "He is the Peter Mandelson of the media world," added 
another, which not everyone – Mandelson excluded – might take as a compliment.

A one-time rock band manager and son of the late Sir Peter Parker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/apr/30/guardianobituaries>, the former 
head of British Rail, Parker entered the PR industry in the early 1980s atBrian 
Basham's <http://www.prweek.com/uk/news/search/94469//> Broad Street Associates 
and by 1987 had founded Brunswick.

Its clients include around a quarter of the FTSE 100 companies, including 
British Airways, Barclays, BT and Unilever, and in the media sector, Pearson, 
Thomson Reuters, HMV Group and Pinewood Shepperton.

Both Brown and Cameron were guests at Parker's wedding 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-441328/The-wedding-guests-war-families.html>
 to former political lobbyist Jane Hardman three years ago. Parker holidays 
with Cameron and is godfather to one of the Brown's children. "How many people 
bridge the two camps like he does?" said our panel.

It remains to be seen how Brunswick – and rivals such as Roland Rudd's 
Finsbury, also on this list – will be affected by the coalition government's
promised crackdown on lobbyists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/may/15/tories-must-not-backtrack-on-lobbyists>
.

Parker was one of a number of high-profile supporters of the Open Up campaign 
<http://www.timesonline.co.uk/tol/news/politics/article6886256.ece> calling for 
all MPs who were tainted by the expenses scandal to resign and face reselection 
by their constituents.

Brunswick's high-profile partners include former Sun editor David Yelland and 
Tim Burt, ex-media editor of the Financial Times.

One of three famous brothers – actor Nathaniel Parker 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0662511/> and film director Oliver Parker 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0662529/> – Alan Parker is also chairman of Save 
the Children UK.
 