
Shortly after Rebecca Walker was born, a nurse materialised with a question. 
Was the birth certificate correct in listing her mother's race as "Negro" and 
her father's as "Caucasian"? Yes, came the reply, correct.

This was the segregated US South in 1969, and Walker's birth raised eyebrows - 
and hackles. But in other quarters, the new daughter ofAlice Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-walker>, the author of The Color 
Purple, and the white Jewish civil rights lawyer Mel Leventhal was viewed as a 
small victory, a symbol of a new America rising out of the ashes of the 
viciously racist past.

Thirty-four years later, when Rebecca became a mother to her son, Tenzin, now 
two, a sense of victory also hovered overhead - this time it was not political, 
but personal. As much as she wanted a baby, Walker, 37, a feminist writer and 
activist, was "wracked with ambivalence," as she writes in her new book, Baby 
Love, the subtitle of which is Choosing Motherhood After a Lifetime of 
Ambivalence.

"I had the usual questions: when, with whom, and how the hell was I going to 
afford it?" writes Walker. "But there was something else, too, a question 
common - if not always conscious - to women of my generation, women raised to 
view motherhood with more than a little suspicion. Can I survive having a baby? 
Will I lose myself - my body, my mind, my options - and be left trapped, 
resentful, and irretrievably overwhelmed?"

Today, Walker's hesitancy to enter the world of Teletubbies and sippy cups 
seems sweetly ironic. The woman Time magazine once named one of the 50 most 
influential future American leaders under 40 is clearly high on motherhood. 
"Part of what I wanted to do with Baby Love was to suggest that not only are 
you giving birth to a baby, but also you can use the experience to give birth 
to a new sense of yourself."

For Walker, a "sense of self" is something she values highly, principally 
because for so long hers never stopped shifting. After her parents divorced 
when she was eight, she spent her childhood alternating every two years between 
her father's new family and Jewish world in New York, and her mother's 
African-American artist community in San Francisco.

"Exhausting" is how she now describes bouncing between families of two races 
and two religions. In her 2001 memoir, Black, White and Jewish: Autobiography 
of a Shifting Self, she tells how in Jewish suburbia she is mistaken for her 
step-siblings' nanny; and in San Francisco, black girls accuse her of acting 
white. In neither environment does she experience true belonging, compounded by 
her claim that her hard-working parents didn't quite show up for the job.

As an adolescent, she experimented with drugs and there was an abortion - 
Walker learned young to look after herself. "I got birth control by myself at 
14," she says. "I got sick and checked myself into the hospital at 15. I was 
cleaning the house at 10 or 11. I was doing well in school. I was super 
precocious so it didn't really seem to my parents there was anything wrong with 
letting me go out and fend for myself."

To be fair, she says, her parents did not have good family role models. In her 
father's family there was the legacy of the Holocaust; her mother's was 
blighted by poverty and segregation. "Their take on me was, 'Look, you're not 
afraid you will be gassed, you're not drinking out of the coloured water 
fountain; you've got it really good,' so they didn't really understand that 
being biracial and the child of divorce would affect me in the way it did."

Walker also had to contend with what she perceived to be her mother's own 
ambivalence towards having a child. "In a poem ... she compares me to various 
calamities that struck and impeded the lives of other women writers," she 
writes. When Rebecca was in her 20s, her mother admitted she "chose" to love 
her. Such candour hurt. "There is no choice involved in my love for Tenzin," 
Rebecca writes in Baby Love. "And if there were some secret place where I 
wondered and there isn't, I would never tell him about it."

Does she understand her mother's ambivalence? Walker sighs. "The problems 
began when I did my first book and really raised the issue of dogma in feminist 
communities. There was a sense I was undermining her work.

"She once told me that because I am lighter-skinned than her I would be 
treated better, and then the divorce from my father, I think she felt betrayed 
by whiteness in a certain kind of way, and I represent that whiteness."

Walker spent a lot of time negotiating the landmines in her relationship with 
her mother; when she got pregnant, she decided the bond had to be renegotiated 
or let go: "I hadn't really come to terms with my relationship with my mother. 
I was really allowing myself to be wounded again and again, and it wasn't until 
I got pregnant that I decided that was no longer necessary. The idea of my 
vulnerable, defenceless child seeing his mother destabilised by any kind of 
relationship forced me to stick up for myself in a way I hadn't been able to."

In an email, Rebecca asked Alice to apologise for what she felt was years of 
hurt; Rebecca says Alice refused and claimed she was no longer interested in 
the job of mother. Today they are estranged; Rebecca was told by a cousin he 
had replaced her in Alice's will. (Interestingly, in the acknowledgements of 
her new book, Rebecca thanks Alice "for having the courage to live her truth, 
and by example, teaching me to live mine".)

The pregnancy, and the birth of Tenzin, was Walker's chance to do the 
mother/child relationship right. "I couldn't have anticipated the fierce love, 
the protectiveness, the unconditional, overwhelming love that I had never felt 
for anybody else," she says. She also needed, with her partner, Glen, a 
Buddhist teacher, to create a healthy family dynamic for their baby, and as a 
child of divorce whose parents barely spoke for 25 years, worried she had no 
model for one. "In my family, there were secrets, factions, a lot was unspoken. 
We don't really have that, everything is explored, there is a level of openness 
and honesty that is very key."

Philosophical flexibility is also a priority. "I was torn apart by politics as 
a child ... between Zionism and black nationalism, feminism and traditional 
family values, Judaism and the pagan feminine divine. I no longer see the 
necessity of having such strong ideological beliefs that could terminate or 
extinguish the idea of familial or even world peace."

Tenzin isn't Walker's first experience of parenting. In her 20s, she became a 
stepmother to Solomon, the son of her ex, the singer Meshell Ndegeocello. She 
credits Solomon, who she still parents, with teaching her to love selflessly, 
but admits that while her love for him is palpable, it's different.

"I don't care how close you are to your adopted son or beloved stepdaughter, 
the love you have for your non-biological child isn't the same as the love you 
have for your own flesh and blood," she writes in Baby Love, and with that set 
off some frenzied discussion in the US. Step-parents and children thanked her 
for saying what they couldn't say; adoptive parents threatened to boycott the 
book.

"The adoptive parents who are so fixated on wanting this sameness, I just 
think it's unhealthy. As a biological parent, I feel like it's a kind of 
erasure of the specificity of a biological experience. It's OK for the adoptive 
experience to be what it is, different, and with its own terrain."

Walker wants another child, and this time there will be no ambivalence. 
Motherhood is the first club she feels she has really belonged to. It has not 
only allowed her to construct a family, but has also stabilised her shifting 
sense of self.

"I have become more decisive and self-aware," she writes of her transformation 
from daughter to mother. "Less prone to being yanked about by the needs and 
wants of others. It seems being able to love my child unconditionally, I am 
more able to love myself unconditionally."

Â· Baby Love: Choosing Motherhood After a Lifetime of Ambivalence is published 
by Riverhead Books at $24.95
 