
What do the Australian’s columnist Nick Cater 
<http://www.luckyculture.com.au/media-library/making-friends-with-the-fright-bats/>
, video game hate group #Gamergate 
<https://twitter.com/search?f=realtime&q=gamergate%20cultural%20marxism&src=typd>
, Norwegian mass shooterAnders Breivik 
<http://www.talk2action.org/story/2011/7/23/8287/32273/Front_Page/Anders_Behring_Breivik_Soldier_in_the_Christian_Right_Culture_Wars>
 andrandom blokes on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2Jlk1frpWrI> have 
in common? Apart from anything else, they have all invoked the spectre of 
“cultural Marxism” to account for things they disapprove of – things like 
Islamic immigrant communities, feminism and, er, opposition leader Bill Shorten.

What are they talking about? The tale varies in the telling, but the theory of 
cultural Marxism is integral to the fantasy life of the contemporary right. It 
depends on a crazy-mirror history, which glancingly reflects things that really 
happened, only to distort them in the most bizarre ways.

It begins in the 1910s and 1920s. When the socialist revolution failed to 
materialise beyond the Soviet Union, Marxist thinkers like Antonio Gramsci and 
Georg Lukacs tried to explain why. Their answer was that culture and religion 
blunted the proletariat’s desire to revolt, and the solution was that Marxists 
should carry out a “long march through the institutions” – universities and 
schools, government bureaucracies and the media – so that cultural values could 
be progressively changed from above.

Adapting this, later thinkers of the Frankfurt School 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Frankfurt_School> decided that the key to 
destroying capitalism was to mix up Marx with a bit of Freud, since workers 
were not only economically oppressed, but made orderly by sexual repression and 
other social conventions. The problem was not only capitalism as an economic 
system, but the family, gender hierarchies, normal sexuality – in short, the 
whole suite of traditional western values.

The conspiracy theorists claim that these “cultural Marxists” began to use 
insidious forms of psychological manipulation to upend the west. Then, when 
Nazism forced the (mostly Jewish) members of the Frankfurt School to move to 
America, they had, the story goes, a chance to undermine the culture and values 
that had sustained the world’s most powerful capitalist nation.

The vogue for the ideas of theorists like Herbert Marcuse and Theodor Adorno 
in the 1960s counterculture culminated with their acolytes’ occupation of the 
commanding heights of the most important cultural institutions, from 
universities to Hollywood studios. There, the conspiracy says, they promoted 
and even enforced ideas which were intended to destroy traditional Christian 
values and overthrow free enterprise: feminism, multiculturalism, gay rights 
and atheism. And this, apparently, is where political correctness came from. I 
promise you: this is whatthey really think 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d4v6CVcHUXY>. 

The whole story is transparently barmy. If humanities faculties are really 
geared to brainwashing students into accepting the postulates of far-left 
ideology, the composition of western parliaments and presidencies and the 
roaring success of corporate capitalism suggests they’re doing an astoundingly 
bad job. Anyone who takes a cool look at the last three decades of politics 
will think it bizarre that anyone could interpret what’s happened as the 
triumph of an all-powerful left.

The theory of cultural Marxism is also blatantly antisemitic, drawing on the 
idea of Jews as a fifth column bringing down western civilisation from within, 
a racist trope that has a longer history than Marxism. Likethe Protocols of the 
Elders of Zion 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Protocols_of_the_Elders_of_Zion>, the theory 
was fabricated to order, for a special purpose: the institution and 
perpetuation of culture war. We can even nominate an author for this lunacy:
William S Lind <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_S._Lind>, a polymath of 
the American hard right, who sought to put rightwing activism on a new footing 
as the cold war drew to a close.

In the late 1980s, Lind wrote a couple of monographs arguing that there was an 
emerging mainstream political consensus on free-market economics (due in part 
to the “disarray” of the traditional social-democratic left), but that many 
Americans across the political spectrum were dismayed by the decline in 
traditional values, the family and middle-class life. If conflict with the left 
could be shifted to the ground of culture, there was a chance of binding the 
right and even claiming some socially conservative voters who had traditionally 
voted for the Democrats.

When the Berlin Wall fell, it was time for Lind’s strategy of “cultural 
conservatism” to become a central strategy for US Republicans: it identified a 
new kind of social enemy for the right to mobilise against. The changing 
parameters of economic debate and the beginning of American decline demanded 
that conservatives embrace a politics “centred more, not less, on cultural 
issues” – the family, education, crime and morality. The fairytale of cultural 
Marxism provided a post-communist adversary located specifically in the 
cultural realm – academics, Hollywood, journalists, civil rights activists and 
feminists. It has been a mainstay of conservative activism and rhetoric ever 
since.

While Lind has recently become a more marginal figure, his story of cultural 
Marxism has proved durable and useful across the spectrum of right-wing thought 
because it offers so much.


It allows those smarting from a loss of privilege to be offered the shroud of 
victimhood, by pointing to a shadowy, omnipresent, quasi-foreign elite who are 
attempting to destroy all that is good in the world. It offers an explanation 
for the decline of families, small towns, patriarchal authority, and 
unchallenged white power: a vast, century-long left wing conspiracy. And it 
distracts from the most important factor in these changes: capitalism, which 
demands mobility, whose crises have eroded living standards, and which thus, 
among other things, undermines the viability of conventional family structures 
and the traditional lifestyles that conservatives approve of.

The story of cultural Marxism is also flexible and can be tailored to fit with 
the obsessions of a range of right-wing actors. As such, it’s one example of an 
idea from the extremes which has been mobilised by more mainstream figures and 
has dragged politics as a whole a little further right.

Anders Breivik <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik> 
killed young social democrats because he believed that their party was involved 
in a cultural Marxist plot to undermine traditional European values by means of 
mass immigration from the Islamic world. Prominent voices in the #Gamergate 
movement have invoked it to warn of what is really motivating the feminist and 
queer critics of game aesthetics and culture – a desire to purge the culture of 
“proper” masculine values. It can even chime with Cater’s dreary, pedestrian 
moaning about how a “graduate class” seeks to remodel authentic, “egalitarian” 
Australian culture.

The idea of a cultural Marxist conspiracy has also endured because, in the 
absence of a genuine clash of ideas about the way the economy should be run, it 
provides an animating idea for the political contest. For Cater to claim that
Bill Shorten <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> is a 
Marxist of any kind is laughable precisely because to the extent that the 
opposition leader is explicitly offering anything, it’s plainly just a slightly 
more cushioned version of the same underlying economic orthodoxy embraced by 
Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey. Until that changes, the right will always be able 
to offer their story of victimhood and conspiracy with some hope of success.
 