
In 1984, when the National Theatre premiered a new play about Chicago 
real-estate salesmen by a dramatist known only to the theatrical cognoscenti,
Aidan Gillen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aidan-gillen> was a 
16-year-old actor in the Project Arts Centre in Dublin, playing Bottom in a 
production of A Midsummer Night's Dream and learning the pleasure of getting a 
reaction from the audience.

Almost a quarter of a century on, David Mamet's Glengarry Glen Ross is being 
revived in London's West End with the status of one of modern drama's most 
cherished scripts, and Gillen's standing has risen - through TV roles in Queer 
As Folk andThe Wire <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire> and a 
Tony-nominated performance in Harold Pinter's The Caretaker on Broadway - to 
the level of above-the-title billing in this production.

Although Glengarry is a team piece, with half-a-dozen decent acting parts, 
Gillen has the choice speeches, getting the play's catch phrase (the salesman's 
slogan, "always be closing") and the curtain lines in both acts, as Richard 
Roma, the amoral super-schmoozer whose prize of a Cadillac for being the 
office's salesman of the month is threatened by a police investigation.

Talking before rehearsals in an East London day centre, Gillen is polite but 
keen to get to work. Mamet's scripts need rehearsing even more than most pieces 
because they are as precise as orchestral scores in telling the players when to 
come in, interrupting or overlapping other lines.

"You sort of have to learn it all twice," he says. "You learn the lines at 
home and then you have to relearn it, when you see what the other actors are 
doing."

Slight of body and tight of face, Gillen's striking resemblance to Sean Penn - 
who, it turns out, heads his list of favourite actors - has been further 
enhanced by a moustache grown for this role. Another of his professional 
role-models is Al Pacino, which could be problematic as he took the role of 
Roma in Mamet's film version.

"Yeah," Gillen acknowledges. "I saw the film when it came out but luckily 
don't remember what Pacino did with it. The odd thing is that the character 
everyone remembers from the film is Alec Baldwin and that part wasn't even in 
the play. Mamet wrote it for the movie as a way of explaining what the fuck was 
going on."

The climax of that sentence - and Gillen's description of Roma as a "cunt with 
a romantic, poetic streak" - suggest that the actor was already well attuned to 
the spectacular scatology of Mamet's dialogue or has now become so, perhaps as 
a result of having just done the same dramatist's American Buffalo in Dublin.

Some actors would prepare for Glengarry Glen Ross by actually selling 
properties in Illinois for several months but Gillen has found a less intense 
way of doing methodical research: "The internet has made it much easier. I 
might look up the rules of filing a real estate contract or what the economic 
climate was in Chicago in 1984. It's all there, the kind of stuff that comes up 
when you're looking at a play like this."

He also clearly has a strong instinct to perform. The sixth in a Dublin 
family, he remembers that, during his childhood, "we used to make fake movies 
in the back garden". It would, presumably, have been a video camera in those 
days? "No. Nothing. Just like this." He rolls one hand into a pretend lens, 
raises it to his eye and mimes pulling the focus-puller with the other. "I was 
cameraman, director and star."

It was when a neighbour in the road joined the Project Arts Centre that Gillen 
went along as well: "I don't know how serious I was, playing bit parts in this 
and that. But the social life was definitely good."

When big laughs started coming back from the stalls, he began to think of this 
being his living. In his early days as an aspiring actor, he was so short of 
cash that he would go to casting directors who had copies of his photograph and 
take them back to mail on to other offices. The response, though, was slow: 
"There was a year between school and getting going as an actor when I basically 
just watched films. Video shops were the new thing and there was a good one 
round the corner and me and my brother just watched everything, from the horror 
to the European art-house. Everything except the porn."

If sitting watching videos seems a passive way of preparing for an acting 
career, Gillen next became proactive, getting his first major role - in Billy 
Roche's play A Handful of Stars - with a rather forceful audition: "I ambushed 
Roche and the director in the street; just demanded they see me."

He also recalls getting his first film work by "gate-crashing the set, 
basically" of Jack Clayton's 1987 production of Brian Moore's The Lonely 
Passion of Judith Hearne, starring Maggie Smith as an alcoholic spinster. 
Gillen is credited as "Youth in Liquor Store", playing a teenager encountered 
by the title character on one of her booze-buying trips. He forgot two of his 
four lines but the director kept the fumble in the final cut as an example of 
adolescent bafflement and Gillen got "Â£700 for the day, shit-loads of money at 
the time".

These early performances - suggesting an unusual intensity and eye-catching 
quality - got Gillen to the stage where he no longer had to hang around in 
alleys waiting for the director or writer but was sent scripts in the usual 
way, one of them being Russell T Davies's pioneering Channel 4 drama of gay 
life, Queer As Folk: "It was originally called Queer As Fuck, which I remember 
being incredibly impressed by. It just kind of laid it out there."

The sex scenes crossed a border in broadcasting, but, though a young Irish 
Catholic lad at the time, Gillen had no qualms about filming them: "I'd been an 
altar boy. But what does that mean these days? Ample training, I'd imagine. I 
think my mother made it to halfway through episode two. I heard she was 
watching it with my brother-in-law and she said, 'How are they actually doing 
that?' And he said: 'It's trick photography.'" He had "half expected some 
backlash and grief" from Catholic Ireland but almost nothing happened until, 
surprisingly, last year, "when a guy pulled up in a van in London - an Irish 
guy - and started giving me grief. And it was about that. I was taken aback. I 
didn't know whether to laugh or get in at him through the window."

More recently, Gillen has risked moralistic monologues from truck-drivers in 
Baltimore, after playing the politician Tommy Carcetti in the final two seasons 
of The Wire, the searing American series about political and police corruption 
in the American city. If the acting challenge in Mamet's stage plays is making 
sense of the overlaps, the obstacle in the scripts for The Wire is the gaps: 
plot lines and speeches are fragmented, as if the story line has been smashed 
to the floor and then reconstructed.

And, for Gillen, there was the additional difficulty that he was taking his 
place in the mosaic three seasons in: "Most of the characters in that spend 
most of their time off screen, so you have to be able to fill it in. It's like 
opening a book in the middle and trying to understand a chapter. David Simon, 
the creator, made himself available to answer any questions about what had 
happened in the past, where a particular character had been."

Gillen liked The Wire because he found in the scripts something he rarely sees 
on TV: "A lot of the stuff on American television at the moment is quite 
fantastical. Heroes, Desperate Housewives, The Sopranos - they're all very 
stylised. The Wire is much more rooted in realism and honesty. In American 
television, I can't think of anything I'd rather have been in because it has 
got something to say and that is the kind of thing I want to do."

Actors who take their first transatlantic roles often comment on the greater 
level of pampering: drivers and hair stylists and personal assistants.

"Not on The Wire," Gillen laughs. "One of the things on that was that there 
were no egos, no stars. There's none of that politics of billing and who gets 
the biggest fucking trailer and big extravagant premiere parties. You can use 
the energy on set. They didn't cast recognisable stars in the first place. You 
were never going to get Don Johnson in a special guest appearance. You always 
knew you weren't going to be on the cover of Now or TV Guide but you'd be part 
of something great."

Gillen and the British actor Dominic West in The Wire were - along with Hugh 
Laurie in House, Deadwood's Ian McShane and Ashley Jensen in Ugly Betty - part 
of the wave of talent from the UK and Irish side of the Atlantic playing roles 
that might more obviously have been cast from the thousands of performers on 
the books of American Equity. Why is a green or burgundy passport such a 
calling-card in US film and television now?

"Because we're cheaper?" half-jokes Gillen. "I dunno. I think Hollywood has 
always been the place that actors from here went because it was where the whole 
business started."

More flatteringly to the outsiders, an American producer recently told me that 
actors from across the water are valued because they tend to have greater 
training and versatility than their modern American counterparts (usually 
having done some stage, TV and film) and because they are less worried about 
playing unpleasant roles. Stars in New York and Los Angeles often choose their 
parts like campaigning politicians, calculating the demographics. When the role 
of a paedophile-murderer was being cast in a current movie, only British and 
Irish actors were willing to audition.

"I can't understand that," says Gillen. "I suppose there are actors who are 
worried about their public image. But I've never had any trouble playing 
unpleasant characters. It is only a part. Which is why you do it because you 
are interested in exploring something you never could or would be."

And then he leaves with relish to rehearse the revolting but rewarding Richard 
Roma.

Â· Glengarry Glen Ross opens at the Apollo Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, London W1 (020-7087 7599), on 
October 10. Seasons 1-3 ofThe Wire are available on DVD.
 