
“I’m not damaged,” says Ben Whishaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ben-whishaw>. “Not more than anybody else.”

Whishaw is resting in his dressing room at the Walter Kerr theatre on 
Broadway; it is a few hours before the evening’s performance of Arthur Miller’s 
The Crucible, directed by the brainy Belgian artist Ivo van Hove. Starring 
opposite Sophie Okonedo as his wife and Saoirse Ronan as his former mistress, 
Whishaw plays the anguished hero John Proctor, a just though morally 
compromised man, ensnared by the witch trials in colonial Salem.

Ben Whishaw leads the soulful shift in what it means to be a leading man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/13/ben-whishaw-soulful-brit-who-charmed-new-york-the-crucible>
Anguished heroes are what Whishaw does best. He played Hamlet at 23, months 
after graduating from Rada, in a career-defining performance that the Telegraph 
described as “the kind of evening of which legends are made”. Now 35, he has 
made a speciality of the damaged, the doomed, the beautiful and damned: from 
Sebastian Flyte of Brideshead Revisited to John Keats of Bright Star to Danny 
Holt of the recent London Spy and now John Proctor, too. (Q, the geek-chic 
genius of the James Bond franchise, is a “happy and fun” departure. So, it 
seems, is Paddington Bear.) And, much as he might like to deny it, they are 
what he is drawn to.

“It’s weird, isn’t it?” Whishaw says. “Because I don’t see myself that way and 
I’m not that way. But I agree that obviously I’ve played a lot of people like 
that. I don’t know why it’s come about to be like that.” Interviews have often 
described Whishaw as sharing the qualities he projects on screen and on stage – 
a vulnerability, an unworldliness, a not-quite-human mingling of limpid eyes 
and tousled hair and innocence, as though some tremulous fawn or wood sprite 
had somehow carved out a successful acting career.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa789ae512fd70fa9974a7b3097530b4fcff98f9%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'm%20not%20damaged'%3A%20Ben%20Whishaw%20on%20sexuality%2C%20privacy%20and%20playing%20troubled%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27m%20not%20damaged%27%3A%20Ben%20Whishaw%20on%20sexuality%2C%20privacy%20and%20playing%20troubled%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa789ae512fd70fa9974a7b3097530b4fcff98f9%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘A happy and fun departure’ … As Q in Skyfall. Photograph: Allstar/Sony 
Pictures 
Despite what his fansites might suggest, Whishaw is no forest creature, at 
least not this afternoon. He is shy, which he readily admits, and has a 
tendency to look off and away while chatting. But he is also gracious and 
friendly, offering wheels of strawberry liquorice and laughing often (a cheeky 
little “heh heh” sound). Throughout, he eats oranges and sucks on lozenges and 
sips herbal tea, in an effort to protect his throat. (Van Hove’s production 
requires plenty of yelling.) He has grown a shaggy beard for the role, and he 
is wearing clothes a modish Hamlet might approve of – an inky blazer and 
sweater, loose charcoal trousers – yet that is pretty much where any 
resemblance to the Dane ends.

Still, he is the actor directors call upon when they need someone to project 
an awesome emotional volatility and candour. Even when his face is seemingly at 
rest, you can see the thoughts and feelings flickering and flaring just under 
the surface. Trevor Nunn, who directed his Hamlet, remarked on his 
“extraordinary sensitivity – sort of one skin less than most people around 
him”. It is fitting that he has played Keats because in his work he strives 
toward what Keats called “negative capability”, a comfort with human mystery 
and uncertainty.

His dressing room, where he spends most of his time when he’s not at home in 
the West Village, is cramped and featureless, but he has cheered it up with a 
pink hyacinth atop the air conditioner; photos of his husband, the composer 
Mark Bradshaw, and his family; and a volume of Emily Dickinson poems to help 
put him in the Puritan mindset. There is a bright purple yoga mat, though 
little space to unroll it, and a large chunk of smoky quartz, which has a 
nicely witchy look to it and which Whishaw sometimes clasps. “It’s my rock,” he 
says. “I just have it around.”

The Crucible marks Whishaw’s Broadway debut, but it isn’t his first crack at 
the play or at the part of Proctor. He played the role in secondary school, at 
the same time that he began working with a youth theatre troupe near his 
Bedfordshire home. His father had brought him to the group, perhaps as a way of 
counteracting Whishaw’s introversion, which it didn’t exactly cure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79b9a447bd07703ef69a1802a01c52958218eef9%2F0_0_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'm%20not%20damaged'%3A%20Ben%20Whishaw%20on%20sexuality%2C%20privacy%20and%20playing%20troubled%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27m%20not%20damaged%27%3A%20Ben%20Whishaw%20on%20sexuality%2C%20privacy%20and%20playing%20troubled%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79b9a447bd07703ef69a1802a01c52958218eef9%2F0_0_4284_2570%2F4284.jpg>
 As Danny in London Spy. Photograph: Joss Barratt/BBC/WTTV Limited 
Until then, he hadn’t had much exposure to the theatre. His mother sold 
cosmetics, his father worked in IT, his non-identical twin doesn’t seem to have 
shared his interest in the arts. But he took to it immediately. “It was like an 
addiction,” he said. “I couldn’t wait to be back there.” The troupe, an early 
and profound influence, didn’t go in for light fare. They adapted a Primo Levi 
novel; they did Hamlet, in which Whishaw starred at 16.

Whishaw doesn’t remember much about that earlier Crucible. “I’m not sure what 
I must have understood at the time, really,” he says. But he recalls finding it 
“powerful even then. I do think actually it’s a good play for teenagers. It is 
somehow accessible.”

He wasn’t necessarily interested in revisiting it. When he was sent the 
script, he thought: “Oh, The Crucible, has it not been done a lot?” (It has.) 
But he read it again, and decided that if a production could correct “some of 
the things that are problematic or old-fashioned and attempt to restore it or 
to rediscover the power it must have had when he wrote it in 1953, it could be 
really amazing”. When Van Hove signed on as director, Whishaw, who had recently 
seen his astonishing production of Miller’s A View from the Bridge, signed on 
too.

He finds resonance in the play, in this production particularly, with its 
suggestion that a version of hysteria could rear up anywhere, at any moment. 
Petty resentments can still birth great crises; catastrophes can arise when the 
private and the social aren’t allowed their separate spheres. “The vengefulness 
in the play, the vengeance that is at work, is something I very much feel in 
the world at the moment,” he says.


He thought of the play while reading about recent terrorist attacks, noting 
how individuals still use the veneer of religion to unleash incredible 
violence. “With the attacks that happened in Brussels, it’s like, what is a God 
that can sanction these barbaric things?” He feels some of Proctor’s confusion 
when he encounters such stories. “Everything is switched upside down, turned 
topsy-turvy,” he says. “Bad is become good. Good is become bad. What do any of 
these things mean?” (In fairness, this sounds a little like Hamlet, too, his 
insistence that: “There is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it 
so.”)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09dbdeb5b82a0b1eb688af16a8d51efa6f2f03e8%2F0_177_2658_1595%2F2658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'm%20not%20damaged'%3A%20Ben%20Whishaw%20on%20sexuality%2C%20privacy%20and%20playing%20troubled%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27m%20not%20damaged%27%3A%20Ben%20Whishaw%20on%20sexuality%2C%20privacy%20and%20playing%20troubled%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09dbdeb5b82a0b1eb688af16a8d51efa6f2f03e8%2F0_177_2658_1595%2F2658.jpg>
 As Sebastian Flyte in Brideshead Revisited. Photograph: Allstar/BBC 
Films/Sportsphoto Ltd 
Before each performance of The Crucible, he says, he simply tries to step out 
“and have a go and hope for the best. That’s really what I do.” (And the best 
is usually what he gives. As his costar Ronan recently told the New York Times: 
“I’m a bit in awe of how brilliant he is, I really am.”) For an actor as 
obviously skilled as Whishaw, a statement like this seems almost perverse. But 
there is no sign that he means it facetiously or with deliberate 
self-deprecation.

This unknowing might make other actors anxious. But Whishaw is nervous in his 
life, not in his art. “I am shy,” Whishaw says. “I accept that.” You can hear 
that in his naughty, nervous laugh, and see it in his sometimes reluctance to 
maintain eye contact.

But this natural timidity disappears the minute he steps on stage. “I don’t 
really even feel nerves,” he says. “I don’t have any shyness or any inhibition 
and never have when I’m acting. It all falls away. I feel quite extrovert when 
I’m in that place. It’s funny, isn’t it?”

This is not to say that this role and this production haven’t challenged him. 
Van Hove, he says, “doesn’t explain himself”. His actors learn by trial and 
error, by experiment and exploration. The hardest thing for Whishaw to grasp, 
though in some ways the most liberating, is Van Hove’s unconcern with what 
Whishaw calls “the psychological, naturalistic stuff”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c6555ddf2379e4ac98c6e394ea2f3f602395e62%2F0_36_4285_2571%2F4285.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'm%20not%20damaged'%3A%20Ben%20Whishaw%20on%20sexuality%2C%20privacy%20and%20playing%20troubled%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27m%20not%20damaged%27%3A%20Ben%20Whishaw%20on%20sexuality%2C%20privacy%20and%20playing%20troubled%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c6555ddf2379e4ac98c6e394ea2f3f602395e62%2F0_36_4285_2571%2F4285.jpg>
 As Freddie Lyon in The Hour. Photograph: Joe Martin/BBC/Kudos 
“I’ve never really worked with a director who is less interested in that,” he 
says. Van Hove wanted the work to feel real, to feel immediate, to feel 
emotionally urgent, but not stagey. “He’s, like, take out all of the 
psychological pauses,” says Whishaw.

If this is a fresh approach for Whishaw, that shouldn’t suggest that he has 
ever really found a consistent practice or a way to articulate his work as an 
actor, nor does he want to. “I never really feel as if I know what I’m doing. I 
don’t feel any great sort of confidence in my ability,” he says. “But I’ve sort 
of reached the point where I think it’s OK. It’s OK not to know.”

This doesn’t mean, however, that he has reconciled himself to every aspect of 
the business. At the beginning of his career, he preferred not to discuss his 
personal life in interviews at all. “And that just made it worse,” he says. 
“Because then people assume you’ve got some really juicy, awful thing that 
you’re keeping from them.” After an intrusive journalist exposed his civil 
partnership with Bradshaw, he was forced to speak more openly, and he found 
this something of a relief. “Because now people aren’t that interested, because 
now there’s nothing being concealed,” he says.

So far, there don’t seem to have been consequences for his career, such as the 
limits that openly gay actors such as Rupert Everett have complained of. 
Whishaw gives stirring performances in straight roles (The Crucible, The Hour) 
and in gay ones, too, such as London Spy. He is capable of androgynous parts, 
such as his portrayal of the god Dionysus inBakkhai 
<http://www.almeida.co.uk/whats-on/bakkhai/23-jul-2015-19-sep-2015>, and of 
those in which his love object is androgynous, as in The Danish Girl.


He tries not to think about how others might consider him or perceive his 
sexuality. “If you don’t let it be a weight upon you, it won’t manifest as one 
in your life,” he says. “I just try to give it little space in my brain. It’s 
not interesting to me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3aeae5b2f556f6fa74125e7b4cec80d98cce27f8%2F0_73_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I'm%20not%20damaged'%3A%20Ben%20Whishaw%20on%20sexuality%2C%20privacy%20and%20playing%20troubled%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%27m%20not%20damaged%27%3A%20Ben%20Whishaw%20on%20sexuality%2C%20privacy%20and%20playing%20troubled%20heroes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fben-whishaw-damaged-sexuality-privacy-troubled-heroes-broadway-crucible-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3aeae5b2f556f6fa74125e7b4cec80d98cce27f8%2F0_73_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
 As Hamlet, with Imogen Stubbs as Gertrude. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
Yet he would prefer to maintain more privacy, and believes that knowing too 
much about an actor’s life does no favours to his or her work. “It’s completely 
shooting yourself in the foot,” he says. “It’s not helpful.” When he goes to 
see a play or a film: “I don’t want to watch the thing with a cloud of what 
I’ve read about people in the way. I want to get immersed in the thing. Don’t 
you? Wouldn’t anybody?”

And he doesn’t like to think that the roles he has played previously – all 
those serious, suffering, lost young men – might delimit his career as it 
progresses. He has little interest in repeating roles – not those he has played 
as an adult, anyway. Not even Hamlet. “I don’t feel any need to go back and 
re-examine it,” he says. “Which is not to say that I felt like I did a good job 
or got anywhere near the bottom of it, because I don’t feel that, but I would 
never want to return to anything I’ve done.”

He is not even especially eager to return to Shakespeare. “I don’t really 
think that way,” he says. “I don’t have a sense of parts as hurdles that you 
must jump over in some Olympic event. I don’t have that thing at all.” He would 
rather be sent a new play – or at least a play new to him; something fresh, 
something different, something that stretches him, such as Bakkhai, or the 
revival of Jez Butterworth’s Mojo, in which he appeared as a psychotic gangster.

Would he consider something even more atypical – a light romantic comedy, say, 
or some harmless bit of fantasy – something bare of anguish, of torment? 
Probably not.

“I wonder if I’d find it that interesting,” he says. “I think I’d always need 
something that has a bit of, not necessarily suffering, but some resonance or 
that has a bigger pull. I don’t know. Something. Otherwise I think I’d be 
bored.”
 