
On 26 November 2014, I wrote an email to a couple of trusted colleagues at the 
Observer. I said that there was a piece that I wanted – needed – to write about 
the slow, sad dying of my father. He had lived well with dementia for 10 years 
or more, but a five-week stay in hospital had caused a shocking and 
irreversible deterioration, so that although he came home and lived for a 
further nine months, he was a ghost of himself.

In the same email, I wrote that I knew his story was not unique but horribly 
familiar, and that hundreds and thousands of men and women up and down the 
country had the same story. Hospital is a hazardous place for those who are 
vulnerable and confused, and doubly so when their loved ones are not welcome to 
stay with them. I said that I was intending to start a campaign, which would 
insist, very simply, that the carers of those with dementia have the same 
rights as parents of sick children to accompany them when in hospital.

Observer-backed John’s Campaign wins support from NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/13/johns-campaign-dementia--nhs-approval>
I took my forlorn appeal for help to the safest place, where honourable 
journalism flourishes alongside a liberal, humane agenda; where a voice can be 
given to the voiceless and where words can become actions. TheObserver 
published my article a few days later, andJohn’s Campaign 
<http://johnscampaign.org.uk/#/> was launched – it’s a campaign that began with 
two women in a kitchen and quickly became a national movement for more 
compassionate care for those who most need it, one which is supported by policy 
makers, charities, nurses, doctors, carers and, above all, by people living 
with dementia.

But we would have got nowhere without this newspaper, which gave us a 
foundation and a platform; carried regular stories (my own and others); kept 
the subject of dementia care on the agenda;dedicated a page of its website to 
the campaign <https://www.theguardian.com/society/series/johns-campaign>, 
including the growing list of hospitals that had signed up to the principle of 
welcoming carers; was patient, steadfast, swift to help, flexible and 
encouraging. It became the hub for change and for hope; it remains the hub.

The Observer has a long and honourable tradition of campaigning, and although 
the causes that it has chosen to champion have been diverse, there is a thread 
that runs through them: to stand up for justice, to be on the side of those who 
are powerless, to bring about change through collective, democratic endeavour. 
Although I wasn’t aware of it two years ago, it came as a happy if unsurprising 
discovery to find that in the early 1960s, after research by the influential 
psychologist John Bowlby into “separation anxiety”, it was theObserver who 
supported the campaign for unrestricted visiting of children by their parents 
in hospital.

It was under David Astor’s trailblazing leadership that the Observer 
campaigned for the abolition of capital punishment, in 1956 serialising Arthur 
Koestler’s anti-death-penalty book,Reflections on Hanging. Koestler had been 
imprisoned and sentenced to death during the Spanish civil war: his accounts of 
men and women being put to death by the state were grim, specific, bodily and 
terrifying. He described the case of one sick woman of 28, whose “insides fell 
out” before she disappeared through the trap; he said that women were forced to 
change into canvas underwear on the day of their death. And he quoted the 
gaolers who said that Edith Thompson – hanged in 1923 – “disintegrated” as a 
“human creature” while waiting for her hanging, contrasting this with the 
impersonal, bureaucratic, mechanistic process: “the brisk, business-like 
opening of the door, the pinioning of the hands behind the back and the walking 
or dragging… in solemn procession to the execution shed and on to the white 
chalk mark on top of the trap”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fobserver-225-campaigning-journalism-nicci-gerrard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6a1290ab5c94880bbeb52e01c65add40466631c%2F0_384_3510_2107%2F3510.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20took%20my%20appeal%20for%20help%20to%20the%20Observer...%20where%20words%20become%20actions%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fobserver-225-campaigning-journalism-nicci-gerrard%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20took%20my%20appeal%20for%20help%20to%20the%20Observer...%20where%20words%20become%20actions%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fobserver-225-campaigning-journalism-nicci-gerrard%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb6a1290ab5c94880bbeb52e01c65add40466631c%2F0_384_3510_2107%2F3510.jpg>
 Police hold back a crowd of sightseers outside Strangeways in Manchester, 
before the execution of Dr Buck Ruxton for the murder of his wife and her maid, 
1936. The death penalty was abolished in 1965. Photograph: Fox Photos/Getty 
Images 
But the campaign took years to succeed, often in the teeth of popular opinion: 
it wasn’t until 9 November 1965 that capital punishment was abolished in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/04/50-years-death-penalty-uk-capital-punishment>
. TheObserver acclaimed the vote as a “resounding condemnation of an odious 
practice”.

The unflagging support for abolition of the death penalty was part of the 
Observer’s more general interest in prison reform and its central role in the 
birth of a great and enduring movement: Amnesty International. In 1960, Peter 
Benenson – a barrister and a recent convert to Catholicism – was sitting on the 
underground train reading a report on two Portuguese students who had been 
sentenced to gaol for having made a toast to liberty in a Lisbon cafe. He got 
out of the train, went at once to the church of St Martin’s-in-the-Fields and 
“pondered on the situation… What about a World Year against political 
imprisonment?” In May 1961, Benenson’s full-page article in theObserver, The 
Forgotten Prisoners, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1961/may/28/fromthearchive.theguardian> 
launched an appeal for amnesty that resonated round the country and the world. 
Amnesty International came into being during a brief window in the cold war. 
Within two years, one of the most successful campaigning voluntary 
organisations had been conceived, formed and achieved an institutional 
maturity. It now has over 7 million members and supporters round the world.

Dementia: how our campaign for patient dignity in hospitals took off | Nicci 
Gerrard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/25/dementia-need-not-be-a-death-sentence>
Amnesty campaigns against the abuse of human rights; Index on Censorship 
<https://www.indexoncensorship.org/> for the freedom of expression. It was 
founded in 1972 by the poet Stephen Spender, the philosopher Stuart Hampshire, 
the Soviet Union expert Edward Crankshaw – and, yes,Observer editor David 
Astor. The founding editor was the critic and translator Michael Scammell. The 
inspiration came from Soviet dissidents, but its reach was wide: right-wing 
dictatorships, military regimes, religious extremism of all forms.

What these campaigns have in common – along with the World Wildlife Fund, 
founded after theObserver carried three powerfully eloquent articles by Julian 
Huxley in 1960 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/nov/07/wwf-world-wildlife-fund-huxley>
– is that they endure. Often started by individuals who believed they could 
change the world, often going against the tide of public opinion, yet their 
roots go deep, tapping into people’s better selves. Peter Benenson died in 
2005, David Astor in 2001, but the campaign against the abuse of human rights, 
for the abolition of the death penalty around the world, the campaign for more 
compassionate care for those with dementia, these continue.

For many decades, the Observer has embodied a kind of liberalism that believes 
that, at certain times, it is not enough just to report and comment on the 
world. Sometimes you have to change it.
 