
At 80 years of age, Barbara Baker never thought she’d find love again, let 
alone get married. She lost her husband of 45 years, the father of her five 
children, 19 years ago and had been living on her own since.

But in April last year she met Leslie, 85, over a game of dominoes at a day 
centre. She proposed to him three weeks later because the frequent taxi rides 
ferrying Leslie to and from her home were getting too expensive, and they 
married in August.

“How’s that for quick? I ain’t slow on the uptake,” she says with a twinkle in 
her eye. “I thought I would never marry again because I had a lot of children 
and marriage [wasn’t an option]. It’s hard to explain. I fell in love.”

Love in later life: share your stories with us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/05/love-later-life-dating-marriage>
Barbara and Leslie are part of a growing cohort of older adults who found love 
in later life. According tofigures published by the Office for National 
Statistics 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/vsob1/marriages-in-england-and-wales--provisional-/2012/stb-marriages-in-england-and-wales--provisional---2011.html>
, marriage in 2012 was up 5% – the highest total in any year since 2004 – and 
older men and women are leading the way, with the biggest leap in marriages 
among those aged between 65 and 70. The number of grooms in their late 60s 
increased by 35% (2011-12) to 3,520, and the number of brides of the same age 
rose by 21%, to 1,990. One in 10 had been single, two-thirds divorced, and the 
rest widowed before tying the knot.

It’s not just heterosexual couples that are saying “I do”, though. A total of 
1,409 marriages were formed between same-sex couples between 29 March and 30 
June 2014. Of these, 32 were between people aged over 65. And, from 2008 to 
2012, there were 1,997 civil partnerships among the over-65s.


Roger Newman, 73, who lives in Margate, Kent, was in a similar situation to 
Barbara when he met Nigel Hurley, 60. Newman had been living alone for five 
years after his partner, Michael, died of an asbestos-related cancer in 2004.

“I never thought I’d meet someone,” he says. “I thought that after Michael 
died, that would be it and I’d be like so many other gay men that I knew who 
were widowed; I thought I’d just go on and on and on alone.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmarry-love-older-people-civil-partnerships%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423589663731%2F914661d4-1450-468e-a670-3f8606db8874-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20thought%20I%20would%20never%20marry%20again%2C%20but%20I%20found%20love%20at%20the%20age%20of%2080%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmarry-love-older-people-civil-partnerships%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20thought%20I%20would%20never%20marry%20again%2C%20but%20I%20found%20love%20at%20the%20age%20of%2080%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmarry-love-older-people-civil-partnerships%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423589663731%2F914661d4-1450-468e-a670-3f8606db8874-1020x612.jpeg>
 Roger Newman, 73, met Nigel Hurley, 60, on a chatline and had a civil 
partnership in March. 
When they met on a chatline, Hurley was going through a divorce and had 
started seeing men for the first time in his life. He says: “Seeing guys was 
always there in my head but I’d never acted on it because I was married. Then I 
met Roger and that was it. We clicked.”

Hurley proposed on New Year’s Eve in Gran Canaria where the couple spend 
Christmas each year. They had watched the fireworks on a rooftop and then gone 
to sit in a quiet bar.

“It was pretty unromantic really,” says Newman. “There was no on one knee or 
anything like that,” chips in Hurley. “It was just, you know, what do you 
think?”

At their civil partnership ceremony in March, the pair walked down the red 
carpeted aisle dressed in suits and rainbow ties to theProclaimers’ Let’s Get 
Married <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9CHet9RSBac>.

They don’t agree with divorce, and then the gay thing – I’m virtually growing 
horns out the top of my head

They each wrote their own vows which, despite neither knowing what the other 
was going to write, echoed each other almost word for word. Afterwards, about 
50 guests went back to their house and a neighbour set off a firework display 
in his garden.

Both couples are a great advert for marriage in later life, but Roger and 
Nigel’s path, in particular, has not been entirely smooth. Some of Hurley’s 
friends and family were shocked at his new relationship. He had been an 
evangelical church minister and since he left, people he thought were friends 
have not been in touch. “They don’t agree with divorce,” he says, “and then the 
gay thing – I’m virtually growing horns out the top of my head in their eyes.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmarry-love-older-people-civil-partnerships%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423578664108%2F3f11d5f1-ae6f-474b-ac22-0ef2d9bce8f5-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20thought%20I%20would%20never%20marry%20again%2C%20but%20I%20found%20love%20at%20the%20age%20of%2080%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmarry-love-older-people-civil-partnerships%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20thought%20I%20would%20never%20marry%20again%2C%20but%20I%20found%20love%20at%20the%20age%20of%2080%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmarry-love-older-people-civil-partnerships%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423578664108%2F3f11d5f1-ae6f-474b-ac22-0ef2d9bce8f5-1020x612.jpeg>
 When Nigel (left) and Roger started talking, Nigel was going through a divorce 
and had started seeing men for the first time in his life. 
Newman adds: “No one comes to situations like this without a certain amount of 
struggle. What we’ve been through is a part of how things are and how they will 
be.”

Barbara Bloomfield <https://www.relate.org.uk/users/barbarabloomfield>, a 
Relate counsellor and author ofThe Mature Guide to Love, Relationships and Sex 
<http://www.maturetimes.co.uk/mature-guide-relationships-love-sex/>, recognises 
that family can also be a problem. Issues around inheritance and blended 
families can impede a relationship. Another factor preventing a happy marriage 
in later life is that older people can become set in their ways.

Despite that, though, she says the benefits to starting a relationship in 
later life far outweigh the risks. A report by Relate,Who Will Love Me When I’m 
64? The Importance of Relationships in Later Life 
<http://www.relate.org.uk/policy-campaigns/publications/who-will-love-me-when-im-64-importance-relationships-later-life>
, says relationships promote good physical and mental health. Epidemiologists 
have documented a link between social isolation and an increased risk of death 
among older people. Good quality relationships have been shown to protect 
against a range of illnesses, from the common cold to cancer and cardiovascular 
diseases.

Let’s talk about sex for the over 60s
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/21/over-60s-sex-education-sexual-health>
Newman says: “As human beings, we’re not meant to be alone. However much of a 
challenge it is to be with another person, our lives are richer because of it.”

He adds: “It’s worth it because you get a tremendous amount out of being with 
someone … As gay people, we are much more likely to be living alone than 
heterosexual people. It’s a big issue. I’m really grateful that I’ve got 
somebody. But we’ve had to work at it.”

Back at the Hanover retirement home where Barbara and Leslie live, meanwhile, 
the couple are tucking into tea and cake.

Barbara takes a long look at Leslie and says, “I wouldn’t be without you.”

“Pardon?” he replies.

“I wouldn’t be without you,” she repeats a bit louder.

“I’m too good.”

“Cheeky.”

For them and the thousands of others who have formed new relationships in 
their later years, life has taken on a romantic glow. And, while numbers of 
marriages in later life may be small now, given that there will be 20 million 
over-65s by 2031, a sprinkling of confetti at this stage, may eventually turn 
into tonnes of the stuff relatively soon.
 