
Junior Agogo is full of himself when, a couple of hours after scoring the 
winning goal for Ghana against Namibia, he is the centre of attention back at 
the team's five-star hotel in the capital, Accra. Signing autographs, posing 
for photographs with beautiful women, being a front-page hero in Ghana, being 
interviewed for the papers back in Britain - it does not get much better than 
this when your entire career has been spent in the lower two divisions of 
English football, or in the MLS in the United States.

'All my mates in England are watchin' it. My phone's blowin' up, innit! All my 
boys are watchin' it, congratulate me on the goal, hoping we go on to the next 
stage. It's good, it's all good.

'I picked up the accent in London, but I speak my native tongue, too, so I 
speak Ga [the language spoken around Accra] in front of the boys here, so 
that's all good. Funny how things have turned out, innit!'

Yes, it is, and not just in the bubbly world of Junior Agogo, the Nottingham 
Forest striker who was born and raised in Accra before moving to Kilburn in 
north-west London at the age of 15.

Yesterday was an historic day in African football. The first match in the Cup 
of Nations, in February 1957, was Sudan v Egypt in Khartoum. Last night, in 
Ghana's football-mad second city, Kumasi, they met again, for the first time in 
decades in a tournament that bears little, if any, resemblance to the original 
version.

A week in, and Ghana 2008 is more than living up to expectations, with three 
goals a game - many of them spectacular - and a feel-good factor that compares, 
in its way, to the atmosphere at the last World Cup in Germany.

There have been the usual cock-ups over transport, ticketing, security, media 
arrangements and the pitches, and there has been a match-fixing scandal, with 
Benin's coach having been approached by an Asian betting syndicate to see if he 
could help them out. Even so, everyone is loving it.

Sudan, Egypt and Ethiopia were the three teams in that first Cup of Nations. 
South Africa should have been there, too, but the Confederation of African 
Football could not welcome a team playing for an apartheid regime.

'In 1957 we were in the vanguard in the fight against racial discrimination in 
sport,' said Dr Abdel Halim Mohammed, one of the founders of CAF and the Cup of 
Nations. He is still alive, but well into his nineties he is too frail to 
travel across the continent. Hopefully he will have been among the 35 million 
following the game over the airwaves back in Sudan.

'We are so proud to play this game, a special game, the derby of the Nile, 
against our enemy brothers,' says Badreldin Hamid of the Sudan FA. 'We are 
very, very happy to be here again [Sudan last qualified for the Cup of Nations 
in 1976]. Sudan created this tournament. Sudan is the home of African football. 
We are very proud of our history.'

Throughout a game played in a smoky, eye-watering smog, Sudan were loudly 
cheered by the locals on the way to a 3-0 defeat. They had a couple of early 
shots that sent the fans into a frenzy, but, once they fell behind to a 
penalty, converted by Egypt skipper Hosny, they were never in contention. Even 
South Africa made a fleeting presence, unlike in 1957, when the first few bars 
of their anthem were played by mistake instead of Egypt's.

Sudan are one of only two teams without a goal here - the other, to their 
great embarrassment, are Nigeria - and face another hammering in the final 
group game against Cameroon, who thrashed Zambia 5-1 yesterday.

In the 32 years since Sudan last competed, the tournament has been dominated 
by West African teams, with nine wins, and Agogo is hoping that number will 
reach 10 in Accra on 10 February. War, famine and football history could not be 
farther from his mind as he discusses the love of football in this part of the 
world. 'I'm not into all that politics part of football, you know. I like 
goals.'

So do the fans. 'I knew how passionate they are, but once you get here it hits 
home even more. All they want is goals. Sometimes they might not know the ins 
and outs of football, but all they talk about is goals, goals, goals.

'They love football. The funny thing about it is, I was in the lobby earlier 
on today and this guy came in, wanted to speak to me and wanted to speak to the 
manager because he wanted to come to training and tell us where to run on the 
pitch. I thought: "Who is this joker?" But listen, there are 20 million people 
who think they are coaches, mate. And it's not just the men. The women here 
think they are coaches, too. It's something you've got to swallow, innit?

'But if it's goals they want, they've had them here, and there've been some 
phenomenal ones.' By, among others, Salomon Kalou of Ivory Coast and Chelsea, 
Manucho of Manchester United (for whom he is yet to play) and Angola, Zidan of 
Egypt and Hamburg, and Sulley Muntari of Ghana and Portsmouth.

Will we be adding Agogo of Nottingham Forest to that list? 'I've scored a few, 
yeah,' he says. 'You know what? I'll take them any way they come. I'm not gonna 
say I'll give you a little screamer, but if it comes, I hit it and it goes in, 
that's for you lot, innit?

'I don't think there's a specific side to my game, but I just like to think I 
can do a bit of everything, hold the ball up and bring other people into play, 
create goals, win headers, and score goals. I like to think I can do a bit of 
everything. I try and learn everything. That's what you're supposed to learn, 
innit?'

How does playing international football compare to playing in League One?

'The difference is you are playing with world-class players. They see things 
much quicker, don't they? Sulley and Michael [Essien], they give you the ball 
where you are supposed to be, you know. They've made up your mind for you. 
Like: "Cheers, mate, you made me look good."'

Agogo has had plenty of attempts to look good, starting at Sheffield Wednesday 
as a 16-year-old. He then played for Oldham, Chester, Chesterfield, Lincoln, 
Chicago, Colorado, San Jose, QPR, Barnet, Bristol Rovers and Forest. He is 28 
and dreaming of one more move upwards. Perhaps it would have come sooner had he 
shown an interest when Ghana first asked him to play for them, when he was a 
teenager. Not until after Ghana's appearance in the 2006 World Cup did he 
establish himself under new manager Claude Le Roy, who says of him: 'I know 
people in England are surprised by his success, but he's a good player. He has 
a nice sensibility, no arrogance, he's a good man, a very important presence in 
the group. And he's skilful.'

'I've done all the lower-league stuff,' Agogo says. 'I want to play at the 
top, innit? I've been playing for my country for almost three years now, though 
this is the first tournament I've played with them. So hopefully something good 
can come out of this.'

Like many others at this tournament who are hoping for a move, Agogo learned 
his football without the benefit of grass pitches. 'There was no surface, to be 
fair. Make a ball out of socks and newspapers, find somewhere to put two goals 
up and just play football. In those days, you don't get a position, you just go 
out there and play.'

Which is what so many teams here have done. Many have played attacking 
football, and there have been no howlers from the goalkeepers this time.

Ivory Coast have had the shakiestlooking keeper and that will be a problem for 
them as the tournament progresses, as they are the favourites.

The performance of the week was by Egypt, whose 4-2 defeat of Cameroon 
featured some of the best fluid football you will see anywhere. They are not 
all about power and strength, which makes a pleasant change.

Agogo has a small band of fans from Nottingham following him and the number of 
Europeans at all games has been higher than at previous tournaments. They all 
seem to be enjoying themselves, despite the busy pickpockets and a number of 
hefty losses. At the Angola v South Africa game in Tamale there was one Briton 
who had lost his passport, another who had lost Â£700 in cash, and a South 
African who told of a 40-strong group of fans who had all lost their passports.

But none of these people has had a miserable time, because the football has 
been excellent and, trouble spots apart, the Ghanaians are very friendly hosts.

Agogo is having the time of his life. 'Yeah. Before I came back for the 
African Nations, I hadn't been back here for quite a while. A good couple of 
years. I'm happy to be back. The fans have shown me so much love, you know. I'm 
like a superstar, to be fair.'

He giggles and heads off to meet those girls who have been dying to say hello.

For all the latest news on the tournament, plus live minute-by-minute reports 
and a daily blog from Observer Sport's Brian Oliver in Ghana go to: 
football.theguardian.com/ africannations2008
 