
This is the Chilean presidential hopeful, Patricio Aylwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/19/patricio-aylwin-president-chile-dies-democracy>
, walking on stage to address supporters in O’Higgins Park, Santiago. It was 
December 1989, days before he was elected president, replacing the 17-year 
military dictatorship ofAugusto Pinochet. 
<http://www.biography.com/people/augusto-pinochet-9441138> Moments later, 
Aylwin promised the thousands watching that Chile was heading for democracy 
under his leadership.

I’m standing with fellow singers in a small choir, in the blue T-shirt in the 
centre, and the crowd behind us were chanting, cheering and clapping. We had 
been singing the campaign song,Gana la Gente 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XuiNEKh61q8> (The People Will Win), up and 
down the country at rallies for months. That was the last time we sang it – 
political campaigning and advertising in Chile have to finish a few days before 
elections, to give people a chance to reflect.

My friends and I had formed the choir at university, calling ourselves Coro 
Bajocuerda, which means “against the ropes”; it’s how we felt living under 
Pinochet’s oppressive regime. Most good music at that time was political. A 
year earlier, we sang a song written by a friend and music producer, called No, 
during the referendum that ended Pinochet’s bid to remain president for another 
eight years. A 2012film with Gael García Bernal, No, 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/No_(2012_film)> featured our recording.

Pinochet came to power when I was 10. From then on, it was a volatile 
atmosphere: you worried who you talked to in case you were reported. One day 
the police came to our house, looking for my dad – they were interested in him 
because they had arrested his friend, a professor. When he eventually came 
home, they took him away. He was released soon after; he was working for the 
United Nations at the time, so my mum called them up and said: “Can you do 
anything?”

When I was at university, there were constant protests and police raids, 
looking for militant students. Once I was taking an exam and smoke bombs came 
through the window – we just picked up our papers and moved to another room.

‘I hopped up on the wall and got my sax out’: the fall of the Berlin Wall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/24/opening-berlin-wall-east-germans-thats-me-picture>
The day after this picture was taken, I was shocked to find it on the front 
page of the Pinochet-supporting newspaper, La Tercera. I was working as a 
research assistant at the Catholic University ofChile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile>, an organisation dominated by the 
so-called “Chicago Boys”: rightwing economists who trained in Chicago in the 
1960s and supported the dictatorship. I had the uneasy feeling I was being 
“outed” as a pro-democracy supporter, so I snatched the paper away before my 
bosses could read it.

Aylwin won a huge victory. We didn’t know if we were going to win – we might 
have had another 10 years of Pinochet – so people were on the streets, blowing 
horns, organising parties. I watched it at home with my family. It was an 
electric end to an electric year, but more than anything, we were relieved.

Aylwin died in April this year. His death reminded me of my deep sense of 
gratitude for what he achieved. People respected him; he was courageous to take 
on the dictatorship. Although more than 26 years have passed since this picture 
was taken, I can still feel the excitement.

• Are you in a notable photograph? Email thatsme@theguardian.com <>
 