
By 10.30am, 10 minutes before her first appointment, Catriona is already 
grey-faced with exhaustion and so tired that talking is a struggle; her words 
fall out on top of each other. She is six weeks pregnant and has travelled 
overnight by boat from a small town an hour outside Belfast to Liverpool for an 
abortion. She took the boat because it was cheaper than flying and because she 
had no passport, and didn’t have the money or the time to get one; but it has 
been a difficult journey and she hasn’t slept. Tonight, after the procedure, 
she will go back by boat, a second night sitting bolt upright, trying to sleep. 
This is her first trip to England.

“A lot of bad things have happened to me in my life, but this has been the 
worst,” says the 28-year-old single mother who, like all the women I spoke to 
for this article, did not want to use her real name. It’s not the abortion 
itself that is troubling her; she has two sons already, and no desire to expand 
her family. It’s the difficulties involved in getting herself, at short notice, 
to England for a medical procedure considered a criminal offence punishable by 
life imprisonment inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>. In total, the cost of the 
round trip and the abortion will come to about £570. Over the past three weeks, 
while saving for the journey, she has cut down on the food for the family and 
hasn’t bought oil to heat the house. “We’ve been going to my mum’s house, where 
there’s a fire; she’s been giving food to the boys.”

Catriona hadn’t realised abortion law in Northern Ireland was so restrictive. 
When she told her GP she didn’t want to keep the baby, the doctor said she 
couldn’t help her and that travelling to England was the only option; she gave 
her a piece of paper with a telephone number for theBritish Pregnancy Advisory 
Service <https://www.bpas.org/>, who booked her into the Liverpool clinic.

'I didn't tell the children, or my friends – I think they'd be sympathetic, 
but most are Catholic and think it's a sin'

Northern Ireland’s abortion laws have added multiple layers of stress to an 
already difficult situation for Catriona – expense, secrecy, stigma and 
logistical difficulties. “I’m not feeling too well,” she says. “I don’t know if 
it’s tiredness or the travelling, the thinking what is going to happen, the 
wondering if it’s a good thing or a bad thing.” Her mother’s boyfriend has made 
the journey with her, to give her support, but no one else apart from her 
mother knows she is away. “You feel like it has to be a big secret. I didn’t 
tell the children. I haven’t told my friends… I think they would be 
sympathetic, but most of them are Catholic and think it’s a sin, so I never 
mentioned it. There’s so much negativity about it. They make it out to be so 
bad. You still know it is right for you, but in your head you are thinking, 
maybe it is bad.”

In the BPAS clinic waiting room on a Saturday morning in October, there are 
six women from Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland waiting for 
terminations. The clinic, inside a converted, red-brick, double-fronted 
Victorian family home in Merseyside, sees about 30 people every week who have 
travelled from there for abortions. At least 4,500 come each year to England to 
terminate pregnancies, according to Department of Health statistics (although 
this is only the number of women who give their home addresses inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, which some women don’t want to do; 
the true figure is higher).

Three of the women here today are in their late teens or early 20s, travelling 
alone. One of them “has got herself into a bit of a state”, the clinic’s 
manager says, and is quietly crying, observed in silence by the 20 or so other 
people in the pre-consultation waiting room. Some of the people who have 
accompanied women to Liverpool are sleeping, after the early start.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445959511802%2F6385a52e-2cef-4c0f-88a1-22c0567a840c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20scariest%20thing%20I've%20ever%20done%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20Irish%20women%20forced%20to%20travel%20for%20abortions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20scariest%20thing%20I%27ve%20ever%20done%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20Irish%20women%20forced%20to%20travel%20for%20abortions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445959511802%2F6385a52e-2cef-4c0f-88a1-22c0567a840c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Helen, lead nurse at the British Pregnancy Advisory Service clinic in 
Liverpool, which treats around 30 women a week. Photograph: Christopher Thomond 
for the Guardian 
For women, such as Sophie, 29, working in the Republic of Ireland but 
originally from France, the experience is a logistical headache which makes her 
incredulous about Ireland’s attitude towards women’s rights. “From my French 
point of view, it seems crazy,” she says. Because she has a good job and a 
supportive boyfriend, the trip has not caused a major upheaval, and she is 
composed and philosophical about this unexpected weekend stay in Liverpool. One 
of her Irish flatmates had made the same journey and gave her advice. For 
others, such as Anna, 23, a student from Dublin who already has a young child, 
the financial fallout from this trip will be with her for months. The cost of 
the flights, two nights in a bed and breakfast, and bringing a friend with her 
for moral support has come to about ¤1,000, of which €800 is money lent to her 
by friends.

“Not everyone can get the money and, if they can’t, they have to have the 
baby,” Anna says. “It was very stressful. It’s not nice asking people for 
money.” She thinks it will take at least six months to pay back the loans, and 
she worries that the extra financial pressure may make it harder to complete 
her degree. However, she’s reassured to know that there are other women here 
who have made similar journeys. “It’s comforting to know that you are not the 
only one.”

Abortion is legal in Ireland only if the woman's life is at risk, but there is 
no clear guidance on how to define that

Kally, the clinic manager, feels worried for the women who travel from 
Ireland. She works with the clinical lead nurse, Helen, to make sure they 
smooth over the extra problems these women face. They help to book them in on a 
Saturday, so they don’t need to miss work, and (if necessary) they can tell 
friends they are popping over to England for shopping, or accompanying a 
partner to the football. They let them stay later at the clinic, if they have a 
late-night flight. They advise any woman who is having a medical abortion (one 
that induces miscarriage) not to travel back by boat or plane that night 
because of the unpredictability of the bleeding; but often women can’t afford 
the extra cost of a night in a hotel.

“If they’ve had to book a really late flight, we advise them to go to the 
cinema, so they can sit down and relax. It is not ideal but it is better than 
lying down on the airport floor,” Helen says. “If you start getting a bit faint 
in the middle of the airport, they are going to refuse to let you on the 
flight; you have to be ready to travel.”

They are furious at the misinformation given by some pregnancy counsellors in 
Ireland. Kally pulls a stapled-together booklet from her in-tray, left by a 
woman from Northern Ireland earlier in the week. The sheets, which appear to be 
a simple consent form, go on to warn of a 72% higher risk of rectal and colon 
cancer among women who have had abortions and a 50% greater risk of breast 
cancer; they suggest that a woman who has had one may be more prone to 
seizures, tremors, comas, frigidity and committing child abuse. “This kind of 
thing sinks in,” Kally says, jabbing at the text with a pen.
 ‘The system is inhumane’: Kally, manager of the Liverpool clinic. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
She describes the system as “inhumane”. “It is very difficult for women from 
Ireland to come here. Lots of things contribute to the stress: they don’t want 
people to know; there is the extra cost, and they have to travel; there is 
still a stigma attached to abortion; they are afraid they may meet someone here 
who knows them. It has happened. I’m not saying that women from England aren’t 
anxious and worried, but they don’t have the added stress that the women from 
Ireland have.”

***

Abortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> in Northern Ireland is 
lawful only in extremely restricted circumstances, where there is a risk to a 
pregnant woman’s life or a real and serious risk of long-term damage to her 
physical or mental health; just 23 legal abortions were carried out on the NHS 
in 2013-14. Under any other circumstances, a penalty of life imprisonment could 
be imposed on both the woman undergoing the abortion and anyone assisting her – 
even if the abortion is sought because of a fatal foetal impairment, for 
example, or because the pregnancy is the result of rape. This is the harshest 
criminal penalty for abortion anywhere in Europe.

In the Republic of Ireland, abortion is legal only if the woman’s life is 
deemed to be at risk, but there is no clear guidance on how to define that.Women
 <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> and anyone who assists them 
face up to 14 years in prison for breaking this law. The eighth amendment to 
the Irish Constitution puts the foetus’s right to life on an equal footing with 
the woman’s, and the provision of information about abortion services is also 
restricted, under legislation that criminalises any information by healthcare 
providers that “advocates or promotes” abortion.

In practice, women who want to end a pregnancy in Northern Ireland or the 
Republic are faced with two options: travel abroad for a termination, or 
receive abortion pills by post. Mifepristone and Misoprostol can be taken in 
combination to trigger a miscarriage, up to the ninth week of pregnancy. These 
are widely available from online pharmacists, but they are expensive, and it is 
hard to know whether the online provider is genuine.

As the pills are illegal in Northern Ireland and the Republic, 
suspicious-looking parcels are routinely checked; about 1,200 packages 
containing the pills were seized by customs in Ireland last year. In Northern 
Ireland, a mother isbeing prosecuted for obtaining abortion pills for her 
pregnant underage daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/15/pro-abortion-campaigners-picket-derry-police-station-mother-prosecution>
; she was charged with procuring “poison or other noxious substance” in the 
knowledge that they were to be used to cause a miscarriage. A trial is expected 
later this year; if found guilty, she faces a five-year sentence.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445963709295%2Fdb4a986a-6e11-49a2-96c8-568119b38d8b-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20scariest%20thing%20I've%20ever%20done%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20Irish%20women%20forced%20to%20travel%20for%20abortions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20scariest%20thing%20I%27ve%20ever%20done%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20Irish%20women%20forced%20to%20travel%20for%20abortions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445963709295%2Fdb4a986a-6e11-49a2-96c8-568119b38d8b-1020x612.jpeg>
 Northern Ireland imposes the most severe penalty in Europe for abortion. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
In both the Republic and Northern Ireland, however, women cannot be prevented 
from seeking safe and legal abortion abroad; in the past 30 years, more than 
160,000 women have travelled from Northern Ireland and the Republic for a 
termination. The phenomenon rarely attracts much attention:two-thirds of 
British people 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/press-releases/abortion-reform-law-northern-ireland-says-new-amnesty-poll>
 are unaware that the laws on abortion in Northern Ireland are different from 
those in the rest of the UK. After the success of theequal marriage referendum 
in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/live/2015/may/23/counting-underway-for-irelands-referendum-on-marriage-equality>
 earlier this year, campaigners are calling for a referendum on repealing the 
eighth amendment. Last month,thousands marched through Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/26/irish-marchers-referendum-legalising-abortion>
 in support of decriminalisation. But while popular support isgrowing across 
the UK 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/press-releases/amnesty-launches-new-campaign-abortion-northern-ireland>
 for reform in Northern Ireland, there is little political will among 
politicians across the spectrum, Catholic and Protestant.

***

Lila, 25, a student who has two children, one of whom has special needs, found 
out she was pregnant late last November. She immediately knew she couldn’t 
manage another child. She was brought up in England, and although she has lived 
in Northern Ireland for the past five years, she didn’t realise the law would 
apply to her.

“I stupidly thought that I might be able to get around it because I was 
English,” she says. She decided the cheapest option was to fly to the BPAS’s 
Liverpool clinic; still, she needed to find £400 for the flights and the 
procedure. Women from Northern Ireland are not eligible for NHS abortions, even 
if they travel to England. “It was a shocking amount of money. I cut all my 
direct debits for that month – the phone bill, electricity, TV licence. I had 
to pull my eldest son out of pre-school. I felt terrible about that.”

'I felt wrecked… I thought, maybe if I fell down the stairs the right way I 
could end the pregnancy but not kill myself'

She didn’t feel able to discuss the issue with anyone, which made borrowing 
money impossible. Concerned that she wasn’t going to be able to save the money 
quickly enough, she pushed the date of the procedure back. This was the most 
difficult time – forced to continue with a pregnancy she didn’t want so she 
could save money for the abortion. “The worst was the waiting, and having to 
save up, and pretending everything was fine. It was just an awful experience. I 
didn’t want to be pregnant at all. I felt like a zombie; I could barely get out 
of bed; I didn’t want to eat. I had to put on a happy face because it was 
Christmas, but I felt wrecked. I remember thinking maybe if I fell down the 
stairs the right way I could hurt myself enough to end the pregnancy but not 
kill myself. It was just awful.”

She was able to afford the procedure only with the help of an English-based 
organisation called theAbortion Support Network 
<https://www.abortionsupport.org.uk/>, which offers grants to Irish women 
struggling with the costs of abortion. Recalling that month makes her cry but, 
most of all, the memory enrages her.

“Once the being upset wore off, I was very angry. It felt so demeaning – the 
sneaking out before dawn, feeling I couldn’t tell anyone. I had to lie to the 
taxi driver, who was really nice, and was asking me what I was doing.”

Waiting at Liverpool airport for the last flight back to Belfast, she noticed 
three or four women whom she had seen at the clinic earlier in the day. “One 
was very young, in her late teens. It hurt that she was on her own. One of them 
looked as if she was in a lot pain, so I bought some Paracetamol and gave some 
to her. I said, ‘I saw you before, earlier today, and you look like you could 
do with some.’ She just thanked me.”

The experience has made her feel very hostile to the country she calls home. 
“I like to think I am fairly intelligent and in a stable relationship. But I 
wonder about women who aren’t as well supported or educated – how do they cope? 
I worry about other women who are alone, who are in abusive relationships, or 
who don’t have that support. It’s just wrong. If I had daughters, I would be 
making plans to move. I would not be staying in this part of the world.”

Sara, 20, a student at Dublin University, originally from England, also found 
herself grappling with the cost of travelling to England for an abortion when 
she found out she was pregnant earlier this year. The doctor she consulted was 
sympathetic, but made it clear that there was nothing he could do to help.

She chose to go to a clinic in Manchester because that’s where the flights 
were cheapest; she and her boyfriend decided not to stay overnight because they 
didn’t have the money for a hotel. “It was the scariest thing that I have ever 
done – going into a place you don’t know anything about, the whole travelling 
aspect of it. I was a nervous wreck.”

The clinic told her to wait at a designated spot in Manchester airport, where 
she would find a taxi driver holding a board with her name on it. “There must 
have been 10 or 12 girls in exactly the same place, being taken away by taxi 
drivers. They were there at the clinic. Most of them in their 20s.”

'They're at their wits end – it's nothing to do with the decision to have an 
abortion, but the fact they can't get one'

Delays at the clinic meant Sara was still waiting at 4pm. “I hadn’t got to the 
theatre yet and I was thinking to myself, I have to be at the airport in a 
couple of hours. It was an absolute nightmare.” They made the flight with very 
little time to spare. “It was the worst thing, to have to get on a flight 
afterwards. I wanted to get into a clean bed and go to sleep. I didn’t want to 
be worrying about getting bags on and off a plane, and organising a taxi to get 
home. I was worried about what would happen if I got on to the flight and 
started bleeding uncontrollably. I didn’t know what was going to happen.”

In retrospect, she is angry that the enduring stigma associated with abortion 
in Northern Ireland meant she was unable to talk about what she was doing. “It 
is your right as a woman to decide what you want to do with your body, and the 
fact that they do their best to stop that is a disgrace.”

***

Mara Clarke, an energetic New Yorker who lives in London, set up the Abortion 
Support Network in 2009, startled to learn that thousands of women were coming 
from Ireland to seek help in England. “I knew if that many are coming over, 
then there’s 500 or 50 or five who aren’t coming over because they don’t have 
the money,” she says. “That’s always the cost of restricting abortions – women 
who have money have abortions, women without money have babies, or they do 
really, really desperate things to not be pregnant. When we started, we 
wondered if the phone would ring; the phone hasn’t stopped ringing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445960574869%2Ff81540c0-f6ef-48d5-815d-9d9b721ceb54-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20scariest%20thing%20I've%20ever%20done%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20Irish%20women%20forced%20to%20travel%20for%20abortions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20scariest%20thing%20I%27ve%20ever%20done%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20Irish%20women%20forced%20to%20travel%20for%20abortions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445960574869%2Ff81540c0-f6ef-48d5-815d-9d9b721ceb54-1020x612.jpeg>
 Mara Clarke, who set up the Abortion Support Network, which offers women 
grants to travel and negotiates lower fees for their terminations. Photograph: 
Karen Robinson for the Guardian 
Not only does her organisation offer grants to help women to travel, it also 
advises on flights and the best clinics to travel to, and helps negotiate fees 
down if women are struggling with the cost of the procedure.

In 2009 the clinic helped four women; in 2014 it helped 552. “We’ve had 
teenagers, we’ve had women who have attempted suicide, refugees pregnant as a 
result of rape. Because they don’t happen to have £400 to £2,000 [depending on 
how many weeks pregnant they are], they are put into this spiral of despair in 
terms of how to come up with the money. As you are trying to find the money, 
you get further into the pregnancy; at 14 weeks the price doubles and at 19 
weeks the price trebles.”

Clarke views her job with bleak humour, explaining how she has tried without 
success to get Ryanair and Virgin to offer these women free flights. “If only 
women could plan their unplanned pregnancies better, so they could take 
advantage of the reduced advance booking fares on Ryanair,” she says. But she 
finds the details of the situation depressing. “Fewer than 1.4% of the 
abortions in England, Scotland and Wales happen at over 20 weeks. With our 
clients, it’s 8%, because they spend so long trying to raise the money.”

The organisation has 60 volunteers, who take turns to look after the mobile 
phone and reply to emails from women asking for help. It can be a difficult 
job. “They are at their wits’ end; you can hear it in their voices. All this 
turmoil has got nothing to do with the decision to have an abortion: it’s to do 
with the fact that they live in a country where they can’t get one. Sometimes 
people will give us all the justifications for why they want to have an 
abortion, and we say, ‘You’re welcome to tell me this, but it’s not my 
business.’ The women with money don’t have to throw reasons in front of a panel 
for judgment. We don’t judge; we’re the money people.”

As you're trying to find the money, you get further into pregnancy. At 14 
weeks the price doubles, and at 19 it trebles

Then there are the desperate stories they hear. “I drank floor cleaner. I 
drank bleach. I took all the pills in the medicine cabinet. I have been trying 
to think how to crash the car to injure myself permanently but not die – a 
mother of four. I found poison bottles under my daughter’s bed, that’s how I 
found out she was pregnant. I’ve taken scalding hot baths, I’ve asked my 
boyfriend to punch me in the stomach. People say, oh, you’re just making stuff 
up. No, I wish I was.”

As well as offering money, the organisation has an address book of carefully 
vetted host families, who live close to the most popular clinics and can offer 
a bed to women so that they don’t have to fly back home immediately after the 
abortion.

Sally and Fred have had about 15 women to stay in their home in Manchester 
over the past two years. “They usually feel very relieved,” Sally says. “We 
bring them home, they have a cup of tea and something very simple to eat, and 
then have a lie down.” They warn women in advance that they are vegan, and that 
they don’t have a television, but they keep milk and snacks for their visitors. 
They also keep spare toothbrushes, because sometimes women are scared to pack 
their overnight bags.

“They daren’t bring their own with them because they’re frightened that 
someone might ask where they are going. Some women come with euros, because 
they’re frightened to be seen with sterling. One came with her son’s school 
bag, rather than an overnight bag, in case someone questioned what she was 
doing.” Some want to be left alone in the spare room; others enjoy the couple’s 
company.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445960237089%2F11bdb08b-7e32-4fb3-a012-25d6fd550bfc-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20scariest%20thing%20I've%20ever%20done%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20Irish%20women%20forced%20to%20travel%20for%20abortions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98It%20was%20the%20scariest%20thing%20I%27ve%20ever%20done%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20Irish%20women%20forced%20to%20travel%20for%20abortions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Fabortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445960237089%2F11bdb08b-7e32-4fb3-a012-25d6fd550bfc-1020x612.jpeg>
 Sally and Fred, part of a network of volunteers who offer the women an 
overnight stay after their abortion – many dread travelling immediately after 
the procedure. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
“We are both from Belfast; we chat. We talk about family. We have two dogs and 
a cat, and that helps break the ice. Some people use this period as an 
opportunity to take stock of their lives. You might be a sounding board – it’s 
like talking to strangers on a train, it is a safe thing, because you are never 
going to see them again,” Sally says. “When they leave I feel happy that they 
have got their lives back. I am delighted to be able to contribute to that in a 
small way.”

***

The fact that the numbers of women coming to England for terminations have 
declined in recent years (from a high of about 9,000 in 2003) reflects the 
growing use of medical abortion tablets that can be taken at home. The 
difficulty is in getting hold of them, but here, too, organisations have sprung 
up to help Irish women. In the Netherlands,Women on Web 
<https://www.womenonweb.org> and Women Help Women <https://womenhelp.org> send 
tablets to women in Northern Ireland in exchange for a donation, and offer 
online support for the usually straightforward process. They no longer send 
tablets to the Republic of Ireland, however, as the postal services routinely 
seize the packets.

“When you cannot guarantee that it is going to arrive, then it is bad help,” 
says Rebecca Gomperts, founder of Women on Web, “because one of the harmful 
things is when somebody waits for weeks, the pregnancy advances and it never 
comes. It’s harmful because people are not taking the proper decisions to get 
care; the longer women wait, the riskier an abortion becomes and the more 
expensive it becomes.”

The organisation advises about 200 women from Ireland every month; pills are 
sent to Northern Ireland by a partner organisation in India. “Medical abortion 
is so easily available now. You can get it over the counter in Nepal, Cambodia 
and India. In Vietnam it is really widely available; in China it is very easy 
to get. These are good medicines. Sometimes the government tries to scare 
people by saying they are bad quality – but these are medicines normally 
available on the open market.”

Kinga Jelinska of Women Help Women, which assists about 200 women a month in 
Ireland, says getting pills posted is the easier option for those women who 
have no time or money to contemplate travelling to England. “The bottom line is 
that access to abortion is a matter of social justice. The ones who have the 
money will always find a way, no matter what the legal situation is. The women 
with the least resources and the least skills to navigate this difficult 
situation are the ones who suffer the most.”

Anna, 20, a student from Dublin, took abortion pills late last year, when she 
found out she was three weeks pregnant. She had them sent by Women on Web to an 
address in Northern Ireland, then had them couriered to Dublin (at a cost of 
€90). She resented the secrecy that had to accompany what was otherwise a 
straightforward procedure, and she hated having to do something illegal.

“I was very worried that it would be intercepted and I would have the guards 
knocking on the door,” she says. “Or, when I went to the depot, that I’d turn 
around and there would be a squad car behind me. It is so uncertain what the 
law actually is and what they might do. The fear was all-pervading. For weeks 
after, I was still thinking, oh God, will they come knocking?”

'My mum, her cousin, my granny… they've gone 30, 40 years and never told 
anyone. None of us feels able to talk about it'

Online advisers from Women on Web are there to answer questions during the 
procedure, and the website explains what the experience should feel like. “They 
advise you, if you feel something is not right, to go to the hospital and say 
you think you might be having a miscarriage, but don’t tell them about the 
pills, because then you could be prosecuted. It’s hard to know what it is meant 
to feel like, to know what normal is, as opposed to abnormal. You do worry.”

How heartbreak led Graham and Helen Linehan to campaign for abortion in Ireland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/19/graham-helen-linehan-ireland-abortion-amnesty-international>
She has told a few friends, but she hasn’t enjoyed having to reassure them 
when they express shock at what she did. “I felt like I had to comfort them, 
tell them it’s not that awful. I made my decision.”

Some weeks later, Anna’s mother found out what she had done, after spotting 
and questioning the PayPal transfer on her daughter’s bank statement. 
Unexpectedly, she was understanding, revealing that she had travelled to 
England for an abortion herself in the 1980s, when she was 21 and not ready to 
look after a child. In the days following, it emerged that her mother’s cousin 
had made the same journey, as had her own mother, Anna’s grandmother. None of 
them had spoken about it.

“My mum, her cousin, my granny – they’ve gone for 30 or 40 years and never 
told anyone,” Anna says. “If I’d known about my mum’s experience, maybe I could 
have told her, and maybe it wouldn’t have been such an ordeal. To have the 
moral support would have been great. But none of us feels able to talk about 
it.”

• Some names have been changed.
 