
It is the end of the first world war, inflation is soaring and the inhabitants 
of a German-speaking city are starting to turn on each other. Politicians are 
quick to find a scapegoat: “The people,” the chancellor announces, “demand the 
expulsion of all Jews.”

What may sound like a snippet from a history book about the Third Reich is in 
fact the synopsis of a film produced at a time when the Nazi party was still 
banned and Adolf Hitler was putting the finishing touches to Mein Kampf in a 
Bavarian prison cell.

Based on a dystopian novel by the Jewish publicist Hugo Bettauer, Die Stadt 
ohne Juden(“The City Without Jews”) originally premiered in Vienna in July 
1924, but the original version vanished in the war years and was considered 
lost for more than 90 years.

Now, thanks to a chance discovery in a Parisian flea market and the biggest 
crowdfunding campaign to date in Austria’s culture sector, the silent film is 
set to be digitally restored and re-released in its original form for the first 
time, with a premiere including a new live score scheduled at Vienna’s concert 
hall for autumn 2017.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flost-austrian-film-predicting-rise-of-nazism-restored-and-relaunched%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c1100479488fcbd1bc8b1af69bdca9db4a2e44e%2F0_2384_4529_2716%2F4529.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Lost'%20Austrian%20film%20predicting%20rise%20of%20nazism%20restored%20and%20relaunched&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flost-austrian-film-predicting-rise-of-nazism-restored-and-relaunched%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Lost%27%20Austrian%20film%20predicting%20rise%20of%20nazism%20restored%20and%20relaunched&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flost-austrian-film-predicting-rise-of-nazism-restored-and-relaunched%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c1100479488fcbd1bc8b1af69bdca9db4a2e44e%2F0_2384_4529_2716%2F4529.jpg>
 A frame from The City Without Jews. Photograph: Filmarchiv Austria 
The Austrian Film Archive, which organised the crowdfunding campaign, managed 
to reach itstarget of €75,500 
<https://wemakeit.com/projects/filmrettung-stadt-ohne-juden> on Tuesday, four 
days before Saturday’s deadline. A spokesperson for the organisation said a 
major donation from an anonymous Jewish foundation in the US after Donald 
Trump’s election victory and a doubling of daily donations after thedefeat of a 
rightwing populist candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
 in the Austrian presidential election had boosted its cause.

The film shows not just the economic circumstances that led to a flaring up of 
political antisemitism, but also satirically plays through the consequences of 
a rapid exodus of the Jewish population of Vienna, called “Utopia” in the film.

Initially, the city’s “Aryan” population celebrate the departure of their 
Jewish neighbours with fireworks. But Utopia’s cultural life soon falls into 
neglect: cafes turn into beer halls, shops sell basic folk costumes rather than 
urban fashion, and foreign countries cut off their trade links.

“Strangely,” one political adviser tells the mayor, “our currency is still 
worth absolutely nothing.” Soon, posters start appearing around the city: 
“You’ve thrown out our prosperity with the Jews.”

A damaged and incomplete version of the film, possibly censored or 
self-censored, had been discovered by archivists at the Dutch film museum in 
1991. According to Nikolaus Wostry, director of collections at the Austrian 
Film Archive, the new edit – which was found by a collector at a Paris flea 
market in October 2015 – not only politicises the film’s message and contains 
its original ending but also adds a number of detailed scenes exploring the 
different social spheres of Jewish life in Vienna.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flost-austrian-film-predicting-rise-of-nazism-restored-and-relaunched%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c94c52783b4c79563551d5115b7caedc1475318%2F119_2436_4309_2584%2F4309.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Lost'%20Austrian%20film%20predicting%20rise%20of%20nazism%20restored%20and%20relaunched&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flost-austrian-film-predicting-rise-of-nazism-restored-and-relaunched%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Lost%27%20Austrian%20film%20predicting%20rise%20of%20nazism%20restored%20and%20relaunched&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Flost-austrian-film-predicting-rise-of-nazism-restored-and-relaunched%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c94c52783b4c79563551d5115b7caedc1475318%2F119_2436_4309_2584%2F4309.jpg>
 A frame from The City Without Jews. Photograph: Filmarchiv Austria 
“The message we want to send out is that this is not just a film about the 
past, but an anti-Nazi statement,” Wostry told the Guardian.

“Back when The City Without Jews was made, we had a very similar situation to 
the one we are in now. At the end of the first world war, a lot of people had 
been displaced by Russian forces in the north of the empire and were migrating 
south to Vienna, especially Jews from Bukovina and Galicia. Antisemitic 
feelings got a massive boost through this refugee crisis and all parties 
started to make politics with it.”

After the second world war, when Austria had to redefine itself as a nation, 
Jewish Vienna played an important part. Wostry said: “We became the nation of 
Schnitzler, Freud and Schönberg. ButAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> never actually tried to bring back 
Jews that were driven out. There’s a great paradox at the heart of this nation.”


In the film, Utopia’s fictional chancellor eventually decides to invite the 
Jewish population back into the city. Real life did not offer such a happy 
ending. Oskar Helmer, Austria’s postwar interior minister, did little to hide 
his belief that questions over reparation payments and restitution of Jewish 
property should be drawn out as long as possible.

Bettauer, the author of the novel that inspired the film, was assassinated in 
his office by an ex-member of the then banned Nazi party only months after the 
film’s premiere.

History also had in store a number of cruel twists for the film’s lead actors. 
Johannes Riemann, who plays the film’s Jewish protagonist, Leo Strakosch, later 
joined the Nazi party and in 1944 performed at a variety evening at the 
Auschwitz concentration camp, while star actor Hans Moser, who plays one of the 
film’s most rabid antisemites, refused to get divorced from his Jewish wife, 
who eventually had to emigrate to Hungary.

• This article was amended on 15 December 2016. An earlier version said 
incorrectly that Hans Moser had to emigrate from Austria because her refused to 
divorce his Jewish wife.
 