
On Wednesday 18 November, theatres, amateur groups, arts companies and 
audiences from across the UK and beyond will take part in the second 
#LoveTheatreDay on Twitter – theLovie award-winning 
<http://winners.lovieawards.eu/> social media celebration of all things stage. 

#LoveTheatreDay 2015 – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/live/2015/nov/18/love-theatre-day-2015-live-blog>
With British, European and global organisations invited, the 24-hour Twitter 
event – run in partnership by theGuardian Culture Professionals Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network>, Twitter UK 
<https://twitter.com/TwitterUK> and CultureThemes 
<http://culturethemes.blogspot.co.uk/> – is open to all, from the people behind 
the scenes who make the magic happen, to the audiences who put bums on seats 
every week.

But why does theatre need our love? As David Brownlee, the then exec director 
ofUK Theatre <http://www.uktheatre.org/>, wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/19/theatre-uk-love-lose-david-brownlee>
 for last year’s event: “Theatres play an enormous role in the community that 
goes far beyond what’s on stage.” They bolster local areas financially, support 
the development of children, provide opportunities of paid work and give us all 
a rare chance to share experiences with our local community, he said.

But all this is under threat. “We are looking into an uncertain financial 
future,” wrote Lorne Campbell, artistic director of Northern Stage, in a recent
blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/aug/15/theatre-wages-lorne-campbell-cuts-edinburgh-festival-2015>
.
“The autumn spending review will almost certainly bring further cuts.”

In challenging times, #LoveTheatreDay 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23LoveTheatreDay&src=typd> will give 
organisations an opportunity to shout about the great work they do, both on and 
off stage. It will help theatres forge relationships with new audiences and 
others working in the sector. Most of all, it will drive positive, active 
engagement in the run up to the busy festive season.

Hashtags

Like last year’s event, there will be one main hashtag, which this year will 
group all three words together:#LoveTheatreDay 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23LoveTheatreDay&src=typd>. This will guide the 
overall conversation throughout the day, with three sub-hashtags to highlight 
specific themes:

• #BackStage (10am–12pm) will offer audiences and other arts pros a glimpse 
into how a production comes together in the weeks and months leading up to the 
big night.

• #AskATheatre (3–5pm) will offer a unique opportunity for theatre fans and 
aspiring actors to hear first-hand from the individuals and groups that make 
the magic happen.

• #Showtime (7–10pm) will give those who can’t make it to a theatre the chance 
to sit in the “virtual stalls” to experience a performance, or several, via 
Twitter.


How to get involved

Theatre lovers
Simply share this page and encourage your local theatre, stage company or 
drama group to sign up – and don’t forget to follow the hashtag on the day for 
updates from your favourite theatres.

Theatres
Whether you’re professional or amateur, big or small, regional or national, we 
want you to join in, so sign up using this simple form (below). We’ll send you 
an information pack later in October that tells you what to do next and how to 
prepare. As soon as you’ve signed up, don’t forget to tweet about your 
excitement over #LoveTheatreDay, how others can join, and how you plan to get 
involved.

Sign-up form

This form is now closed

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.

 