
For two years after she was arrested, Aya Hijazi refused to give up hope that 
Egypt’s courts would let her, an American who ran a child welfare clinic, go 
free to reunite with her family. Nine hundred days after her arrest, she has 
started to lose that hope.

Egypt unhappy with 'unjustifiable' US security warning to tourists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/08/egypt-travel-us-security-warning-tourism>
“In the first year and a half, she had taken it with a lot of grace,” said her 
sister, Alaa. “After she hit the two-year mark, five-month mark, she’s been 
despondent. She’s feeling no certainty or end in sight.”

The whole family has felt the toll. Their mother recently became bedridden, 
Alaa said, adding: “I wake with nightmares sometimes, in a panic. You never 
think that something like this could happen.”

The Hijazi siblings grew up in Falls Church, Virginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/virginia>. After graduating George Mason 
University in 2009, Aya Hijazi left for Cairo, where she met her future 
husband, Mohamed Hassanein, in Tahrir Square during the country’s 2011 
revolution.

Disenchanted by Egypt’s convulsing politics, the couple used their wedding 
fund to start a not-for-profit group, Belady, meant to offer a refuge for 
homeless children.

By May 2014, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi had taken control of the country and cracked 
down on dissent 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/10/14/world/middleeast/egypt-cracks-down-on-new-student-protests-arresting-scores.html>
, real and perceived. His security forces took notice of the Belady center. 
According to a human rights group supporting them, Hijazi, Hassanein, six 
volunteers and several children were arrested in a raid.

The police didn’t let them speak with a lawyer for a day, said Wade McMullen, 
a lawyer forRobert F Kennedy Human Rights <http://rfkcenter.org/>, a 
not-for-profit organization that has taken on Hijazi’s case. During 
questioning, Hassanein was beaten and Hijazi was threatened and struck on the 
head, McMullen said. They were eventually charged with human trafficking and 
sexual abuse.

“For about three days they were incommnicado,” Alaa Hijazi said. “All my 
mother knew was the headlines about this American woman, which were all the 
same template.”
 Aya Hijazi with Mohamed Hassanein. Photograph: Courtesy Alaa Hijazi 
Right before the 2014 election that Sisi hoped would cement his rule, 
state-censored media ran with the sensationalist story – an American woman 
involved in kidnapping and sexual abuse. Officialsreported that Sisi won 96.1% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/03/abdel-fatah-al-sisi-presidential-election-vote-egypt>
 of the vote.

“It’s very clear that they wanted big, splash propaganda to show that the 
government was standing up to the big, bad west,” McMullen said.

Alaa Hijazi said: “It’s the idea in this public narrative of Americans 
corrupting our children and it caters to the idea of western influence and 
loose morals.”

The family and human rights groups say the charges are bogus, and that a 
forensic examination of the children showed that they had suffered abuse before 
they were taken in by Belady. Prosecutors stalled, renewing detention without 
charges for 15 days at a time, a tactic McMullen said has become “quite 
routine”.

Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> has a limit of two-year 
pre-trial detention, but McMullen said the courts had adjourned for as long as 
six months, delaying any trial. Hijazi said that at first, the family did not 
want to go to the press or US officials.

“We waited a while trying to be not too antagonizing – not that it’s a crime 
to be an American, but we didn’t want to reinforce the impression. We hoped 
this would self-correct,” Hijazi said.

“But Aya has a law degree. A few times she would try to say something just on 
her own behalf and the courts wouldn’t even permit that.”

Time and Egypt’s labyrinthine justice system weakened the family’s hopes: “We 
don’t have any faith in the judiciary,” Hijazi said. They eventually approached 
US officials,petitioned 
<http://rfkhumanrights.org/media/filer_public/a7/59/a759af40-59a1-4499-a852-d8d6a9285caf/unwgad_petition-_hijazi_and_hassanein_1.pdf>
 the United Nations working group on arbitrary detention and, finally, spoke to 
the press.

Neither the White House nor the state department nor the Egyptian embassy in 
Washington responded to questions about the case, but Barack Obama’s 
administration has called for Hijazi’s release, if in muted terms.

In September, the Hijazis met Washington’s UN ambassador, Samantha Power, and 
Avril Haines, one of Obama’s national security advisers, who “reiterated the 
president’s deep concern for the welfare of all American citizens held abroad”, 
according to a White House statement.
 The couple celebrates Valentine’s Day behind bars. Photograph: Courtesy Alaa 
Hijazi 
“The United States will continue to offer her all possible consular support,” 
the White House added. “The United States calls on the [Egyptian] government to 
drop all charges against Hijazi and release her from prison.”

A handful of senators and representatives, led by the Virginia representative 
Don Beyer, have urged Obama and Sisi to secure the Belady group’s release as a 
means to improve ties between the US and Egypt.

“The charges against them are as salacious as they are farcical,” Senator 
Patrick Leahy of Vermontsaid late last month 
<https://www.congress.gov/congressional-record/2016/9/27/senate-section/article/S6127-1>
. “She and the others should be immediately released. Absent proof, made 
available for all to see, that they have committed a punishable offense, the 
charges should be dismissed.”

Human rights groups have condemned the detention and said it falls within a 
largercampaign 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/25/world/middleeast/egypt-continues-crackdown-on-groups-documenting-government-abuse.html>
 against aid and civil rights workers.

“From everything we can tell, it’s ridiculous,” said Sarah Margon, the 
Washington director of Human Rights Watch. “She’s been held in conditions that 
are worrisome, denied medicines that she needs, and there’s no reason for her 
to be there. The charges against her should be dropped and she should be sent 
home.
Samantha Power (@AmbassadorPower) 
Met family of Aya Hijazi, jailed w/o charges 865 days in #Egypt 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Egypt?src=hash> for running children’s shelter. 
Loss for Egyptpic.twitter.com/73BboDdaiw <https://t.co/73BboDdaiw>
 <https://twitter.com/AmbassadorPower/status/775828598800482304> September 13, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/AmbassadorPower/status/775828598800482304> 
“She got swept up into this excessively heavy handed approach by the Sisi 
government to go after a whole range of actors. So while the work she was doing 
was for children, development oriented, it seems very likely that she was 
lumped in with a campaign against NGOs, human rights organizations and in some 
cases even against difficulties with western governments.”

A “very virulent anti-American and anti-western” sentiment has dominated 
Egyptian media for months, Margon said, noting how difficult it had been for 
the US to secure the release of another American, Mohamed Soltan, who was 
released only after a 16-month hunger strike and international attention to the 
case.

According to Amnesty International, more than 40,000 people have been 
imprisoned in Egypt since 2013 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2014/07/egypt-anniversary-morsi-ousting/>
, many tortured or detained without trial or legal counsel.

“In a way, we’re lucky that she’s not been tortured,” McMullen said. “We’re 
quite aware of the relative privilege but it’s sad that we have to be grateful.”
 