
Inefficient, bureaucratic and blighted by overlap – but also well-meaning, 
hard-working and no worse than other big organisations: former and current UN 
staff members have painted a mixed picture of the world body on the occasion of 
its 70th birthday.

Some describe a byzantine bureaucracy in which reports must be reviewed on 
three continents even if that means it won’t be published until it is out of 
date. A typical comment on a Guardian form inviting insiders to have their say 
was this from a World Food Programme (WFP) staffer: “Bureaucracy makes daily 
work more difficult, which in turn makes helping the people we serve more 
difficult.”

Frances, now retired, was with the UN office of drugs and crime for 30 years. 
He agrees bureaucracy is a problem: “The UN needs major changes: on one side 
the staff has gradually brought itself into a heavy bureaucracy with all the 
power in the hands of an antique administration and with a lot of waste.” But 
she believes it’s not just the fault of the organisation. “The member states 
also have a major responsibility for the UN shortcomings as they are not keen 
on major reforms and the big players control the game with their money.”


Camilla has been employed by the multinational Exxon Chemical, the European 
commission, the Danish foreign ministry and is now atUnited Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> development programme (UNDP). 
She says they all have their advantages and disadvantages and actually the 
private company was the most bureaucratic. She feels the UNDP is on the right 
track: “It is not perfect, it is as effective as other big organisations and as 
effective as the member states allow it to be.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnot-perfect-but-it-is-effective-un-from-the-point-of-view-of-its-staff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F042bc9d16ab9ab8a2a5612dc46abea317dbfbd61%2F0_38_5328_3196%2F5328.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Not%20perfect%2C%20but%20it%20is%20effective'%3A%20UN%20from%20the%20point%20of%20view%20of%20its%20staff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnot-perfect-but-it-is-effective-un-from-the-point-of-view-of-its-staff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Not%20perfect%2C%20but%20it%20is%20effective%27%3A%20UN%20from%20the%20point%20of%20view%20of%20its%20staff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnot-perfect-but-it-is-effective-un-from-the-point-of-view-of-its-staff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F042bc9d16ab9ab8a2a5612dc46abea317dbfbd61%2F0_38_5328_3196%2F5328.jpg>
 Students look at an ebola prevention poster as part of a campaign by the 
United Nations development programme in Abidjan, Ivory Coast. Photograph: Sia 
Kambou/AFP/Getty Images 
The UNDP is voluntarily funded, which Bruckner believes provides good value 
for money but she thinks funding across the organisation is an issue. “The UN 
as a whole would work better if there were fewer organisations, but more 
adequately funded.”

Peter Haag has worked for many of the UN agencies – he’s currently a 
consultant for the WFP. He says of this agency that it’s the most rewarding 
work experience he’s ever had.

“The WFP is an organisation with a corporate culture of getting the job done,” 
Haag says. Though like Bruckner, he believes the UN as a whole could function 
far better “if it did not have to spend most of its time and resources on 
scrambling for resources”.

Haag is hopeful that the initiative to coordinate UN affairs better, “One UN” 
(Delivering as One) <http://www.un.org/en/ga/deliveringasone/>, could be a 
solution – though H who’s in the programming side at the International Labour 
Organisation (ILO) doesn’t think it’s effective yet: “At my technical level I 
see no evidence of a “One UN’ and am aware of severe competition among UN 
agencies for external funding.” 


Competition between agencies can spill over into operational matters too. BM 
who has also worked as a consultant for several UN agencies and is now at 
children’s agency Unicef said that he often finds agencies competing with one 
another.

“It is clear to me that a lot of money could be saved by sharing certain 
things instead of duplicating and one agency believing they do X better than 
another agency. So much energy is also wasted that way.” Loretta, an unpaid 
intern at the UNHCR, the UN’s refugee agency, in Geneva shares this view: “I do 
not believe the UN is as effective as it could be… the UN agencies seem to work 
against each other at points. The UN should also work harder on interactions 
between all of its agencies so they are not conflicting, or are at the very 
least more aware of the conflicts so they can be addressed positively and with 
a chance for productivity within the agencies.”

Recruitment at the UN has also come under scrutiny. Mala, an international 
development practitioner who has worked for both Unicef and the WFP maintains 
that current systems make it difficult to recruit and retain the right staff at 
the right time.

“Many senior-level staff are guaranteed contracts that can cost an upwards of 
$300-500k a year, yet the bulk of the work falls on lower level staff who are 
not guaranteed a salary for more than a few months at a time,” she says. “As a 
result, each individual response, project and programme must go through long 
and time-consuming recruitment processes just to find the right team.”

Sokunthea, a former local employee for UNDP in Cambodia feels that though the 
UN is a good employer, the huge salaries paid to international staff are 
counterproductive.

“The expat salary should not be paid too much [more] than the local standard. 
UN is not a business firm which people can make money out of. UN is a 
development agency and [is] supposed to help the poor by using the causes of 
the poor. UN must cut the salary of expats in order to make the available 
funding to the programme’s operation and development.”


There are other areas where the UN needs to improve its relations on the 
ground. One Unicef employee, Anne, believes her agency works very effectively 
with governments in developing countries “but they have to be more open to 
working with civil society as well – local NGOs for example”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnot-perfect-but-it-is-effective-un-from-the-point-of-view-of-its-staff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d90450bdcd0e1f44c8eab717cdc8fc454bdff00%2F0_129_3900_2342%2F3900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Not%20perfect%2C%20but%20it%20is%20effective'%3A%20UN%20from%20the%20point%20of%20view%20of%20its%20staff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnot-perfect-but-it-is-effective-un-from-the-point-of-view-of-its-staff%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Not%20perfect%2C%20but%20it%20is%20effective%27%3A%20UN%20from%20the%20point%20of%20view%20of%20its%20staff&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F21%2Fnot-perfect-but-it-is-effective-un-from-the-point-of-view-of-its-staff%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d90450bdcd0e1f44c8eab717cdc8fc454bdff00%2F0_129_3900_2342%2F3900.jpg>
 A health worker administers polio vaccine to a child as part of a 
Unicef-supported vaccination campaign in Damascus, Syria. Photograph: Omar 
Sanadiki/AP 
Eva at the WFP in the Philippines also thinks the UN needs to be more engaged 
on the ground. “We are so much better than before. We have evolved so much. If 
there is anything that I would change [it] is for the UN to be more responsive 
to the needs of the people. To listen more so that people would feel more 
connected with the UN and not view it as very far or distant or elite.”


According to Jose, who is working for the secretariat in New York, if change 
is to come, it must be from the top: “It [the UN] would need a secretary 
general that does not believe in managing the organisation as if it were a 
private company or a ministry, because it is not one, but as what it is, a 
non-for-profit organisation that cannot afford a cumbersome bureaucratic 
workload. Administration would be greatly simplified, staff privileges and 
hierarchical system would be erased, including the shaming differentiation 
between international and local recruits.”

However as Stephan, who worked for the UNDP, states: “There is an unpleasant 
spillover effect from the constant deadlocks at the UN security council to the 
reputation of the UN agencies. And being a world body comes at a price: any 
mistake receives public attention to an extent unknown to non-UN organisations. 
Effectiveness? Efficiency? Let’s face it: there are even private enterprises of 
this size that do not reach the UN agency’s level of effectiveness and 
efficiency.”

Some of the individuals who contacted us wish to remain anonymous and their 
first names or initials have been used in this article.


This piece was amended on Tuesday 22 September




 