
Homelessness is a very real risk that many people face. It only takes one or 
two things to happen, such as losing your job, a relationship break-up or ill 
health, to find yourself struggling with rent or mortgage payments.

I work in West Sussex for housing provider Southdown as a floating support 
officer in theMyKey service 
<http://www.southdownhousing.org/services/housing-support/mykey/>. This helps 
prevent homelessness by supporting people to find and retain affordable 
housing. Many of my clients are vulnerable and also face other challenges such 
as a learning disability or mental health problem.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fone-person-had-her-housing-benefit-stopped-while-in-hospital-giving-birth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434627783614%2Fe7953381-ccc5-4897-9c75-dd5e174d251d-673x720.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='One%20person%20had%20her%20housing%20benefit%20stopped%20while%20in%20hospital%20giving%20birth'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fone-person-had-her-housing-benefit-stopped-while-in-hospital-giving-birth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27One%20person%20had%20her%20housing%20benefit%20stopped%20while%20in%20hospital%20giving%20birth%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Fjun%2F19%2Fone-person-had-her-housing-benefit-stopped-while-in-hospital-giving-birth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434627783614%2Fe7953381-ccc5-4897-9c75-dd5e174d251d-673x720.jpeg>
 Maggie Walton-Thenet. Photograph: Southdown Housing 
I don’t only focus on a person’s immediate housing need. I work alongside 
clients to look at other areas of their life that may be affecting their 
housing situation. I also coach people to achieve goals they have. These could 
relate to their health and wellbeing, employment, finances, social networks or 
feeling safe in their local community.

I get up at 5.30am and for four days a week I begin work from home at around 
8am. On Wednesdays, I go into our office in Worthing. A typical morning begins 
by checking emails and my phone, and responding to anything urgent. Then I get 
in my car, turn Heart FM on, and visit clients in the community and their own 
homes.



I visit between two and four clients a day, depending on how long the visits 
take. Common issues my clients have that can result in them losing their home 
are a deficit in housing benefit, not accessing welfare benefit entitlements, 
and difficulty budgeting.

Many people don’t understand the jargon-filled letters they receive from 
housing and welfare benefits agencies. This can lead to people not knowing how 
to claim what they are entitled to, and consequently falling behind on payments 
for their home and facing eviction. Often clients don’t understand the benefit 
sanctions, and if a welfare benefit is sanctioned then their housing benefit is 
stopped.

Mental and physical health can also affect people’s situation. One person had 
her housing benefit stopped while she was in hospital giving birth. She should 
have submitted a wage slip the day before the baby was due but was rushed into 
hospital and was not discharged for two weeks. When she got home with her new 
baby she found a letter stating that her housing benefit had been stopped.

Getting to the heart of why young people misuse drugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/may/01/getting-to-the-heart-of-why-young-people-misuse-drugs>
It can be difficult for people with mental health issues to keep within the 
time restraints required by housing benefit. Sometimes people can’t face 
opening letters, resulting in missing deadlines to submit information. In some 
cases clients are required to travel to medical appointments for employment 
support allowance review claims. This can be difficult for some people with 
poor mental health who find it difficult to leave the house, use public 
transport and be around other people. This isn’t taken into account and if they 
don’t turn up for the appointment, their benefits are stopped.

 When a client’s housing benefit has been stopped or suspended, I support them 
to make a new claim requesting it to be backdated to the date when it was 
stopped, and to provide the evidence required to support the claim. I also 
support clients to liaise with their landlord to explain the situation and to 
set up a repayment plan. Then I help to do benefit checks to ensure that the 
client gets the correct benefits to maximise their income.

I discuss real, tangible things clients can do to improve their situation. And 
I listen to what people think are achievable actions. Facing homelessness can 
be overwhelming, especially when people have several problems that affect their 
situation. Breaking things down into smaller, more manageable pieces can often 
help. Where there are issues such as poor mental health, alcohol or substance 
misuse or domestic violence, with the consent of the client I refer them to 
specialist services to ensure they are getting all the support available to 
them.

The best thing about my job is that regardless of how challenging a situation 
is, if a client engages with the support then they will be able to make a 
positive difference to their life. To see a client take those steps, however 
small, towards becoming financially stable and being secure in their own home, 
is wonderful.

In a complex case, an example of a good outcome for one of my clients is that 
they are now free from alcohol and drug use, living independently without any 
involvement from their violent ex-partner, and are managing their tenancy and 
finances. They are happy and secure in their home and their health and 
wellbeing has greatly improved. Without our intervention, it is likely that 
they would have become street homeless without the underlying issues that 
affected their mental health being addressed.

The job can be challenging. Not seeing colleagues on a daily basis can be 
quite isolating, especially if I’ve had a difficult visit with a client. In 
these situations, I call a colleague or a manager to talk through my concerns.

 After a hard day’s work, I like to unwind in a long bubble-bath followed by a 
good TV drama or book. At weekends, I catch up with the family and in the 
summer nothing is more relaxing than going fishing with my sons. The last thing 
on my mind before I drift off to sleep is how comfy my bed is.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 