
Daniel Martin, curator of making, and Lucy Bamford, curator of art, Derby 
Museums <http://www.derbymuseums.org/>


Tell us something we don’t know about being a museum curator

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F782ed2c366b7596d966d7fcb2e12be67a4d43f56%2F0_48_635_952%2F635.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='People%20think%20curating%20just%20means%20choosing%20nice%20things'%20%E2%80%93%20secrets%20of%20the%20museum%20curators&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27People%20think%20curating%20just%20means%20choosing%20nice%20things%27%20%E2%80%93%20secrets%20of%20the%20museum%20curators&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F782ed2c366b7596d966d7fcb2e12be67a4d43f56%2F0_48_635_952%2F635.jpg>
 Daniel Martin, curator of making, Derby Museums 
Daniel: Probably most things. The most common follow-up question when I tell 
people what I do for a living is: “Great! What’s that then?” It’s quite hard to 
answer. We don’t spend all day lurking in musty stores any more; it’s all about 
people. It’s their stories and complexity that really make collections pop.

 Lucy: A popular misconception concerns museum gloves. We rarely use white 
cotton gloves. Nowadays we use synthetic rubber ones, which make your hands 
sweat. It’s not as glamorous as it might appear.

What career insight would you give to an aspiring curator?

Daniel: Nothing is as important when you’re starting out as gaining 
experience. An undergraduate and postgraduate degree is a wonderful foundation, 
but employers will see it as just that. Experience gained via volunteering, 
internships and work placements will always be preferred over a degree from a 
prestigious university.

With government cuts facing our sector over the coming years, make sure that 
being a curator is something to which you’re totally committed. There will be 
lots of short-term contracts and project-related work throughout your career. 
Curating is no longer a suitable choice for those seeking long-term stability.

 Lucy: Be open-minded and prepared to dig deep often for creative solutions to 
an unimaginable range of problems and issues. It’s not easy, but it is 
rewarding.
No other job has given me the opportunity to meet so many interesting people 
and learn so many new things. Working in a museum has given me a connection to 
people – to the rest of humanity – that I never had before.

What’s your favourite career artefact – and why?

Daniel: As a vintage motorbike enthusiast, I’m biased towards the rare and 
beautifulSilk 700S <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silk_700S>. We’re restoring 
the bike to running condition in co-production with museum-goers and an 
original Silk mechanic this year, so look out for me on my tours in 2017.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e41e86f77ef7bab94f4fa0b7fa386fcceb7e857%2F0_174_3936_2362%2F3936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='People%20think%20curating%20just%20means%20choosing%20nice%20things'%20%E2%80%93%20secrets%20of%20the%20museum%20curators&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27People%20think%20curating%20just%20means%20choosing%20nice%20things%27%20%E2%80%93%20secrets%20of%20the%20museum%20curators&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e41e86f77ef7bab94f4fa0b7fa386fcceb7e857%2F0_174_3936_2362%2F3936.jpg>
 Lucy Bamford in front of Joseph Wright of Derby’s A Philosopher Lecturing on 
the Orrery. Photograph: Jon Hindmarch/Derby Museums Trust 
Lucy: Mine is a work by 18th-century artist Joseph Wright of Derby 
<http://www.derbymuseums.org/joseph-wright-gallery/>. His Orrery, Alchymist and 
Earthstopper are justly esteemed and well-loved, but his self-portrait in 
pastels catches my breath every time.

People know him as an outstanding painter, but he was an equally-skilled 
draughtsman. His dark, velveteen self-portrait reveals a deeply troubled man, 
given to bouts of debilitating depression and self-doubt. The eyes have it; you 
feel as if you might know him. The medium carries a tantalising hint of his 
presence as well; pastel feels intimate for the proximity of the artist’s hand 
– a gentle smudge with the finger or “stump” to soften a line. It’s mesmerising.


Lucy Worsley, chief curator, Historic Royal Palaces <http://www.hrp.org.uk/>


Tell us something we don’t know about being a museum curator

One thing that’s bound to annoy any museum curator is other people abusing the 
word for what we do. In a world where department stores talk about “curating” 
their shoe selections or whatever, people think that curating just means 
choosing nice things. But this is only half of it. Our real job as museum 
curators is to look after artefacts from the past,yet also to be the repository 
of knowledge about them, to be expert, to have spent 10,000 hours immersed in 
the subject.

We think as much about the public as we do the works of art.
Ana Debenedetti 
Curating isn’t just a matter of taste. It involves building up real knowledge 
of the items in your care. As the world gets quicker, and shallower, and 
bite-sized, retaining our ability to take a deep dive into history is more and 
more
important.

What career insight would you give to an aspiring curator?

In big museums, the role of the curator has shrunk in recent years as 
different branches of curatorial work – such as interpretation, or learning, or 
conservation – have split off and become professions of their own. A lot of 
people think: “Hum, I’d like to be a curator,” but actually they would be more 
interested in one of these other activities. If you want to experience it all, 
though, get yourself to a small museum, where all hands have to do everything.

What’s your favourite career artefact – and why?

Lots of items that survive from the past are high-status, valuable things that 
people have treasured. For us at Historic Royal Palaces, that means things 
belonging to kings and queens. But I like things that have survived 
accidentally and show the seamy side of palace life.

A few years ago, archaeologists working in the privy garden at Hampton Court 
dug up pieces of a tudor chamber pot – or “piss-pot” as they would have called 
it. It was sent off for laboratory analysis and was found to contain traces of 
genuine tudor urine. Yes, it’s a very unimpressive object, but once you know a 
bit about it, it’s gripping.

Ana Debenedetti, curator of paintings, V&A <http://www.vam.ac.uk/>


Tell us something we don’t know about being a museum curator


Contrary to popular belief, we think as much about the public as we do the 
works of art in our care. Our job is to facilitate and promote access to the 
museum’s collections. The V&A has an extraordinary collection of drawings and 
paintings, which is actually not very well-known to the public. So we’re 
seeking to create as many full-catalogue online entries as we can, with 
photographs.

We also organise displays and exhibitions; the public can view individual 
works by appointment in our print room; and an opinion service is available the 
first Tuesday of every month. It sometimes looks a little like an episode of 
the Antiques Roadshow but, of course, we can’t provide valuations. We see some 
fantastic works, but not all works are what they seem. For example, it can be 
difficult to explain to someone that their piece isn’t an original Winnie the 
Pooh drawing, but a mid-20th century commercial reproduction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff34ff1dfccdc23b874d0912ae315d2ac1b75befa%2F41_25_2170_1300%2F2170.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='People%20think%20curating%20just%20means%20choosing%20nice%20things'%20%E2%80%93%20secrets%20of%20the%20museum%20curators&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27People%20think%20curating%20just%20means%20choosing%20nice%20things%27%20%E2%80%93%20secrets%20of%20the%20museum%20curators&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff34ff1dfccdc23b874d0912ae315d2ac1b75befa%2F41_25_2170_1300%2F2170.jpg>
Allegory of Abundance or Autumn 
<http://beta.wikiart.org/en/sandro-botticelli/allegory-of-abundance-1485#list-search-undefined>
, by Sandro Botticelli. Photograph: The British Museum 
What career insight would you give to an aspiring curator?

A curator is someone curious, dynamic and driven by passion for art in all its 
forms. Although it’s expected that we specialise in a particular area, I think 
it is most rewarding to expand that expertise and see to what extent artistic 
movements are in constant dialogue with each other over time and place. At the 
V&A we seek to show these interactions in the galleries by interweaving many 
objects of different types (and from different cultures) across a long timeline.

What’s your favourite career artefact – and why?

I’m co-curating the forthcoming Botticelli Reimagined 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/exhibition-botticelli-reimagined/> 
show and was particularly happy to to include some of his most beautiful 
drawings. I have expertise in Renaissance paintings, but my passion lies with 
old masters’ drawings.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5963e3276eb3488aebb0c0d19b4b72107d77686e%2F289_543_713_753%2F713.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='People%20think%20curating%20just%20means%20choosing%20nice%20things'%20%E2%80%93%20secrets%20of%20the%20museum%20curators&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27People%20think%20curating%20just%20means%20choosing%20nice%20things%27%20%E2%80%93%20secrets%20of%20the%20museum%20curators&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Fmuseum-curator-job-secrets-culture-arts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5963e3276eb3488aebb0c0d19b4b72107d77686e%2F289_543_713_753%2F713.jpg>
 Ana Debenedetti, curator of paintings at the V&A 
Looking at drawings allows you to observe the artists at work thanks to the 
variety of materials and techniques. In this case, the artist’s choice of the 
material and technique provides an insight into his mind. The subject of a 
drawing can be as different as a human figure, a landscape or a building, but 
what the drawing can show is the artist thinking, plus a chance to observe and 
examine his reasoning as he seeks to explore and resolve complex aspects of the 
design.

In the forthcoming show, we present two spectacular Botticelli sheets. One 
represents hisAllegory of Abundance or Autumn 
<http://beta.wikiart.org/en/sandro-botticelli/allegory-of-abundance-1485#list-search-undefined>
 and the other, his Allegory of Faith. The former is considered one of the most 
beautiful drawings of the Renaissance: an image of feminine beauty capturing 
the essence of the characteristic Botticellian nymph, which recurs in many of 
the his painted compositions and has almost become the hallmark of his oeuvre.

The latter, by contrast, looks much more laborious and appears less graceful. 
Only 20 years separate the two drawings, but this dramatic new style reveals 
the evolution of an ageing artist confronted by a change of taste following the 
political upheavals in Florence.

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 