
The young gay activist slowly stirs sugar into his coffee as he says he’s 
never had a boyfriend who would hold his hand in public.

“Most people from my generation are too scared to come out,” says 22-year-old 
Liridon Veliou, who works with the LGBT rights groupQESh 
<https://www.facebook.com/pages/QESh/418557711503586>. Behind him, is a cafe 
scene from any European city – smartphones and MacBook computers illuminating 
the faces of young men and women against a backdrop of bookshelves stacked with 
60s American novels.

But beyond the cafe’s terrace and its young, open-minded clientele, lies a 
country where 81% of the LGBT community has suffered threats or insults because 
of their sexual orientation or gender identity. This is the highest rate of 
discrimination in the western Balkans, according to a2015 poll by the National 
Democracy Institute <https://www.ndi.org/LGBTI_Balkans_poll>. The statistics 
are a sharp reminder that, despite appearances, this isn’t London or Rome – 
this is Pristina, capital of Kosovo.

Trans rights: Meet the face of Nepal's progressive 'third gender' movement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/12/trans-rights-meet-the-face-of-nepals-progressive-third-gender-movement>
On paper, Kosovo looks modern and inclusive – its progressive constitution 
written in the aftermath of the 1998-99 warincludes a ban of discrimination 
based on sexual orientation <http://www.fmreview.org/sogi/fauchier.html>. But 
LGBT groups say this image contradicts reality. “If you look at the 
constitution in Kosovo, you’d think this is a pretty good place to live as an 
LGBT person,” says Gemza Burgija, programme manager at theCentre for Equality 
and Liberty <http://cel-ks.org/> (CEL), an LGBT rights group based in Pristina. 
“But that’s not really the case.”

To unveil the difficulties faced by the LGBT community in Kosovo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kosovo>, Burgija and her colleagues have 
started working on the country’s first public database, which will document 
cases of discrimination and violence against the LGBT community and will be 
available online by June.

Evidence-based advocacy is an important tool, says Lilit Poghosyan who works 
withIlga Europe <http://www.ilga-europe.org/>. “In the beginning, [governments 
in the western Balkans] said there was no discrimination. To prove this was an 
issue, organisations started to collect data because no government had a system 
in place to do so.”

Since the LGBT community is invisible, most people and institutions we work 
with ask for numbers and percentages
Vladana Vasić and Maja Lukic Schade 
Using data to fight discrimination has helped the cause in Bosnia. In 2013, 
survey data collected by the human rights group theSarajevo Open Centre 
<http://soc.ba/en/> (SOC), revealed that 73% of the LGBT community did not 
trust the police 
<http://http//soc.ba/site/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/Analiza-istrazivanja-eng_web-verzija.pdf>
. Armed with this evidence, the group approached the ministry of interior and 
begin working with the police department to educate them about LGBT hate crime.

SOC staff members Vladana Vasić and Maja Lukic Schade believe they were 
invited to be involved in police training because their data allowed them to be 
“very loud” about the increasing number of hate crimes. “Had we not documented 
cases, conducted research among the LGBT community and presented the ministry 
with concrete data, we probably would not cooperate with them as closely as we 
have so far,” they said.

 Vasić and Lukic Schade believe that data is crucial for pressuring the 
authorities. “Since the LGBT community is invisible, most people and 
institutions we work with ask for certain numbers and percentages to establish 
relevance of the issue. When there is no data , relevant authorities might 
claim there is no need to work on that issue.”

The top 10 sources of data for international development research
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/mar/16/the-top-10-sources-of-data-for-international-development-research>
Exploiting EU ambitions

A collaboration between six NGOs across the region is aiming to use the fact 
thatrespect for gay rights is a criterion for joining the EU 
<https://euobserver.com/lgbti/116963> to improve the treatment of LGBT people 
in the western Balkans 
<http://soc.ba/en/sarajevo-open-centre-beginning-of-the-project-eu-integration-for-improvement-of-lgbt-rights-in-western-balkans/>
. Activists document the situation on the ground, so that candidate or 
potential candidate countries, such as Kosovo, Bosnia, Macedonia and Serbia, 
cannot exaggerate the progress they’ve made.



Whereas Kosovar campaigners use data to push the country’s institutions to 
fulfil their responsibilities, inSerbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/serbia>, collection has become an important 
tool to check state institutions are not manipulating statistics.

 “Data is important for us because the state tends to lower the rates of hate 
crime, hate speech and discrimination,” says Jelena Vasiljević, programme 
coordinator at Belgrade-based LGBT groupLabris <http://labris.org.rs/en/>. She 
believes the Serbian justice system does this by processing crimes against the 
LGBT community as ordinary violent crimes, removing the hate crime label.

Six countries making progress on LGBT rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/10/lgbt-rights-six-countries-progress>
As rights organisations in the western Balkans cooperate more, the power of 
data has spread slowly throughout the region, reaching Albania – also an EU 
candidate country – where thePink Embassy <http://www.pinkembassy.al/en> is 
currently working on its first ever survey.

Artan Karoli, director of the group, says that as the Pink Embassy gathers 
more and more evidence of discrimination inAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania>, the country’s institutions are 
starting to see the organisation as “more powerful, more serious”.

Ultimately, data is giving civil society groups, such as the Pink Embassy, the 
muscles to challenge their country’sLGBT rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lgbt-rights> record because, as Poghosyan of 
Ilga Europe says, “personal stories are not enough”.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 