
Around 60 people, mostly men, are gathered in the local mosque in an old 
central neighbourhood of Mashhad, the shrine city in easternIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>. In between midday and afternoon 
prayers, the men fiddle with their prayer beads, sitting on a floor covered 
with long, factory-made, green carpets with “prayer rug” patterns.


A middle-aged man asks the imam about the election due on Friday for the 
clerical body whose one real task is to choose Iran’s supreme leader should a 
vacancy arise. “The Assembly of Experts must consist of the most righteous 
statesmen and religious figures,” says the imam, who is in his early 30s. “I’m 
not going to suggest names, as the Qom seminary hasn’t given us a preferred 
list of candidates, but remember to vote for someone whose thoughts and ideas 
are closer to the ones of the supreme leader, someone who will continue his 
path.”

The Guardian Council – which has qualified only 160 candidates, including a 
handful of reformists, out of 800 hopefuls – has narrowed the field. When it 
comes to the Assembly of Experts, the conservative clerical establishment is in 
no mood to concede an inch to reformists or moderates, or even to have too 
contentious an election.

Some provinces have no competition. Out of 88 members in the next assembly, 
nine (10.2%) are already selected as the number of candidates equals the number 
of seats in the provinces of Western Azerbaijan, Ardebil, Bushehr, northern 
Khorasan, Semnan and Hormozgan.

And in some others, there are few options. In two provinces, Eastern 
Azerbaijan and Khuzestan, 13 candidates are competing for a total of 11 seats, 
and in seven others - Gilan, Khorasan-e Razavi, Kerman, Fars, 
Sistan-Balouchestan, Ghazvin and Lorestan - 39 candidates are competing for 24 
seats.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd11f6fc93a7c08e6905967f2affb052c2ddc624c%2F0_0_2685_1612%2F2685.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Through%20a%20religious%20prism%E2%80%99%3A%20Iran's%20clergy%20view%20upcoming%20elections%20with%20wariness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Through%20a%20religious%20prism%E2%80%99%3A%20Iran%27s%20clergy%20view%20upcoming%20elections%20with%20wariness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd11f6fc93a7c08e6905967f2affb052c2ddc624c%2F0_0_2685_1612%2F2685.jpg>
 A man works at a photo studio near the Imam Reza shrine in Mashhad, Iran. 
Photograph: Xinhua /Landov / Barcroft Media/Barcroft Media 
In such times, voting is not so much a positive choice as a chance to say no, 
according toMohsen Kadivar 
<http://religiousstudies.duke.edu/people?gurl=&uil=12286&subpage=profile>, who 
trained at the seminary in Qom and is now research professor of Islamic studies 
at Duke University, North Carolina. “This election is more about putting the 
supreme leader in his place,” says Kadivar. “In my opinion, more than 80% of 
Iranians cannot find their preferred candidates among those qualified. So their 
only remaining option is to vote against the leadership’s favourite figures.”

He compares the current situation in Iran with 1975 when Shah Mohammad Reza 
Pahlavi abolished the multi-party system and replaced it with only one party, 
Rastakhiz. But such methods don’t work in the long run, he said: “In 1979, just 
a few years after the establishment of the Rastakhiz party, the Shah was 
toppled.”

In Tehran, reformists and supporters of President Hassan Rouhani are 
circulating a list topped with photos of Rouhani, himself an Experts’ Assembly 
candidate, and former president Mohammad Khatami backing 16 candidates for the 
Experts Assembly election and 30 for parliament. This follows a statement 
<http://isna.ir/fa/news/94120100680/%25d9%2581%25d8%25b1%25d8%25a7%25d8%25ae%25d9%2588%25d8%25a7%25d9%2586-%25d9%2587%25d8%25a7%25d8%25b4%25d9%2585%25db%258c-%25d8%25b1%25d9%2581%25d8%25b3%25d9%2586%25d8%25ac%25d8%25a7%25d9%2586%25db%258c-%25d8%25a8%25d8%25b1%25d8%25a7%25db%258c-%25d8%25ad%25d8%25b6%25d9%2588%25d8%25b1-%25d9%2585%25d8%25b1%25d8%25af%25d9%2585-%25d8%25af%25d8%25b1>
 published on 20 February in whichAkbar Hashemi Rafsanjani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/jan/27/iran-ali-akbar-hashemi-rafsanjani-comeback-assembly-experts-election>
, the former president and another candidate for the assembly, asking people to 
take an “opportunity” to prevent society drifting towards “political and 
religious extremism”.

Can a former kingmaker make a comeback in Iran?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/jan/27/iran-ali-akbar-hashemi-rafsanjani-comeback-assembly-experts-election>
Hossein, a retired manager of a state office in Mashhad, is proud of hardly 
ever missing Friday prayers at the shrine of Imam Reza. He says that all 
candidates in the province – Khorasan-e Razavi – stand by the side of the 
supreme leader.

But that does not stop him making a choice. While Ayatollah Ahmad Alamolhoda, 
Mashhad’s Friday prayer leader is, he says, an “extreme hardliner”, others like 
Ayatollah Mahmoud Hashemi Shahroudi and Mohammad Hadi Abdekhodaei have more 
moderate perspectives. “So I am probably going to vote only for these two,” he 
explains.

Even with a narrow field, the country’s clerical establishment is not at ease. 
A Shia scholar with extensive ties to Qom, who asks to remain anonymous, says 
the establishment is wary of the reformists trying to “sneak back” into 
influential positions. According to him, conservative clerics are worried that 
reformists and moderate allies will use the success of the nuclear deal and the 
easing of sanctions to re-launch “the reformist programme or ...[a] slightly 
less conservative reading of how Iranian society should be run”.

But instead of expressing this openly, he says, these clerics are using 
“mutterings and murmurings” to spread their views: “That’s how they do 
politics. They won’t stand up and say, ‘Don’t let this guy come back in’. They 
will just disgruntle loudly during a class or Friday sermon when emotions are 
high… suddenly drop a line to say ‘Look, these reformists are still trying to 
undermine the credentials of the Islamic Revolution’.”

A general warning has come from the top. On 18 February, supreme leader 
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei asked people to resist attempts by “the enemy” to 
influence the elections. Friday prayer leaders around the county echoed his 
words, warning against “the enemy’s infiltration”. AyatollahAhmad Khatami 
<http://www.farsnews.com/newstext.php?nn=13941130000365>, substitute Friday 
prayer leader in Tehran and a member of the Experts’ Assembly, said the west 
was trying to plant insiders both in the assembly and in Iran’s parliament.

Iran's ayatollahs spring a surprise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/mar/13/iran-supreme-mohammad-yazdi-leader-in-waiting>
Kadivar says these warnings reveal how nervous the leadership is. “Currently 
they are so fragile that they are even scared of Hashemi Rafsanjani and 
Rouhani. The Islamic Republic is like a train. In each station it disembarks 
some of its political figures. Previously it got rid of the reformists and now 
it’s Hashemi Rafsanjani and the moderates’ turn.”

The careful attention being paid – both in Iran and internationally – to the 
election for the Experts Assembly comes from the likelihood that it may in its 
next eight-year term choose a successor toKhamenei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>, who is 76 and in 
2014 underwent prostate surgery. But whatever the backbiting surrounding 
Friday’s election, this is just the start of a process of succession that could 
take years.

Kadivar stresses this isn’t a job for just anyone. “The next leader can’t be 
an unknown figure and must be in a high political position within the hierarchy 
of the Islamic Republic,” he said. Kadivar believes the main decision-makers 
will be the Revolutionary Guards (IRGC) and Khamenei, who will be able to shape 
his own succession and might even express a preference.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce9756dc50d00819b75ec8e0785ddeb0067ac922%2F0_0_1074_1557%2F1074.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Through%20a%20religious%20prism%E2%80%99%3A%20Iran's%20clergy%20view%20upcoming%20elections%20with%20wariness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Through%20a%20religious%20prism%E2%80%99%3A%20Iran%27s%20clergy%20view%20upcoming%20elections%20with%20wariness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce9756dc50d00819b75ec8e0785ddeb0067ac922%2F0_0_1074_1557%2F1074.jpg>
 Ayatollah Mahmoud Hashemi-Shahroudi in a ceremony in August 1999, taking over 
duties from his predecessor Ayatollah Mohammad Yazdi, who is now head of the 
Assembly of Experts. Photograph: EPA  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7669f9886b99c0d99ce3235042d4b07f235fb4fa%2F0_0_1255_1684%2F1255.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Through%20a%20religious%20prism%E2%80%99%3A%20Iran's%20clergy%20view%20upcoming%20elections%20with%20wariness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Through%20a%20religious%20prism%E2%80%99%3A%20Iran%27s%20clergy%20view%20upcoming%20elections%20with%20wariness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7669f9886b99c0d99ce3235042d4b07f235fb4fa%2F0_0_1255_1684%2F1255.jpg>
 Mohammad Taghi Mesbah-Yazdi at the Experts Assembly in 2011. Photograph: 
Behrouz Mehri/AFP/Getty Images 
A principle-ist and former high-ranking official close to Iran’s supreme 
leader disagrees. “The Assembly of Experts is the most important organisation 
in Iran after the leadership and it’s not correct to say the IRGC has [undue] 
influence over it,” he told Tehran Bureau. “The best reason [evidence] for this 
is the presence of Rafsanjani in the election.” The former president is 
disliked by many IRGC commanders and was barred from the 2013 presidential 
election.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5edb18dbf96b456fd79183cc1bcd5542c0a5cf6%2F0_0_1634_2200%2F1634.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98Through%20a%20religious%20prism%E2%80%99%3A%20Iran's%20clergy%20view%20upcoming%20elections%20with%20wariness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98Through%20a%20religious%20prism%E2%80%99%3A%20Iran%27s%20clergy%20view%20upcoming%20elections%20with%20wariness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Firan-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5edb18dbf96b456fd79183cc1bcd5542c0a5cf6%2F0_0_1634_2200%2F1634.jpg>
 Undated file photo of Iraq’s most revered Shia cleric, Ayatollah Ali 
al-Sistani Photograph: Reuters 
The Shia scholar cited earlier says that those who stress the influence of the 
Revolutionary Guards believe they will be able to impose “a frail, weak 
candidate, someone they can control,” citingAyatollah Mohammad Yazdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/mar/13/iran-supreme-mohammad-yazdi-leader-in-waiting>
, the current chair of the Experts’ Assembly.

But the scholar prefers to stress the role that will be played in selecting 
the leader by the clergy loyal to the Islamic Revolution and its ideals. “They 
see the world through a religious prism, a conservative theological prism. Many 
long for someone [as leader] who reminds them of Ayatollah Khomeini. The whole 
paradigm of the guardianship of the jurist [the system concentrating 
constitutional powers in the leader] is built on the belief that he has to be a 
jurist and a mystic philosopher. Khomeini combined both - he was a grand 
ayatollah [a pre-eminent jurist] and a mystic.”

This, says the scholar, undermines the chances of some often cited as 
potential leaders: “[Ayatollah Mohammad Taghi] Mesbah-Yazdi is neither a mystic 
nor a pre-eminent jurist. Nor is Yazdi or Shahroudi.”

He believes the chances of Shahroudi, 67, who was regarded by many as a 
front-runner until he failed to put his name forward last year as chair of the 
Experts Assembly, have receded. “He’s too Iraqi for them, even though he’s a 
former head of the judiciary. He speaks Arabic with a heavy Persian accent, and 
I hear when he speaks Persian he has a bit of an Arabic accent.”

The scholar believes Ayatollah Abdollah Javadi-Amoli, although 82, fits the 
criteria of “someone who is a mystic and a jurist” as well as being “a strong 
politician with a proven track record”. Plus he’s a pragmatist: “He’s flexible, 
he controls large shares of companies, the bonyads [religious foundations] – 
this could sit well with the Revolutionary Guards.”

A further factor is the Shia religious establishment in neighbouring Iraq, 
centred on the city of Najaf. Its relations with Qom have frayed, partly 
because Najaf, and especially Ayatollah Ali Sistani, resisted what they saw as 
an attempt by Iran to “parachute” Shahroudi intoIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>.

But Sistani is himself 85 and the relationship between Iran’s leader and Shia 
internationally has been changed by developments in Syria and Iraq, and growing 
tensions with a Sunni Arab establishment led by Saudi Arabia. The bombing this 
week by the Islamic State onSayida Zeinab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/jan/06/syria-iran-axis-nadia-von-maltzahn-cultural-diplomacy>
, Syria’s leading Shia shrine, may add to a growing sense of pan-Shiism.

 “The perception that Sunni elders are coming together against the Shias, 
while Turkey has formed an alliance with Saudi and Jordan, suggests everyone is 
out to get the Shias,” says the scholar. “So they [the clerics in Najaf] are 
happy to form some kind of temporary alliance with the Iranians. At the end of 
the day, they’re co-religionists.”

A correspondent in Iran contributed reporting. The Tehran Bureau is an 
independent media organisation, hosted by the Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau 
<https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>. 

This article was updated to expand and clarify Mohsen Kadivar’s quotes. 
 