
More than 100 leading British cultural figures have signed a statement calling 
for the UK to take in more refugees and complaining that the British 
government’s response to the European refugee crisis has been “too little, too 
late”.


If this is the best Britain can do for refugees, it’s sickening | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/10/britain-refugees-sickening-david-cameron-big-society>
Sir Anish Kapoor, Jamie Oliver, Keira Knightley, Jude Law, Sir Michael Caine, 
Colin Firth andBenedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch> are among a long 
list of illustrious British names to sign a message published in a full-page 
advert in Friday’s Guardian.

The message says Britain has a moral responsibility to offer safe haven to 
people fleeing war and persecution: “A responsibility that should be shared 
with our European neighbours and not simply shouldered by the countries closest 
to the turbulence driving people from their homes.

“Whilst we appreciate the UK government’s recent commitments on refugee 
resettlement, we worry that this is too little, too late,” the group says.

They add: “We urge the UK government to wake up to the urgency of the current 
crisis and work with its European counterparts to offer immediate humanitarian 
help and agree long-term solutions to refugee resettlement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ftoo-little-too-late-uk-cultural-figures-call-for-greater-refugee-intake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb973ef2b5011f89209a411157bc2b388f0174d21%2F0_208_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Too%20little%2C%20too%20late'%3A%20UK%20cultural%20figures%20call%20for%20greater%20refugee%20intake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ftoo-little-too-late-uk-cultural-figures-call-for-greater-refugee-intake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Too%20little%2C%20too%20late%27%3A%20UK%20cultural%20figures%20call%20for%20greater%20refugee%20intake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ftoo-little-too-late-uk-cultural-figures-call-for-greater-refugee-intake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb973ef2b5011f89209a411157bc2b388f0174d21%2F0_208_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 A refugee wrapped in a thermal blanket looks at a boat full of migrants and 
refugees approaching the coast of Lesbos island, Greece. Photograph: Petros 
Giannakouris/Associated Press 
The advert was conceived and organised by Indian-born British sculptor Kapoor, 
director Joe Wright and his wife musician Anoushka Shankar, Canongate publisher 
Jamie Byng and Adam Broomberg, a South African artist based in London.

It’s an expression of what they say is mounting embarrassment, frustration and 
impotence in Britain at the government’s response to a crisis that has seen 
340,000 asylum seekers arrive in the EU so far this year, and thousands die in 
the attempt. Fewer than 5,000 Syrian asylum seekers have been allowed to stay 
in the UK since 2011.


“I was motivated by a sense of outrage against our doctrinaire government, 
which had been so grossly unjust,” Kapoor told the Guardian.

“We have taken the view that it is better to have an influence on policy than 
send direct aid – we hope to apply pressure to change the government’s 
position. Although sadly I doubt we will, we believe public opinion is with us.”

David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> announced 
this week that the UK will take 20,000 Syrian refugees over the course of the 
next five years, prioritising women and children from refugee camps in Lebanon, 
Turkey and Jordan. It’s an offer Kapoor – and the leading figures in art, film, 
music and literature who have have signed the letter – believe is woefully 
inadequate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ftoo-little-too-late-uk-cultural-figures-call-for-greater-refugee-intake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf1c3b2ac4f9a618bed602c63d705927692266c6%2F0_142_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Too%20little%2C%20too%20late'%3A%20UK%20cultural%20figures%20call%20for%20greater%20refugee%20intake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ftoo-little-too-late-uk-cultural-figures-call-for-greater-refugee-intake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Too%20little%2C%20too%20late%27%3A%20UK%20cultural%20figures%20call%20for%20greater%20refugee%20intake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ftoo-little-too-late-uk-cultural-figures-call-for-greater-refugee-intake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf1c3b2ac4f9a618bed602c63d705927692266c6%2F0_142_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 A young refugee covering himself with his jacket stands during heavy rain in 
front of a tent in a park in Belgrade. Photograph: Alexa Stankovic/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Cameron has refused to sign up to a quota system proposed by Germany and 
France that would require the UK to take 18,000 asylum seekers. Britain is 
among only four European states to reject the scheme, along with Hungary, 
Romania, the Czech Republic and Slovakia. France has said it will take 24,000 
refugees over the next two years; around 18,000 arrived in Germany last weekend.

“20,000 people over five years, that’s 4,000 people now, in this immediate 
crisis? When we’re looking at who knows how many thousands of people arriving 
in the next month? It’s pathetic,” Kapoor told the Guardian.

Juncker talks of welcoming refugees, while turning Europe into a fortress | 
Apostolis Fotiadis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/10/refugees-europe-european-commission-migration-crisis>
“Britain is identifying itself with the fascists, and we are not that. This is 
a new kind of fascism, a fascism that is polite. Cameron comes across as a nice 
guy, but he’s more rightwing than anything we’ve known.”

Kapoor and Broomberg both pointed to their deep discomfort with language used 
by British government ministers to described the crisis as a major motivation 
to speak up. Cameron has referred to a “swarm of people coming across the 
Mediterranean, seeking a better life, wanting to come to Britain”.

“It was the callous, inhumane language the government used that made me so 
angry. That galvanised me to do something,” explained Broomberg.


“This is where I live, this is a government that’s meant to represent me, and 
it isn’t coming anywhere close. In fact, I find the language it’s using toxic. 
I find Cameron’s cynical use of targeted assassination insulting.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ftoo-little-too-late-uk-cultural-figures-call-for-greater-refugee-intake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd726957d04d749c076e1993bdb2154c17ab6fb2a%2F0_83_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Too%20little%2C%20too%20late'%3A%20UK%20cultural%20figures%20call%20for%20greater%20refugee%20intake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ftoo-little-too-late-uk-cultural-figures-call-for-greater-refugee-intake%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Too%20little%2C%20too%20late%27%3A%20UK%20cultural%20figures%20call%20for%20greater%20refugee%20intake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Ftoo-little-too-late-uk-cultural-figures-call-for-greater-refugee-intake%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd726957d04d749c076e1993bdb2154c17ab6fb2a%2F0_83_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Benedict Cumberbatch is one of the signatories of the letter published in the 
Guardian, and is also part of the Save the Children’s Help Is Coming campiagn. 
Photograph: Save the Children/Press Association 
“We’re trying to voice empathy on behalf of this country, and critique a 
government that’s not representing its people. Hopefully we’ll make a dent.”


Kapoor and Broomberg have both also taken issue with the language used by some 
parts of the British media and politicians that has conflated refugees with 
economic migrants. Rather than sapping British resources, Kapoor believes it 
would be in Britain’s interests to welcome the talent and knowledge many 
refugees bring with them.

“Germany has shown incredible nous. In welcoming refugees in huge numbers, 
they are welcoming the elite, the teachers, the engineers, the people who 
decide to pick up their families and get out of there – something that demands 
huge inventiveness.

“Germany is welcoming a whole workforce of Syria’s intelligentsia. Why are we 
not? Why are we so morally impoverished that we can’t do it?”

Anish Kapoor's 'queen's vagina' vandals and the rise of cultural fascism in 
France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/08/anish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france>
For Kapoor, it has been impossible not to draw a parallel between the recent 
vandalism of his sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/08/anish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france>
, Dirty Corner, at the Château de Versailles with antisemitic graffiti, and the 
effort to prevent refugees reaching Europe. He spoke to the Guardian on a train 
from Paris, where he had met François Hollande, the French president, to 
discuss the attack.

French authorities issued him with a security detail in the wake of the attack 
on his sculpture. Kapoor said: “I’m on this train, who here has heard of me, 
but I’ve got two bodyguards. An artist with bodyguards! In some way it feels 
deeply personal. But it also feels part of a need to exorcise the other from
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.”

Kapoor believes his message chimes with a public mood that has seen 
spontaneous efforts by the public to welcome refugees into their homes and 
deliver aid to camps in Calais: “That’s why individuals are jumping in cars and 
going to Calais to demonstrate solidarity, or hiring boats to rescue refugees, 
because we understand that all this negativity is being done in our name.”

 