
Carlos Acosta
In Cuba, I started break-dancing in the 80s. I was imitating Michael Jackson 
and so my father forced me into ballet. For three years I struggled; I had the 
ability to mimic movement very well, but I was unreliable. They cast me in 
shows and didn’t know if I was going to turn up or not. One time they had to 
stop a show for an hour and a half to look for me. I was out playing, they 
found me completely soaked in mud. At the age of 13I saw the National Ballet of 
Cuba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/jun/27/carlos-acosta-this-much-i-know>
 for the first time. That’s when I fell in love with it. I saw the 
professionals doing all the lifts and carrying the girl with one hand and I 
decided, “I want to do that.”

I see an injury as an opportunity to explore a new way of moving

Tommy Franzén
Sprained ankles, pulled hamstrings, back problems, neck problems, shoulder 
problems. I see it all as an opportunity for learning and I try to explore 
movement that I can do with that injury, modifying moves, coming up with new 
moves without using that arm or that leg. Take the opportunity to explore a new 
way of moving.

Tamara Rojo
A lot of it is just working and working, because repetition creates instinct, 
especially in ballet. It is literally repeating things so many times that it 
becomes muscle memory. Only now when I’m about to stop dancing do I feel I am a 
good dancer, for the first time in my life. Now my body knows how to do things, 
it’s not my mind telling me how to do it, it’s my body.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436978684555%2Ffc00de27-2e75-46dc-a473-67eb13dba239-1983x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts'%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts%27%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436978684555%2Ffc00de27-2e75-46dc-a473-67eb13dba239-1983x2040.jpeg>
 Teneisha Bonner in Into The Hoods. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian
Lauren Cuthbertson
Don’t mess around with your diet when you’re a teenager. It’ll mess you up. I 
saw it happen when I was young. It becomes this obsession, and the biggest 
gossip of the dance class is what people have got in their lunchbox. You need 
the energy to work hard, and if you mess up your metabolism when you’re younger 
you’ve got less chance of being able to maintain that when you’re older. You’re 
growing and you need the strength; your bones need the nourishment.


Teneisha Bonner
Being a dancer is uncomfortable. I was teaching the other day and I was saying 
to them, “For those of you who are interested in doing this professionally, 
understand: it hurts. And you guys who are doing it for a hobby, that’s fine, 
but it still hurts.” Whichever way you approach it, the common denominator is 
pain.

Adam Garcia
I’ve been so nervous I’ve vomited before a show. It affects your singing, it 
affects your dancing. The tension affects my tapping. I’ve no idea how to stop 
it. Hypnosis – does that work?

Matthew Golding
Charisma? I think it’s just good lighting, good make-up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436982494824%2F05dfd854-5f07-48bf-81b8-619923e01d72-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts'%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts%27%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436982494824%2F05dfd854-5f07-48bf-81b8-619923e01d72-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Aaron Sillis (left) with Ivan Putrov and Elena Glurdjidze in Ithaca from 
Putrov’s Men In Motion. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Aaron Sillis
The lifestyle of a dancer can be very difficult. There’s a lot of partying 
that goes along with it. Performing at night, it can be 10.30 or 11 when you 
leave the theatre and you can’t come down quickly. Some people go out for those 
couple of hours and then you’re never getting the downtime, you’re straight in 
to the next day. When I did Twyla Tharp’s Movin’ Out, I didn’t touch alcohol 
until the closing-night party. I’d come off stage feeling completely exhausted 
and drained, go home to sleep, wake up feeling like I couldn’t get through the 
show again. I’d warm up, do company class, have 110% energy for the show and 
then come off stage and feel like I was going to die. A lot of the time it’s 
like that. 


Seeta Patel
It’s important to keep challenging yourself, but I think that can sometimes be 
misinterpreted as constantly doing something new or grossly different rather 
than an internal refinement.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436983104434%2F221ff334-a9b4-4bb0-9d86-b7b4d983121e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts'%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts%27%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436983104434%2F221ff334-a9b4-4bb0-9d86-b7b4d983121e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kenrick H20 Sandy (centre). Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
As an individual on stage you can feel vulnerable

Kenrick “H2O” Sandy
I may work on a cartwheel for three weeks but I’ll be looking at how many 
different versions of a cartwheel I can do. Two-handed, one-handed, one-handed 
with the following hand, no hands, cartwheel on the forearm. You perfect each 
of them to the level where it becomes like water, so when I do a move it just 
flows. When I get on stage, I’m not Kenrick Sandy, I am my alter ego, H2O. That 
character has a different kind of energy. Most dancers inhip-hop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/hip-hop> do that, have an AKA. As an 
individual you can feel quite vulnerable sometimes, so it’s best to put out 
someone who is more confident and outgoing, so the real you can just be happy 
and cool.

Matthew Rees
Don’t be afraid of failing. It’s a case of taking it and brushing it off and 
then carrying on.


Kate Prince
I know some really talented dancers who spend half their year doing promo 
work, standing in Waterloo station trying to sell a new conditioner, because 
work comes when it comes. I know a great dancer who started her own dogsitting 
company and she does that when she’s not performing. I think they’re smart. 
We’re all freelance and you’ve got to have something to pay your way.

Matthew Bourne
Pushiness is an interesting subject. I work with so many people now – this 
year we had three companies going at the same time, 100 dancers – and the 
people who keep on my radar are more likely to be in my head when I’m casting 
something. It’s clever to remind people you’re there. Go and see their show and 
say hello, or write them a nice message. It’s very good for choreographers to 
hear you love their work. It sounds narcissistic but it’s not. It’s just great 
to work with people who are as excited as you are.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436983243547%2F352bfc2a-911e-411c-a26d-70d1e66abe1e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts'%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts%27%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436983243547%2F352bfc2a-911e-411c-a26d-70d1e66abe1e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Jonathan Goddard (second right), with Phil Sanger, Yolande Yorke-Edgell and 
Laurel Dalley-Smith in Lingua Franca by Yorke Dance Project. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Jonathan Goddard
I used to think going to vocational dance school was more important, but now 
I’m encountering people that trained in Shaolin kung fu and rhythmic 
gymnastics. The titans of modern dance techniques – Cunningham and Graham – are 
starting to slide away.Ballet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/ballet> is 
fairly constant. I think whatever your practice you should touch base with 
ballet. Don’t be scared of it. If you’re scared of it you’ve got the wrong 
teacher.

My very first teacher taught me to be fearless

Steven McRae
My very first teacher taught me to be fearless. “You can jump higher than 
that!” she would say. “Why can’t you do the splits?” So I would stretch every 
day until I could do the splits. There was never any question, it was, “Just do 
it.” I remember aged eight she was teaching me double tours en l’air. I just 
threw myself around. A lot of dancers lose that freedom.


Stephen Mear
There’s a big difference between ambitious and obnoxious. There’s nothing 
wrong with being ambitious, not in the sense of wanting to stab somebody in the 
back, but in the sense of wanting to be good. The English lack that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436983444674%2F779570f4-0dce-4991-af1c-6cf85dc5b9bd-2022x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts'%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts%27%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436983444674%2F779570f4-0dce-4991-af1c-6cf85dc5b9bd-2022x2040.jpeg>
 Hofesh Shechter in rehearsal. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Maxine Doyle
I must have seen thousands of young dancers in the UK and the US. We look for 
people who are dynamic, have a good use of the floor, energy, a sense of risk. 
But beyond that, I’m most interested in presence and charisma and confidence. 
And I’m interested in dancers who aren’t frightened of acting.


Hofesh Shechter
For me, dancers that think they’ve “got it” are kind of boring. In our art 
form there is no indication of whether what you’re doing is right or wrong. 
It’s only cultural agreement. So the idea that somebody feels like they’re 
doing it really well, for me that doesn’t work. But the idea that there are a 
million ways of doing it and somebody did it in an interesting way, now that I 
can accept. It’s the endless search.

Darcey Bussell
Retiring is always tough because dancing is the only thing you know about 
yourself. That is your strength. When you suddenly don’t have that, you feel 
lost. Suddenly you’re on your own. I made sure I had other distractions as soon 
as I retired, other things to focus on. That’s what helped me cope. And there 
are so many ways of using all the disciplines you have from dance in your 
everyday life.


Arlene Phillips
I think the demands on dancers are greater than ever. At one time dancers 
weren’t expected to do so many different styles. When I was first teaching in 
London I used to get a lot of theRoyal Ballet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/royal-ballet> dancers coming to my rock-jazz 
classes in secret. Nowadays the classical dancers are exploring all kinds of 
contemporary dance and the dancers are being pushed beyond the limits, not just 
of the body but of the mind.


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436978818665%2F7fb6bf8c-8645-425d-ae1c-e6350d019633-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts'%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts%27%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436978818665%2F7fb6bf8c-8645-425d-ae1c-e6350d019633-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Tommy Franzén in Smile from The Associates at Sadler’s Wells. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
You have to grow a thick skin, rhino skin because of the rejection

Tommy Franzén
You have to grow a thick skin, rhino skin, because the amount of rejection you 
can have – even if you’re successful – it’s a huge amount. Probably getting one 
out of 10 auditions that you go for is normal.

Adam Garcia
It’s both the horrible thing about theatre and the beauty of it: you can have 
a horrific moment where you want the stage to swallow you up, feeling 
humiliated and the curtain comes down and you feel shit. And then the next 
night it’s a completely new audience that have never seen the show before and 
you get to make amends. 


Tamara Rojo
There’s a fear of disappointing people, a fear of not being good enough. 
That’s when it will come and play games with your mind and that’s when I’ve 
found that having rituals, having a consistent way of preparing for something, 
for me, is the only way to not succumb to panic.

Marlon “Swoosh” Wallen
On stage, you automatically have to turn yourself into an entertainer. You’re 
no longer dancing for yourself, there’s an audience, they need to be 
entertained, that’s what you’re there to do. You can afford to be charismatic, 
cocky; you can afford to be a little bit cheeky, because now you’re 
entertaining, it won’t come across as arrogant.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436983856117%2Fc52a1adb-5f56-4e04-8c69-fb3eb4b78549-1864x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts'%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Understand%20%E2%80%93%20it%20hurts%27%3A%20giants%20of%20dance%20reveal%20its%20tolls%20and%20triumphs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fjul%2F15%2Fbeing-a-dancer-secrets-dance-ballet-choreography-lyndsey-winship%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F15%2F1436983856117%2Fc52a1adb-5f56-4e04-8c69-fb3eb4b78549-1864x2040.jpeg>
 Darcey Bussell in Apollo at Royal Ballet in 2007. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
for the Guardian 
Darcey Bussell
Making mistakes, that’s part of the job. It’s all about taking risks. Don’t be 
safe. A lot of dancers would say, “Oh, I can’t do that.” There is a lot of 
fear. I was happy to make mistakes. I was happy to throw myself into something 
and make a fool of myself. It wasn’t about always doing everything perfectly 
straight away. You have to test yourself and see.


Lauren Cuthbertson
Darning pointe shoes is so time-consuming, but I think the minute you don’t 
care to sew your shoes for the next day is the minute you don’t really care 
about dancing. I find it quite calming – unless it’s five minutes before the 
Sleeping Beauty and you’re about to do the Rose Adagio.


Adam Garcia 
As a dancer, or an actor, you are going to hear “no” a lot more than you hear 
‘yes’. It’s not always personal. Sometimes they might have a point, maybe you 
do need to work on this a bit more, maybe that’s what holding you back. But be 
prepared to hear no ninety per cent of the time. I audition still for things 
and I don’t get them. Realistically, if I get three jobs out of, let’s say, 50 
auditions a year, I’m a 6% strike rate. But I get work.

One way of getting noticed is to have a kick-ass technique

Tamara Rojo
One way of getting noticed is to have a kick-ass technique. If you go to a 
class and you can do more pirouettes than everybody else, and your legs are 
higher than everybody else, and you can jump higher than everybody else, people 
will notice. The truth is, if you are a good dancer, people will notice. That’s 
the good thing about ballet, it is meritocratic.


Wayne McGregor
At the end of the day, it’s only dancing. And I’m obsessed and passionate, and 
it is my whole life, but it is only dancing.


Cassa Pancho
One piece of advice to someone who wanted to be a dancer? Become an accountant.


 * Extracted from Being a Dancer by Lyndsey Winship, published by Nick Hern 
Books <http://www.nickhernbooks.co.uk/Book/1765/Being-a-Dancer.html>
 