
Fresh from the success of his vampire romance Let the Right One In 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/apr/12/let-the-right-one-in>, Swedish 
director Tomas Alfredson found himself deluged with offers to direct another 
horror movie. This frustrated him for two reasons. One, because most of the 
films sounded horrific for all the wrong reasons ("Rabid Zombie Gorillas 4 and 
stuff like that") and two, because he'd never considered Let the Right One In 
to be a horror movie anyway.

Happily, Alfredson has now come in from the the cold, directing an adaptation 
ofJohn Le Carré <https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnlecarre>'s twisting, 
turningTinker Tailor Soldier Spy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142611/tinker-tailor-soldier-spy> for 
British production house Working Title. Like his previous film, it's a study of 
people who live in the shadows and depend on one another for survival, although 
in this case they are spies, not bloodsuckers. If advance word is to be 
believed,Alfredson's version 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/142611/tinker-tailor-soldier-spy> 
(starring Gary Oldman, Colin Firth and Benedict Cumberbatch) may even erase 
memories of theclassic 1979 TV series 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vQFPDuTGsqk> with Alec Guinness as George 
Smiley.

Le Carré one quipped that turning his books into films was akin to turning a 
cow into an Oxo-cube. With Tinker, the film-makers faced arguably the biggest 
bovine of them all. "We agreed that this was probably a totally impossible book 
to turn into a film," Alfredson admits, recalling his first meeting with the 
producers. "That it was almost blasphemous to introduce anyone other than Alec 
Guinness as George Smiley, and that it might as well be a confused Swedish 
non-horror director who would go out and explore this strange idea."

Certainly Alfredson has taken a route to the top. He has worked in kids' TV, 
joined a comedy troupe and shot a bawdy mockumentary (Screwed in Tallinn 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jMpKzTHtupk>) about bachelors in search of 
Estonian girlfriends. Now, in his mid-40s, he is out of Sweden and struggling 
to adapt to a new country, a new language and the intricate protocol of Le 
Carré's world.

Yes, he says, it has been hard. "There's only one way to get through it and 
that's to be totally open about your ignorance. Everyone's been really helpful, 
patient and understanding. But sometimes you have to accept being addressed as 
if you're half-deaf."

Released 16 September
 