
The cheers of 1,300 Norwegian teenagers carry far over the still grey waters 
where, on 22 July 2011,children swam for their lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jun/01/utoya-survivors-story-anders-breivik>
.

They are returning to Utøya to re-establish the Labour party youth wing’s 
annual summer camp on the island. Their return is a show of defiance toAnders 
Behring Breivik <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik> and 
a tribute to the 69 people he killed – most of them teenagers, the youngest 
just 14. The organisers of this year’s event include survivors of that day, but 
the camp has attracted many new faces.

“We are sending a message that we are taking the island back, there’s a good 
energy,” says Victoria Øverland, 17, here for her first camp. There were 
anxious moments when she and her friends boarded the ferry to the island, but 
the camp spirit quickly took over.

Utøya four years on: what's the mood in Norway?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/07/utoya-four-years-on-whats-the-mood-like-in-norway>
“It is a part of the grieving process to take back the place where terrible 
things happened,” Øverland says. “Everyone here is aware of what took place and 
they have been through a process in their head, though for some people it is 
really hard.”

The camp’s return marks a turning point in a national tragedy that is still 
unfolding. It is the culmination of a long and painful attempt to find a 
balance between politics and grief, courage and remembrance, youth and 
parenthood, moving on and looking back.

Utøya has posed the question of how, when the fabric of society has been torn, 
the threads can be woven back together. It has forced Norwegians to weigh the 
concerns of those directly affected against the wider needs of a nation living 
with the knowledge that Breivik came from within, and that the virus that 
spawned him has not gone away.

For some, a refusal to “reclaim” the island would be a victory for terrorism 
and an affront to the dead. Others want Utøya left as a memorial, unable to 
countenance laughter, music and selfies on the site of slaughter.

“I don’t think Utøya will ever be that paradise again,” says Lisbeth 
Røyneland, whose daughter Synne lost her life, aged 18. Røyneland is happy the 
camp is re-opening, and that young people are getting on with their lives.

“On the other hand, for me it is a time with many feelings, because Synne 
isn’t with them anymore,” says Røyneland, who chairs the national support group 
for survivors and relatives. “But because of the memorial, the 69 who were 
killed that day will never be forgotten.”

In a quiet clearing on the island’s highest point, suspended from three tall 
pines, isa massive steel ring cut with the names and ages of the dead 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2015/07/22/the-clearing-memorial-utoya-massacre-norway-3rw/>
. In the circle no one is first, and no one last. The soil below has been 
planted with flowers to attract butterflies. When the thick mist pours into 
Tyrifjord, it condenses, and the steel weeps.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17b905ba4ae4f845ba30a2ca85b2cefc9450bc91%2F0_0_5472_3280%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20taking%20the%20island%20back%E2%80%99%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20long%20road%20back%20to%20Ut%C3%B8ya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20taking%20the%20island%20back%E2%80%99%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20long%20road%20back%20to%20Ut%C3%B8ya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17b905ba4ae4f845ba30a2ca85b2cefc9450bc91%2F0_0_5472_3280%2F5472.jpg>
 A memorial marking the names of those who died on Utoya in 2011 – but not all 
of them, as for some it is still too soon to imagine their child’s absence 
fixed in metal. Photograph: David Crouch/Guardian 
The spot was proposed by Kolbein Fridtun, who lost his 19-year-old daughter, 
Hanne, on the island; a dozen parents of children who died have worked to clear 
the site. But space on the ring remains for seven names missing from the 
memorial – for some it is still too soon, and the emotions too raw, to imagine 
their child’s absence fixed in metal. Each person’s despair moves at its own 
pace.

“The parents feel their loss in very fibre of their bodies,” says Åsne 
Seierstad, novelist and author of abestselling book on the massacre  
<http://gu.com/p/46482/stw>. “Maybe there are longer periods now when they 
don’t think about their children – half an hour or perhaps an hour – but it is 
there every day.”

And for most of them, Utøya is not their main concern, she said. It was never 
their island – it belonged to the young people who went there every year, the 
island of AUF, the Labour party’s youth organisation, since 1932, and many 
future Labour leaders cut their political teeth at the annual summer camp. It 
is not a place you can just visit to remember.

“These young people were so in love with the island,” Seierstad explains. “The 
terrorist killed them because they were there, so strong, so political and 
independent-minded. They would probably have wanted their names to be on the 
memorial.”

The decision to return was taken on the day after the attacks, says Mani 
Hussaini, leader of the AUF. This will be the biggest summer camp ever, with 
talks and workshops on internationalism, feminism and anti-racism, preparation 
for the next elections – and a lot of fun. “Our response is more openness and 
more democracy in our fight for equal rights. Utøya is at the heart of Labour 
youth.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438959217438%2F83c8fea6-0b1d-4b59-807d-3fbc1062af3f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20taking%20the%20island%20back%E2%80%99%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20long%20road%20back%20to%20Ut%C3%B8ya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20taking%20the%20island%20back%E2%80%99%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20long%20road%20back%20to%20Ut%C3%B8ya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438959217438%2F83c8fea6-0b1d-4b59-807d-3fbc1062af3f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Our response is more openness and more democracy in our fight for equal 
rights. Utøya is at the heart of Labour youth’ … Mani Hussaini (front), the 
president of Norwegian Labour party youth division (AUF). Photograph: Odd 
Andersen/AFP/Getty Images 
But the left have had to temper their passion to reclaim the ground that 
Breivik took away. On the day after the attacks, the then prime minister, Jens 
Stoltenberg, said he would camp out on Utøya in a year’s time. There was a rush 
to commission a memorial and prepare for an uninterrupted return to the island.

The following year a firm of architects called Fantastic Norway presented 
sketches ofbright new buildings and smiling young people 
<http://www.fantasticnorway.no/?portfolio=xxx>. Buildings where children died 
would be torn down. It was too much, too soon. Plans to commemorate the first 
anniversary on the island excluded the parents of the dead. “It seems they did 
not understand the force of grief,” says Seierstad. “For traumatised young 
people, it was all about moving on. That mistake destroyed a lot.”

Ragnhild Kaski, the AUF’s general secretary, who was 21 when she fled from 
Breivik on the island, admits blunders were made.

“The project has changed. It needed to change,” she explains. “The things you 
think are right at first are not necessarily the right things to do a few years 
later … It has been a bumpy road for many of us. Our plans have changed and we 
have changed as well.”

Wounded landscape: how Norway is remembering its 2011 Utøya massacre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/06/norway-massacre-memorial-jonas-dahlberg-anders-behring-breivik>
Talking to the parents helped them to find a balance between learning how to 
shape Utøya’s future and remembering its past, Kaski says. Tens of millions of 
krona have been donated by unions, businesses and individuals to build 
conference and learning centres as a resource for the labour movement. 
Meanwhile, for the past two years Labour youth have held a summer camp on the 
mainland.

“When they came forward in 2012 with the plans for a new Utøya, almost all the 
survivors and relatives of the dead said they needed more time,” Røyneland 
says. “We talked to Labour youth and gave them our advice, which they followed 
– after that we have had very good communication with them.”

With the re-opening of the camp this weekend, earlier divisions about the 
reconstruction have been laid to rest. The event has re-awakened public debate, 
which had died down since Breivik’s trial in 2012. In last year’s extravagant 
bicentenary celebrations of the Norwegian constitution, the nation’s unity 
after the attacks was barely mentioned.

But there have been moments that threatened to undermine the consensus in 
Norway around how to respond to the attacks. On the third anniversary last 
year, 19 mothers of the island’s dead wrote to Conservative prime minister Erna 
Solberg asking for Utøya to stay closed, and to remain as a place of 
remembrance. Just north of the island, residents are attempting to sue the 
government to prevent a national memorial on the mainland. Some locals picked 
up survivors, the dead and dying from the fjord, and feel that a proposal to
dissect a peninsular of rock at Sørbråten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/06/norway-massacre-memorial-jonas-dahlberg-anders-behring-breivik?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 – creating a symbolic wound in the landscape – would aggravate their trauma.

At the new July 22 Centre in downtown Oslo 
<https://www.regjeringen.no/en/aktuelt/the-july-22-centre-opened/id2427846/>, 
inaugurated last month, there are also seven blank spaces where parents have 
asked that their children be excluded from photographs of the Utøya dead. 
Disagreements broke out about whether or not to exhibit artefacts of the 
attacks in the very office block that Breivik bombed. There were rumours that 
the museum planned to exhibit the gun he used, and that it could become a 
traumatic, daily reminder to civil servants. The exhibit that visitors now see 
includes the remains of the car bomb Breivik detonated outside the prime 
minister’s office just hours before the Utoya shootings, killing eight people.

John Christian Elden, a lawyer whose firm represented most of the victims at 
Breivik’s trial, branded it the “museum of Breivik”, and likens displaying his 
possessions to placing photographs of Hitler at Auschwitz.

For others, labelling it the Breivik museum is just as absurd as calling the 
9/11 memorial at Ground Zero in New York a museum to Osama Bin Laden. The 
blown-out windows of the office buildings awaiting demolition at the Oslo bomb 
site are a far more visible reminder to workers than the museum, tucked away in 
the wrecked basement of the central block. Since its opening on 22 July, it has 
received around 1,000 visitors a day,the museum said 
<https://blogg.regjeringen.no/22julycentre/> – big numbers in this country of 5 
million people.

Rather than a story of division, however, the new museum and the coming 
together of parents and activists for the camp in July represent a remarkable 
tale of unity in facing up to the tragedy. “The 9/11 memorialtook a decade to 
agree, and lots of conflict <http://gu.com/p/3vp35/stw>,” says Seierstad. “For 
us it has been four years. It could have been so much worse.”

And yet doubts linger that the deep scar on the national consciousness can 
heal without concerted effort at the top of Norwegian society. “The nature and 
magnitude of the crime mean that the response to the tragedy cannot be decided 
only by those directly affected,” says Arne Johan Vetlesen, professor of 
philosophy at Oslo University.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F832fe4c43dde326acf4da47660dbf3f5fbc91999%2F0_138_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20taking%20the%20island%20back%E2%80%99%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20long%20road%20back%20to%20Ut%C3%B8ya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20taking%20the%20island%20back%E2%80%99%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20long%20road%20back%20to%20Ut%C3%B8ya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F832fe4c43dde326acf4da47660dbf3f5fbc91999%2F0_138_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
 The remains of the car bomb Breivik detonated on the same day as the Utøya 
shootings, now on display at the July 22 museum in Oslo. Photograph: Sigrid 
Harms/Picture Alliance/Photoshot 
For survivors and relatives, wounds inflicted by Breivik might not be visible, 
but they are no less real. They find it hard to hold down jobs or study, and 
there is lasting depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress.

“They have had a lot of problems, there is still quite a long way to go before 
they are back to their normal health status,” says professor Grete Dyb of the 
Norwegian Centre for Violence and Traumatic Stress Studies in Oslo.

She has followed survivors and their parents, and advised Labour youth leaders 
on how to approach the big decisions they have faced. Tears will flow on Utøya 
island this weekend, Dyb says, but she is confident that the organisers have 
taken every precaution to ensure any outpouring of emotion will be healthy.

Elisabeth Haukeland’s eldest son and daughter both survived the massacre, and 
they aren’t going back to Utøya. But her youngest daughter is. Just 13 at the 
time of the attack, she went straight out to join the Labour youth.

Breivik victims' parents too traumatised to work four years on, research shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/22/anders-breivik-victims-parents-too-traumatised-to-work-research>
“I think she is very brave,” Haukeland tells me. All the same, she tries not 
to dwell on the thought of her daughter on the island this weekend, in a place 
where her other children suffered so much. “I am convinced it would be worse if 
she was afraid and didn’t want to get out and do things.” The keenness of AUF 
leaders to get back on to the island makes sense, Haukeland says, because with 
each passing year the numbers of survivors eligible to attend the camp will 
fall, and the memory of 2011 needs to be passed on. Without a grasp of Utøya’s 
enormous significance to the labour movement, she adds, it could seem 
provocative to stress the need for continuity.

But despite the strong association of Utøya with the left, party politics are 
largely absent from the public debate inNorway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> about Breivik. Despite the attacks, 
in 2013 the country elected a rightwing coalition, which, for the first time, 
included the anti-immigrant Progress party, of which Breivik was a member for 
nine years until 2005.

People did not vote for the right because they were sympathetic to Breivik, 
Seierstad says. He has never been cited in political debate, even on 
immigration or jihadism. The Progress party is less extreme today, she 
explains, and in any case, has never been linked to the attacks. “The Progress 
party has never been made to pay for Breivik’s membership – people are too 
decent in Norway.”

Even the youth wing, which is to the left of the Labour party on immigration, 
has moderate views on asylum. “We want more liberal asylum policies, but we 
also have an understanding that too-liberal policies will cause rightwing ideas 
to grow, if you can’t accept 20,000 each year and integrate them,” says Håkon 
Knudsen, 23, a survivor of the attack and a member of the Labour youth 
leadership.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe649328c617cc19c9b42a6328ce51b66b615c8a4%2F0_66_5472_3280%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98We%20are%20taking%20the%20island%20back%E2%80%99%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20long%20road%20back%20to%20Ut%C3%B8ya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98We%20are%20taking%20the%20island%20back%E2%80%99%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20long%20road%20back%20to%20Ut%C3%B8ya&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Faug%2F08%2Fwe-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe649328c617cc19c9b42a6328ce51b66b615c8a4%2F0_66_5472_3280%2F5472.jpg>
 Messages tied to a tree near the main campsite on Utøya island. Photograph: 
David Crouch/Guardian 
Outside the July 22 museum, people queue up at lunchtime to get in; as they 
emerge, many are tearful.

“It’s difficult, but to see it makes it more real,” says Karolina, 27, who 
works in an Oslo law firm. It is important to see the car bomb itself and its 
effects, and the faces of the dead, she says.

“For me it’s a way to show respect for the victims and their families, it’s 
important for Norway to remember that these things can also happen here.”

On the island this weekend, the fresh crop of teenage socialists is more 
interested in the football tournament and making new friends than discussing 
the unspeakable presence who robbed their movement of its innocence.

“No one is talking about him,” Øverland says. “It’s really surreal – I know 
that it happened but I can’t imagine that someone would come here and do that 
to young people.”

The tragedy has changed her perspective on politics, she says, especially on 
the extreme right, which she fears is growing.

“It made me think, OK, I can make a difference here. I have to join, I have to 
do something, I have to help. Everyone is trying to grow from this experience.”
 