
The first thing you notice is the row of open windows, tilting out from the 
walls of a black wooden cabinthat stands enshrined in a temple-like pavilion on 
the island of Utøya. They are the windows through which teenagers jumped, 
fleeing the bullets ofAnders Breivik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik>, who murdered 19 
students inside this small cafe building, before scouring the rest of the island
to kill a further 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/23/utoya-mass-murder-anders-behring-breivik>
.

Five years after the event that shook the very foundations of Norway’s 
national identity, the site of the 22 July massacre – the deadliest ever 
shooting by a single gunman in history (who also killed eight more people in 
Oslo with a car bomb earlier that day) – has been transformed into a place that 
tells the story with stark, stirring power.

The cafe building now stands like a piece of forensic evidence in this 
woodland vitrine, chopped and sliced in a process of architectural editing, so 
that only the rooms relevant to the events of that day are left standing. You 
climb the crumbling concrete steps, where dried weeds still poke through the 
cracks, to enter a small room with a lino floor and low suspended ceiling. A 
piano stands in the corner – some of the victims tried in vain to hide behind 
it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Futoya-massacre-memorial-norway-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bc3b575c90f615ee09bae74874efb229285addd%2F0_137_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20had%20to%20tell%20this%20dark%20story'%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20Ut%C3%B8ya%20is%20remembering%20the%20massacre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Futoya-massacre-memorial-norway-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20had%20to%20tell%20this%20dark%20story%27%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20Ut%C3%B8ya%20is%20remembering%20the%20massacre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Futoya-massacre-memorial-norway-architects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7bc3b575c90f615ee09bae74874efb229285addd%2F0_137_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 The piano inside the cafe building that some children tried to hide behind 
Photograph: Oliver Wainwright for the Guardian 
A few tiny bulletholes mark the flimsy fibreboard walls; dried flowers lie 
strewn across the floor; a door leads to a row of toilet cubicles, where a 
number of survivors huddled together in safety. It’s a prosaic and familiar set 
of rooms, still furnished with the classroom ephemera – an overhead projector, 
a pot plant, some wall hangings – that only serve to emphasise the 
extraordinary and inexplicable nature of what happened here.

“We wanted to present the bare facts,” says Erlend Blakstad Haffner 
<http://www.blakstadhaffner.com/utoya-memorial/>, architect of the island’s new 
memorial building and learning centre. “The choices of that day were hide, flee 
or die. We had to tell this dark story – but it is also a story of survival.”

It is a story that has been a fraught one to get right. Haffner’s original 
proposal <http://www.fantasticnorway.no/?portfolio=xxx> – developed with the 
Workers’ Youth League (AUF), which has held its summer camps on the island for 
the last 60 years – was to remove all trace of the existing buildings and erect 
new ones. “They wanted to tear everything down and totally erase the memory of 
what happened,” he says. “It was too traumatic for them to keep any reminders.”

The challenge was to let it exist and not exist at the same time

But the parents of the victims, who were sidelined in these early discussions, 
had other ideas. To destroy the only surviving trace of the place where their 
children died was too much too soon. “It seems the AUF did not understand the 
force of grief,” said Åsne Seierstad, author ofa bestselling book about the 
massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/26/one-of-us-the-story-of-anders-breivik-massacre-norway-asne-seierstad-review>
, speaking to the Guardian when the summer campfirst returned to the island 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/08/we-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya>
 . “For traumatised young people, it was all about moving on. That mistake 
destroyed a lot.”

‘We are taking the island back’: Norway’s long road back to Utøya
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/08/we-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya>
After a period of reflection and consultation, involving a panel of advisers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/14/9-11-memorial-museum-new-york>
 from New York’sSeptember 11 Memorial Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/14/9-11-memorial-museum-new-york>
 and the Pentagon Memorial, the proposals were scaled back and a compromise 
found in the form of the Hegnhuset. Roughly translated as “safeguarded house” 
(protecting both the building and the democratic ideals it embodies), the 
pavilion shields views of the cafe structure from those who don’t want to be 
reminded, while framing it in a direct, matter-of-fact way within. As Haffner 
puts it: “The challenge was to let it exist and not exist at the same time.”

A screen of 495 wooden posts marches around the outside of the building, 
marking the number of survivors of the attack, and forming a cloistered walkway 
between the outer and inner facade where 69 structural columns symbolise the 
number who died here. The double layer enclosure serves to baffle the cafe 
building from the outside and casts a wash of dappled light inside, where a 
small exhibition space has been carved out of the sloping ground beneath the 
timber cabin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Futoya-massacre-memorial-norway-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F632c50fa0ff3c2ee5499ae38aa8943161a6a828c%2F0_0_4255_2553%2F4255.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20had%20to%20tell%20this%20dark%20story'%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20Ut%C3%B8ya%20is%20remembering%20the%20massacre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Futoya-massacre-memorial-norway-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20had%20to%20tell%20this%20dark%20story%27%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20Ut%C3%B8ya%20is%20remembering%20the%20massacre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Futoya-massacre-memorial-norway-architects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F632c50fa0ff3c2ee5499ae38aa8943161a6a828c%2F0_0_4255_2553%2F4255.jpg>
 The Hegnhuset courtyard at Utøya Photograph: Are Carlsen/Blakstad Haffner 
Arkitekter 
With its roof and walls sliced right through, left with rough exposed edges as 
if cut by the chainsaw ofGordon Matta-Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2003/feb/22/art.artsfeatures>, the 
Hegnhuset has a rawness that feels perfectly judged. “We didn’t want the sense 
of trauma to be too overexposed,” says Haffner. “The facts are just there for 
your own experience and interpretation.”

Rotated off-axis with the charged relic it houses, the Hegnhuset is aligned 
with a new cluster of barn-like buildings that stand nearby, providingspacious 
facilities <http://www.utoya.no/> for the camps and other conferences held 
here, in a loose courtyard arrangement. A dining room, auditorium and library 
enjoy lofty nine-metre high pitched-roof spaces, where tall bookshelves brim 
with volumes by Marx and Mandela, Tito and Trotsky – who spent the summer of 
1936 on the island, after fleeing Stalin and winning asylum in Norway.

It is a radical heritage that has made Utøya (which appropriately means “outer 
island”) something of an outsider in this traditionally conservative region. 
The Oslo Trade Union Confederation acquired the island in 1933 and later 
donated it to the AUF, transforming it from the holiday home of a former 
Conservative minister into a place where future Labour leaders would cut their 
political teeth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Futoya-massacre-memorial-norway-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6fb80fd8db095bd184b9cc2f73eec7076b9efcf%2F0_639_2758_3567%2F2758.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20had%20to%20tell%20this%20dark%20story'%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20Ut%C3%B8ya%20is%20remembering%20the%20massacre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Futoya-massacre-memorial-norway-architects%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20had%20to%20tell%20this%20dark%20story%27%20%E2%80%A6%20how%20Ut%C3%B8ya%20is%20remembering%20the%20massacre&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Futoya-massacre-memorial-norway-architects%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6fb80fd8db095bd184b9cc2f73eec7076b9efcf%2F0_639_2758_3567%2F2758.jpg>
 The 3RW memorial, inscribed with victims’ names Photograph: Are 
Carlsen/Blakstad Haffner Arkitekter 
These ideological differences with the mainland have made attempts to 
commemorate the events of 22 July even more delicate. The winning and widely 
praised proposal for a memorial to cut a dramatic slice through the Sørbråten 
peninsula 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/06/norway-massacre-memorial-jonas-dahlberg-anders-behring-breivik>
 as a “symbolic wound” has been held up by local protest and now looks unlikely 
to go ahead. Local residents, led by right-wing politician Jørn Øverby, have 
threatened to sue the state, claiming the proposal – by Swedish artist Jonas 
Dahlberg – breaches their human rights and constitutes a “rape of nature”. In a 
depressing victory for nimbyism, last weekthe government announced 
<http://theartnewspaper.com/news/news/swedish-artist-s-memorial-to-norway-terror-attack-unlikely-to-go-ahead/>
 it was willing to drop the proposal to reach a settlement with the group.

A more low-key memorial on the island 
<http://www.dezeen.com/2015/07/22/the-clearing-memorial-utoya-massacre-norway-3rw/>
, designed by Bergen-based architects 3RW, thankfully suffered no such 
obstacles. A big steel ring hovers at head height, suspended from the trees in 
a clearing overlooking the water, inscribed with the names of the victims. When 
the mist pours in from the fjord, the water condenses and the steel weeps.

Visitors to Utøya might well find themselves doing the same. But the overall 
message is one of optimism: that life goes on here, more reinvigorated than 
ever. “It has been reaffirmed as a place for young people to come and engage in 
democratic debate, culture, sports, friendship and love,” says Haffner – 
perhaps no more evident than in the “lover’s trail” that loops around the 
island, complete with brightly coloured condom buckets dangling from the fence.

 