
A certain event currently taking place in Equatorial Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/equatorial-guinea> has shown just how easy 
it can be for dictators to convince us all to play along with their games.

Since 2012, the country’s president, Teodoro Obiang Nguema 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/aug/22/equatorial-guinea-human-rights>, 
has hosted every event international organisations would let him get his hands 
on. He has twice hosted the African Union summit, for which hebuilt an entire 
luxury village 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/07/equatorial-guinea-luxury-resort-sipopo>
 at the cost of millions of euros. He has hosted the African Cup of Nations 
twice, first in tandem with Gabon in 2012 and stepping in again this year when 
Morocco pulled outover fears of an Ebola outbreak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/14/equatorial-guinea-new-hosts-africa-cup-of-nations-morocco>
.

He set about making sure the stadiums would be full by buying up tickets and 
forcing government ministers and private companies to do likewise. This will be 
the first edition of the tournament that a leader has gifted to his people – a 
people who love football so much they have been willing to compromise 
themselves and accept those tickets in order to be present at matches.

What a way to celebrate the Africa Cup of Nations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/06/africa-cup-of-nations-celebrate>
They compromise themselves because Obiang is also Africa’s longest serving 
dictator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/11/equatorial-guinea-human-rights-africa-dictatorship-tutu-alicante>
, having been in power for 34 years. He oversees a regime that oppresses its 
own people, refusing to allow any political opposition and regularly cracking 
down on critics. A wealthy country that protects the interests of a tiny elite 
while the majority live in severe poverty.

Over the course of the tournament more than one Equatorial Guinean has died 
<http://www.diariorombe.es/el-pasado-viernes-enterraron-dos-jovenes-de-22-anos-que-fallecieron-en-el-estadio-de-bata/>
 at the hands, or rather truncheons, of foreign police forces drafted in to 
contain them, or in the crush of the stampeding hordes. But they didn’t care, 
they came back for more. Many of them barely have roofs over their heads, for 
the majority live in horribly overcrowded houses and sleep in whatever 
living-space is left over to them. We won’t even mention drinking water, 
schools or centres for professional training.

 Equatorial Guinea fans at the game against Ghana and in Malabo. Photograph: 
Li Jing/Xinhua Press/Corbis 
Some Equatorial Guineans, old enough to know better, have argued that people 
should be allowed to enjoy the sweet taste of victory offered by the nation’s 
footballers in reaching the semi-final; that they have suffered a lot and 
deserve it. But these same people are quick to oppose the official excesses and 
waste that goes with celebrating theAfrican Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> summit.

Football is a sport of mass consumption and so football tournaments have more 
capacity to influence the will of the people than do political summits. 
Therefore, anyone who thinks the Equatorial Guinean dictatorship should be 
abolished must see that successfully hosting the African Cup of Nations does 
more harm than any African summit. (The latter, as we know, are totally devoid 
of content.) They must see that by benefitting Obiang it is harming his people.

How do we make sense of the situation in which certain Equatorial Guineans are 
jailed for opposing a sporting event 
<http://www.frostillustrated.com/2015/peaceful-protesters-jailed-shadow-africa-cup/>
 and its implied ideology while others are prepared to risk their lives to get 
a front-row view of the spectacle? Is it right that because we have suffered so 
much we should be grateful to Obiang for bringing football to our home? If so, 
what sacrifices must we make in order to eradicate a dictatorship that has 
lasted for almost 50 years?

Sepp Blatter slams media coverage of Africa Cup of Nations violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/07/fifa-sepp-blatter-equatorial-guinea-crowd-violence-ghana-africa-cup-of-nations>
In this environment, the violence at the semi-final against Ghana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/06/equatorial-guinea-fined-africa-cup-violence-ghana>
 follows a different sort of logic. Given the state the country is in, it was 
always ridiculous to think that herding young and adult Equatorial Guineans 
like sheep to the stadium to support the team would not expose the inevitable 
cracks and contradictions.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-equitorial-guinea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423247035780%2F10be9828-19cc-4d71-a186-70411287cf07-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Why%20we%20shouldn't%20support%20the%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-equitorial-guinea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Why%20we%20shouldn%27t%20support%20the%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F08%2Fafrica-cup-of-nations-equitorial-guinea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423247035780%2F10be9828-19cc-4d71-a186-70411287cf07-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Riot police shield Ghana’s John Boye and team mates from objects thrown by 
Equatorial Guinea fans. Photograph: Amr Abdallah Dalsh/Reuters 
By indulging themselves Equatorial Guineans are being indulgent of Obiang and 
his subjugating lackeys, and thus we become a country of blind reptiles, 
scurrying around without knowing where we’re going. How can it be that we are 
prepared to take the law into our own hands and protest violently because we 
lost a football match – but not when we’ve been deprived of our freedom and 
dignity?

A first version of this article appeared in Spanish on Juan Tomás Ávila 
Laurel’s blog 
<http://www.fronterad.com/?q=bitacoras/juanavila/guinea-ecuatorial-reptiles-ciegos>
. Translation by Jethro Soutar
 