
Jack Rice, 19, is at Manchester airport with a group of friends waiting to go 
on his first “lads’ holiday” to the Spanish party resort of Magaluf, on 
Mallorca. The group have arrived four hours early for their flight and after 
they go through security, they plan to sit down and have a few beers before 
getting on the plane.

“I’m not going to drink loads, just have a few,” he says. “We want to have a 
drink before we get over because it’s the start of our holiday. I’m not a big 
drinker, but I’m going to have a drink, because we don’t get there until later 
and I don’t want to be stone cold sober.”

Banning alcohol in airports is the worst idea I’ve ever heard | Luke Holland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/29/banning-alcohol-airports-worst-idea>
On Friday, the aviation minister, Tariq Ahmad, who was appointed by Theresa 
May this month, announced areview of the sale of alcohol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/29/minister-wants-to-tackle-excessive-alcohol-consumption-at-uk-airports>
 at airports after a series of incidents involving drunk passengers.

Bars and restaurants in airports are not subject to normal licensing 
restrictions and can sell alcohol 24 hours a day. Although Lord Ahmad said he 
did not want to “kill merriment altogether”, the review will look at the times 
alcohol is on sale and the possibility of screening passengers before they get 
on their flights.

Like many other British tourists waiting to board flights to sunnier climes 
from Manchester, Rice does not object to the idea that there should be a limit 
to the amount you can drink at an airport. “If you’re too drunk, you obviously 
shouldn’t be allowed on a plane,” he says.

Mike Berridge, 39, is waiting with his wife, Karen, and their daughter to fly 
to İçmeler, Turkey. “Last year we sat just in front of an idiot who was far too 
drunk [and using bad language], and I don’t think it’s acceptable, especially 
when you’re travelling with children,” he says. “It really spoiled the journey.”

A freedom of information request by the Press Association revealed that at 
least 442 people were arrested in the two years to March 2016 on suspicion of 
being intoxicated on a plane or at an airport. Several airlines have raised 
concerns with the government about the number of alcohol-related incidents on 
flights.

In May, police were called to Manchester airport when a female passenger 
allegedly punched an easyJet pilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/12/manchester-flight-delayed-after-woman-punched-pilot-in-face>
 in the face after being ordered to leave a plane bound for Cyprus. In 
February, six British men on a stag party were arrested by German police 
following a mid-air brawl that caused a Ryanair flight from Luton to Bratislava 
to be diverted to Berlin.

Louise Mowthorpe, 46, is on her way to San Javier, Spain, with her partner, 
Chris Knaggs, and 10-year-old daughter. She is in favour of trying to limit 
people’s drinking at airports, but thinks it will be difficult to police. “Some 
people use drink for medicinal purposes, or when they’re stressed, they have a 
drink. And some people can manage alcohol better than other people,” Mowthorpe 
says.

Should we crack down on alcohol sale and consumption at UK airports?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/29/should-we-crack-down-on-alcohol-sale-and-consumption-at-uk-airports>
Knaggs says drinking in an airport is very different to drinking in a bar. 
“You’ve got a responsibility to other people’s safety on a plane. In a bar, you 
can just walk away from people, but [a plane is] a confined space and people 
are supposed to be able to operate doors ... You don’t want to be sitting next 
to someone who’s been drinking and can’t function properly if they evacuate the 
plane,” he says.

A code of practice on disruptive passengers 
<http://www.aoa.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/The-UK-Aviation-Industry-Code-of-Practice-on-Disruptive-Passengers-FINAL.pdf>
 was published this week after talks between airlines, the police and bodies 
including the British Air Transport Association and the Airport Operators 
Association.

The code instructs airport shops to advise passengers not to drink alcohol 
they have purchased before or during their flight, and calls for the training 
of restaurant and bar staff to limit or stop serving alcohol in order to 
prevent or manage disruptive behaviour.
 