
If, having shimmied your bottom to exactly the right indentation in the sand 
for maximum comfort, you're going to hold a book up to the sun, let its world 
be entirely incongruous, a pleasing contrast to its holiday context. Such was 
my thinking when, in the quiet glaze of the Sicilian afternoon heat, the 
company of The Moonstone seemed the obvious choice.

Published, in serial instalments, in 1868 and described by TS Eliot as "the 
first, the longest, and the best of modern English detective novels" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/27/100-best-novels-moonstone-wilkie-collins>
, the narrative follows the disappearance and eventual recovery of a priceless 
stone given to Rachel Verinder on the evening of her 18th birthday.

So far, a cosy detective story. But it is the blend of drama (occasionally 
melodrama) and the human aspect that makes such good use of those unhurried 
beach hours. It is as if the characters on the page are putting in all the 
effort.

The novel opens with an account, "extracted from a family paper", of how, 
following his participation in the storming of the Indian palace of 
"Seringapatam" in 1799, Sir John Herncastle, a British army officer fighting in 
India, came to be in the possession of a "large yellow diamond". According to 
his cousin, Franklin Blake, Sir John took the stone from its rightful place, 
"set in the forehead of the four-headed Indian god who typifies the moon'", 
killing the three Brahmins guarding it. Before his death, one of them vowed 
revenge by the stone: "The Moonstone will have its vengeance yet on you and 
yours!" Franklin, convinced that his cousin's motives in passing the diamond on 
are his own form of vengeance for being a family outcast, takes the story 
forward. Its legacy and legend is set. A holiday context gives it wings.

As we settle in, the story jumps forward to 1848; the diamond has been missing 
for two years, lost the morning after it was presented to Rachel. We learn of 
the appearance of three mysterious Indian jugglers at the birthday party, their 
presence a continued theme, hanging at the edge of the text and linking the 
stone back to its origins. It is at this stage that Blake takes up the 
editorial reins, asking that Gabriel Betteridge, the house steward of the 
Verinder family, places the whole story on record "in the interests of the 
truth". It is a charm of the novel that Collins seems to hand the narration to 
his characters, passing to them the responsibility of the accounts that follow.

The Moonstone is funny; sometimes self-consciously so, but it is a foible to 
indulge. The Robinson Crusoe-loving Betteridge is a joy. Taking firm hold of 
his portion of the story, making references to his favoured reading matter, his 
all-knowing gaze falls with distaste on members of his host household. It is, 
to his mind, of little surprise that the grubby case of the missing jewel 
should have taken place under such a roof.

Furthermore, lest our own minds should wander, Betteridge commands the reader 
pay due attention: "Clear your mind of the children, or the dinner, or the new 
bonnet, or what not â€¦ and don't I know how ready your attention is to wander 
when it's a book that asks for it, instead of a person?" (Comfortable in your 
corner of the beach, you might just be thinking about bonnets.) The formality 
of the style is irresistible, because you are so far from it.

In the second part of the novel, dramatically entitled "the discovery of the 
truth", the individual accounts begin in earnest. Collins uses the series of 
first-person narratives he adopted in his earlier work, The Woman in White. The 
effect is almost but not quite that of witness statements, as a series of 
characters come forward at Blake's request, their peccadilloes securing our wry 
smiles. In their asides they impart a sense of access to the inner confidences 
of the tellers.

Miss Clack, the niece of Sir John Verinder, if a satirical character, is the 
creation of which Collins was most proud. Fabulously self-righteous and 
apparently struggling against her Christian virtue even to accept payment for 
her account, she is instructed by Franklin to stay within the limits of her 
direct experience of the story of the diamond and not to offer up the wisdom of 
hindsight. To reinforce his role as editor, not to say curator, of the 
narratives, Blake appends a series of footnotes to the text. In a memorable 
exchange Clack takes umbrage with him within these notes, about the difficulty 
of narrating without providing the benefits of her insights and her natural 
wish to "improve" the reader. Her hindsight is eventually silenced but not 
before she "affectionately reminds Mr Blake that she is a Christian, and that 
it is, therefore quite impossible for him to offend her".

As if to reverse the narrator/suspect relationship, the light of suspicion 
falls on Franklin himself in the last part of the novel. An unspoken love 
surfaces in the story of Rosanna Spearman, a former servant within the Verinder 
household who nursed a hidden affection for Franklin. Seeking to protect his 
good name and to avoid his implication in the theft of the diamond, she changes 
the course of events, introducing a new direction.

It has been said of The Moonstone that the author's imperious address to the 
reader gets in the way of his or her enjoyment of the story. For me, being on 
the receiving end of energetic advice, proclamations and remonstrations, from 
the comfort of the beach, felt a bit like lying cosseted in bed listening to 
the Today programme. The effort is put in by those speaking, while the reader 
rests.

As the story draws to a close and we learn the true journey of the diamond, 
bit-part characters emerge to entertain and make revelations, against a 
background of the continuing presence of the Indian men in London. The conduct 
of an experiment, carried out by Ezra Jennings (Lady Verinder's doctor) and 
involving the use of opium (a further theme) permits the re-enactment of the 
evening of Rachel's party and the disappearance of the stone.

The selection of characters chosen to tell the story of the diamond can feel 
arbitrary but also gives the book its charm, spinning out the mystery. The 
forensic exploration is as much into "society" and human weaknesses as it is 
into the loss of the diamond.

An Armenian friend of mine tells me it is a habit peculiar to the English and 
northern Europeans to read on the beach. Really, she assures me, it should be 
either the beach or the book. To combine them does justice to neither. This is 
an interesting perspective but for me, on this second acquaintance with The 
Moonstone, I had the best of both worlds. I read it, for the first time, aged 
15, as a set text. I chose to read it, on holiday, 20 years later, because I 
wanted to hear those voices again and because I had the time and the space in 
which to do so.
 