
With the Guardian’s unstoppable rise to global dominance** we at Guardian US 
thought we’d run a series of articles for fans wishing to improve their 
knowledge of the sports history and storylines, hopefully in a way that doesn’t 
patronise you to within an inch of your life.A warning: If you’re the kind of 
person that finds The Blizzard too populist this may not be the series for you.


** Actual dominance may not be global. Or dominant

The members of England’s fabled Golden Generation of the early Noughties never 
achieved very much with the three lions on their shirt. But then again, who 
does? And at least plenty of them have mighty fine club careers to look back 
on. The likes of David Beckham, Rio Ferdinand, Gary Neville, Steven Gerrard, 
Michael Owen, Wayne Rooney, Paul Scholes, Frank Lampard and John Terry didn’t 
do badly at all.


Ashley Cole joins Steven Gerrard at LA Galaxy after release by Roma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jan/27/ashley-cole-joins-la-galaxy-roma-steven-gerrard>
You could make an argument, though, that while all these lads operated at the 
very top level of the world game, none of them reached the very topin their own 
right: that is to say, none of them could ever claim to have been, at any point 
in their career, the very best in the world in their given position. (No, 
hipsters, Scholes didn’t get there, but that’s an argument for another day.)

There’s always an exception that proves the rule, though, and one member of 
that generation is able to make that claim. He was probably one of the least 
heralded of the group, and certainly the least popular with the neutral punter. 
And yet for a good chunk of the Noughties and beyond,Ashley Cole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-cole> was probably the best 
left-back on the planet.

Good luck in getting any credit for that, though. Unfortunately, Cole also 
possessed a world-class ability to get himself into world-class trouble, thanks 
to a series of regrettable incidents that would do much to obscure his slick 
operations on the field of play. Take, to pull a random example from the ether,
the time he shot someone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/feb/27/ashley-cole-chelsea-air-rifle>
.

Early in 2011, Cole was “larking around” at Chelsea’s training ground with a 
.22 calibre air rifle, the most powerful weapon that can be legally owned in 
the UK without a licence. Sure enough, it accidentally went off in his hand, 
officer, and a young sports science student at Chelsea on work experience found 
himself full of buckshot. Cole had been unaware the gun was loaded. A severe 
bollocking followed. Cole, for the record, was a 30-year-old man at the time.

In 2010, Cole was hauled over by traffic cops for whistling down the A3 in 
leafy Surreyat 104mph in his Lamborghini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/jan/29/ashley-cole-banned-speeding>. 
The speed limit on the stretch was 50mph. Cole told the arresting officer that 
he was aware of the restriction, but thought he had just been pootling along at 
a mere 80mph. He also claimed to have been fleeing from paparazzi, and that the 
local constabulary’s time might be better spent dealing with that particular 
menace. Cole was fined GBP£1,000, plus another GBP£315 to “reflect his income”.

Cole also became something of a national pariah in the wake of marrying Cheryl 
Tweedy out of popular singing troupe Girls Aloud. Pious moralisers had a field 
day when Cole later became the subject of a kiss-and-tell tabloid story about a 
drunken liaison with a hairdresser: how dare he cheat on the nation’s 
sweetheart!

Of course the majority of normal folk – ie those who didn’t have newspaper 
columns to fill – were less censorious over this private matter. However, 
goodwill for the marriage remained thin on the ground thanks to an infamous 
promotion for the National Lottery, which pictured the love-struck millionaires 
as angelsdraped over a white Rolls-Royce in heaven 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=ashley+cole+lottery&espv=2&biw=1364&bih=667&tbm=isch&imgil=Xia2s-Z00WTehM%253A%253BX-eW-Gdu2rB1wM%253Bhttp%25253A%25252F%25252Fwww.dailymail.co.uk%25252Fsport%25252Ffootball%25252Farticle-2477204%25252FChelsea-star-Andre-Schurrle-mocks-Ashley-Cole-live-phone-in.html&source=iu&pf=m&fir=Xia2s-Z00WTehM%253A%252CX-eW-Gdu2rB1wM%252C_&usg=__QCj6rhWcOrRBE0WJZNtXEclpnNs%3D&dpr=1&ved=0ahUKEwi9voCauc3KAhVFjz4KHXhNAm0QyjcIJw&ei=k4eqVv2oNcWe-gH4monoBg#imgrc=Xia2s-Z00WTehM%3A>
. The 2006 campaign, which health experts now agree should have come with a 
health warning over the potential onset of type II diabetes, irritated everyone 
who saw it beyond patience.

Perhaps most notoriously – a state of affairs which takes some doing, given he 
once capped someone while at work – Cole suffered a dreadful PR disaster when 
he got round to explaining the thought process behind his defection from 
Arsenal to London rivals Chelsea in the summer of 2006. His autobiography My 
Defence sold just 4,000 copies in the first six weeks on sale, but garnered an 
equal number of column inches thanks to the account ofhis response to Arsenal’s 
offer of a £55,000-a-week contract extension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2006/sep/14/sport.comment>.

Cole had been wheeling around in his motor at the time, when his agent 
Jonathan Barnett announced the figure over the Bluetooth. Cole, in his own 
words, “nearly swerved off the road. ‘He [Arsenal suit David Dein] is taking 
the piss, Jonathan!’ I yelled down the phone. I was so incensed. I was 
trembling with anger.”

And in a stroke, the “Cashley” Cole character was born. Thing is, though Cole 
was also swerving recklessly towards world’s smallest violin territory, he had 
something of a point. In the absurd context of Big Football, the offer wasn’t 
commensurate for a player who had established himself at the very top of his 
sport – his duel with Cristiano Ronaldo at Euro 2004 was an engaging, epic 
battle between two emerging greats – and who Arsenal had previously valued at 
£30m. Perhaps some things are better left unsaid, but his argument had a sound 
logic.

Cole was the real deal. His partnership on the left flank for Arsenal with 
Robert Pires was a major factor in the team’s famous Invincible season of 
2003-04. Gary Neville once compared the triple threat of Cole, Pires and 
Thierry Henry to having the Red Arrows whoosh around him.This is as good a goal 
as you’ll ever see from a full-back 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XDLnbFwBtZc>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXDLnbFwBtZc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXDLnbFwBtZc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXDLnbFwBtZc&media=>
At Chelsea he would develop a penchant for crucial goalline clearances: in 
their successful Champions League campaign of 2012, he denied Christian Maggio 
of Napoli and Barcelona’s Cesc Fabregas at crucial moments. In the final he was 
brave enough to take the fourth penalty, as he did in Chelsea’s defeat by 
Manchester United in 2008, too. His willingness to step up to the plate – never 
mind score – was very rare for an English defender.

He joins LA Galaxy <https://www.theguardian.com/football/losangelesgalaxy> 
having won everything there is to win. His domestic league title four times. A 
League Cup. The Champions League. The Europa League. And the FA Cup – a record 
seven times. Everything except a medal for England, of course. But let’s not 
demand he hook the moon with a lassoo. Unquestionably a world-class operator, 
and the best of the Golden Generation. All those lurid headlines will fade away 
soon enough. History will be kind.
 