
Since The Forgotten Children: The Young Refugees Stranded on Nauru 
<http://www.abc.net.au/4corners/stories/2016/10/17/4556062.htm> aired on Four 
Corners on Monday night, the ABC has been under fire on several fronts – 
including by the government of Nauru, the Australian government and some 
Liberal senators at an estimates committee in Canberra.

The Nauruan government said the report was “an embarrassment to journalism” 
and “denigrating, racist, false and pure political activism”. On Tuesday, the 
Australian continued the criticism witha front-page story 
<https://urldefense.proofpoint.com/v2/url?u=http-3A__www.theaustralian.com.au_business_media_broadcast_abcs-2Dfour-2Dcorners-2Dslammed-2Dover-2Dold-2Dselective-2Dnauru-2Dfootage_news-2Dstory_f80ceeb432f4ec5907a10beff3697877&d=DQMFaQ&c=ptMoEJ5oTofwe4L9tBtGCQ&r=ZRm2XwhewrM1EFKhCSrxP4D5f1w9AeAz1-lbHjtao38&m=RMLs76uqmGgt9_N0FjwQyRugmDVrRNyQFYsnx88oWfQ&s=3mUULebfuf0tpP9snrW9b4tsqKZQzPfyBSYaeJ9_Cnw&e=>
 that accused the public broadcaster of selective editing and using old 
footage. Not to forget Andrew Bolt, who said the report proved that the ABC had
“become as honest as a Socialist Alternative activist” 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/blogs/andrew-bolt/how-abc-stitched-up-nauru/news-story/3f02639207f007184cd64a97ad2b2912>
.

Why I spoke to Four Corners about the children I taught on Nauru | Tracey 
Donehue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/21/why-i-spoke-to-four-corners-about-the-children-i-taught-on-nauru>
Now Channel Nine’s A Current Affair has joined the fray with a report on 
Wednesday’s program 
<http://aca.nine.com.au/article/9175887/the-truth-about-nauru>. ACA is 
apparently upset because Four Corners didn’t pay due deference to itsown 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/a-current-affair-goes-to-nauru-refugees-facile-questions-and-lingering-shots-of-flatscreen-tvs>
 earlier this year. ACA was the second media outlet given access to the tiny 
island since the Australian’s Chris Kenny reported from there with government 
sanction last year. The Nauruan government has routinely denied access to 
everyone else, demanding a non-refundable $8,000 fee just to process the 
application.

“Everyone knows that A Current Affair was granted unrestricted access,” said 
the host of ACA, Tracy Grimshaw, before going on to complain that the ABC 
didn’t use ACA’s material or even acknowledge it.

Reporter Caroline Marcus – who said in a column in the Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/rendezview/why-are-activists-so-afraid-of-the-truth-about-nauru/news-story/ee5cc5fb94e586e98f6f8d6e9a2daab3>
 that the refugees on Nauru were “well-fed, most live in relative comfort and 
they’re free to move around” – was furious her “groundbreaking” reporting had 
been overlooked by the ABC. Marcus contrasted claims made on the ABC with those 
made on ACA. For example, while the teachers on Nauru told Four Corners it was 
unsafe for children, the Nauruan officials told ACA it was a very safe 
community with a lower crime rate than Australia.
Caroline Marcus (@carolinemarcus9) 
We got plenty of footage and refugee accounts when we went to Nauru 4 mths ago 
but@4corners <https://twitter.com/4corners> didn't bother to acknowledge it. 
@bairdjulia <https://twitter.com/bairdjulia> https://t.co/3m5Zqayy2n 
<https://t.co/3m5Zqayy2n>
 <https://twitter.com/carolinemarcus9/status/788627629347930112> October 19, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/carolinemarcus9/status/788627629347930112> 
The ABC has returned fire, telling senators the program would not be 
investigated because “we don’t launch inquiries into excellent pieces of 
journalism”.

The director of news, Gaven Morris, said claims by critics of inaccurate 
reporting were wrong and issued a detailed statement rebutting them. “As the 
Nauruan government routinely refuses journalists access to report on offshore 
processing, and charges prohibitive fees for media visas which are not refunded 
if the applications are refused, Four Corners relied on a range of sources for 
footage.”

Herald Sun climate contrarians

Bolt and Mike Sheahan are both very popular Herald Sun columnists but they 
also hold opposing views on climate change.

This week the AFL commentator used a column to make a gentle plea to Bolt to 
change his mind on climate change. “Bolt has greater reach than any current 
affairs commentator of my time,” Sheahan wrote.

“He is one of the few people politicians seem to read and listen to and he is 
bold enough to take on the heavyweights, from the prime minister down, and to 
lead causes, no matter how unpopular. I just wish he were as committed to the 
future of the reef – perhaps the planet – as he is to the downfall of Malcolm 
Turnbull … Come on, Andrew, jump on board. What’s the downside? Only that more 
and more of us will like you. You will learn to live with that irritation. You 
might even grow to like it. Give it a try.”

Courier-Mail’s chunder club

Journalists are well known for being able to handle a few drinks so we were a 
little disappointed to hear about the performance of a couple of journalists 
from the Courier-Mail in Queensland who clearly had too much to drink too 
quickly.

Weekly Beast heard about one young chap who unloaded the contents of his 
stomach in a ministerial office at an after-work party a few months back. Now 
this would be unremarkable were it not for the fact that a second Courier-Mail 
journalist has repeated the performance, leaving a big mess for the 
parliamentary cleaners to mop up.

ABC job title or some random words: can you tell the difference?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/08/abc-job-title-or-some-random-words-can-you-tell-the-difference>
ABC’s title deed undone


When the ABC restructured its five radio networks in April and added a layer 
of “preposterously named executives”,we loved the ridiculous names so much we 
created a quiz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/08/abc-job-title-or-some-random-words-can-you-tell-the-difference>
 that asked readers to pick the ABC job title from a random set of words. New 
titles included “ideas network lead”, “capital local lead”, “head spoken” and 
“classical lead”. Weekly Beast is happy to report that, after our gentle 
ribbing of radio management, the worst offenders have been changed to something 
resembling an actual job title. That is good news indeed for the Sydney Morning 
Herald editor, Judith Whelan, who would have been referred to as “Head Spoken” 
when she joined the ABC on 7 November had the title remained intact. The new 
recruit will now be known as the head of spoken content. Capital local lead has 
been changed to manager, capital city radio and ideas network lead has been 
changed to manager ideas network. A small win for language.

This means Warby 

We reported in August that SBS’s dedicated women’s sport site had been dumped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/12/chris-mitchells-clangers-and-shouting-at-the-sky-while-googling-twitter>
 after just eight months, disappointing sports fans who were crying out for a 
serious treatment of women’s sport. But when the managing director of SBS, 
Michael Ebeid, was questioned about it at Senate estimates this week he 
downplayed Zela’s significance. He said the closure was not related to a 
funding cut, the site was poorly performing and women’s sport had been 
incorporated into the main sports site again. What he didn’t anticipate was 
that the former managing editor of Zela, Danielle Warby, would answer back. 
Warby disagreed with many of his comments and took to Twitter and later her 
blog to call him out.

“There was funding allocated to Zela – approximately $125,000. It was obtained 
through an in-house ‘shark tank’-style process and given to the sports 
department to set up and run the site for six months. We stretched it to eight. 
That funding has since been exhausted.”

SBS <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sbs> refused to comment on the matter 
further when approached by Beast.



Ad industry’s stubborn gender gap


A survey of the country’s top advertising agencies – including Leo Burnett, 
Marketforce, M&C Saatchi Group, McCann and Clemenger BBDO – has revealed that, 
at entry level, there is an even split between men and women but, by the time 
you reach the executive level in advertising, there is a ratio of 82 men to 
just 18 women. The inequality and lack of diversity in the industry is now 
being tackled by a national voluntary body committed to addressing the 
imbalance, the Agency Circle, which is made up of people from these agencies. 
Michele O’Neill, the strategy director at agency VCCP and the cofounder of the 
Agency Circle, told Beast she was sick of all the talk and wanted to see 
action. “We have to stop hiring in our image,” O’Neil said. “It’s what 
perpetuates this white, tight, straight, middle-class view of Australia because 
it’s driven by ad agency people.”
 