
Last weekend, New York's Museum of Modern Art joined the growing list of 
prestigious institutions that areacquiring and exhibiting video games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/mar/01/video-games-art-moma-exhibition>
 as art.

Like the Smithsonian's recent offering, many of the titles now on display at 
Moma aren't actually playable by visitors, and the selection has been culled of 
any distasteful vulgarities (gratuitous violence, sexual piggery, etc) common 
to mainstream releases. And it's a pleasure to see the work of fine designers, 
like Jason Rohrer, Jenova Chen and Will Wright, honored this way.

For some, the appearance of video games in major collections is seen as 
evidence that the medium is finally earning acceptance as a "legitimate" art 
form. Others, myself included, remain unconvinced.

Some years ago, film critic Roger Ebert enraged both players and the industry 
by flatly declaring that"video games can never be art." 
<http://blogs.suntimes.com/ebert/2010/04/video_games_can_never_be_art.html> My 
own reservations were expressed inan address at the 2011 Game Developer's 
Conference <http://www.ludix.com/moriarty/apology.html>, in which I lamented 
the predilection for kitsch, technological instability and a chaotic business 
climate that have persistently retarded games' aesthetic development. Aside 
from a few passages that could have been worded more diplomatically, I stand by 
that lecture; indeed, subsequent research leads me to suspect that my argument 
was too timid.

A survey of the past 2,500 years of art philosophy offers no support for the 
classification of games as art. If games are mentioned at all, they are 
dismissed as a pastime, harmless at best, and an evil destroyer of youth at 
worst.Schopenhauer <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_Schopenhauer> appears 
to be alone among the major authors in offering games more than passing 
consideration. His assessment was not sympathetic.

In his magnum opus, The World as Will and Representation 
<http://en.wikisource.org/wiki/The_World_as_Will_and_Representation> (1818-44), 
he condemns game-playing as an egregious form of "excitement" precisely opposed 
to the experience of sublime art, and he specifically calls to task "the 
invention and maintenance of card-playing, which is in the truest sense an 
expression of the wretched side of humanity". This is possibly the first 
allusion to game designers in a major philosophical text.

It's fair to ask whether the opinions of crabby old philosophers like 
Schopenhauer are relevant to a discussion of video games as art. I would 
respond that when deciding value, ignoring the ideas of history's greatest 
thinkers seems reckless, and that the novelty of interactive video does not 
invalidate the wisdom of ages.

Speaking of the ages, it's pertinent to ask why mildly interesting game 
designs like Canabalt are being enshrined by Moma whilechess 
<http://kenilworthian.blogspot.com/2010/04/is-chess-art.html> and go, the most 
elegant and durable rulesets ever devised, find no place in their exhibit.

If their excuse is a focus on contemporary artifacts, the omission of Allan 
Calhamer'sDiplomacy <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diplomacy_(game)>, widely 
acknowledged as one of the greatest game designs of the past century, is also 
cause for regret. Mr Calhamer's passing a week before the MoMA opening makes 
the slight more tragic.

There are many good reasons to question the status of video games as art. 
Nevertheless, I find myself becoming cross and irritable when I read the 
particular objection expressed inJonathan Jones' recent Guardian editorial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2012/nov/30/moma-video-games-art>
 (also found in Mr Ebert's writings), where he states that games cannot be art 
simply because they appear to abrogate the authority of the artist. This 
argument brushes aside nearly a century of vital artwork exploring the 
conventional boundaries between artist, exhibitor and spectator.

It may be that these experiments have so far failed to produce works capable 
of eliciting the experiences traditionally associated with sublime art. But 
this "failure", if such it is, actually validates the significance of the 
experiments. We must avoid falling prey to theFile Drawer Problem 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/freekvermeulen/2012/01/06/publication-bias-or-why-you-cant-trust-any-of-the-research-you-read/>
, in which research that doesn't yield interesting results remains undervalued 
or ignored.

It is the nature of art to renew and redefine itself, both as a reflection of 
evolving culture and as an active catalyst of that evolution. Questioning and 
healthy skepticism will always be an essential part of this historical process, 
but we must remain alert to the possibility of a breakthrough.

If and when a video game achieves this breakthrough, we doubters and Romantic 
old fogeys will fall respectfully silent. No one quarrels over a lightningbolt.
 