
I’m spinning like a leaf in a drain. Rain and spray sting my cheeks and 
branches snag and scratch me. I’ve drifted from the imaginary line in the 
middle of the river and am gathering enough foliage to camouflage a tank.

The Alps may be more associated with winter action breaks, but it’s August and 
I’m in the mountain village of Chaillol in the southern French Alps for a 
week’s adventure with my wife Tracey and sons Jacob, 7, and Joe, 10. Kayaking 
on the frothing Severaisse river certainly has the adrenaline pumping.

“You love the trees, don’t you Richard?” says Sylvain, our instructor, with a 
broad grin, as I study yet more Alpine flora. Joe, sharing a kayak with another 
instructor, whoops all the way, while my kayak flips over momentarily and I 
emerge soaked but exhilarated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Ffamily-adventure-holiday-the-alps-chaillol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434722547788%2F04ac9698-62b5-4099-85cc-1a02cd73290f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Alps%20%E2%80%A6%20whooping%20all%20the%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Ffamily-adventure-holiday-the-alps-chaillol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Alps%20%E2%80%A6%20whooping%20all%20the%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Ffamily-adventure-holiday-the-alps-chaillol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434722547788%2F04ac9698-62b5-4099-85cc-1a02cd73290f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kayaking is one of the holiday’s activity options – others nclude tubing and 
mountain hiking 
Kayaking is just one option on the itinerary, organised by Undiscovered Alps, 
that has included activities from tubing to mountain hiking. An hour’s drive 
from our chalet in Chaillol is the man-made Lac de Serre-Ponçon, one of the 
largest artificial lakes in western Europe and a playground for French 
families. We spend an afternoon being dragged around by a speedboat on 
biscuit-shaped inflatables – and Jacob declares it the best day of his life.

Before hitting the winding road through mist back to Chaillol at 1,600m, we 
stop at cheese-lovers’ paradise, the Laiterie du Col Bayard. I tuck into its 
specialityassiette du Champsaur – a delicious and filling selection of local 
hams and cheeses, salads and pastry, while the boys munch their way through 
crepes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Ffamily-adventure-holiday-the-alps-chaillol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434722842822%2F05c3c85a-5e0e-4baf-b9a1-1faa835becf5-929x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Alps%20%E2%80%A6%20whooping%20all%20the%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Ffamily-adventure-holiday-the-alps-chaillol%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20family%20adventure%20in%20the%20Alps%20%E2%80%A6%20whooping%20all%20the%20way&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjun%2F21%2Ffamily-adventure-holiday-the-alps-chaillol%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F19%2F1434722842822%2F05c3c85a-5e0e-4baf-b9a1-1faa835becf5-929x1020.jpeg>
 Richard Lakin’s sons loved their summer activity break. Photograph: Richard 
Lakin 
Next morning the sun has scorched the mist away and the valley and mountains 
unfold before us as we head to Jungle Laye, an adventure park an hour away in 
the small ski resort of Laye. Joe takes to the high ropes with ease, scrambling 
up cargo nets, whistling down zipwires and swinging from platform to platform 
in the towering pines.

Our final activity is a climb to Refuge du Tourond, at an altitude of 1,712m 
on the edge of the Ecrins national park. It can only be reached on foot. From 
the hamlet of les Fermons, we make our way up a steep path past boulders the 
size of sheds and trees uprooted by melting snow. The walk takes two hours with 
stops to guzzle water, admire bursts of speckled butterflies and waggle our 
tired toes in the streams. We get a dorm to ourselves before joining English 
and French families to dine on herby soup and plates heaped with gammon, pasta, 
spinach and cheese.

Sweaters are pulled on as the sun retreats behind the peaks and we gaze out of 
our window at mountains now black as felt and topped with shimmering starlight. 
The chatter of crickets is incessant and loud as an orchestra, like nature’s 
television set left on standby – the perfect end to a week of adrenaline, 
cheese and fun-filled family adventure.

• Activities and accommodation were provided by Undiscovered Alps (0845 009 
8501,undiscoveredalps.com <http://www.undiscoveredalps.com/>), which has a week 
in Chaillol with all activities for about €432 adult, €361 child. Flights to 
Marseilles from Birmingham via Paris and car rental were provided by Much 
Better Adventures (020-0333 1176,muchbetteradventures.com 
<https://www.muchbetteradventures.com/>) 

Richard Lakin was a winner in our 2013 Guardian travel writing competition in 
the family category, and this was the assignment he won. The competition has 
now been discontinued

 