
‘Atchoo! Atchoo!” My 10-year-old daughter, Mia, isn’t struggling with a cold, 
but trying some basic Lithuanian –aciu means thank-you – as our host, Zigmas, 
helps her with his potter’s wheel. She gets the hang of keeping the kick-wheel 
moving with her foot, and splatters of clay fly as a wobbly pot begins to take 
shape between her hands. Her brother Harry, 14, is busy etching a design into a 
square of clay with Zigmas’s tools.

We adults leave them to it and slip across the garden to the wine cellar, 
where Zigmas has lined up some snifters of deliciousmidas (mead) as well as 
wine from his own grapes. I’m surprised the weather in this Baltic state is 
warm enough for vines, but his wife, Violeta, tells me summer temperatures 
reach 35C.
Lithuania map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/01/travel_lithuania/giv-27167JHaw6y8Qj1QG/>
We’re staying at Zigmo Ukis <http://en.zigmukaimiosodyba.lt/> farm in Panemunė 
regional park, south-west Lithuania. It’s October half-term, a bracing 7C, and 
the forests along the banks of the Nemunas river are a patchwork of orange and 
yellow. Talented carpenter Zigmas has converted a barn into a three-bedroom 
guesthouse that’s a fairytale vision of carved wood, exposed brick and twinkly 
lights. There’s a wood-fired stove, bar stools made from old leather saddles, 
and steps to a mezzanine (“a stage!” cries Mia) with a piano and several old 
accordions and concertinas. There’s home-made apple cake on the table, and the 
bar has unpasteurised beer from a brewery in nearby Kaunas. Bliss.

Zigmas and Violeta have hosted friends here for years, and recently decided to 
open their doors to guests from further afield. The night we arrive, over a 
moreish “pudding” of potatoes and sour cream, Violeta, an English teacher, 
tells me this is their way of helping keep traditions alive. The country 
declared independence from Soviet rule in 1990, and now English, rather than 
Russian, is the main foreign language taught in schools.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Flithuania-activity-family-holiday-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00ca61480b7dcf0f8de7ad494eca2f0c9c7eb934%2F0_0_4608_3072%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20family%20adventure%20in%20Lithuania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Flithuania-activity-family-holiday-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20family%20adventure%20in%20Lithuania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Flithuania-activity-family-holiday-children%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00ca61480b7dcf0f8de7ad494eca2f0c9c7eb934%2F0_0_4608_3072%2F4608.jpg>
 The bar, with ‘stage’ at Zigmo Ukis. Photograph: Catherine Nelson 
Lithuanian heritage is everywhere: vintage tools decorate the outside of the 
guesthouse; an open-sided barn opposite displays ornate wooden sleighs and a 
finely restored wagon. Best of all is the bathhouse, a log cabin sauna that 
Zigmas has painstakingly built on the chassis of an old truck.

It’s often tricky to find holidays that my son and daughter – with their 
four-year age gap – will both enjoy, but this one is a winner. Lithuania may 
not be on many people’s radar for a family activity holiday, but we find a 
bewildering array of great-value things to do. Our only problem is fitting 
everything in, and the kids enjoy every minute.

Mia loves petting the horses – two of only 400 remaining of a historic breed 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C5%BDemaitukas> from Samogitia, in the 
north-west. Harry bonds with Zigmas over crossbow practice, and a shared love 
of sleight-of-hand tricks with a pencil. I’m bowled over by the sheer magic of 
the place, and particularly enjoy trying out an accordion, with Harry on piano.

We stay two nights, and fit in a trip across the Nemunas on a chain-link 
ferry, through pastures punctuated by beautiful wooden houses in shades of 
apricot or green and a visit to 400-year-oldPanemune Castle 
<http://www.panemunespilis.lt/?lang=en>. We climb its tallest turret to gaze 
out over the river and eat in its grand restaurant – all candelabras and red 
velvet. The prices are family-friendly, though: Mia’s fluffy potato pancakes 
and sour cream are €5, my salmon in butter sauce €10.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Flithuania-activity-family-holiday-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30a876cb29d8497c647a34faa4e1bcdd07ee6b6d%2F0_1147_3072_2801%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20family%20adventure%20in%20Lithuania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Flithuania-activity-family-holiday-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20family%20adventure%20in%20Lithuania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Flithuania-activity-family-holiday-children%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30a876cb29d8497c647a34faa4e1bcdd07ee6b6d%2F0_1147_3072_2801%2F3072.jpg>
 Mia on the zipwire near Anyksciai. Photograph: Catherine Nelson 
The next morning, after hugs and farewells, we’re on the road again. Our trip, 
put together by Baltic Holidays, is showcasing the best of rural Lithuania – a 
mix of forest hideaways and spa towns, all with plenty for the kids to do. Our 
next stop is aspa hotel <https://beta.spa-vilnius.lt/en/anyksciai> a couple of 
hours east in the pine and birch woods of Anyksciai, and handy for arope park 
<http://www.nuotykiuslenis.lt/>, where a 2½-hour forest adventure costs the 
three of us €33. Helped by guide Ignas, we start off on obstacles 50cm from the 
ground to build confidence, and before long are several metres up. Harry, an 
old hand at this kind of thing, is impressed by the size and range of the 
course. We’d thought Mia might be less keen, but her daring takes both of us by 
surprise as she dances along narrow ledges, crawls through suspended barrels 
and bowls down zipwires. The sky is blue, the park empty and we’re all buzzing 
with achievement, especially after a final zipwire flight across the Sventoji 
river.

Back at the hotel, Mia and I ease our muscles with a milk bath for two (€20). 
Mood lighting beneath the water shimmers blue, purple, silver and gold, and Mia 
relishes her job as chief button-presser. “More bubbles? Jets? Bubbles and 
jets?” It’s top mother-and-daughter bonding.

The next day we visit the forest again to tackle a spectacular 28-metre-high 
treetop walk before heading to our final destination, Druskininkai, a tiny spa 
town in the Dzūkijos national park in the south. This time we’re ina modern and 
stylish Domi Lini apartment <http://www.domilini.lt/>, where bedlinen and 
towels from the owner’s own company up the luxury quotient.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Flithuania-activity-family-holiday-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a7d80dd9f59027a29f3674f7da570b7a926e433%2F0_0_3500_2250%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20family%20adventure%20in%20Lithuania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Flithuania-activity-family-holiday-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20family%20adventure%20in%20Lithuania&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjan%2F10%2Flithuania-activity-family-holiday-children%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a7d80dd9f59027a29f3674f7da570b7a926e433%2F0_0_3500_2250%2F3500.jpg>
 The ‘Joy of all who Sorrow’ church in Druskininkai. Photograph: Alamy 
We’ve been promised a traditional Lithuanian baking session. Bake Off fan Mia 
is raring to go, Harry less so, but we’re all won over by the crazy art of
sakotis (it means “branches”, as the finished cake resembles a pine tree). 
Sakotis cakes, a speciality of Druskininkai’sRomnesa restaurant 
<http://www.romnesa.lt/druskininkai/>, are made by ladling layers of batter on 
to a spit over a birchwood fire. A chef in traditional dress supervises as we 
take it in turns to drizzle mixture over the spit. It’s hot work but I’m sure 
even Paul and Mary would be impressed with our 50cm-high sakotis: crumbly and 
sweet with a hint of smoke.

Next up is skiing at Druskininkai’s Snow Arena 
<http://www.snowarena.lt/en/home>, which has a 500-metre indoor piste and a 
snow park with rails and jumps. As with so many family activities in Lithuania, 
it’s great value – two hours including equipment and clothing hire from €78 for 
four.

On our last morning, I sneak out early to photograph the town’s 19th-century 
Russian orthodox church, cobalt blue against the autumn skies. As I cross the 
bridge over the Nemunas, I catch my breath at the sight of the dense pines 
lining its banks. There are so many things we didn’t have time to do. The kids 
are still hankering after a trip to Druskininkai’sAqua Park 
<http://akvapark.lt/en/>, but top of my list for our return visit will be a 
family cycle ride through that murmuring forest.

Way to go

The trip was provided by Baltic Holidays (0845 070 5711, balticholidays.com 
<http://www.balticholidays.com/private-tours/family-holiday-in-lithuania-%28guardian%29/>
), which has a seven-night trip for four people from £563pp, with two nights’ 
full-board farm accommodation with activities, two nights’ B&B at Anyksciai spa 
hotel, two nights’ self-catering in Druskininkai, one night B&B in Kaunas and 
transfers.Ryanair <http://ryanair.com> flies to Kaunas from six UK airports 
from £46 return
 