
A cluster of Arthur Ransome <http://www.arthur-ransome.org> fans picnicking on 
Coniston's Peel Island have just had a surprise - when the writer's famous 
literary creation theSwallow sailed into the tiny scrap of land's 'secret 
harbour'.

The gaff-rigged dinghy, the actual boat used in the 1974 film version 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/cumbria/content/articles/2005/07/26/swallows_and_amazons_feature.shtml>
 of Ransome's masterpiece for childrenSwallows and Amazons, had sailed to the 
islet – known more excitingly asWild Cat island 
<http://www.luphen.org.uk/public/2007/2007wild_cat_island.htm> in the book – 
for the first time for 38 years.

Ransome's series about children's adventures in the Lake District and beyond 
have an enduring appeal, even though his wife Evgenia regularly castigated him 
for supposedly wasting his time on such trivia. In another side of his life, 
Ransome was the early 20th century's equivalent of today's celebrity 
journalists, travelling all over the world for theManchester Guardian.
 Trotsky with Frida Kahlo in Mexico. If only he'd hidden away on Wild Cat 
Island. Photograph: Bettmann/CORBIS 
Marrying Evgenia was one of his smartest moves, as she had been Leon Trotsky's 
secretary <http://arthur-ransome.spb.ru/index/0-8> and possibly mistress and 
was thus an excellent news source. He was happy to put up with her admonitions 
about his children's fiction and this month's voyage of theSwallow shows how 
his judgement was correct.

The TV dinghy spent 30 years in a Thames boatyard when the filming was over, 
but was then bought at auction by a consortium of 83Arthur Ransome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/arthur-ransome> fans from all over the 
world who raised the money to buy her. She was restored at Pattersons in 
Hawkshead, has visited the London Boat Show, and has taken young fans for short 
sails on Ullswater this summer.

Now she's been transferred to Coniston 
<http:/www.visitcumbria.com/amb/coniston.htm> by two of the consortium, Rob 
Boden, a district councillor from Kendal, and Dave Thewlis, an IT consultant 
from Humboldt County in California. They launched her at Brown Howe on the 
western shore of the lake for the historic voyage to Wild Cat and the 
children's secret base.

Rob says:

She was recognised by so many people on the lake. It was a very exciting 
experience, and proof that the stories are still loved by children – and adults 
– today. Sadly, though, there as so little wind that we didn't so much sail as 
drift into the harbour.

Of the rival Amazon, with her fearsome all-girl crew and reputation for giving 
no quarter, there was no sign.
 