
The American League West and the final AL wild card place

Practically speaking, not mathematically speaking, there are four teams, the 
Texas Rangers, Houston Astros,Los Angeles Angels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/los-angeles-angels> and Minnesota Twins, 
trying to squeeze into the two remaining playoff spots: this is the week we 
finally figure out who wins the AL West and who becomes the second AL wild card 
team ... unless of course, it stretches into next week. Stick with me.

First off, depending on how things break early in the week, the upcoming 
four-game series between thestreaking, better late than never Angels 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/teams/LAA/2015.shtml> and the hosting 
Rangers could become a crucial showcase. Los Angeles, currently just two games 
behind Texas and a half-game behind the wild card leading Astros, began their 
week at home with awalk-off win 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2015_09_28_oakmlb_anamlb_1#game=2015_09_28_oakmlb_anamlb_1,game_state=Live,game_tab=box>
 against the Oakland A’s while the suddenly slumping Rangerslost their first of 
three 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2015_09_28_detmlb_texmlb_1#game=2015_09_28_detmlb_texmlb_1,game_state=Wrapup,game_tab=box>
 with downtrodden Detroit.

The Astros, currently just 1.5 games behind Texas are on the road where they 
are just 30 and 46 - first in Seattle where theywon the series opener 3-2 on 
Monday 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2015_09_28_houmlb_seamlb_1#game=2015_09_28_houmlb_seamlb_1,game_state=Wrapup,game_tab=box>
, and then at Arizona, where they’ll have the pleasure of potentially playing 
with their season on the line without a designated hitter (sweet!).

The Twins, now 1.5 games behind Houston, started their series in Cleveland by 
beating the Indians 4-2 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2015_09_28_minmlb_clemlb_1#game=2015_09_28_minmlb_clemlb_1,game_state=Wrapup,game_tab=box>
, further dampening the slender but not mathematically impossible playoff hopes 
of the Tribe. The Twinkies finish off with four games at home against the 
Kansas City Royals.

Still following? OK, let’s start with what what happens if the Rangers, Astros 
Astros, Angels and Twins finish all with the same record. If that scenario 
played out the galaxy would likely burp us all up into deep space, but after a 
short regrouping period, there’d be quite a bit of baseball to play.

Because the Angles have the best combined record against all the teams 
involved, they will have a choice of opponent for the additional games played 
on Monday 5 October: play at home against Houston or host Minnesota (they could 
also play on the road against Texas but that would be silly).

Choosing to face the Astros means probably having to face Dallas Keuchel 
<http://www.baseball-reference.com/players/k/keuchda01.shtml>, who is a 19-game 
winner (I know we’re not supposed to mention wins anymore but still) with a 
2.47 ERA, and that’s not really recommended. So, let’s assume LA plays the 
Twins and theirless imposing starting pitching options 
<http://puckettspond.com/2015/09/15/minnesota-twins-who-starts-in-the-wild-card-one-game-playoff/>
 which doesn’t include Ervin Santana, (he’s undefeated in September 
<http://m.mlb.com/video/topic/32862096/v506686983/> but not eligible thanks to 
his PED suspension), putting Houston away to Texas for the biggest game in the 
history of that rivalry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fa-handy-guide-to-this-seasons-mindbending-mlb-playoff-permutations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff094463dd555522a94f676c5cdc08fe30a33ca73%2F91_3_1382_2073%2F1382.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20handy%20guide%20to%20this%20season's%20mindbending%20MLB%20playoff%20permutations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fa-handy-guide-to-this-seasons-mindbending-mlb-playoff-permutations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20handy%20guide%20to%20this%20season%27s%20mindbending%20MLB%20playoff%20permutations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fa-handy-guide-to-this-seasons-mindbending-mlb-playoff-permutations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff094463dd555522a94f676c5cdc08fe30a33ca73%2F91_3_1382_2073%2F1382.jpg>
 Mike Trout’s glove and bat are two reasons why the Los Angeles Angels are in 
the thick of the playoff race. Photograph: Stephen Dunn/Getty Images 
If the Twins beat the Angels they become the final AL wild card team and the 
winner of Texas/Houston are AL West champs. But if LA beat Minnesota, they’ll 
play on the road against the winner of Texas/Houston on Tuesday. Whoever wins 
that game would become AL West champs, while the loser would be the final wild 
card team. That would almost certainly means a date with the Yankees in New 
York, likely on Wednesday the 7th, in what would be one crazy bit of 
pre-playoff travel mayhem.

Other only slightly less intense two-team tie-breaking scenarios include:


The Astros hosting the Angels in Houston because they beat LA in the season 
series.

The Twins and Astros playing a tiebreaker game in Minnesota because Houston 
had a worse intra-division record.

The Angels hosting the Twins in LA because they beat Minnesota in the season 
series.

Now, if you thought the four-way tie was complex, there are no fewer than 
three, three-way tie scenarios, and if you want details of all of them, at your 
peril,I suggest you click here. 
<http://m.mlb.com/news/article/147856758/breaking-down-possible-postseason-tiebreakers>

Dissecting the division of death

That is, of course, the National League Central, whose teams have combined to 
win a ridiculous 283 games this season. One thing that’s virtually certain is 
that the potentially curse-bustingChicago Cubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chicago-cubs> won’t be playing inside the 
friendly confines of Wrigley Field, at least initially. They’ll be in St Louis 
or Pittsburgh for the winner-take-all one-game super death match wild card 
contest. If they win that they’ll face, you guessed it, Pittsburgh or St Louis, 
and more on that in just a bit.

Whichever team they play, the Cubbies will be in tremendous shape because Jake 
Arrieta and his insane 1.82 ERA will be waiting. Pittsburgh got their latest 
taste of Arrieta, who hashad himself one heck of a second half 
<http://www.fangraphs.com/blogs/jake-arrietas-argument-for-the-best-season-half-ever/>
, on Sunday evening in Chicago when the hurler had Buccos batters on their 
knees, begging for anything they could handle with the ace taking a perfect 
game into the seventh inning (he also hit a home run, just for fun). The thing 
to love about the Cubs is that they’ll be resting some of their every day 
players this week, all while keeping their horse in a perfect baseball rhythm: 
Arrieta will take his turn on Friday in Milwaukee, and then be on exact rest 
heading into the big game on Wednesday, and that doesn’t bode well for his 
opponent.

Meanwhile, on Monday, the Pirates and Cardinals dueled in Pittsburgh with the 
Buccos more-or-less needing to sweep first place St Louis to have any decent 
shot at overtaking the team they’ve been chasing all season long. The 
Cardinals, still playing without all-star catcher Yadier Molina,scraped out a 
3-0 win 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2015_09_28_slnmlb_pitmlb_1#game=2015_09_28_slnmlb_pitmlb_1,game_state=Wrapup,game_tab=box>
 during which they may have lost another spark-plug: Stephen Piscotty,who 
suffered a head contusion during a scary seventh inning outfield incident 
<http://sports.yahoo.com/blogs/mlb-big-league-stew/cardinals--stephen-piscotty-carted-off-the-field-after-gruesome-outfield-collision-015107805.html>
. If Pittsburgh can win Tuesday with Charlie Morton on the hill, ace Gerrit 
Cole is lined up for the series finale on Wednesday. The Cards, who now lead by 
the Bucs by four games and could be on the verge of getting Adam Wainwright 
back from his Achilles injury, will finish the season up in Atlanta against the 
Braves while the Pirates host the Cincinnati Reds for three games.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fa-handy-guide-to-this-seasons-mindbending-mlb-playoff-permutations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2033e5f67dd7159042fffd989f9641032ef19fc6%2F0_154_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20handy%20guide%20to%20this%20season's%20mindbending%20MLB%20playoff%20permutations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fa-handy-guide-to-this-seasons-mindbending-mlb-playoff-permutations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20handy%20guide%20to%20this%20season%27s%20mindbending%20MLB%20playoff%20permutations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Fa-handy-guide-to-this-seasons-mindbending-mlb-playoff-permutations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2033e5f67dd7159042fffd989f9641032ef19fc6%2F0_154_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 The Pittsburgh Pirates Gregory Polanco and Josh Harrison are trying their best 
to put their hex on the St Louis Cardinals, but of course, nothing ever works. 
Photograph: Doug Pensinger/Getty Images 
If the teams are tied at the end of the season, they’ll play a game on Monday 
5 October in the park of whoever wins the season series between the teams 
(right now the Redbirds lead 9-8), to determine the division winner and who 
will lose to have to face the crazy intense monster that lives deep inside Jake 
Arrieta. Gulp.

Settling home field advantage and playoff seeding

Generally speaking, teams go all out to reach the post-season but let the 
chips fall when it comes to home filed advantage and seeding. Are theMets going 
to go pedal to the metal 
<http://www.fangraphs.com/blogs/the-mets-are-a-scary-playoff-team/> to make 
sure they have an extra home game in Queens? That’s unlikely: instead, the New 
York’s final games against thefolly-filled Washington Nationals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2015/sep/28/baseball-dugout-brawl-video>
, once circled as potentially season-deciding encounters, will be more about 
resting up those young, innings challenged pitchers than anything else. The 
same can be said for theirNL Division Series opponents 
<http://www.truebluela.com/2015/9/28/9407733/mlb-standings-2015-playoffs-mets-dodgers-nlds-race>
, Don Mattingly’s,Yasiel Puig-less 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/dodgers/dodgersnow/la-sp-dn-dodgers-yasiel-puig-injury-update-20150927-story.html>
 Los Angeles Dodgers, that is, when and if they wrap up their third consecutive 
NL West title with a single win during their upcoming four-game series in San 
Francisco against the Giants. Their No-Cal rivals staved off elimination for 
one more day at least,outlasting LA 3-2 in 12 innings 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2015_09_28_lanmlb_sfnmlb_1&mode=wrap>
.

Over in the AL, the one-seed is still to be decided. The Toronto Blue Jays, 
who have 91 wins, are closer to wrapping up the division 
<http://www.thestar.com/sports/bluejays/2015/09/28/blue-jays-rally-late-close-in-on-al-east-title.html>
 after beating Baltimore Monday, now holding a five game advantage on the 
Yankees wholost to the Boston Red Sox 5-1 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2015_09_28_bosmlb_nyamlb_1#game=2015_09_28_bosmlb_nyamlb_1,game_state=Wrapup,game_tab=box>
, are likely resigned to hosting a wild card game barring a any baseball 
miracles. Masahiro Tanaka, recovering from a hamstring suffered during the 
recent Subway Series against the Mets,will likely take the ball against their 
mystery wild card opponent next week 
<http://nypost.com/2015/09/28/yankees-line-up-masahiro-tanaka-for-wild-card-game/>
. AL Central division champion Kansas City also have 90 wins. Since the Royals 
and the Jays,who should have Troy Tulowitzki back in time for the playoffs 
<http://mlb.nbcsports.com/2015/09/28/troy-tulowitzki-says-hell-definitely-be-ready-for-the-playoffs/>
, have assured home field advantage in the Divisional Series, none of these 
teams are going to risk anything to assure an extra home game during a 
Championship Series they’re not even sure they’ll reach.

 