
It was one of Elvis Presley’s more unusual ventures. The king of rock’n’roll 
had just been enjoying his first taste of success with singles such as 
Heartbreak Hotel, and was about to appear on theEd Sullivan Show in 1956, when 
he was given an unexpected medical challenge. Would he agree to be vaccinated 
against polio in front of the press before the show? He did.

The resulting photographs were published in newspapers across the US. The 
publicity was part of a bid to help correct a major flaw in the nation’s polio 
vaccination campaign, as Cambridge university historianStephen Mawdsley 
<https://www.cam.ac.uk/people/stephen-mawdsley> revealed in a paper in the 
latest issue of theJournal of Cultural and Social History.

“The [Dr] Salk vaccine against polio had just been produced and young children 
were being vaccinated in their millions. However, teenagers, who were also 
vulnerable to polio, were not taking up the vaccine,” Mawdsley told theObserver
. “Elvis was approached to provide publicity aimed at teenagers and agreed to 
help to put things right.”

His involvement in the polio vaccine programme is outlined in a film, Teens 
Against Polio <https://youtu.be/EZ7lL7Pzcws>, which was released online by 
Cambridge university on Sunday to mark the start ofWorld Immunisation Week 
<http://www.who.int/campaigns/immunization-week/2016/en/>. The project aims to 
close the “immunisation gap” that exists between those who get vaccines for 
diseases such as polio and those who do not.

The film offers intriguing insights on how that gap was closed in the US using 
the input of stars like Presley as well as Clark Gable and Mickey Rooney, and 
highlights the profound change that has taken place among celebrities in their 
attitude to vaccines and other health programmes over the past 60 years.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEZ7lL7Pzcws&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEZ7lL7Pzcws>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DEZ7lL7Pzcws&media=>
 Watch theTeens Against Polio film 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EZ7lL7Pzcws&feature=youtu.be> featuring Elvis 
Presley. 
In the 1950s stars were supportive. Today many are vocal in their opposition 
to vaccine programmes. Earlier this month Robert De Niro continued to give 
verbal support to the filmVaxxed: From Cover-Up to Catastrophe even though he 
had been forced towithdraw it from the Tribeca film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/27/robert-de-niro-pulls-vaccination-film-tribeca-vaxxed>
 because it supports the controversial anti-vaccine views of the disgraced UK 
doctor Andrew Wakefield, who directed the film. In doing so, De Niro joined 
modern showbiz stars – including Jim Carrey, Jenny McCarthy and Charlie Sheen – 
who have questioned the safety of vaccines.

The problem is that vaccines have become victims of their own success, said 
Mawdsley. “We have largely forgotten what it is like to face an epidemic 
sweeping through a population.” This was not the case in the first half of the 
20th century when a series of polio epidemics affected hundreds of thousands of 
children across the world. Many were left seriously incapacitated as a result. 
Victims included Franklin D Roosevelt, US president from 1933 to 1945.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Felvis-presley-polio-vaccine-world-immunisation-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54348177dda097825e14d6e74b429d9cb4b5a61e%2F0_83_2125_1275%2F2125.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20jab%20for%20Elvis%20helped%20America%20beat%20polio.%20Now%20doctors%20have%20recruited%20him%20again%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Felvis-presley-polio-vaccine-world-immunisation-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20jab%20for%20Elvis%20helped%20America%20beat%20polio.%20Now%20doctors%20have%20recruited%20him%20again%E2%80%A6&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fapr%2F24%2Felvis-presley-polio-vaccine-world-immunisation-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54348177dda097825e14d6e74b429d9cb4b5a61e%2F0_83_2125_1275%2F2125.jpg>
 Dr Jonas Salk, who developed the first polio vaccine, in his laboratory in 
Pittsburgh, 1955. Photograph: AP 
A major research programme was launched to combat the disease and in 1955 
Jonas Salk announced he had developed a vaccine which, after three shots had 
been administered, provided more than 90% protection. Vaccination programmes 
for children were launched. However, in the US few teenagers and adults sought 
immunisation, as most believed they were not at risk.

“This, sadly, was not the case,” said Mawdsley. And so Elvis was recruited to 
boost teenager take-up of the polio vaccine. “Presley Receives a City Polio 
Shot,” announced theNew York Times.

“It was obviously a help in getting teenagers to take up the vaccine, but – 
intriguingly – not an overwhelming one,” added Mawdsley. “The real game-changer 
came through the teenagers themselves. With the help of the National Foundation 
for Infantile Paralysis, they established a group called Teens Against Polio, 
canvassed door-to- door, and set up dances where only vaccinated individuals 
could get in. It showed, almost for the first time, the power of teens in 
understanding and connecting with their own demographic.”

The result was startling. The annual incidence of polio in the US decreased by 
nearly 90% between 1950 and 1960. “Getting teenagers to take up the vaccine was 
critically important, and that success shows that it is possible to reach 
hard-to-influence groups – if you involve them in the right manner.”

The lesson from this story is that a hard-to-influence group can still be 
reached
Stephen Mawdsley, historian 
The lesson is important, he believes, because in the wake of the hysteria 
against the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine – triggered by the alarms raised 
by Wakefield, who claimed that it could cause autism – another vaccination gap 
is being created. This has been created between those who will accept the 
vaccine and those who will not. Serious outbreaks of measles have occurred in 
several countries as a result.

“The lesson from this story is that a hard-to-influence group can still be 
reached,” concluded Mawdsley. “This could be by tapping into new forms of 
communication such as social media, or clever approaches to promoting 
vaccination to people opposed to vaccination. It can be done.”
 