
7. Brisbane Roar:

Roar’s tumultuous off-season raised concerns for many about their on-field 
chances; but in fairness we saw some of this last pre-season and Brisbane went 
within a whisker of finishing premiers.

The dust has now settled on behind-the-scenes upheaval, which almost saw coach 
John Aloisi walk, and there are some impressive late signings, spearheaded by 
former Socceroo Brett Holman and Spaniard Manuel Arana have those in orange 
beginning to feel a finals finish is not unrealistic.

A-League season preview part I: Central Coast, Newcastle and Wellington
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/04/a-league-2016-17-season-preview-part-i->
Ins and Outs

In: Manuel Arana (Mallorca, Spain), Brett Holman (Emirates Club, UAE), Joey 
Katebian (Victory), Thomas Kristensen (Den Haag, Netherlands), Connor O’Toole 
(Adelaide), Jacob Pepper (Wanderers), Kye Rowles (Palm Beach)

Out: Corona (Almeria, Spain), Devante Clut (Newcastle), James Donachie 
(Victory), Henrique (Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia), Javier Hervas (Zeljeznicar 
Sarajevo, Bosnia), Steven Lustica (Wanderers), Jean Carlos Solorzano 
(released), Shane Stefanutto (retired), Jerome Polenz (released)

How they’re better 

Like the rug from The Big Lebowski, Brett Holman just might tie the room 
together. Most likely playing as a No10, the former Premier League midfielder 
will attract plenty of attention, creating space for serial goal-poacher Jamie 
Maclaren and pacey duo Brandon Borrello and Dimi Petratos.

The best thing about this Roar side is not necessarily what’s new, but what 
they already have. Luke De Vere has been ravaged by injury since his return to 
the club, but will feel like a new signing. Tommy Oar has had a full pre-season 
and will surely show more than his cameo late campaign, and on top of this 
there’s the ever-green Thomas Broich. Remember him?

Area of concern

You might remember last season’s remarkable 6-3 loss to Perth, and the perhaps 
even more amazing 5-4 finals loss to Western Sydney. Aloisi’s side is built for 
entertainment, no doubt, but even with the efforts of Jade North they can look 
incredibly exposed at the back. De Vere can’t afford more injuries; Michael 
Theo needs to win his place back from Jamie Young (and keep it) and with scant 
cover at fullback, Corey Brown and Jack Hingert are crucial to Roar’s chances.

Who to watch

Holman is the obvious name, but much of Roar’s success might depend upon 
winger Tommy Oar. With a full pre-season under his belt the fringe Socceroo 
could torment defences with his pace and delivery – the potential combination 
of him and Maclaren is mouthwatering. Should he falter two-time Johnny Warren 
medallist Broich will be waiting in the wings. No pressure, kid.(RP)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-league-season-preview-part-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F660d7ca6498d7d5aae09d3a815eb1769f3f81cd6%2F0_201_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A-League%20season%20preview%20part%20II%3A%20Brisbane%2C%20Perth%2C%20Adelaide%20and%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-league-season-preview-part-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A-League%20season%20preview%20part%20II%3A%20Brisbane%2C%20Perth%2C%20Adelaide%20and%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-league-season-preview-part-ii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F660d7ca6498d7d5aae09d3a815eb1769f3f81cd6%2F0_201_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 “Keogh. Keogh”. Photograph: Paul Kane/Getty Images 
6. Perth Glory

A massive recruitment drive has Perth poised for great things this year.

Glory’s 2015-2016 season fizzled out in the finals after finishing fifth on 
the table. They were eliminated in the first round and Tony Sage has gone back 
to his chequebook once more to make the WA club real title challengers. Perth 
have gone local, bringing home a gaggle of players who were born and bred near 
the Swan river. Rostyn Griffiths comes back from Holland, youngster Brandon 
Wilson from Burnley and former Socceroo Rhys Williams from Middlesbrough. If 
Williams can stay fit, watch out. Combine then with the likes of foreign trio 
Diego Castro, Andy Keogh and Nebojsa Marinkovic, along with Perth locals Adam 
Taggart, Josh Risdon and Shane Lowry and they’ll be far from easybeats.

Ins and Outs

In: Joel Chianese (Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia), Nick Feely, Rostyn Griffiths 
(Roda JC, Netherlands), Joseph Mills (Oldham Athletic, UK), Liam Reddy 
(Wanderers), Milan Smiljanic (Maccabi Netanya, Israel), Jordan Thurtell, Rhys 
Williams (Charlton Athletic, UK), Brandon Wilson (Burnley FC, UK)

Out: Ante Covic (released), Diogo Ferreira (released), Hagi Gligor (released), 
Gyorgy Sandor (released), Krisztian Vadocz (released), Ruben Zadkovich 
(retired), Jerrad Tyson (Wanderers)

How they’re better

Perth’s depth has improved greatly and Kenny Lowe has two players for every 
position. Liam Reddy replaces the experienced Ante Covic, and he has options up 
front with Keogh, Chianese, Taggart, Chris Harold and young strikers Jamal 
Reiners and Kosta Petratos. The midfield is bursting with talent and quality, 
from European playmakers Marinkovic, newcomer Milan Smiljanic and Castro, to 
the more robust Griffiths, Wilson and Richard Garcia. In defence there are two 
Williams brothers to choose from, along with veteran Dino Djulbic, Socceroo 
Risdon, Lowry and new English fullback Mills.

Area of concern


Keeping all his players happy and content, with appropriate game-time could be 
a problem for Lowe. Unless injuries strike the coach has at least 15 players 
who would command starting spots at other clubs. If Lowe does get the mix right 
though it could be quite explosive.

Who to watch

Irishman Andy Keogh has a point to prove after his departure amid salary cap 
rumblings, and subsequent mid-season return to theA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> from Thailand last year. His 
first stint in Perth was dynamic, with goals coming from all angles, and if he 
can reproduce those performances than the Glory will be hard to stop.(JD)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-league-season-preview-part-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46c8b97db7078ed3d6366f5a72c3f400f946aa9d%2F0_31_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A-League%20season%20preview%20part%20II%3A%20Brisbane%2C%20Perth%2C%20Adelaide%20and%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-league-season-preview-part-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A-League%20season%20preview%20part%20II%3A%20Brisbane%2C%20Perth%2C%20Adelaide%20and%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-league-season-preview-part-ii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46c8b97db7078ed3d6366f5a72c3f400f946aa9d%2F0_31_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Only one team (Brisbane Roar) has successfully defended an A-League 
championship; how will Adelaide United fare? Photograph: Daniel Kalisz/Getty 
Images 
5. Adelaide United

Reigning champions Adelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united> will be hard pressed to 
repeat their double-winning success. Everything fell into place for the Reds 
last season, vaulting them from bottom after eight rounds to top after 27, 
culminating in a dominant finals series.

A by-product of A-League glory is the inevitable talent drain that follows, as 
international scouts and wealthy rivals cherry pick from the champions. 
Guillermo Amor will have to refashion his attacking strategy this campaign 
without the pace of Craig Goodwin and Bruce Kamau, or the hold-up play of Bruce 
Djite. Establishing a new blend will take time, especially considering how 
recently key recruits Sergi Guardiola and James Holland joined the squad.

Ins and Outs

Ins: Ben Garuccio (City), Sergi Guardiola (Granada, Spain - loan), James 
Holland (MSV Duisburg, Germany), Henrique (Negeri Sembilan, Malaysia), Ryan 
Kitto (Newcastle), Jesse Makarounas (Victory), Marc Marino (City), Nikola 
Mileusnic (Adelaide City)

Outs: Eli Babalj (AZ Alkmaar, Netherlands), Bruce Djite (Suwon, Korea), Mate 
Dugandzic (released), Craig Goodwin (Sparta Rotterdam, Netherlands), Bruce 
Kamau (City), Stefan Mauk (NEC, Netherlands), Pablo Sanchez (released), Ruon 
Tongyik (City)

Areas of strength

Eugene Galekovic was arguably the league’s most influential player last 
season. His return from injury after six rounds shored up a leaky defence and 
his leadership steered the Reds through squeaky-bum time. He will again marshal 
a solid and experienced unit that will be difficult to penetrate.

Areas of concern

On paper at least, Adelaide’s attacking options look considerably less 
threatening than last year. In particular, the loss of so much pace removes a 
significant weapon at Amor’s disposal, especially away from home when looking 
to counterattack. United failed to score in their three preseason matches 
against A-League opposition, and they were outscored by Redlands United in the 
FFA Cup round of 32.

There’s also a worry over the depth of United’s squad, especially considering 
the fitness of a number of key players. Jordan Elsey has already been ruled out 
for the season, Michael Marrone has not yet returned from a long-term injury 
while Marcelo Carrusca, Sergio Cirio and Iacopo La Rocca have all spent time on 
the treatment table in preseason.

Who to watch

The midfield triumvirate of Isaias, Holland and Carrusca should complement 
each other perfectly. Their mix of skills and nous provide Amor flexibility to 
route possession either from the base of midfield or through his roaming No10.
(JH) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-league-season-preview-part-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe582ea6562d845af924bab3215e63720f75dcfed%2F0_87_5047_3028%2F5047.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A-League%20season%20preview%20part%20II%3A%20Brisbane%2C%20Perth%2C%20Adelaide%20and%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-league-season-preview-part-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A-League%20season%20preview%20part%20II%3A%20Brisbane%2C%20Perth%2C%20Adelaide%20and%20Sydney&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-league-season-preview-part-ii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe582ea6562d845af924bab3215e63720f75dcfed%2F0_87_5047_3028%2F5047.jpg>
 Star import, Bobo, in action for Sydney FC during the FFA Cup. Photograph: 
Cameron Spencer/Getty Images 
4. Sydney FC

A Graham Arnold coached A-League side has never failed to make the finals but 
that’s precisely what his splutteringSydney FC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sydneyfc> chargers achieved last 
campaign. An injury-ravaged season for captain Alex Brosque didn’t help, but 
underperforming marquees meant the Sky Blues were at times pedestrian in the 
front third.

They scored a whopping 27 fewer goals than Melbourne City last season – 
exactly one per match – and will need Brazilian Bobo and the returning Bernie 
Ibini to give them far greater potency in attack.

Ins and Outs

In: Bobo (Gremio, Brazil), Josh Brilliante (Fiorentina, Italy), Bernie Ibini 
(Club Bruge, Belgium - loan), Danny Vukovic (Victory), Alex Wilkinson (City), 
Michael Zullo (City)

Out: Ali Abbas (Pohang Steelers, Korea), Zac Anderson (released), Jacques Faty 
(Mariners), Andrew Hoole (Newcastle), Chris Naumoff (retired), Ivan Necevski 
(Mariners), Shane Smeltz (Kedah FA, Malaysia), Robert Stambolziev (released), 
Mickael Tavares (Mariners), Riley Woodcock (released)

How they’re better

With Matthew Jurman the only solid performer in an otherwise raggedy looking 
backline last season Arnold has gone for tried and tested, raiding City for 
Socceroos defensive duo Wilkinson and Zullo. Vukovic is another quality pick up 
and should put pressure on gloveman Vedran Janjetovic whose promising 
development plateaued last campaign.

It’s one thing scoring in the FFA Cup against state league opposition but if 
Bobo can maintain his impressive early form, he’s not just one star signing, 
he’s two. They were prolific together at Besiktas and if Bobo can re-inspire 
the occasionally forlorn Holosko, ‘Holo-Bobo’ could just become the cute double 
act Sydney fans have been craving.

Area of concern

Graham Arnold has responded by recruiting real quality, but with the spotlight 
that comes with Sydney FC it’s a very different season whether Bobo goes Marc 
Janko, or Kruno Lovrek. Ninkovic and Holosko cannot afford underwhelming 
seasons (again).

Arnold utilised the siege mentality brilliantly at the smaller Central Coast 
Mariners, but Sydney need to recapture the pride and swagger of being a “big 
club”. The pizazz of a Dwight Yorke, Alessandro Del Piero, or even Terry 
Antonis is sewn into the fabric of this club – relying on workhorses like Matt 
Simon won’t captivate this notoriously fickle supporter base (or the media).

Who to watch

Josh Brilliante, one of the best young players to emerge out of the A-League 
in recent years. A harrowing start to life in Serie A has seen the talented 
Socceroo’s career stagnate. If he can anchor the Sydney midfield, screen the 
defence and control tempo, distributing well to the Brosque’s and Ninkovic’s of 
the team, the front third could click, and click dangerously.(RP)

Predicted placings were determined by aggregating the verdicts of a 
nine-strong panel of Guardian Australia football writers comprisingRichard 
Parkin, John Davidson, Jonathan Howcroft, Paul Connolly, Pete Smith, Mike 
Ticher, Richard Gadsby, Sam Perry and Kieran Pender. The full breakdown of that 
process will be published in Thursday’s final preview. Tomorrow: part III – 
title contenders.
 