
Guardian writers' predicted position: 8th
Last season's position: 9th

Clint Bolton believes  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9_C0lBa75aY>in 
Melbourne Heart.Some cute kid <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3qDmZg3mxXQ> 
believes,as does a woman lost <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=95QBNZzMiZ4> by 
the train tracks.Golgol Mebrahtu believes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RDEW0_loLNc>, despite the fact that he's spent 
his off-season busking on city streets. Even Harry Kewell, the man who asked 
"who are Melbourne Heart" in 2011 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=5fVxbirG6uM#t=91>, 
has seen the light andconverted to the Book of Heart 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eCgwI7UXugY>.

All this despite reports that Scott Munn has been spotted roaming the campus 
at La Trobe University, quoting excerpts of Jean Paul Satre's Being and 
Nothingness at undergraduate philosophy students. Perhaps this is why most of 
Melbourne, not to mention the rest of the country, isn't so sure about 
Melbourne Heart. With the Victory cornering much of the market thanks to their 
five-season headstart, the Heart have so far only served niche interests.

It's become a truism of modern football. When faced with an existential 
crisis, embark on a cheesy ad campaign. Harry Kewell is a good example of why 
franchises shouldn't wheel out players to generate rivalries and a sense of 
loyalty to the club colours. Perhaps it's all harmless fun, but if those ads 
actually inspire anyone to part with their hard-earned for a membership,I'm 
Benny Hinn <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Oqxxhx3qYpg>.

Not a lot went right for the Heart last season. After the board chose John 
Aloisi to take over from the outgoing Dutch coach John van't Schip, Ante 
Milicic took up a new role as assistant to Tony Popovic at the Western Sydney 
Wanderers. Privately, the Heart might have soon regretted this move. For 
Milicic, on the other hand, being stiffed for a less experienced coach looks to 
have turned out to be a blessing in disguise.

That is a little tough on John Aloisi. He certainly looked every bit the part 
in his dashing three-piece suits, and he uncovered a few gems, including Sam 
Mitchinson, Jeremy Walker and David Vrankovic. However, he wasn't helped by 
injuries to Josip Tadić, Mate Dugandžić and Vince Grella, who all missed 
lengthy periods of last season.

Grella was perhaps the most disappointing of all. His return to the A-League 
was heralded by many, and would have added some much needed bite in the heart 
of midfield. The former Socceroo made it explicitly clear that having Aloisi as 
a coachwas his motivation to return to Melbourne 
<http://theworldgame.sbs.com.au/news/1129637/grella-keen-to-repay-old-mate-aloisi>
, however injuries forced him into retirementafter just one appearance off the 
bench in January 
<http://www.theage.com.au/sport/soccer/grella-retiring-after-injury-in-his-first-heart-match-20130128-2dgxx.html>
.

Heart performed admirably in Melbourne, however away from AAMI Park they 
failed to inspire, and after losing their last five matches they finished 
second-last. Despite their excellent home form, the only serious crowds that 
turned up were at the derby fixtures, or when Alessandro Del Piero came to town.

This apathy gave rise to an audacious bid from Oceania club of the century and 
former NSL powerhouse South Melbourne to buy theirA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> licence. It generated a lot of 
discussion – most of it bordering on the ridiculous – before the owners of 
Melbourne Heart put it to rest by announcing that the club wasn't for sale. 
Apparently they even made a profit for the financial year. That might have been 
helped by the fact that they sold Eli Babalj twice in one year, first to Red 
Star Belgrade and then to AZ Alkmaar.

Aside from the marketing campaign, Melbourne Heart have been busy in the 
off-season. After the retirement of Clint Bolton and Aloisi's decision to 
release experienced players such as Richard Garcia, Simon Colosimo, Matt 
Thompson and Fred, the Heart have arguably strengthened their squad.

In comes Patrick Kisnorbo from Leeds United, Iain Ramsay from Adelaide, Tando 
Velaphi from Melbourne Victory, Rob Wielaert from Roda JC, and Massimo 
Murdocca, the workhorse midfielder from Brisbane Roar. Michael Mifsud, the 
'mosquito' from Malta, might also be a handy pick-up, especially given the 
departure of last season's top goalscorer, Tadic. Meanwhile, foundation coach 
John van't Schip returns as 'technical manager' for the club, which Munn 
promises us isn't for a lack of faith in Aloisi's coaching abilities.

The biggest signings, of course, have been Harry Kewell and Orlando Engelaar. 
It's a strange twist of fate that one of the smallest clubs in the A-League is 
paying Kewell minimum wage, but if he can stay fit, it'll be one of the buys of 
the season.

Engelaar, on the other hand, has gone the way of Grella. The lanky Dutch 
midfielder looked to be a great pick-up by Aloisi, but luck has again gone 
against the Heart with Engelaar suffering a broken leg in his first outing in 
pre-season, which will cause him to miss much of the campaign. As injury cover, 
Aloisi has signed Italian midfielder Andrea Migliorini.

With a crop of young players including Walker, Dugandzic, Vrankovic, Ben 
Garrucio, Sam Mitchinson, Nick Kalmar and Golgol Mebrahtu, Aloisi will have a 
tricky balancing act in mixing youth and experience.

Melbourne Heart will be hoping to reach the finals, but of equal concern will 
be what goes on off the pitch. Signing Harry Kewell might bring a few thousand 
extra fans, and the Melbourne derbies should go up another notch this season 
thanks to his presence.
 