
Guardian writers' predicted position: 3rd
Last season's position: 1st (lost in grand final)

What to say about the Western Sydney Wanderers that hasn't already been said? 
They are, according to everybody, the greatest thing to happen to Australian 
football sinceJohn Walter Fletcher decided to organise a kick-about between two 
schools in Sydney in 1880 
<http://www.migrationheritage.nsw.gov.au/exhibitions/worldcup/timeline.shtml>. 
Or whatever.

The A-League's "newest oldest club" will enter A-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> 9.0 with high expectations. In 
their first season, they won the premiership, attracted a colourful and 
parochial mix of active fans, who, when they are not silent-protesting canteen 
price hikes and people who don't indicate at roundabouts, create the best 
atmosphere of any team in the competition. And despite the fact they lost the 
grand final to the Central Coast Mariners, memberships have had to be capped to 
allow a little room for the day-trippers and away fans.

In a competition comprised of small squads levelled out by a salary cap, it is 
the consistent teams that succeed, and last season the Wanderers played their 
hand perfectly. Headed by Tony Popovic, the coaching staff managed the team 
with authority, limiting injuries and rotating players to create a sense of 
cohesion for both the regular starters and squad players. As a result, the 
Wanderers began to peak at just the right moment, going undefeated for their 
last 12 matches to take out the premiership in March.

Perhaps the most encouraging sign of the Wanderers breakthrough season was the 
renaissance in the careers of A-League journeymen Michael Beauchamp, Nikolai 
Topor-Stanley, Ante Covic and Mark Bridge, as well as the successful 
repatriation of Aaron Mooy from St Mirren in Scotland. Popovic and Ante Milicic 
crafted a team out of the dregs and leftovers of other A-League squads, in the 
process making more than a few other clubs look silly, and creating an 
'underdog' culture at the club. They are Wanderers by name, Wanderers by nature.

However, despite the success of the club both on and off the field, their 
second season will present quite different challenges. Last year, fans only 
expected the Wanderers to make up the numbers and restore some credibility to a 
competition reeling after two successive expansion failures in Queensland. All 
players, aside from the captain, Beauchamp, and marquee player Shinji Ono, were 
signed to one-year contracts, and expectations were meagre at best.

This season the Wanderers will be one of the teams to beat. Their tactics will 
have been studied intently by rival coaches in the off-season to search for 
weaknesses to exploit, while every team will lift in their presence. Moreover, 
Popovic will have to regenerate his squad, which he has made a good start on 
during the winter break.

Both Joey Gibbs and Dino Kresinger have been shown the door, while Tomi Juric 
and Brendon Santalab have been signed in their places. The jury is still out on 
former Sydney FC striker Santalab, but Juric already looks a natural fit in the 
Wanderers line-up. Big, strong and mobile, Juric will be groomed as the 
centre-forward who can score goals as well as holding up the ball for speedy 
wingers, and creative midfielder Ono. Under the guidance of former goal-shark 
Milicic, don't be surprised if this is a breakthrough season for JuriÄ‡, who has 
tentatively been dubbed 'the next Mark Viduka' and attracted the attention of 
the Socceroos coach Holger Osieck.

But for all the changes up front, the Wanderers will once again be looking to 
build their season on a solid defensive foundation. Dean Heffernan and Matthew 
Spiranovic have both signed with the Wanderers, adding depth across the 
backline. Last season the Wanderers conceded the fewest goals of any team, with 
Topor-Stanley and Beauchamp forming a formidable partnership in central 
defence. The two centre-backs, who between them have traversed six A-League 
clubs in just eight seasons, were like that unlikely couple inJohn Prine and 
Iris DeMent's famous duet, In Spite of Ourselves 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CCObON5sJzU>. The roles of John and Iris are 
yet to be determined, but Topor-Stanley surely has dibs on the"whacked out 
weirdo and lovebug junkie" 
<https://m.ak.fbcdn.net/sphotos-a.ak/hphotos-ak-prn1/1237870_576978559032816_447069765_n.jpg>
.

This season takes on an extra dimension, as the Wanderers enter the Asian 
Champions League in early 2014. If Popovic can continue his success in Western 
Sydney, he'll surely become a target for overseas clubs, as will many of his 
players. Foiled by the Central Coast Mariners in the grand final in April, the 
Wanderers will have their sights firmly set on silverware. Only time will tell 
if second-season blues catch up with them.
 