
'Expectations: I thought it would be OK, but it is brilliant because it is so 
cosy and comfy. One of the downsides are that all the films are in German so 
you can barely understand."

I had offered nine-year-old Joss a notebook, and suggested he help me with 
this article by jotting down his thoughts over our weekend. Last time I went 
away with him and Joan and Bren was a typical holiday for us: me in my small 
campervan, and they in theirs, in a field with a cold tap and one toilet. So 
when I invited them to share my prize, a break in a luxury cabin in Sherwood 
Forest, we were somewhat uncertain.

I drove to Nottinghamshire on one of those July 2012 days when flood warnings 
dominated the traffic news. Our weekend home was nestled among trees: even from 
the deck there was little sense of our 64 neighbours, and extensive windows 
gave a feeling of being in the forest, but without the insects or rain. Joss 
quickly discovered he could order pizza via the cabin's TV, a novelty that sent 
him into paroxysms of delight, topped only by leaping into our private outdoor 
hot tub. Sadly, the pizza never arrived as we didn't realise they had to be 
ordered by 7.30pm. Joss was deeply disappointed – on top of the films being 
incomprehensible he had to endure home-cooked fare.

Next morning the charming young receptionist reset the entertainment system to 
English – apparently it's easy to press the wrong button on arrival. Bren tried 
the hot tub, disturbed only by two squirrels, who peered into the water then 
squared up to one another over whatever it is squirrels fight about – food or 
sex presumably. Forest Holidays has been developing holiday locations in 
England and Scotland since the 1960s; Sherwood, which opened in spring this 
year within the 3,300-acre Sherwood Pines Forest Park, is its newest site. We 
had wondered if there would be enough to do without shelling out loads of cash, 
jostling with crowds or getting in a car but the company focuses on the forest 
itself for entertainment.
 Inside one of the luxury cabins 
We were five minutes by bicycle from the visitor centre 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/sherwoodpines>, focal point for a range of 
activities and facilities including bike hire, cafe, playgrounds, walking 
trails and cycle routes. Four months too young to play Tarzan on theGo Ape 
<http://goape.co.uk/days-out/sherwood> treetop adventure, Joss was mollified by 
the excellent (free) Robin Hood's Hideout, a huge climbing frame with 
treehouses, rope ladders, chain walkways and tightropes. With hardly anyone 
else around, his companions found it fun too, a test for our middle-aged core 
muscles.

We also had an hour's archery lesson, tried two of the excellently signposted 
cycle trails, and went on the ranger-led night walk.

Joss: "I enjoyed the green [family] cycle track but I found the blue 
[adventure] a bit challenging. In the evening we went on the night walk, to be 
honest I found it quite boring."

I can't blame the ranger that the TV package was more enticing to a 
nine-year-old than calls, wails and screeches in a darkening wood. She was very 
informative and did her best to find us at least one of the forest's three 
varieties of deer. We had night-vision glasses, but they were playing hard to 
get.

On my final night, after Joan, Bren and Joss had left, I wandered the site, 
hoping to get a sense of how the place ranked for those more familiar with this 
kind of holiday.

"Very plush," said a man who has been doing Forest Holidays since his now 
late-teenage son was a toddler. I asked how it compared with its better-known 
rival (Center Parcs) nearby.

"Much more relaxed here," said the son, "especially with the hot tub."

Another couple were on their second visit and have booked a third.

I leave the final words to Joss: "Hot tub was brilliant. The bathrooms are 
perfect and the bedrooms are cosy. Pizza delivery I think should be a little 
later."

• Ruth Bowen won the UK category in the 2011 competition. The trip was 
provided by Forest Holidays (0845 130 8223,forestholidays.co.uk 
<http://www.forestholidays.co.uk>). Three-night weekends in Sherwood Forest 
cost from £244 for two
 