
The spontaneous shooting of a father over some texting and tossed popcorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/14/tampa-police-officer-movie-theatre-shooting>
 had barely grabbed our attention when the headlines came about theeven more 
horrific crime in New Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/14/two-children-injured-new-mexico-middle-school-shooting>
. Both were senseless, both all the more riveting for their quotidian settings. 
The antsy atmosphere of a pre-screening theater, the casual boredom of a 
student assembly – these are the universally-identifiable situations of standup 
comedy routines. To have them turned inside-out by unspeakable violence 
provokes primal outrage and fear.

Because school shootings absorb us especially thoroughly (they are especially 
appalling), they attract the most sympathy for the gun control cause. Support 
for stronger regulation is never moreardent 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/01/18/us/poll-shows-school-shooting-sways-views-on-guns.html?_r=0>
 than after such tragedies. The New Mexico school shooting will likely stir up 
more calls for changes to the law. It's terrible that it takes such tragedy 
against our kids to motivate us to action.

But I wish more Americans realized that shootings like the one in the Tampa, 
Florida suburb at the movie theatre that say more about how gun control laws 
have failed everyday Americans, and made us less safe, not more so.

We may have the good sense to understand that the wall-to-wall coverage of 
school shootings is still, thank God,out of proportion 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-09-17/mass-shootings-fuel-fear-account-for-fraction-of-murders.html>
 to their frequency. It's their infrequency, in addition to their awfulness, 
that makes them news. Advocates of gun control use them as evidence not because 
they represent the scope of the problem, but because most people instinctively 
understand that part of the tragedy is the sense that it could have been 
prevented. The mind recoils so thoroughly at the thought of children murdering 
children, we cling to the notion that something could be done. Gun control 
advocates try to leverage this desperation into laws that often only 
tangentially intersect with the violence in the news.

But gun advocates can trump gun control support exactly because these 
child-on-child crimes stir such desperation and are so shocking to our 
sensibilities. This may be why support for regulation seems tofade 
<http://politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com/2013/12/04/cnn-poll-support-for-stricter-gun-control-fades/>
 so quickly. Yes, something could be done, the National Rifle Association and 
others say: we can protect our children from evil by disarming evil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/15/no-guns-on-college-campuses>
. They argue for mental health restrictions or "enforcing existing law", both 
methods that depend on the belief that bad things happen because of bad people. 
If you're a good guy, they argue, guns aren't just neutral but perhaps 
necessary. We shouldn't keep guns out of the hands of thegood guys. 

Curtis Reeves was a retired police officer, the very definition of a good guy 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/01/15/florida-movie-theater-shooting_n_4601538.html>
. He may also prove to be unbalanced in a legally-applicable way, but that 
wouldn't have prevented him from getting a concealed carry permit in Florida. 
Since Floridagrants 
<http://articles.sun-sentinel.com/2012-07-06/news/fl-gun-carry-permits-20120706_1_mental-illness-mental-health-nics>
 concealed carry permits via its Department of Agriculture, rather than, say a 
criminal justice agency, the state cannot use the National Instant Criminal 
Background Check System to screen applicants. To put that another way, Florida 
simply doesn't have the federal background check required in every other state 
that grants concealed carry permits.

Indeed, even if Florida had a more stringent conceal carry screening process – 
or if it didn't have a concealed carry law at all – Reeves could have had his 
weapon on him. Retired law enforcement personnel are allowed byfederal law 
<http://le.nra.org/leosa.aspx> to carry a concealed weapon in any jurisdiction 
except where it's explicitly banned by law or the property owner. This is a 
loophole that may seem natural (again: good guys!), but it's actually a 
reflection of just how deeply we've bought into the myth that guns aren't the 
problem and we only need worry about who has them. That's not true: we need to 
worry about guns, no matter who has them.

The National Rifle Association likes to argue that criminals, or people intent 
on committing a crime, will obtain guns no matter what the law says. Among the 
5,417 gun homicides in 2012 that the FBIassigns  
<http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2012/crime-in-the-u.s.-2012/offenses-known-to-law-enforcement/expanded-homicide/expanded_homicide_data_table_11_murder_circumstances_by_weapon_2012.xls>
 a circumstance to (3,438 are "unknown circumstances"), a mere 1,324 were 
committed in conjunction with another felony. Three times that (3,980) were 
committed by otherwise law-abiding citizens. Of that, over half (1,968) were 
the result of an argument that escalated fatally out of control.

To put it another way: otherwise unpremeditated murders, where people kill out 
of momentary rage, are the single most common type of gun homicide in America. 
More than gangland killings (822); more than murders committed during robberies 
(505) and drug deals (311) combined.

Much as with gun suicides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/17/obama-gun-control-miss-target>
 (which account for a majority of all gun deaths), these are the deaths that 
the government has the most power to stop, simply by making guns harder to get 
a hold of. Any argument can end in violence, no one can stop that. But if 
there's a gun involved, the likelihood of someonedying is far greater. 

You keep a gun out of the argument, you will save lives. This is not 
hypothetical. A person may be intent on killing someone else, but it is simply
harder to do with anything else. That's why forms of homicide other than guns 
account for only about athird 
<http://www.fbi.gov/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2012/crime-in-the-u.s.-2012/offenses-known-to-law-enforcement/expanded-homicide/expanded_homicide_data_table_7_murder_types_of_weapons_used_percent_distribution_by_region_2012.xls>
 of all homicides. Someone gets angry at someone else, they may reach for a 
weapon. If we make guns harder to get, by requiring a test for the license, or 
by banning handguns more broadly, the one at hand might be far less deadly. 
Like, say, popcorn.
 