
A couple of weeks ago at Glastonbury I met a gang of lads and lasses from 
Staffordshire having a riotous time. One couple among their number were on 
honeymoon. I mention this because a) they were having lots of fun; b) it seemed 
like a non-traditional way to spend your post-wedding days; and c) so thatCKsam 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/users/cksam/comments> doesn't have to worry that we 
are merely assuming that all weddings should follow the "classic format". 
Although, obviously, the couple were "on honeymoon".

You don't have to go on honeymoon, but after months of organising the most 
hectic day of your life (apart from childbirth and pretty much every day as a 
parent), it is lovely to relax. And among my favourite memories of our 
honeymoon (10 days onMaui <http://waikoloa-realty.com/wri-images/hawaii.gif>, 
five days in Las Vegas) are the gradual remembering and sharing of wedding day 
incidents.

After forking out for a wedding, you might not want to shell out a fortune on 
a holiday. But asEileenB <http://www.guardian.co.uk/users/eileenb/comments> 
said, there are ways of raising the cash: "When my husband and I married in 
1982 in New York, I told him I did NOT want an engagement ring, that I wanted 
him to spend the money on a fabulous honeymoon instead. We spent three glorious 
weeks in Europe."

Romantic getaways don't have to cost a fortune, as slinkymalinky75 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/users/slinkymalinky75/comments> says: "Honeymoon was 
not expensive as we didn't want a lying on the beach on a remote tropical 
island affair - neither of us are sun-worshippers and had already had the 
romantic coupley honeymoon-type holidays when we first went out, and went on a 
walking holiday in Andalucia instead. We hardly spent any money there either as 
the food and wine was so cheap (and fantastic) and costs of meals were shared 
between 14 of us in the group. You would buy contents of lunch from the village 
bakery and store in the morning. Ah, I could just do it all over again!"

While Lecksicun <http://www.guardian.co.uk/users/lecksicun/comments> says: 
"We'd just had a long holiday in the US, so my wife thought we were not having 
one, but I booked a last minute easyJet flight to Nice and we had a week in a 
four-star hotel which we found when we got there. Much more romantic than a 
pre-ordained "you better have a good time on this Pacific island cos you ain't 
ever coming back". Antique shops, flower markets, lovely restaurants, beautiful 
architecture and light. I even swam in the sea (despite it being late October)."
 A honeymoon at Butlin's in 1957. Photograph: Lee Tracey/Getty Images 
Although I think Chumbles <http://www.guardian.co.uk/users/chumbles/comments> 
thinks that the recent vogue towards slightly more glamorous international 
venues is an improvement on his honeymoon in Bournemouth in 1972 â€¦

Another who trumpets the collective honeymoon (with minor reservations, which 
might suggest the advantages of foreign climes), isTechnosaurus 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/users/Technosaurus/comments>:
"For our "honeymoon", we took our seven collective offspring and a few friends 
of ours and theirs to a self-catering cottage in the Lake District for a week, 
which would have been our idea of a perfect holiday had it not poured with rain 
the entire time."

Some sensible advice from TristramShandy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/users/tristramshandy/comments>: "You might think 
it's romantic to jet off on honeymoon asap, but plane journey + banging 
hangover = grumpy newlyweds. Give yourselves a day or two to recover ..."

As always, please share your honeymoon anecdotes, advice and suggestions ...
 