
There was a time when the groom-to-be had a night out with his friends the 
night before he got hitched and it was called a stag night. Times have changed. 
Sensibly, the stag is nowadays rarely insensibly drunk the night before he gets 
married. He's also much less likely to spend just an evening with his mates.

I've been on a lot of stag dos, but only the first was of the traditional 
variety. Since then it's been a roll call from Amsterdam to Alicante, Ibiza to
Ljubljana <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Ljubljana.jpg>, and more British 
towns and cities than I can remember, never for less than 36 hours, and 
sometimes much longer. The stag night has become the stag weekend, and 
occasionally the stag holiday.

As NickBown said last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/users/nickbown/comments> about celebrating 
overseas (weddings rather than stag dos, but the theory holds true): "The 
people who care about you the most will come and those which aren't so bothered 
have an excuse not to." Although there is a rider to that: it is also possible 
that some would like to come but can't afford to go abroad. The cheaper it is, 
the more inclusive. Personally, I'm more than happy to stump up the cash for a 
tip-top weekend.

You want something memorable. Overseas can often be so, but so can stag dos at 
home. You just need to show some imagination to make it "yours". As a 
cricket-lover, the 99 World Cup was perfectly timed and offered trips to sports 
stadiums where I had spent much of my youth.

Plenty of other sports and activities are great for a stag weekend: without 
stag dos I would probably never have been clay pigeon shooting, go-karting, 
surfing or paintballing. These are good for team bonding too, given that stag 
dos throw together friends from different parts of life who often don't know 
each other. And then there are impromptu sporting events, such as glove puppet 
rugby, beach cricket and imaginary grand nationals. And walking, because there 
is always a long, unplanned walk on a stag weekend: either someone thinks that 
walking back to the hotel at 7am is a good idea, or you are lost, or that 
cathedral on top of a mountain seems like a good place to visit.

While on the subject of getting about, my advice would be that public 
transport, or professional transport, is the best. Certainly not one of the 
stag team. And absolutely not a mate of a mate who offers to drive. On one stag 
weekend, a friend of a friend had access to a minibus and offered to drive for 
a small consideration. He said it was all right because he didn't drink. He 
did, however, find other ways to be unfit to drive â€¦

Thankfully the days of the stag being stripped and left naked, tied to a 
lamppost, seem to have ended (or maybe it's just the stag dos I've attended). I 
do, however, remember one stag throwing up out of the taxi window, minutes 
before he was given a shotgun to discharge.

Shared rooms are another stag do issue (remember how even England footballers 
used to share rooms?). As I've got older I've noticed that stag weekenders tend 
to sleep more/eat more/behave more sensibly than when we were younger - 
probably something to do with kids and lack of sleep at home. We stay in nicer 
hotels too. Thrown into a young men's stag weekend a couple of years ago, I 
found myself sharing a hostel room full of bunk beds with half a dozen others 
bouncing around at 5am.

But that's enough from me, what are your stories/tips/advice? Of course, some 
of you may wish to debate whether there should even be a stag event. Or if 
there should be one, whether it should be a joint affair with the hens.

And feel free to use the internet's cloak of anonymity to post your more 
outrageous stag stories below.
 