
When the big day dawns it can fly by in a blur, so remember to take a deep 
breath every now and then and take it all in.

There are so many elements to the day and so many types of ceremony, as 
discussed in ourwedding planning thread 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/08/mans-guide-marriage-wedding-planning>
, that I'm just going to focus here on music and food and drink. There will be 
a special speeches blog next week.

Music can be a joyous thread running through the day. There are the hymns 
chosen for the church service (pick some that even non-regular churchgoers know 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/08/mans-guide-marriage-wedding-planning>
) or the tune for the registry office. Then there's the first dance, an 
enduring tradition. OK, there's something slightly exposing about the happy 
couple getting up to dance watched by everyone else, and it is a relief when 
others join in (something that the best man and FOTB can take a hand in 
leading), but it is also one of those traditions that many love. We swayed 
along toWe've Only Just Begun <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=__VQX2Xn7tI>. One 
couple I know chosePerfect Day <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QYEC4TZsy-Y>, 
which, despite its strange meaning, was perfect. Another friend even chose 
Billy Bragg.

For a strange take on all things musical at the wedding, have a read of John M 
Flaherty'sAn Aspiring Club DJ Reluctantly Moves Onto Weddings 
<http://www.mcsweeneys.net/links/monologues/3dj.html>. It is worth making the 
effort for your disco music, whether it is the lower-budget iPod playlist, a 
friend spinning the discs, or making sure you get the right DJ who will play 
the tunes you want. And be prepared to think liberally about what music you 
like:Sweet Caroline <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JMTgiFedLpE> filled the 
dancefloor like no other song at our wedding. At another wedding, where I was 
best man, I doubt so many elderly folk have ever grooved to Primal Scream'sCome 
Together <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L3vvn2qOh58>.

When it comes to food, it depends very much on the venue and budget. But my 
top tip would be just to avoid the assembled party getting hungry. Early 
afternoon weddings often lead to the guests having nothing to eat between 
breakfast and dinner, which can lead to grumpiness (asblood sugar levels fall 
<http://women.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life_and_style/women/body_and_soul/article3503845.ece>
) or early drunkenness (with nothing to soak up the champagne).

Having said that, you also want to ensure that there is plenty to drink: 
whether it be a free bar, or BYO, or ensuring that there are bottles on the 
table during the speeches (they can go on a long time and guests are asked to 
charge their glasses several times).

There are so many other things to discuss about the big day, so please feel 
free to post about whatever aspect of it interests you. Such as how to occupy 
yourself in the morning: I had a barbershop shave, while Mrslinkymalinky75 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/users/slinkymalinky75/comments> played golf. Or 
wedding vows: are you in favour of writing your own or adopting the Church of 
England's? Or reception lineups: they are strangely formal, but a good way of 
ensuring that you see everyone at the wedding (although aslobster1 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/2010/jun/29/mans-guide-marriage-father-of-the-bride?showallcomments=true#CommentKey:7dd5c0f2-33e9-46c9-bbca-602ba793b4a7>
 suggested last week, the bride and groom can do lots of "table-hopping" during 
the meal, but they may get to eat less that way).

Or you could just tell us your own choice of first song.
 