
You've returned from some exotic paradise/B&B in the Scottish Isles (Â© ibukun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/users/ibukun/comments>), the smaller of the two of 
you has been carried over the threshold, there's a big pile of presents 
(including a fondue set which you really must get round to using some time), 
and a hundred thank you letters to write.

So, what now? As balmer <https://www.theguardian.com/users/balmer/comments> so 
succinctly put it: "Weddings are easy; it's the marriage that's hard."

There are no easy answers and I certainly won't pretend to have them, despite 
having been married for a decade. No one knows what goes on inside anyone 
else's marriage, and everyone's is different.

I could throw a few words at you - supporting, sharing dreams and aspirations, 
confiding, loving, compromising - but these are just words unless you act upon 
them.

Here are just a couple of the suggestions that have been offered during the 
course of this series:

MrsLacey <https://www.theguardian.com/users/mrslacey/comments>: "Marriage was 
hard work when we set off but we stuck at it and, a few more years down the 
line we are happier than we've ever been. It has been a steep learning curve, 
not least learning to say 'Sorry' and 'I forgive you' from the heart (almost 
every day at some point), and finding out what makes each other tick, how to 
communicate etc, but it is so good - when we put the effort in. I'm not always 
lovely to live with but it is a huge comfort to know that someone has committed 
to me, whatever the weather and however I'm feeling, and declared this to me 
and all our nearest and dearest. I know I can lean on that. The ring and the 
wedding were just the tiniest parts of all of this. Marriage is so much better."

Deen B <https://www.theguardian.com/users/deenb/comments>: "Marriage has 
introduced a greater depth of feeling that was not apparent in the relationship 
before ... or at least I was not as aware of it as I am now."

Of course, when children come along they change the game completely. While 
they're the best thing I ever did - the most rewarding, as well as the most 
exhausting - they change the dynamics of your relationship and leave a lot less 
time for the two of you.

So, for one last time in this blokes' guide to weddings series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/mans-guide-to-marriage>, I'd 
like to ask for your thoughts, suggestions, anecdotes and advice. And I'd like 
to take this opportunity to say thank you for your participation over the last 
couple of months. It's been fun and I've learned a lot. I hope you have too.

One last thought: I won't be following up with vertical's cynical suggestion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/users/vertical/comments>: "Busfield's guide to 
divorce - when's it coming?!"
 