
Two of the performances that have stayed with me from last autumn’s Dance 
Umbrella <http://danceumbrella.co.uk/> are those in which the audience, rather 
than the professionals, were dancing. One wasDan Canham’s Of Riders and Running 
Horses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/16/of-riders-and-running-horses-review-an-exuberant-nighttime-experiment-in-urban-folk-dance>
, which concluded with all the spectators being invited on to the stage to 
carry on dancing with the cast. The other wasCharlotte Spencer’s Walking Stories
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/20/walking-stories-review-greenwich-park-charlotte-spencer-dance-umbrellax>
, a choreographed journey around a London park that had its participants 
linking up in circles, exchanging a spontaneous semaphore of gestures, and 
lying on the grass to stare at the clouds.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F128265616&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F128265616>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F128265616&media=>
 Film by David McCormick 
On both occasions, members of the public turned into dancers without a trace 
of self-consciousness. Historically the British have been stereotyped as a 
nation with two left feet, physically buttoned-up, with no sense of rhythm. Yet 
slowly dance has become woven into the fabric of our collective lives. We have 
community-dance choreographers such asRosemary Lee 
<http://theatreanddance.britishcouncil.org/artists-and-companies/profiles/rosemary-lee/>
 andRoyston Maldoom <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/nov/03/dance>, 
who’ve made their careers by creating beautiful, sophisticated dances for 
ordinary people to perform. We havedance programmes that improve the mobility 
of Parkinson’s sufferers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2014/nov/20/dance-for-parkinsons-disease-capturing-grace-therapeutic-benefits>
, and that mitigate the effects of dementia. And we also have theBig Dance 
<http://www.bigdance.org.uk/> initiative, a mix of earnest officialdom and 
locally sourced anarchy, which for the last decade, has been promoting the 
beauty, fun and social value of dance.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwXamnO0nE6A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwXamnO0nE6A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwXamnO0nE6A&media=>
Briefly, the story of Big Dance is that it was launched in 2006 by Ken 
Livingstone, then mayor of London. During its inaugural weekend, people in 37 
cities across the UK participated in the Biggest Dance Class, and there was a 
mass dance performed by a cast of hundreds in Trafalgar Square. When Boris 
Johnson replaced Livingstone as mayor, he was keen to continue the project and 
expand the scope of its activities. In 2008, the Big Chair Dance was performed 
by 200 of London’s senior citizens; participants in a new Breaking Records 
event attempted the world’s Largest Bollywood Dance, and the Most Ballet 
Dancers on Pointe. There was also the innovation of theBig Dance Pledge 
<http://blog.dancedirect.com/2013/05/17/big-dance-pledge/>, a specially 
commissioned dance work created by a well-known choreographer, which would be 
short and simple enough for anyone to learn and perform.

In the year of the 2012 Olympics, Big Dance went huge. Wayne McGregor 
choreographed that year’s Big Dance Pledge 
<http://www.randomdance.org/wayne_mcgregor>, with more than 121,000 children 
performing it at a designated time, as he attempted to set a record for The 
Largest Simultaneous Dance Routine ever. Now promoted to the status of Olympic 
Legacy Project, the 2012 Big Dance was also steered by some serious 
organisation. High-profile choreographers such as Siobhan Davies worked through 
local hubs to deliver material for community projects around the country: 
Channel 4 became involved, commissioning and screening five short dance films; 
Tamara Rojo was theBig Dance Ambassador 
<http://balletnews.co.uk/ballet-star-tamara-rojo-launches-global-big-dance-in-london/>
,Arlene Phillips was its Champion 
<http://www.istd.org/news/news-archive/big-dance-volunteers-honoured/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fa-nation-of-dancers-10-years-of-the-big-dance-in-the-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f6f4aa4f4f2a6f18318cdbadfd7367e427f9b02%2F0_260_4080_2447%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20nation%20of%20dancers%3A%2010%20years%20of%20the%20Big%20Dance%20in%20the%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fa-nation-of-dancers-10-years-of-the-big-dance-in-the-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20nation%20of%20dancers%3A%2010%20years%20of%20the%20Big%20Dance%20in%20the%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fa-nation-of-dancers-10-years-of-the-big-dance-in-the-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f6f4aa4f4f2a6f18318cdbadfd7367e427f9b02%2F0_260_4080_2447%2F4080.jpg>
 Teenagers performing Wayne McGregor’s Big Dance Pledge in 2012. Photograph: 
Kois Miah 
But for all the official steering, much of the Big Dance activity was now 
taking place spontaneously, with people participating in their own group 
events, street dances and eccentric solo performances. Britain has a long and 
singular tradition of local arts activity, from amateur dramatic societies, 
choirs and pageants, tothe dozens of Fun Palaces that sprang up 
<http://funpalaces.co.uk/about/about/> when Stella Duffy attempted to resurrect 
Joan Littlewood’s visionary concept of a space where communities could gather to
celebrate their own culture and creativity 
<http://funpalaces.co.uk/about/what-is-a-fun-palace/>. 

It may be that success in accessing this community spirit is Big Dance’s 
greatest achievement. CertainlyAkram Khan <http://www.akramkhancompany.net/>, 
the choreographer forthis year’s Big Dance Pledge 
<http://www.bigdance.org.uk/big-dance-pledge/>, regards its inclusiveness as 
its special beauty. For him, creating a dance which anyone, of any age or 
ability could perform, was both amoral as well as a creative challenge 
<https://vimeo.com/150775999>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fa-nation-of-dancers-10-years-of-the-big-dance-in-the-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25d2dda1d6848de6ab2b61b1f67c6a13c5ac43bb%2F0_0_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20nation%20of%20dancers%3A%2010%20years%20of%20the%20Big%20Dance%20in%20the%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fa-nation-of-dancers-10-years-of-the-big-dance-in-the-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20nation%20of%20dancers%3A%2010%20years%20of%20the%20Big%20Dance%20in%20the%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F27%2Fa-nation-of-dancers-10-years-of-the-big-dance-in-the-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25d2dda1d6848de6ab2b61b1f67c6a13c5ac43bb%2F0_0_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
 Making dance anyone can do … Akram Khan is this year’s Big Dance Pledge 
choreographer. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Far from patronising the Big Dance Pledge participants with some kind of 
glorified hokey-cokey <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hokey_cokey>, Khan wanted 
his choreography to be as satisfying for professional dancers to perform as for 
complete beginners. Equally he wanted the movement to be so simple, so 
universal, that people could adapt it their own specific physical 
circumstances, to tell their own dance story through their own body.



Already 15,000 people from 16 different countries have signed up to 
participate in the 2016 Big Dance Pledge on 20 May; and during the final 
weekend of Big Dance, 2-3 July, a mass cast of dancers will perform Khan’s 
choreography during the traditional finale in Trafalgar Square. Hundreds of 
other events will be sponsored under the Big Dance banner, and Channel 4 will 
yet again commission and screen a number ofshort dance films 
<http://www.bigdance.org.uk/big-dance-shorts-2016/>. This year is, in fact, the 
last outing for Big Dance and Boris Johnson is already declaring he wants it to 
go out in style as a “top terpsichorean event”.

Yet while Johnson celebrates the 12 million people who’ve participated in the 
“phenomenon” of Big Dance over the last decade, and declares his hopes for its 
lasting legacy, there’s a massive political irony here. It is Johnson’s own 
party that has been limiting the nation’s access to dance, by sidelining the 
arts from the national curriculum, and overseeing brutal cuts to the funding of 
theatres and arts organisations. When Johnson leaves the mayor’s office for his 
next government post, I’ll be curious to see if he remains so committed a 
“terpsichorean”. Will he fight to put dance teachers in schools and to 
galvanise support for regional theatres? Will he acknowledge that while the 
property market continues to run rampant in our big cities, many dance 
professionals are unable to afford the spaces in which to work. For all the 
whoop and fun of the BigDance <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance> 
project, the precarious infrastructure of dance needs more than words to 
sustain it.



 