
The Department for Education plans to introduce an array of computer and 
technical skills into theNational Curriculum in 2014 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-curriculum-in-england-computing-programmes-of-study/national-curriculum-in-england-computing-programmes-of-study>
 for children as young as five years old. The BBC is also planning an 
initiative that is set tobring coding into Britain's schools 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-24446046>, a move dubbed by BBC director 
of future media, Ralph Rivera, as a vital step to "transform the nation's 
ability and attitude towards coding".

Becoming a nation of coders is a good place to start, but coding ability on 
its own does not accomplish the desired outcomes of more jobs and fostering new 
successful businesses from within Britain. Rather than becoming a nation of 
coders, what we need to become is a nation of successful innovative businesses 
and that requires more than just the ability to write code. The US is still the 
home of the biggest technology companies because it values the ability to not 
only create solutions but build businesses out of them.

As it happens, we're a proud nation of explorers, innovators and 
entrepreneurs, from the mighty Victorians who defined global industry through 
to Ellen MacArthur, Jonathan Ive and Charles Dyson, with a history of 
innovation that should serve us well. We live in an age of incredible 
revolutionary technical development that has changed the way businesses operate 
forever.

Along with the internet and the continued trend of technological innovation to 
drive down cost while increasing functionality, the growth ofcloud computing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/cloud> has created the IT 
infrastructure and inspiration to launch thousands of successful businesses in 
recent years.

Traditionally, companies and organisations in need of computing power have 
relied on large server rooms, located in specific isolated geographies (often 
on their premises), all requiring upfront investment. Those same companies are 
now turning to cloud-based IT infrastructures that can be deployed cheaply in a 
matter of minutes and they only spend what they need. The impact of this 
dramatic shift in IT architecture isexpected to boost 
<http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/cloudcomputing/docs/quantitative_estimates.pdf>
 the EU economy alone by some €250bn in GDP by 2020 and contribute to the 
creation of nearly 3.8m jobs. The internet gave us low cost access to a global 
market, and the advent ofcloud computing has just leveled the playing field for 
anyone with a great idea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/apr/26/cloud-services-sme-businesses-growth>
.

The cloud has connected users in disparate locations and demolished many of 
the barriers that traditionally hampered innovation, notably cost and 
commitment of physical space, IT hardware and maintenance cost and time to 
implement. Aided by the expansion of cloud services, open source and 
collaborative platforms have made working together and building from a common 
platform easier than ever.

These same platforms give educators and students a virtual playground to 
experiment, make mistakes and learn how to be successful on their own terms, 
without having to make significant upfront investment in physical hardware. 
Teachers, students and staff are free to create secure, on-demand virtual 
environments for collaboration and innovation, similar to what many students 
will encounter in their first jobs after graduation – or before, as the 
founders of companies such asFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> and Snapchat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/snapchat> did.

But to foster an enduring legacy of innovation, the new curriculum must teach 
students the coding skills whilst instilling them with confidence to "start 
something"; and show them how with sweat – and often tears – but not 
necessarily a lot of money, they could be the next Facebook.

Today, the cloud infrastructure that is essential for developers and coders to 
build on is widely available in the UK and Europe, and in some cases has moved 
to the next stage of development, with the upgrade from internet-only access to 
enterprise class network connectivity. This creates a resilient fully dispersed 
networked cloud, giving quick, easy, low cost access to customers and markets 
across Europe.

Take the UK DNA of entrepreneurial innovation and add in an educational 
syllabus focused on providing the right IT skills, plus a rise in home grown UK 
and European cloud computing providers, and you get a potent mix; ideas, skills 
and access to low cost, reliable IT infrastructure that's fast to provision 
and connected to the world's markets.

With the right investment, belief and support it could be just the recipe for 
success the government is hoping for.

Matthew Finnie is the chief technology officer at Interoute  
<http://www.interoute.com/>

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <https://register.theguardian.com/media/> to the Guardian Media 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> – this content is brought 
to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>.

 

 
 