
There is much to appreciate about the story that concludes James Joyce’s 
Dubliners. After all, The Dead is regarded as one of the greatest short stories 
ever written.

At Christmas time, my wife and I generally watch the film version 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Dead_(1987_film)> and inevitably discover 
something new every time. Directed by John Huston, it is - like Joyce’s 
original prose - also a masterpiece.

In Dublin last week we attended yet another version: a candlelight reading of 
the entire 16,000-word story byAidan Gillen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aidan-gillen>, resplendent in white tie 
and sitting at a desk throughout.*

It is a tribute to Gillen and, of course, to Joyce that the audience was 
riveted as the poignant tale of Gabriel Conroy’s epiphany unfolded.

I had previously overlooked the significance of the mention of a now defunct 
Dublin newspaper, theDaily Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress>, by Conroy’s university 
colleague, Molly Ivors. (NB: this originally said “British” newspaper: see 
thread for reason it has been amended).

She chides him for writing for the paper, calling him a “West Briton”, a 
derogatory term for an Irish person believed to be too much of an Anglophile 
and, by implication, lacking in patriotism.

The Express was opposed to Irish nationalism and the remark stings Conroy, who 
also rejects Molly’s support for the Irish language, but he appears unable to 
answer her charge satisfactorily.

Instead, in his later speech during dinner - after Molly has departed - he 
makes clear his opposition to the “new generation” she exemplifies.

Joyce was writing just ahead of the 1916 Easter Rising 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Easter_Rising>, an event that will be celebrated 
throughout this centenary year. Having attended Sinn Féin’s launch of its 2016 
commemoration of the rising the night before, I realised just how prescient 
Joyce had been in highlighting the conflicting views of Gabriel and Molly.

It is but one small incident in Joyce’s story, but it fits his overall theme 
about the paralysis ofIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>. 
Conroy’s marriage is also paralysed, as are the lives of the other characters.

Joyce uses snow, a freezing blanket, as a continual image to reinforce his 
theme of immobility, returning to it in his memorable final paragraph. With his 
wife having cried herself to sleep, Conroy stares into the street at the 
falling snow:

“Yes,” it begins, “the newspapers were right: snow was general all over 
Ireland...” And it concludes: “His soul swooned slowly as he heard the snow 
falling faintly through the universe and faintly falling, like the descent of 
their last end, upon all the living and the dead.”

By then, Gillen’s voice was almost a whisper, a contrast to the standing 
ovation he received.

*The six performances at Dublin’s wonderful venue, the Smock Alley Theatre 
<http://smockalley.com/the-dead/>, were sold out, as were those at the Sam 
Wanamaker Playhouse in London in December.
 