
Another summit, another alphabet soup of targets from the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>.

This weekend the UN will draw a line under the millennium development goals 
(MDGs), the targets agreed on 15 years ago to “spare no effort to free our 
fellow men, women and children from the abject and dehumanising conditions of 
extreme poverty”.

 But there will be no rest for the international organisation. Almost exactly 
15 years after the MDGs were announced, world leaders will once again agree a 
“plan of action for people, planet and prosperity”, and annouce the successors 
to the MDGs, the 17sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-united-nations>
 (SDGs).

Though the finer details of the SDGs have yet to hammered out, the mere fact 
of their advent raises an inevitable question: will they succeed where their 
predecessors failed?

The UN’s final report on the MDGs, released in July, painted a decidedly mixed 
picture. The MDGs helped lift more than a billion people out of extreme 
poverty, but the goal of achieving universal primary education was just missed, 
as was the target of halving the proportion of people suffering from hunger.

Sustainable development goals: changing the world in 17 steps – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
The question of what can be achieved by the SDGs is particularly pressing 
given their ambitious scope: among other things the SDGs propose to eradicate 
extreme poverty and gender-based discrimination by 2030.

The SDGs – which have already been attacked for being too numerous and 
unwieldy – will differ from their predecessors in one key respect. While the 
MDGs theoretically applied to all countries, they were seen in practice as a 
scorecard for developing countries. The SDGs, though, are explicitly universal 
and every country will be expected to show commitment to and progress towards 
them.

Will that universal pressure force concerted action that is truly global? We 
will see just how loudly the words ofBan Ki-moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ban-ki-moon>, the UN secretary general, 
resonate in the ears of world leaders between now and 2030: “This is the 
people’s agenda, a plan of action for ending poverty in all its dimensions, 
irreversibly, everywhere, and leaving no one behind.”
 