
It was always going to be a difficult morning for Alan. He’d been wrong, you 
see.


Just over a year ago, Jones, the Sydney broadcaster, told Malcolm Turnbull 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2649150/Alan-Jones-interview-Malcolm-Turnbull-gets-heated-minister-accuses-radio-host-bomb-thrower.html>
 he “had no hope of ever being the leader, you have got to get that into your 
head”.

Malcolm Turnbull: three things we need to know about our new prime minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/14/malcolm-turnbull-the-three-things-we-need-to-know-about-the-challenger>
And here the upstart was, the leader of the federal parliamentary Liberal party
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party>. Tuesday 15 
September 2015. An offence against the universe, the settled universe where 
Jones dictates and everyone else obeys.

As the sun rose on Tuesday, Jones was expressing the crotchety confusion that 
many white men of a certain cellared vintage express in Australia now that 
other people, less important people, can occasionally get a word in.

Alan had known “this man” – Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> – “backwards”. 
Perhaps frontal knowledge would have supplied the vital clue that the member 
for Wentworth would persist against Alan’s firm prediction, that he would 
listen to the voters and reach the obvious conclusion the Liberals had only one 
shot left in their pre-election locker – unseating Tony Abbott, the leader 
Australian voters wouldn’t forgive.

Alan was still hopeful that the Nationals would rebuff the amorous advance of 
the ReturnBull and refuse to govern in coalition. The day was yet young.

Perhaps. Perhaps, the eternal perhaps, cut across the usual breakfast currency 
ofAlan Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones>, which is certainty.

Alan’s displeasure was so vivid and protracted he failed to notice Abbott’s 
former colleagues out in force, peppering the airwaves from first light with 
gestures of peace, love and unity.

Canberra’s post-spill end of lease cleaning was under way in full force – even 
Kevin Andrews was suing for peace. “I’ve always liked Malcolm.” (Tony who? Oh, 
that guy. Terrific, but flawed. We are so grateful for your service. Man this 
is hard. Here’s your hat, what’s your hurry?)

Alan didn’t want to be alone – after all, what does misery love? – but he 
didn’t want to be disagreed with either.

Who could come on to chart the decline of Canberra civilisation beyond the 
screened talkback calls featuring various people tearing up their Liberal party 
membership cards?

Ah yes, Andrew Bolt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/andrew-bolt>. Andrew’s 
soothing observations provided an opportune moment for a sip of water, a 
moment’s mindfulness. One mustn’t rasp during the revolution.

“It’s Malcolm Turnbull first and the Liberal party second,” Bolt noted to 
Alan, reflecting his close study of the situation.

Perhaps Malcolm had changed? But the problem was clear. The Liberals still had 
a leader “far to the left of where most Liberals are”.

The base was unhappy. “There are many, many, many Liberal voters absolutely 
appalled by what’s going on.”

Andrew and Alan and Appalled: a trifecta of outrage.

After winning his prize, Malcolm Turnbull must learn from Abbott's mistakes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/15/after-winning-his-prize-malcolm-turnbull-must-learn-from-abbotts-mistakes>
The big question. Would Malcolm learn from his past offensive Malcolmness? 

Well, perhaps. And now, after 30 minutes of garment ripping, we came to the 
nub of the issue. “He’s reached out to me,” Bolt noted to Alan, evidently 
pleased. “We’ll see if that continues.”

Perhaps a slight harrumph could be heard, followed by a laugh straight out of 
musical theatre – “project to the back, Jones, breathe from the diaphragm.”

“Me too,” Jones said, voice rising only a little. “I’ve had plenty of calls.”

Would Malcolm continue with this pleasing trajectory, listening to his 
betters? Could humility be learned?

Again, that eternal perhaps, straining against certainty.
 