 ‘My name is Paula Abdul, and I am no longer held back by America's highest 
rating television show.’ Photograph: GABRIEL BOUYS/AFP/Getty Images 
Woke up and repeated the same mantra I've been saying every morning since I 
made the decision to get clean ofAmerican Idol <http://www.americanidol.com>: 
my name is Paula Abdul, and I am no longer held back by America's highest 
rating television show. People have no idea how exhausting it is explaining the 
power of positive thinking to a sexually confused red state teen who has just 
butchered You Raise Me Up – especially when you know what you want to say, but 
can't seem to hack down the dense thicket of rambling incoherence and liberate 
the sleeping princess of clarity enclosed therein. To do that once a week for 
an entire series is insane, and it's been wonderfulto get off that crazy 
rollercoaster 
<http://guardian.co.uk/media/organgrinder/2009/aug/05/paula-abdul-american-idol-best-bits>
.

This morning I poured myself a prescription painkiller bubble bath and lay 
back and did what I call just enjoying being in my moment. This can mean 
anything from taking a few hours to get fascinated by the pretty colours in the 
bubbles to rambling excruciatingly in a live TV broadcast. Afterwards, I 
reassured my fans that I am sifting through so many wonderful, wonderful 
offers. So many major executives have reached out to me, anxious to have me do 
for their shows what I did for Idol – namely turn it into a global phenomenon 
at the same time as providing constant support dramas, in the form of 
a hit-and-run accident, or an alleged affair with a contestant, or those absurd 
stories about my substance use. Sure, I know I admitted the last one once. But 
I was high at the time, OK?
 