
Once again, Diddy redraws the blueprint. My debut on the Home Shopping Network 
<http://nymag.com/daily/fashion/2009/12/p_diddy_was_born_for_the_home.html> set 
a new sales record, reminding the world that everything I touch turns to 
nine-carat gold. With inlaid Diamonique and emeraldine accents. Let me tell 
you, they just lapped up my understated fragranceI Am King 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IsJcKYVSo2o>, which I dedicated to Barack 
Obama, Martin Luther King and Muhammad Ali. I chose an Israeli model to front 
it, sure, but anyone who smells it will find one word forming on their lips: 
struggle. It really is the essence of a long march, competitively priced.

Of course, I didn't mention that stuff during my HSN spot, as bringing 
politics into the mix can compromise the retail experience. Inevitably, some 
playa haters have been saying to me, "Wait,Diddy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/diddy>, you're the most important artist of 
a generation. You're a mogul. Surely you got no need to be taking calls on a 
rudimentary cardboard set designed to look like a bachelor apartment while your 
co-presenter trills, 'Hurry, only a few more units left'?"

I say to them: I have no problem putting my mouth where other people's money 
is. And if that means telling slack-jawed, home shopping-narcotised housewives 
that I have personally thrown in a suede-effect mini tote just for them, as a 
holiday gift, then I'm going to do it with all the attention to detail I bring 
to any other of my will-this-do retail enterprises. Let me remind you: I am the 
CEO ofBad Boy Entertainment <http://www.badboyonline.com/>. I am Diddy. I am 
king.
 