
By now, my hype campaign should have seen to it that every man, woman and 
child of movie-ticket-buying capabilities knows that I've spent a decade 
creatingAvatar <http://www.avatar-movie.co.uk/>, a film for which the 
designation "game changer" is woefully inadequate. It's a civilisation changer. 
Plus, it has a smoking hot blue CGI alien chick.

As I told Playboy 
<http://www.playboy.co.uk/home/girls/?gclid=CMiHzMqPtZ4CFWlr4wodMl2nmA>, right 
from the beginning my insistence was "she's got to have tits". I explained to 
them that I realised that made no sense, because her race aren'tplacental 
mammals <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eutheria> as if a) I have much idea what 
I'm talking about and b) Playboy is going to theorise any set of high-concept 
tits out of a movie.

But that's what I am: a risk-taker, making pictures for real people, not 
emotionally stunted critics. And I think what those people are starting to 
realise is that nothing has changed since the night my extraordinarily subtle
Titanic <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120338/> won eleventy Oscars, and I 
contrived to make a slightly more crass speech each of the many times I visited 
the stage, culminating in my calling for a moment of silence for however many 
souls it was that went down on the boat, before whooping, "Let's party till 
dawn!"

So yeah, I'm still king of the world. I've been out of the spotlight, sure, 
but I've found it helpful to think of myself as an exiled king, like that Greek 
guy who never abdicated the throne and still refuses to take a surname even 
though his country's been a republic for quarter of a century and he lives in
Hampstead <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hampstead>. I'm Ex-King James of the 
World.
 