
Amazing news: I've landed my first theatre role, and it's on the London stage. 
Some producers from the apparently world-famousNew Wimbledon Theatre 
<http://www.ambassadortickets.com/12/679/New-Wimbledon-Theatre> just asked my 
agent, "What's Pamela doing over the holiday season?" and thank God he mumbled 
something about a cancelledBaywatch <http://www.baywatch.com/> fan convention 
having left an opening.

I don't know much about the role, but my character's name is Jeannie – 
although it's spelt "Genie", which must be a British thing.

It's weird it's so near Christmas – I wouldn't have thought that was a big 
time for plays to open – but I guess it's just another one of those London 
theatrical traditions I'll soon be an old hand at. I called the producers 
to begin my preparation: "I've been wondering what Genie's story is," I said. 
"I see her as a tragic heroine, maybe dying of consumption or one of those 
olden times illnesses."

There was a pause on the line. "I think it'll be more of a question of you 
shouting, 'He's behind you!' at a former'Allo! 'Allo 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/alloallo/>! cast member while small children throw 
sweets at you," he muttered. I just love their sense of humour over there! I 
literally have no idea what they're talking about.

As for my co-stars, they're still working a lot of that out, but he said they 
were hoping for theChuckle Brothers <http://www.thechucklebrothersontour.co.uk/>
, and might even getBonnie Langford <http://www.bonnielangford.co.uk/> if Hull 
don't land her. "My God, I've always wanted to work with the Chuckle Brothers!" 
I trilled nervously, though I think I got away with it. Felt such a rube not to 
know their work.
 