 "You didn't think I was actually going to my own party, did you?" 
Illustration: Photograph: Ben Kirchner 
Oh God, there's a party for my new book 
<http://www.phaidon.com/Default.aspx/Web/my-name-is-charles-saatchi-and-i-am-an-artoholic-9780714857473>
 in half an hour, andNigella <http://www.nigella.com/> is flouncing around 
asking me how she looks. I'd better go upstairs to change. Not into a suit, 
though – into the stripy pyjamas I had made out of a painting by that charlatan
Mark Rothko <http://www.nga.gov/feature/rothko/>. You didn't think I was 
actually going to my own party, did you? I never go to other people's parties, 
so why on earth would I bother going to my own? It's a night in with a repeat of
Midsomer Murders <http://www.midsomermurders.net/> for me. Just like every 
other night.

Look, I know people were hoping I'd write something interesting in the book, 
but my whole image has been founded on saying next to nothing, so why should I 
spoil the mystique? My main aim was to get the requisite words knocked off as 
quickly and painlessly as possible before banking the cheque.

The phone just rang. It was Damien Hirst 
<http://www.whitecube.com/artists/hirst/> telling me, through gritted teeth, 
how much he enjoyed the book. He's never forgiven me for flogging off his 
shark. He'd be more pissed off if he knew I'd only bought it because Nigella 
was into sushi at the time and it looked like a deal. Thank fuck the person 
who bought it from me never bothered to weigh it.

I only wish I'd managed to offload some more crap before the recession. 
Nigella keeps telling everyone how wealthy I am, but she's not the one stuck 
with a Tracey Emin <http://www.tracey-emin.co.uk/>. Why does she think I wrote 
the sodding book?
 