
Finally, cinema is going to get the credit it's been angling for since 
the birth of talkies: "Written and directed byMadonna <http://www.madonna.com/>
". MyEdward And Mrs Simpson film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2009/oct/23/madonna-wallis-simpson-movie>
 has officially graduated from the status of assumed self-parody to actual 
movie in actual pre-production.

In recent years, I've been oddly drawn to Wallis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wallis,_Duchess_of_Windsor>, the super-lean, 
hard-faced American commoner who controversially married an Englisman. Of 
course, the establishment condemned her, because she was a rebel, but my 
high-level research reveals the British people adored Wallis and her 
excruciating attempts to usecockney rhyming slang 
<http://www.cockneyrhymingslang.co.uk/>, even though she did spend part of her 
honeymoon visitingHitler <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adolf_Hitler> and held 
some views about black people being allowed onPark Avenue 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Park_Avenue_%28Manhattan%29>.

The whole story screams "romantic comedy/musical", so that's what I'm going 
with. Intriguingly, though, I've refused to bow to the clamours of those who 
want me to star in the picture, opting to limit myself to just the director's 
chair. So the challenge is to find someone who could fill my shoes. The obvious 
candidates areTilda Swinton <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0842770/> or Kate 
Winslet <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000701/>, but I think Cate Blanchett 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000949/> could really benefit from my direction, 
and a big part of me wants to give her that chance. My cult rabbi keeps telling 
me you get out of life what you put in – usually just before he convinces me to 
buy theKabbalah <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabbalah> Centre another property 
or a swathe ofMalawi <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malawi> – so it feels like 
time to throw Cate a bone. If she's smart, she won't feel intimidated.
 