
It can't be long now before the Duke of Edinburgh's award 
<http://www.dofe.org/> is renamed the Earl of Wessex's award. It's great to be 
able to carry onmy father's work <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/1848553.stm>, 
as the torch of crass insensitivity is passed on to the next generation. 
Typically, though, some wilfully misunderstoodmy comment about the upside to a 
teenager's death while on an expedition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/nov/01/prince-edward-duke-scheme-death>. I 
just pointed out that the risk of death is thrilling, as though the young 
people are foolhardy innocents keen to join the 20-minuters, as opposed to 
mostly being required to orienteer through an Epping Forest picnic area.

Was slightly confused to find the Palace unsupportively declining to explain 
away my comment. I can't be expected to clear up my own mistakes. I wouldn't 
even know where the butler is kept, let alone the cleaning products. And, 
frankly, I haven't made such a success of something since mastermindingIt's A 
Royal Knockout <http://www.its-a-knockout.tv/royal.htm>, though naturally the 
media only ever point out any worthwhile project's most minor faults 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/mar/05/themonarchy.broadcasting> – in 
that case that it was probably the beginning of the end of the monarchy – and 
overplay the fact that I stormed out of a press conference wearing a sweatshirt 
reading, "No, I just look like him." Tiny details – where else could you see 
the Duchess of York bellowing whileBarry McGuigan <http:/www.barrymcguigan.com/>
 grappled withMeat Loaf <http://www.meatloaf.net/>? I was the first creative 
director to dressJohn Travolta <http://www.travolta.com/> as a vegetable. 
That's called thinking outside the box, and I'd love to see DofE youngsters 
develop the skill. Survival permitting.
 