
A rival emerges to the claim that Al Gore invented the internet. It turns out 
thatRichard Desmond <https://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond> 
invented the Beckhams. Please adjust your records accordingly.

It is the only conclusion to draw from the publisher’s complex new memoir, The 
Real Deal: the autobiography of Britain’s most controversial media mogul 
<http://www.randomhouse.co.uk/editions/untitled/9781473518544>. Slightly less 
socially acceptable to read in a public place than earlier Desmond publications 
such as Asian Babes and Over 40s, the work showcases a man sublimely at ease in 
his marriage to a woman more than a couple of decades his junior – a man who 
has, above all, made his peace with his own mortality.

Those looking for the essence of the work could do worse than a couple of 
sentences which feature in Richard’s description of his modest art collection: 
“I also have a Picasso pot which Matthew Freud gave me for my 50th birthday and 
which I thought was worth tuppence halfpenny. (Actually, according to Mr 
Picasso’s grandson – whom I know because he is our neighbour at our holiday 
home in Majorca – it’s worth 50,000 euros.)”

OK! readers will already know Richard as a fastidious chronicler of his good 
works, but those coming fresh to him will enjoy the many passages with 
conclusions such as: “And that was the origin of the Richard Desmond Children’s 
Eye Centre at Moorfields.”

Anyway, back to Richard’s creations, David and Victoria. The Beckhams were 
married in 1999 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/victoria-beckham-shares-unseen-wedding-3808395>
, you may recall, and Richard paid £1m to feature their wedding in his OK! 
magazine. This was clearly an act of commercial lunacy. But I’m getting ahead 
of myself – let Richard paint you a picture with words: “At the time, the Spice 
Girls were no longer at the height of their fame, and David Beckham was a 
respected footballer but not a household name.”
 Young unknowns David and Victoria Beckham, back when they were nothing. 
Photograph: Kent Gavin/PA 
Well, quite. He played for a little club by the name of Manchester United – 
but in the words of Rob Reiner in Spinal Tap: “Don’t look for it; it’s not 
there any more.” Whether this Manchester United did anything even remotely 
noteworthy in 1999 I shall leave to the absolute football anoraks to point out. 
Unless you have an obsessive interest in detail, I think you can only side with 
Richard on the Beckhams’ sublebrity at the time.

“But despite all this, I thought the couple had the potential to be media 
stars.” He informs David and Victoria of this. “‘You know,’ I said. ‘Diana’s 
gone: we need a new King and Queen of Britain …’ They looked at me blankly. 
‘What I am going to do,’ I said, ‘is make you the new King and Queen.”

On their wedding night, the couple stayed up till 3am with Richard deciding 
which pictures would be featured in OK! – a reminder of how very, very much the 
Beckhams wanted it all in those days. There really can be no other possible 
explanation for Richard and his ghastlyNorthern & Shell henchman Martin Ellice 
<http://www.northernandshell.co.uk/board> spending “almost every Friday, it 
seemed” at Victoria’s parents’ house, where they would all “plot and plan the 
next features we’d do”.

Other weddings were less successful – Richard’s product placement of a 
Cadbury’s Snowflake bar in Anthea Turner’s wedding snapssaw her pilloried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2001/mar/16/marketingandpr.broadcasting>, 
something he claims to regret. As the picture of Anthea and his wife from last 
Monday’s book launch shows, “in which a friend is shoving The Real Deal into 
shot as Anthea’s jaw clenches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freading-from-book-of-desmond-and-lo-richard-created-the-beckhams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434631418889%2F1b1db1c7-2b94-45ae-804a-ea535ca35085-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20reading%20from%20the%20Book%20of%20Desmond%3A%20and%20lo%2C%20Richard%20created%20the%20Beckhams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freading-from-book-of-desmond-and-lo-richard-created-the-beckhams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20reading%20from%20the%20Book%20of%20Desmond%3A%20and%20lo%2C%20Richard%20created%20the%20Beckhams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2015%2Fjun%2F18%2Freading-from-book-of-desmond-and-lo-richard-created-the-beckhams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F18%2F1434631418889%2F1b1db1c7-2b94-45ae-804a-ea535ca35085-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Anthea Turner with Joy Desmond pose for a bit of product placement with 
‘talent manager’ Jonathan Shalit. Photograph: Dave J Hogan/Getty Images 
In the end, I like Richard best on other businessmen. You know the sort of 
thing from the movies – even when they’re fighting, they’re complimenting each 
other’s swordplay. To read him on his peer group is to see this echelon of the 
British business landscape as the locker room in Top Gun, with no one ever more 
than a hair trigger away from succumbing to their fight-or-fuck reflex. In 
fact, I can never get through any mogul’s account of his dicing and deal-making 
without imagining it as sex by other means. To hear Richard bang on about 
shaftingAlan Sugar <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/alan-sugar> is to be only 
one remove from Sugar/Desmond slash fiction. I don’t know why he doesn’t open a 
new channel, Red Hot Boardroom, and stage porno reconstructions of this sort of 
thing.

Of course, sometimes it does feel rather exploitative. Consider the bit where 
Richard explains that he was the first choice for The Apprentice when the 
format came to these shores. Naturally, he declined and tried to palm it off on 
his mate Philip Green, who also declined, and suggested Alan Sugar for sloppy 
thirds – “although I don’t think to this day he gives us the credit for setting 
the wheels in motion”. Oof! Your money’s on the nightstand, Lord Sugar.

In the case of Richard’s relationship with Rupert Murdoch, alas, it all feels 
rather more like unwanted frottage. “What you see is what you get,” says 
Richard of the News Corp overlord. “He is also a worthy opponent.”

How very Reichenbach Falls 
<http://www.sherlockholmesquotes.com/images/sherlock%20holmes%20and%20professor%20moriarty.jpg>
. Although it’s arguably more accurate to think of Murdoch as the Moriarty to 
Richard’s Bergerac.

Incidentally, have you noticed how, when people feature Murdoch in their 
memoirs, they literally write down every single thing he ever said to them – 
every wordless quasi-interaction with him – no matter how dull or irrelevant? 
It is as if they believe his every word is invested with the mysteries of 
power, which they have yet to decode, but which they offer up as evidence that 
He Noticed Them.

Here’s Richard on the parking arrangements for a Sky do at London’s Oxo Tower: 
“My driver David suggested we park my Rolls-Royce so that it blocked the main 
entrance, obliging Murdoch to pull up further down the street and walk. Rupert 
sought me out at the reception later.” Course he did. “He said: ‘Ah, Mr 
Desmond, I keyed your car …’” Richard claims this sort of crackling billionaire 
repartee is entirely beyond Rupert’s younger son. “James is quite 
literal-minded: he doesn’t always get when it’s rock and roll.”

Others get away more lightly. “I admire Branson’s work, but he and I tick 
differently. I’m not a techie like him,” explains Richard. “I am at heart just 
a drummer.”

I hope whoever copy-edited this eventually saved time and just commissioned a 
“WAY TOO PARTRIDGE” stamp to dot down the side of every page in the first 
draft. Yet even that task would surely have landed them in the Richard Desmond 
RSI Wing at St Onan’s Hospital. “I’ve been told I’m a good listener,” concludes 
Richard – and if there is anyone with a better ear as to how they come across, 
Lost in Showbiz should like to meet them.
 