
Reviewing 2015’s remarkable run of rediscovered lost books – including works by
Charlotte Brontë <https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlottebronte>, F Scott 
Fitzgerald <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fscottfitzgerald>, Edith Wharton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/edithwharton>, Dr Seuss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/dr-seuss> and, above all, an entire 
previously unknown novel,Go Set a Watchman 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/378697/s/go-set-a-watchman/>
, byHarper Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/books/harper-lee> – Claire Fallon 
wondered in November 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/did-any-famous-authors-not-have-lost-manuscripts-discovered-in-2015_us_564a4ba8e4b06037734a6650>
 if the streak of luck would continue in 2016 and, more cynically, “did any 
famous authors not have lost manuscripts?”.

The first question can be easily answered, since in January a long-lost 
Beatrix Potter book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/26/beatrix-potter-tale-kitty-in-boots-quentin-blake>
 was readied for publication –The Tale of Kitty-in-Boots 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/408262/> immediately 
entered Amazon’s bestseller chart, eight months before its publication in 
September – and this week theNew York Review of Books’ blog revealed that a 
literary manuscript assumed to be among those lost for ever 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2016/04/07/a-different-darkness-at-noon/>, 
like the first version ofSeven Pillars of Wisdom 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/seven-pillars-of-wisdom-4.html> that TE 
Lawrence <https://www.theguardian.com/world/te-lawrence> left on a station 
platform, has reappeared.

Unseen Beatrix Potter story featuring an older Peter Rabbit to be published
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/26/beatrix-potter-tale-kitty-in-boots-quentin-blake>
Arthur Koestler’s original German text of Darkness at Noon 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/darkness-at-noon.html>, his classic novel 
about the Soviet Union’s Stalinist show trial, was hitherto known only via the 
English translation that his British lover, the sculptorDaphne Hardy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/nov/27/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
, hurriedly made in the spring of 1940 before they fled south to escape the 
imminent Nazi occupation of Paris.

With the German version apparently lost, the inelegant English text they 
posted to Jonathan Cape in London – published in the same year, but only 
acclaimed post-1945 (notably by Orwell) once the cold war began – became the 
basis for all translations including, bizarrely, Koestler’s own retranslation 
(once he had morphed into an English-language writer) into German.

Michael Scammell’s NYRB piece suggests that reading the Ur-text, which was 
found by a researcher looking through the papers of Koestler’s Swiss publisher, 
will be “like seeing a cleaned oil painting for the first time after the old 
and discoloured varnish” – meaning the “sins” of the translation – “has been 
removed”.

And perhaps the discovery is itself also illuminating, pointing to which of 
the missing manuscripts whose stories are recounted inStuart Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stuart-kelly>’s The Book of Lost Books 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/book-of-lost-books.html> have any chance of 
showing up: those that went to libraries or museums (the Potter book’s trail 
began in the V&A) or publishers or lawyers (where Lee’s novel was found), or 
remained in the author’s home (Seuss’sWhat Pet Should I Get? 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/385361/> turned up in 
a shoebox), and ideally where their estate was kept together and managed 
carefully.

Go Set A Watchman: read the first chapter - interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ng-interactive/2015/jul/10/go-set-a-watchman-read-the-first-chapter>
So, conversely, we might as well give up on some of the most-missed 
manuscripts of the modern era, because they are unlikely to be in archives or 
attics awaiting discovery: the notebook of never-seen Rimbaud poems that a 
schoolmate managed to lose; the Hemingway first world war novel that was in a 
suitcase stolen from his wife on a train, and the Walter Benjamin manuscript, 
also in a suitcase, that vanished after his suicide; the fragment of a second
Sylvia Plath <https://www.theguardian.com/books/sylviaplath> novel, Double 
Exposure, that mysteriously disappeared in the chaotic aftermath of her death.
 