
A congresswoman from Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/silicon-valley> is planning to 
introduce legislation to amend the law used to prosecute Aaron Swartz, the free 
information activist who killed himself on Friday.

Representative Zoe Lofgren, a Democrat who represents California's 19th 
district, launched "Aaron's law", her draft bill to change the Computer Fraud 
and Abuse Act, onReddit <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/reddit> on 
Tuesday night.

Swartz, a co-founder of Reddit, was charged with wire fraud, computer fraud 
and other crimes for allegedly accessing and downloading academic documents 
from the JSTOR online database through the network of the Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology.

The prosecution against him has been criticised as over-zealous and 
disproportionate and his family have accused MIT and prosecutors of being 
complicit in his death. If found guilty, he faced up to 35 years in jail, and 
although lawyers said plea bargain negotiations were underway before his death, 
his request for a solution which did not involve a prison term was denied.

In a post on Reddit, Lofgren <http://www.reddit.com/user/ZoeLofgren> wrote 
that she was "deeply troubled" that the government were able to bring such 
charges against Aaron.

She said: "His family's statement about this speaks volumes about the 
inappropriate efforts undertaken by the US government. There's no way to 
reverse the tragedy of Aaron's death, but we can work to prevent a repeat of 
the abuses of power he experienced. We should prevent what happened to Aaron 
from happening to otherInternet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> users."

She continued: "The government was able to bring such disproportionate charges 
against Aaron because of the broad scope of the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act 
(CFAA) and the wire fraud statute. It looks like the government used the vague 
wording of those laws to claim that violating an online service's user 
agreement or terms of service is a violation of the CFAA and the wire fraud 
statute.

"Using the law in this way could criminalize many everyday activities and 
allow for outlandishly severe penalties."

It invited "dangerous legal interpretation", she said, which Congress had a 
responsibility to change.

Her amendment excludes access in violation of an agreement, such as an 
acceptable use policy or terms of service agreement, with an Internet service 
provider, in cases where such a violation is the sole reason for determining 
that access to a computer is unauthorised.

Lawrence Lessig, a friend of Swartz and Harvard law professor, gave the 
amendment his blessing. He wrote: "This is a CRITICALLY important change that 
would do incredible good.

"The CFAA was the hook for the government's bullying of [Aaron]. This law 
would remove that hook. In a single line: no longer would it be a felony to 
breach a contract. Let's get this done for Aaron â€“ now."

Marcia Hofmann, a senior staff attorney at the Electronic Frontier Foundation, 
welcomed the bill but said that, as it stood, it would not have prevented 
Aaron's prosecution.

In a tweet <https://twitter.com/marciahofmann/status/291391166270799872>, she 
saidL "Kudos to Rep Lofgren for her swift response. But her bill wouldn't have 
prevented Aaron's prosecution under the CFAA or wire fraud law." In another 
message, she said the bill needed strengthening before it went before Congress.

The Justice Department's prosecution of Swartz, which has been widely 
criticised since his death, is to be investigated by the House Oversight 
Committee.

Darrell Issa, Republican representative for California, praised Swartz's work 
on open government and free access to information. Hetold the Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/15/darrell-issa-aaron-swartz-_n_2481450.html>
 he thought the government's case against Swartz is problematic enough to merit 
investigation.

"I'm not condoning his hacking, but he's certainly someone who worked very 
hard," Issa said, of Swartz. "Had he been a journalist and taken that same 
material that he gained from MIT, he would have been praised for it. It would 
have been like the Pentagon Papers."

Issa said he didn't have enough information to say whether the US Attorney's 
Office in Massachusetts over-prosecuted Swartz. He said he had asked an 
investigator to gather more facts.
 