
A blogger has published once-classified FBI files that show how the agency 
tracked and collected information on internet activistAaron Swartz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz>.

Swartz, who killed himself in January aged 26, had previously requested his 
files andposted them on his blog <http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/fbifile>, but 
some new documents and redactions are included in the filespublished by 
Firedoglake blogger Daniel Wright 
<http://news.firedoglake.com/2013/02/19/aaron-swartzs-fbi-file/>.

Wright was given 21 of 23 declassified documents, thanks to a rule that 
declassifies FBI files on the deceased. Wright said that he was told the other 
two pages of documents were not provided because of freedom of information 
subsections concerning privacy, "sources and methods," and that can "put 
someone's life in danger."

The FBI's files concern Swartz's involvement in accessing the Public Access to 
Court Electronic Records (Pacer) documents. In pursuit of their investigation, 
the FBI had collected his personal information and was surveilling an Illinois 
address where he had his IP address registered.

Aaron H. Swartz FBI File 
<http://www.scribd.com/doc/126146785/Aaron-H-Swartz-FBI-File> by Daniel Wright 
<http://www.scribd.com/dwright_482898> 

One page reads: "Washington Field Office requests that the North RA attempt to 
locate Aaron Swartz, his vehicles, drivers license information and picture, and 
others. Since Swartz is the potential subject of an ongoing investigation, it 
is requested that Swartz not be approached by agents."

The FBI also collected information from his social networking profiles, 
including Facebook and Linkedin. The latter proved to be a catalog of his many 
notable accomplishments, which include being a co-founder ofReddit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/reddit>, a founder of a website to 
improve the government, watchdog.net and as metadata adviser at Creative 
Commons.

Information from a New York Times article about his Pacer hack was also 
included in the files, though strangely, since the article can still be read 
online, the name of the article's other subject, Carl Malamud, was blocked out.

Hacking collective Anonymous <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/anonymous>
 released a State Department database Monday in memory of Swartz. The files 
included employees' personal information such as addresses, phone number and 
emails.
 