
As Aaron Ramsey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aaron-ramsey> picks up 
the microphone and the room falls silent, it is safe to assume that the 
majority of the 120 people taking part in his charity golf day were not 
expecting the Arsenal midfielder to talk so passionately about the importance 
of conserving rainforests and saving endangered animals. The clues were there 
with the World Wildlife Fund leaflets dotted around the tables but it is one 
thing to be seen to be doing the right thing and quite another to speak from 
the heart about supporting a cause.

Ramsey is not putting his name to the charity for some positive PR and when he 
pulls up a chair a couple of hours later, full of apologies for not starting 
the interview earlier, the panda logo and everything that it stands for sound 
almost as important to the Welshman as his football career.

“I’ve always been passionate about animals,” Ramsey says. “And with the way 
things are going at the moment, with all of these helpless animals being killed 
for their ivory and for what people think are for medicinal reasons, it’s just 
beyond me. We need to really take a look at ourselves and do something about it 
before it’s too late because if we don’t, it will quickly be a case of: ‘Do you 
remember these animals?’”

It is a measure of how seriously Ramsey views the subject that he was 
considering going to Africa during the close season to make a documentary with 
the WWF. “I went on safari a couple of years ago and I’d love to do it again,” 
he says. “It’s brilliant, you have hyenas running around, elephants trampling – 
it’s crazy. It’s just an amazing experience being out in the wild, in the bush, 
with all these different animals, the stars, no light pollution or anything.”

In the end the not-so-small matter of helping Wales to beat Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/12/wales-belgium-euro-2016-qualifying-match-report>
 in Cardiff in the middle of June – a game that Ramsey describes as the most 
special he has ever been involved in with his country – followed by a short 
break before returning for pre-season with Arsenal, made it impossible to 
squeeze in a trip to Africa.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F071be18a7e5a7e1040df3bf5053b3c5804512cd5%2F215_0_4357_2615%2F4357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaron%20Ramsey%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20a%20baby%20when%20I%20came%20to%20Arsenal.%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20man%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaron%20Ramsey%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20a%20baby%20when%20I%20came%20to%20Arsenal.%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20man%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F071be18a7e5a7e1040df3bf5053b3c5804512cd5%2F215_0_4357_2615%2F4357.jpg>
 Aaron Ramsey, right, celebrates Gareth Bale’s goal for Wales against Belgium 
in June’s Euro 2016 qualifier. Photograph: Glyn Kirk/AFP/Getty Images 
Spare time is likely to be at a premium again next summer. Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> are on course to take their place 
in the European Championship finals in France – which would be the first major 
tournament that they have qualified for since the 1958 World Cup – and Ramsey’s 
responsibilities at home will soon extend beyond taking Halo and Romie, his two 
dogs, for a walk in the park near his home in Barnet.

Colleen, the player’s childhood sweetheart he married last year, is due to 
give birth in a few months and Ramsey sounds thrilled to bits about the 
prospect of being a father for the first time. “I just can’t wait now until the 
baby is here,” he says. “We’re really excited about being parents, it’s 
something that we want and we feel that we’re ready to do.”

Basking in the sunshine on a glorious evening at the Shire London, Ramsey 
smiles as he reflects on the seven years that have passed by in a blur since he 
swapped Cardiff forArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> and 
nervously walked into the training ground for the first time, secretly 
wondering whether the players were thinking: “Who is this guy?”

“It’s gone so quick and a lot has happened,” Ramsey says. “I was a 17-year-old 
baby coming up to London, didn’t know what to expect and just went with the 
flow. I’ve turned into a man since I’ve been here. I had to grow up quite 
quickly.”

From his burgeoning status on the pitch to the multimillion-pound contracts 
that have brought financial security for life, so much has changed during his 
time at Arsenal. Yet one of the most striking things about spending time in 
Ramsey’s company is that so much remains the same about him. He is still the 
modest, softly spoken kid from Caerphilly who is living the dream, motivated by 
what he can achieve on the field rather than the number of digits on his 
payslip.

“It’s unbelievable what the rewards are like with being a footballer, but I’m 
not stupid – I don’t go around flaunting it,” he says. “I’m quite reasonable 
and level-headed. I live for football and my real passion is just to go out 
there and express myself and show everybody what I’m capable of doing. It’s 
what I’ve always known since I was a kid. All I ever wanted to do was be a 
footballer. Hopefully I can be one of the best midfielders in the world, that’s 
what drives me on, to try and achieve that and to try and go on and win 
many things.”

From a personal point of view, Ramsey outlines two key objectives for the 
season ahead with Arsenal. He desperately wants to steer clear of injury – he 
broke down with hamstring problems on three separate occasions last term – and 
he is also keen to play in the position where he believes he can have the 
biggest influence on Arsène Wenger’s team.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cc844acf373788e5eb90e196e70bdb066baee66%2F0_163_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaron%20Ramsey%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20a%20baby%20when%20I%20came%20to%20Arsenal.%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20man%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaron%20Ramsey%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20a%20baby%20when%20I%20came%20to%20Arsenal.%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20man%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cc844acf373788e5eb90e196e70bdb066baee66%2F0_163_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Aaron Ramsey in pre-season action for Arsenal against Everton in Singapore. 
Photograph: Stanley Chou/Getty Images 
“It was difficult last season because of the injuries I had again, especially 
as it wasn’t just one injury,” he says. “It was a month out and then I came 
back … it was another month out and then I came back. So it’s hard to get a 
rhythm going. You might feel a yard or two off it when you return and then it 
takes a few extra games to get going again. So it was a frustrating one for me. 
But in the games I did play, I did still have an impact, I set up a few goals 
and got into double figures.

“But I just want to stay fit and healthy this season, have a full campaign and 
get my place back in the middle of the park, because that’s where I feel that 
I play my best football. I want to have the freedom to go forward but also, 
once we’re defending, I’ll obviously have to get back in. I don’t want to be 
fixed in front of the back four or in the hole, I want to be the one who can do 
both and get up and down.”

Arsène Wenger on retiring: ‘Sir Alex has his horses. I have no horses’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/22/arsene-wenger-arsenal-alex-ferguson-new-season>
Thierry Henry recently said that he was a big fan of Ramsey and went on to 
talk about the way the 24-year-old has developed into a player who wants to 
“command the field” and dominate the centre of the pitch. Ramsey nods in 
agreement. “That’s obviously really nice of him to say that,” he says.

“I think I’ve definitely grown as a player. I feel there’s a responsibility 
there to perform, to lead the team by driving forward and winning the ball 
back. I’m a player who always wants to be involved in the game. That’s why I 
don’t particularly like going on the right because I’m not involved as much. I 
want the ball every time we have an attack.”

Injury prevention feels like a significant issue. After all, Ramsey was also 
sidelined for three months with a thigh injury during the 2013-14 season, when 
he scored 16 goals, including the winnerin the FA Cup final against Hull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/17/arsenal-hull-city-fa-cup-final-match-report>
, and was such a revelation. One school of thought is that Ramsey, who 
seemingly covers every blade of grass on a matchday and has the same work ethic 
in training, would benefit from sitting out a session now and again, just to 
give his body chance to recuperate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F305bc2b0887d9c8268d850511ed7b6bd516485c9%2F0_146_2433_1460%2F2433.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaron%20Ramsey%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20a%20baby%20when%20I%20came%20to%20Arsenal.%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20man%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaron%20Ramsey%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20a%20baby%20when%20I%20came%20to%20Arsenal.%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20man%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F305bc2b0887d9c8268d850511ed7b6bd516485c9%2F0_146_2433_1460%2F2433.jpg>
 Aaron Ramsey scored the winning goal in extra time for Arsenal against Hull 
City in the 2014 FA Cup final. Photograph: Clive Mason/Getty Images 
“I always give it my everything no matter what, if it is in training or 
games,” Ramsey says. “But I think especially the back end of last season we 
improved that a lot, where I did have a few sessions just to recover that bit 
more. Because I do put in a big shift in games and it’s difficult sometimes, 
when you’re playing two or three games in a week, to recover fully and go into 
the game fresh. I definitely managed myself better with that in the second half 
of the season. And it had to be done, because I was always breaking down, so we 
needed to look at something and I feel we’ve done that. Hopefully we’ll 
continue doing that and it will get me fit throughout the season.”

As for Arsenal’s aspirations for the new season, Ramsey believes that now is 
the time, after winning back-to-back FA Cups, for this group of players to 
mount a legitimate title challenge. “In the last couple of years we’ve started 
off well and then we’ve faded. Last season we didn’t start off too well and 
then we finished really strongly. It’s just a case of being consistent 
throughout the season, which I’m sure we can do if we keep everybody fit and 
healthy as well. And then we’ll give it a good go.

“One of the positives from the last campaign was definitely that we improved 
in the bigger games and got results. Maybe we didn’t play the way that we 
always play; against Manchester City we sat back and invited them on to us and 
then we hit them on the counterattack. Obviously the way we tried to go about 
it before didn’t quite work and we got punished pretty badly at times against 
some of the big teams in the league, so we changed that.”

The reality, though, is that Chelsea, the Premier League champions, finished 
12 points ahead of Arsenal last season. Ramsey believes thatthe signing of Petr 
Cech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jun/26/petr-cech-arsenal-chelsea-transfer>
 will make a big difference, but is that gap really bridgeable? “I think so,” 
he says. “Chelsea were so consistent throughout the season, they didn’t really 
slip up and led from day one. I think it’s important for us to get off to a 
good start. I feel if we do that we’ll give it a good go. And that gap … that’s 
a couple of games they have to lose and we have to win.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe922e524270d73b675f0609363781a51de0c254%2F0_76_5256_3155%2F5256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaron%20Ramsey%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20a%20baby%20when%20I%20came%20to%20Arsenal.%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20man%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaron%20Ramsey%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20was%20just%20a%20baby%20when%20I%20came%20to%20Arsenal.%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20man%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjul%2F24%2Faaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe922e524270d73b675f0609363781a51de0c254%2F0_76_5256_3155%2F5256.jpg>
 Aaron Ramsey had three separate spells on the sidelines with hamstring issues 
last season but he hopes his problems are behind him. Photograph: Richard Saker 
for the Guardian 
Ramsey could be forgiven for thinking anything is possible on the back of what 
Wales have achieved recently, earning a place in pot one for Saturday’s Russia 
2018 qualifying draw. Chris Coleman’s side sit top of their European 
Championship qualification group, unbeaten in six matches, five points clear of 
third place and, incredibly,ranked 10th in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/09/wales-fifa-world-rankings-top-ten-england>
, four years after they languished 117th. “It’s crazy the jump that we’ve 
done,” Ramsey says, “especially from the last World Cup where we were bottom 
seeds. Now we’re going into this one as one of the top seeds.”

There are several reasons, Ramsey says, why everything has fallen into place 
for Wales. “I think there’s more belief now among the players. We trust each 
other in our responsibilities as a team defensively and we believe that we can 
go on and hurt teams. Maybe we were a bit naive in the past defensively, we 
were not mature enough to see out games, or to be solid, and perhaps attacked a 
bit too much and left ourselves open. But we understand that now and that’s 
probably why we’ve turned it around.”

With so much attention on Gareth Bale, especially since that £86m world record 
transfer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/02/gareth-bale-passes-medical-real-madrid>
 to Real Madrid two years ago, it feels as though Ramsey’s presence in the 
Wales team goes under the radar these days. “Maybe I do because of where 
Gareth’s at, the price that he’s gone for, and what he’s done in the game in 
general has been remarkable anyway. He’s out there now. He’s a superstar.

“But it’s a team, and the Welsh team have done fantastically well. He couldn’t 
go out there and win a game on his own against Belgium. He takes the headlines 
but it’s the whole team that puts in the effort and defends just for him, and 
myself, and a few other players, to go on and hopefully nick a goal.”

Talk of Bale and Real Madrid leads the conversation into Barcelona and what it 
feels like for Ramsey to see his name plastered across the back pages asa £50m 
transfer target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/22/football-transfer-rumours-barcelona-aaron-ramsey-arsenal>
 for the Spanish champions. “Obviously it’s very flattering,” he says. “They 
did the treble last year and it’s just really nice to be linked with one of the 
best clubs in the world. One day I would like to go over to Spain to play just 
to see what it’s like and to experience that. But at the moment I’m with 
Arsenal and I feel like this Arsenal team can go and be successful and 
challenge for things.”

It is starting to get dark at the golf course as an evening that has raised 
the best part of £35,000 for the WWF draws to a close. Ramsey has a few more 
autographs to sign and photos to pose for before heading home with his wife. He 
smiles when it is put to him that he looks like a young man thoroughly enjoying 
life. “I’m really happy,” he says. “I’m in a good place on and off the field, 
looking forward to a lot of things this year and this season. Hopefully it will 
all have a happy ending.”

Arsenal director backs Arsène Wenger to break transfer record on striker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/23/arsenal-director-arsene-wenger-break-transfer-record-striker> 