
As the clock ran down in those febrile, oddly still moments after Sam Vokes’s 
goal had confirmed what everyone in the Stade Pierre Mauroy already knew, the 
Welsh end lolled and bounced around like a huge, seething red-shirted basket of 
kittens.Wales were 3-1 up against Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/wales-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>
, on their way to the semi-finals, and two games away from actually winning 
this tournament.

Really, though, this was too much detail. It was simply a glorious, 
self-contained moment, the kind that never leaves fans who were there, the sky 
in Flanders filled with the crackles and shouts and roars of a crowd entirely 
drunk on the spectacle. On the pitch Belgium’s players scurried about looking 
beaten and flattened and frankly a little incredulous.

Wales boss Belgium to sail into semi-finals – Euro 2016 Football Daily
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2016/jul/01/wales-boss-belgium-to-sail-into-semi-finals-euro-2016-football-daily>
It had been a gloomy day in Flanders, a great damp plain that even in 
mid-summer retains its embedded gloom. All day Lille had been turned red by 
150,000 travelling Belgians, who had hopped across the border into this lovely 
ornate town right up in the north eastern armpit of France. And yet it isWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> who will now travel to Lyon to 
play Portugal, taking their first appearance in a tournament for 58 years right 
to the final knockings.

If there was a moment of sadness, it came with Aaron Ramsey’s yellow card in 
the second half for a needless handball. Ramsey will now miss the semi-final. 
But he had a wonderful game here on a wild night in Lille, in a game that 
settled around a genuinely stunning moment 10 minutes into the second half.

Ramsey played his part here too. The introduction of Marouane Fellaini after 
the break had been a tribute to his influence, an extra rumbling body to wrest 
back an area of Welsh strength. It seemed to work for 10 minutes. And then, 
abruptly it didn’t.

“I’ve taken the ball, turned and just hit it,” Hal Robson-Kanu said 
afterwards. Which is certainly one way of putting it, just as Rubens’ Descent 
From The Cross is a nice picture of some people standing around and Notre Dame 
cathedral is a big building by a river. No, Hal. You’re not getting away with 
that.

Has there ever been a better individual moment in Welsh football history than 
Robson-Kanu’s goal here? Perhaps not, given the perfect synchronicity between 
the three players that made it; and beyond that an entire flickering showreel 
of choices made, tiny little shifts, right moves, steps forward that brought 
this vibrant group of players to Flanders in the first place.
Aaron Ramsey 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Aaron%20Ramsey&team=Wales&isSimple=true>
The move started with Ramsey’s driving run through the Belgian midfield to 
take a lovely floated pass from Gareth Bale on his toe. Ramsey killed the ball 
and turned to cross. What happened next was breathtaking. It is a moment that 
will play forever in the background for Robson-Kanu, who paused for the tiniest 
moment, then produced an utterly outrageous Cruyff-style turn, the pirouette so 
swift, so brutally dismissive the comparison seems just.

Three Belgian defenders ran the wrong way, a lovely and indeed very funny 
moment of physical deception. Robson-Kanu shifted his weight and buried it. And 
then off he went, continuing on his way to hurl himself into his team-mates on 
the touchline. Oh, Wales. What have you done here?

It was all the more startling given the beginning to this game. The Welsh fans 
had produced the usual class-leading anthem before kick-off, prickling neck 
hairs all around the stadium. But it wasBelgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> who began at a rush, Kevin De 
Bruyne and Eden Hazard linking with precision. With eight minutes gone they 
somehow contrived not to score, three successive close-range shots blocked by a 
flailing wall of red shirts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Faaron-ramsey-belgium-wales-euro-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85e3021f5f0e581a9e04d737337c62c7b682e96b%2F0_0_3500_2354%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aaron%20Ramsey%20at%20the%20beating%2C%20Belgium-battering%20heart%20of%20Wales%E2%80%99s%20glory%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Faaron-ramsey-belgium-wales-euro-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aaron%20Ramsey%20at%20the%20beating%2C%20Belgium-battering%20heart%20of%20Wales%E2%80%99s%20glory%20%7C%20Barney%20Ronay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Faaron-ramsey-belgium-wales-euro-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85e3021f5f0e581a9e04d737337c62c7b682e96b%2F0_0_3500_2354%2F3500.jpg>
 Hal Robson-Kanu … scores! Photograph: Charles Platiau/Reuters 
Finally Wales found a glimpse of space, Bale turning and running at goal from 
halfway, one against six, looking for a moment like peak-era Jonah Lomu 
carrying an under-the-cosh schools team forward against the Aussies.

Still Belgium moved the ball between them with an ominous slickness. How long 
could Wales hold out? Twelve minutes was the answer. Radja Nainggolan’s opening 
goal was also a stunner. Hazard laid a pass back and Nainggolan struck the ball 
first time with such sweet-spot precision replays showed just a lovely little 
mist escaping beneath the ball as he cut across it, both feet off the ground, 
sending it fizzing into somewhere close to the top corner. Replays might 
incriminate Wayne Hennessey but in real time it was a shot of unsaveable power.

From there Ramsey drove Wales back into the game. In the first half alone he 
created five chances, playing with a waspish, needling energy that troubled the 
Belgium midfield and drew the full backs out into uncomfortable areas. In 
between he tracked Hazard and fought and grappled to get a handle on the 
Mad-Max-Euro-playmaker stylings of Nainggolan.

Wales in dreamland after Hal Robson-Kanu’s magic touch stuns Belgium
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/01/wales-belgium-euro-2016-match-report>
It has been a wonderful tournament for Ramsey, a player who looked a little 
drained in a varying role between defence and attack at Arsenal last season. 
Perhaps the difference at this tournament is simply confidence. It has been an 
occasionally awkward few years at Arsenal. With Wales he looks liberated, 
darling of the crowd, entirely sure of his role, legs constantly whizzing, a 
sniping, scurrying menace.

Against the head the equaliser arrived, Ramsey’s corner headed in with 
bullocking power by Ashley Williams. After half-time there were Robson-Kanu’s 
unforgettable contribution and a fine header from Vokes to complete the victory 
with four minutes remaining. And at the end here as the players danced on the 
pitch, children coming out again to take penalties in front of the Welsh fans, 
the whole occasion had the feeling of a vast, entirely glorious family wedding.

With the stadium empty on three sides the Welsh players, families and coaching 
staff were still sitting on the turf, hugging, laughing, giving each other 
piggy backs and savouring every last tang of the moment. It was, in a cynical 
old game, a magical but also utterly normal moment of joy, the kind of thing 
this sport is basically for. Ramsey, the lion of Lille, will be missing on 
Wednesday. It is a blow. But then nothing this Wales team does from here should 
surprise anyone.
 