
The partner of the internet activist Aaron Swartz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz>, who killed himself 
earlier this week, has blamed his suicide on the stress of his prosecution.

Taren Stinebrickner-Kauffman said she was "absolutely confident" that Swartz 
killed himself because of the case, in which he was being prosecuted for 
downloading academic articles from a university archive.

Swartz, 26, a prominent open-internet advocate who helped build Reddit and 
RSS, wasfound dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/13/aaron-swartz> in the 
Brooklyn apartment he shared with Stinebrickner-Kauffman on January 11. They 
started dating a few weeks before Swartz was indicted in 2011.

He was set to go on trial next month for downloading academic articles from 
JSTOR, an online academic journal library, at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. If convicted, he could have faced a 30-year jail sentence, although 
it emerged this week that he had been offered a six-month term in a plea 
bargain. "The legal system has lost all sense of mercy and justice and it has 
been replaced with punitiveness and vindictiveness," Stinebrickner-Kauffmantold 
Mail Online 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2264177/EXCLUSIVE-Girlfriend-Reddit-founder-hanged-tells-moment-body-hounded-vindictive-legal-system.html>
.

"Felony charges change the course of people's lives. There are things Aaron 
maybe wanted to do – like go into government – and it's just ludicrous that one 
act like this could prevent somebody like him from serving his country. The 
risk was too much for him."

Stinebrickner-Kauffman also provided the Mail with photos of the couple's last 
evening together, which they spent at a New York bar Swartz wanted to go to, 
and where they dined on his favorite foods: grilled cheese sandwiches and 
macaroni and cheese.

"I feel that Aaron's friends and family deserve to know that he had lots of 
happy moments in his last few weeks," Stinebrickner-Kauffman said. "As well as 
the world needing to hear the systemic problems that led to his death people 
need to know that we had lots of happy moments together."

Strinebrickner-Kauffman is the executive director and founder of SumOfUs, a 
movement that attempts to counterbalance the power of corporations. She said 
that Swartz would take the subway with her to work, but the morning of January 
11, he told her he wanted to stay home and rest.

"I wanted to stay with him but he said he didn't want me to and that I should 
go to the office," Strinebrickner-Kauffman said. "So I did."

She found him that evening, dead of an apparent suicide in their apartment.

Swartz's family released a statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/13/aaron-swartz-family-mit-government>
 with Stinebrickner-Kauffman late the next day and said Swartz's death was the 
product of prosecutorial overreach for "an alleged crime that had no 
victims". They also faulted MIT for not offering support in his legal battles 
and not standing up for "its own community's most cherished principles."

The US federal prosecutor handling Swartz's case, Carmen Ortiz, responded to 
these accusations in a statement on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/17/aaron-swartz-attorney-defends-actions>
and said that her office was enforcing the law "reasonably." Ortiz said that 
the office never told Swartz's attorneys that they intended to seek the maximum 
penalties.

"The prosecutors recognized that there was no evidence against Mr Swartz 
indicating that he committed his acts for personal financial gain, and they 
recognized that his conduct – while a violation of the law – did not warrant 
the severe punishments authorized by Congress and called for by the sentencing 
guidelines in appropriate cases," Ortiz said.

An outpouring of tributes appeared online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/14/internet-pays-tribute-to-aaron-swartz>
 following Swartz's death, including comments from the man credited with 
creating the internet,Tim Berners-Lee, who wrote on Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/12/aaron-swartz-internet-twitter-tributes>
: "Aaron dead. World wanderers, we have lost a wise elder. Hackers for right, 
we are one down. Parents all, we have lost a child. Let us weep."

Silicon Valley congresswoman Zoe Lofgren is working on legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/16/zoe-lofgren-proposes-aarons-law>
 to change the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act called "Aaron's law".

"His family's statement about this speaks volumes about the inappropriate 
efforts undertaken by the US government," Lofgren said. "There's no way to 
reverse the tragedy of Aaron's death, but we can work to prevent a repeat of 
the abuses of power he experienced. We should prevent what happened to Aaron 
from happening to other internet users."

A public memorial is set to be held 
<http://boingboing.net/2013/01/17/aaron-swartz-memorial-in-nyc-t.html> at New 
York's Cooper Union on Saturday. 
 