
Aaron Ramsey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aaron-ramsey> is confident 
Wales can secure qualification for Euro 2016 when they travel to Bosnia and 
Herzegovina next month, with the midfielder believing the team are better setup 
to succeed away from home.

Wales could have secured their passage to next summer’s tournament, and their 
first since 1958, with victory over Israel in Cardiff on Sunday. Chris 
Coleman’s sidedrew 0-0 having failed to breakdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/06/wales-israel-euro-2016-qualifying-match-report>
 their opponents, who had five men strung across the penalty area for large 
periods of the match at the Cardiff City Stadium.

Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> get another chance to 
qualify in Zenica, the fourth-largest city in Bosnia, on 10 October. They need 
only a draw to do so but Ramsey feels they can go one step better and beat 
their Group B opponents.

“We feel we can go there and grab all three points,” said the Arsenal 
midfielder. “That’s the confidence in this team at the moment. Hopefully we 
will be able to do that and have a successful end to what has been a great 
campaign.

“The fans have been unbelievable home and away. They travel in their numbers 
and sometimes it is a bit easier playing away from home because teams are 
trying to attack and score, which is a bit more of an open game. We saw against 
Israel it can be quite difficult when a team has 10, 11 players behind the ball.

“We are disappointed not to have qualified yet but we can take positives from 
[Sunday’s] game. We dominated possession, created opportunities and just 
couldn’t quite finish one off. It was important not to lose, we have kept 
another clean sheet and the stats would suggest we had another good game.”

Even if the worst happens and Wales lose against Bosnia, they can still 
qualify by avoiding defeat to Andorra in their final group match in Cardiff 
three days later. Andorra are bottom of Group B having lost all eight of their 
qualifying matches so far.
 