
Aaron Ramsey said that he wanted Wales to be drawn in the same group as 
England for next summer’s European Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/12/lens-england-wales-euro-2016>
 finals in France, and the Arsenal midfielder has warned Roy Hodgson’s players 
that they will be up against a team who have “come a long way” since their last 
meeting.

England won 1-0 at Wembley four years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/sep/06/england-wales-euro-2012-qualifier>
 in a Euro 2012 qualifier that Wales should have claimed a point from, only for 
Robert Earnshaw to squander an excellent late chance. Ramsey captained Wales on 
that occasion as well as in the corresponding fixture at the Millennium Stadium 
six months earlier, whenEngland ran out comfortable 2-0 winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/mar/26/wales-england-match-report>.

England draw Wales, Slovakia and Russia at Euro 2016 finals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/12/england-wales-slovakia-russia-euro-2016-finals-draw>
The message from Ramsey, however, is that Wales are a totally different 
proposition now from the team that turned up at Wembley ranked 117th in the 
world. Chris Coleman’s side climbed toninth in Fifa’s world rankings in 
September 
<http://www.fifa.com/fifa-world-ranking/associations/association=wal/men/index.html>
, putting themabove England for the first time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/03/wales-move-above-england-in-fifa-rankings-for-first-time>
, and there will be no inferiority complex when Ramsey and his team-mates line 
up against Hodgson’s side in Lens.

Asked about the draw, Ramsey said: “It was very exciting. I’m really looking 
forward to it – it’s new for the team to be involved [in a finals]. It’s going 
to be a great occasion for us, we’re going to enjoy every minute. Obviously 
there’s a ‘little’ game in the middle! But while we’re looking to enjoy it, we 
also want to take it seriously and get out of the group. We’ll be looking to do 
that.”

Coleman admitted beforehand that he wanted to avoid England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/11/wales-chris-coleman-euro-2016-england>
, and all the hype that would go with a ‘Battle of Britain’ match, but Ramsey 
said that he never felt the same way. “To be fair, I wanted England. I think 
it’ll be a great game for everyone who’s involved in what’ll be seen as a derby 
if you like. We’ve come a long way since we last played England. I’m sure it’ll 
be a lot closer this game – and it could go either way.”

Ramsey is full of confidence at the moment after catching the eye in Arsenal’s 
comfortable2-0 victory over Aston Villa on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/13/aston-villa-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
. The 24-year-old scored Arsenal’s second, finishing off a brilliant 
counterattacking move that he started when he won possession deep inside his 
own half, and Wengerdescribed his performance as outstanding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/13/arsene-wenger-arsenal-aston-villa-manchester-city>
.
 Midfielder  Aaron Ramsey    Appearances 
 12 
   Free Kicks 
 13 
   Corners 
 2 
   Crosses 
 17 
   Assists 
 1 

The Welshman admitted that he is much more comfortable playing in a central 
role. “I’m really enjoying it,” he said. “That’s where I feel I play my best 
football and can have an effect on the game. I’ve scored a couple and had a 
couple of assists as well in the three games I’ve played there. So I’m 
delighted with the way things are going in there. Hopefully I can continue to 
do well.”

With the Premier League wide open, this season is arguably Arsenal’s best 
chance to win the title for years. “I believe there are a lot more teams now 
capable of taking points off each other,” Ramsey said. “We’ve been shown that 
this season with some of the results. But it’s important for us to look after 
ourselves and get through this busy period and see where we are in January.”
 