
On Monday, BBC Four screened a remarkable film 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b051wkry> in its Storyville series. The 
Internet’s Own Boy told the story of the life and tragic death of Aaron Swartz, 
the leading geek wunderkind of his generation who was hounded to suicide at the 
age of 26 by a vindictive US administration. The film is still available on BBC 
iPlayer, and if you do nothing else this weekend make time to watch it, because 
it’s the most revealing source of insights about how the state approaches the 
internet since Edward Snowden first broke cover.

The Internet's Own Boy review – an engaging and moving documentary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/31/internets-own-boy-review-aaron-swartz-mark-kermode>
To say Swartz was a prodigy is an understatement. As an unknown teenager he 
was a co-designer of tools – likeRSS <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSS> and 
Markdown <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markdown> and of services like Reddit 
<http://www.reddit.com> – that shaped the evolution of the web. He was also the 
kid who wrote most of the code underpinningCreative Commons 
<http://creativecommons.org>, an inspired system that uses copyright law to 
give ordinary people control over how their digital creations can be used by 
others.

But Swartz was far more than an immensely-gifted programmer. The Storyville 
film includes home movies which show the entrancing, voraciously-inquisitive 
toddler who was father to the man. As he grew, he displayed the same open, 
questioning attitude to life one sees in other geniuses who are always asking 
“why?” and “why not?” and driving normal people nuts.

I never met Aaron (though we had a mutual friend) but I spotted him early when 
he first surfaced as a blogger. What struck me instantly was the freshness and 
originality of his authorial voice. He was very young when he went to Stanford, 
and hewrote about the attitudes and social mores of his classmates 
<http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/001427>, many of them brats of the American 
elite, with a raw freshness and naivete that was startling. He didn’t belong 
there; he felt himself an outsider; but at the same time he wasn’t judgmental, 
and ithat combination of candour and uncertainty was attractive and unusual.

As he grew, one could see him becoming more and more interested in politics. 
And this too was predictable, for nobody with that razor-sharp intelligence 
could look at neoliberal capitalism and not see the unfairness, hypocrisy and 
inequality that lies beneath it. So he morphed into the most 
technologically-gifted political activist in history. He looked for instances 
of manifest unfairness and developed software to remedy it. Discovering that 
the provision of court transcripts in the US was essentially a commercial 
racket, he teamed up with other activists toright an obvious wrong 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RECAP>: that the law was only readable by those 
with money.

He was similarly exercised at the fruits of taypayer-funded scientific 
research being monetised by a few ruthless publishing firms which charge 
outrageous fees to access the resulting academic papers. His first foray into 
this field involved downloading a trove of medical research papers and then 
data-mining them to uncover hitherto-undetected links between pharmaceutical 
firms and the authors of articles in prestigious journals.

His downfall came when he turned his attention to JSTOR 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/JSTOR>, a digital library of academic articles 
hidden behind a paywall. He devised a method of downloading large numbers of 
articles from JSTOR, using a computer hidden in a closet at MIT. He was 
arrested in January 2011 and pursued by federal prosecutors with a vindictive 
zeal, eventually being indicted on a raft of charges which carried a potential 
jail sentence of 35 years. Ground down by this, he hanged himself on 11 January 
2013. News of his death left countless people saddened and enraged. What had 
made the Feds so vindictive? Sure, he had broken the law. But it wasn’t as if 
he’d hacked a bank. What came to mind was Alexander Pope’s rhetorical question:
Who breaks a butterfly upon a wheel?. “The act was harmless” wrote Tim Wu 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/how-the-legal-system-failed-aaron-swartzand-us?currentPage=all>
, a law professor at Columbia. “There was no actual physical harm, nor actual 
economic harm. The leak was found and plugged; JSTOR suffered no actual 
economic loss. It did not press charges. Like a pie in the face, Swartz’s act 
was annoying to its victim but of no lasting consequence.”

One explanation for the vindictive prosecution puts it down to a politically 
ambitious federal attorney anxious to make a name for himself. But there is a 
darker, interpretation – that the authorities had noted how effective Swartz 
had become as an activist (he had, after all, mobilised the net community to 
stop the internet censorship legislation of theSOPA bill 
<http://www.sopastrike.com>), and they were determined to make an example of him
pour décourager les autres. Which, if true, would mean the Obama administration 
has taken a leaf out of theChinese book on internet control 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hybtm4Fp1jc>: people can say more or less what 
they like online; but the moment they look like mobilising people, then you 
come down on them like the ton of bricks that crushed Aaron Swartz.
 