
Aaron Ramsey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aaron-ramsey> plans to 
fulfil a career ambition when Wales seek to end 58 years of hurt against Israel 
on Sunday.

Wales stand on the brink of reaching the finals of a major tournament for the 
first time since the 1958 World Cup afterbeating Cyprus 1-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/03/cyprus-wales-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
 in their Euro 2016 qualifier on Thursday night.

The victory in Nicosia left unbeaten Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> top of Group B with 17 points from 
seven games and needing only three more from their final three matches to reach 
the European Championship in France next summer.

Wales within reach of Euro 2016 finals as Gareth Bale downs Cyprus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/03/cyprus-wales-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
Israel’s visit to the Cardiff City Stadium offers Wales their first chance to 
secure qualification and Ramsey, the Arsenal playmaker, appreciates the 
magnitude of the occasion.

“It’s always something I’ve wanted to try and do, to take Wales to a major 
championship,” Ramsey said. “We know what’s on the line for Sunday. So 
hopefully we will take that opportunity, put on a show and get the three points 
because it will mean the world to me.

“The fans want a party but we have to do the job on the pitch first. We need 
to get rest in, recover and hopefully put in a performance which is better on 
the ball than we were in Cyprus.”

Wales struggled at times in Nicosia to cope with energetic opposition, a 
difficult dry playing surface and the oppressive heat and humidity at the GPS 
Stadium.

But Gareth Bale’s towering 82nd-minute header – his sixth goal of the campaign 
– gave Wales three more points and equalled the nation’s best-ever run of nine 
unbeaten games in competitive football.

“It was a difficult game and at times we struggled to keep the ball, but we 
were very solid defensively and kept ourselves in the game,” Ramsey said. “But 
we’ll take the win and we’re in a great position.

“We are defensively very solid and when you can do that you will always have a 
chance. Ashley Williams has had a great campaign and the defenders play as a 
unit.

“They really put their bodies on the line and throw themselves in front of the 
ball, they put in these last-ditch tackles to stop goals and they’ve done it 
again.”

The Wales manager, Chris Coleman, said the final 10 minutes underlined the 
change in his side’s mentality over the past 18 months.

“If we had come to Cyprus in the last campaign and it was 0-0 we would be 
thinking: ‘Let’s see it out. We’ve got a point to take back, it’s a clean 
sheet.’ But it’s different now, expectations are different, and we could sense 
that with 4,000 supporters willing us on. We know what’s at stake now and we 
must handle the situation we find ourselves in.”
 