
Aaron Ramsey is back in the Wales squad after injury for next week’s key World 
Cup qualifier against Serbia in Cardiff on 12 November. Ramsey played 75 
minutes ofArsenal’s Champions League victory over Ludogorets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/arsenal-ludogorets-razgrad-champions-league-match-report>
 on Tuesday night – his first appearance since sustaining a hamstring injury in 
the first game of the Premier League season.

The Wales manager, Chris Coleman, has immediately restored him to the squad 
for a game that has taken on added significance after Wales’ last two Group D 
qualifiers againstAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/06/wales-austria-2018-world-cup-qualifier-match-report>
 andGeorgia ended in draws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/oct/09/wales-georgia-2018-world-cup-qualifier-match-report>
.

The in-form Stoke City midfielder Joe Allen, who missed the Georgia game last 
month because of a hamstring problem, was also named in the squad on Wednesday 
asWales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> look to reignite their 
push for top spot in the group and one automatic qualifying place. There is 
also a return for Crystal Palace’s midfielder Jonathan Williams in the 23-man 
group.

Wales squad to face Serbia

Goalkeepers W Hennessey (Crystal Palace), D Ward (Huddersfield Town, on loan 
from Liverpool), OF Williams (Inverness Caledonian Thistle)

Defenders B Davies (Tottenham Hotspur), J Chester (Aston Villa), J Collins 
(West Ham United), P Dummett (Newcastle United), C Gunter (Reading), N Taylor 
(Swansea City), A Williams (Everton)

Midfielders J Allen (Stoke City), D Edwards (Wolverhampton Wanderers), E Huws 
(Cardiff City), A King (Leicester City), T Lawrence (Ipswich Town, on loan from 
Leicester), J Ledley (Crystal Palace), S MacDonald (Wigan Athletic), A Ramsey 
(Arsenal), D Cotterill (Birmingham City), J Williams (Ipswich Town, on loan 
from Crystal Palace).

Forwards G Bale (Real Madrid), H Robson-Kanu (West Bromwich Albion), S Vokes 
(Burnley)
 