
The family and friends of Aaron Swartz remain critical of MIT's role in the 
internet activist's prosecution followingthe release of a university report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/13/aaron-swartz-family-mit-government>
 claiming the school maintained a neutral position during court proceedings.

The Massachusetts <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/massachusetts> 
Institute of Technology on Tuesday released its first public response to 
Swartz's prosecution. Swartz, 26, was facing 13 felony charges for hacking into 
the university's computer network and downloading more than 4m academic 
articles from the JSTOR database when he killed himself in January. The charges 
carried up to $1m in fines and 35 years in jail.

Since Swartz's death, his family and friends have criticized the school for 
not intervening in what they believe to be overly aggressive prosecution by the 
US government and the report failed to assuage these criticisms.

Swartz's partner Taren Stinebrickner-Kauffman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jun/02/aaron-swartz-hacker-genius-martyr-girlfriend-interview>
 called the report a "whitewash"on her blog 
<http://tarensk.tumblr.com/post/56881327662/mit-report-is-a-whitewash-my-statement-in-response>
.

She also disputed the report's claim that MIT took a neutral position because 
she said prosecutors were given total access to witnesses and evidence but 
Swartz's lawyers were not.

"We have an institution to contrast MIT with – JSTOR, who came out immediately 
and publicly against the prosecution," Stinebrickner-Kauffman said. "Aaron 
would be alive today if MIT had acted as JSTOR did. MIT had a moral imperative 
to do so."

She also criticized the school for objecting to a Freedom of Information Act 
request for the secret service files on Swartz's case. The school took the 
unusual step of intervening in the request for government documentsafter a 
judge ordered the documents to be released in July 
<http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2013/07/mit-swartz-intervene/>.

"If MIT is at all serious about implementing any reforms to stop this kind of 
tragedy from happening again, it must stop objecting to the release of 
information about the case."

Robert Swartz, Swartz's father and a consultant to the MIT lab, had asked MIT 
to aid efforts to have the charges dropped or to get a plea deal that would not 
have jail time during legal proceedings and is mentioned multiple times in the 
report.

"The report makes clear that MIT was not neutral," Robert Swartz told Wired 
<http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2013/07/mit-swartz/>. "But they should not 
have been neutral. They should have advocated of Aaron's behalf, because the 
law under which he was charged was wrong."

The report concedes that the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act under which Swartz 
was charged is "a poorly drafted and questionable criminal law".

"They co-operated with prosecutors in endless ways, and they were 
fundamentally opaque to us," Robert Swartz said.

Lawrence Lessig, a Harvard law professor and friend and mentor to Aaron 
Swartz, wrote on his blog that MITcannot claim neutrality 
<http://crookedtimber.org/2013/07/30/lessig-on-mit-neutrality-and-aaron-swartz/>
:

"Neutrality" is one of those empty words that somehow has achieved sacred and 
context-free acceptance – like "transparency" … But there are obviously plenty 
of contexts in which to be "neutral" is simply to be wrong. … For example, this 
context: the point the report makes in criticizing the prosecutors is that they 
were at a minimum negligent in not recognizing that under MIT's open access 
policies, Aaron's access was likely not "unauthorized."

"MIT knew something here that at a minimum could have cut short a prosecution, 
and which, it turns out, could also have saved someone's life," Lessig said. 
"'Neutrality' does not justify failing to pick up the phone, and telling the 
prosecutor: 'Hey, in fact, his access was authorized.'"

Quinn Norton, who dated Swartz for three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/12/aaron-swartz-dies-quinn-norton>
,said on Twitter <https://twitter.com/quinnnorton/status/362524489575174144>: 
"I will never work with MIT, I will never attend events at MIT, I will never 
support MIT's work, and I hope dearly that my MIT friends leave."

The MIT report was produced by computer science professor Hal Abelson, who was 
asked by school president L Rafael Reif to lead a review of the school's 
involvement in Swartz's prosecution. Abelson led a group that reviewed 10,000 
documents and conducted interviews with 50 people to assess the school's 
involvement in the case.

"Only Swartz knows why he committed suicide," the report said. "However, for 
the final 24 months of his life, he was the subject of a vigorous investigation 
and prosecution by the US Department of Justice, with an indictment and then a 
superseding indictment that could have resulted in years in prison."
 