
Aaron Ramsey believes Arsenal can put the brakes on Leicester City’s 
remarkable season, describing his side’svictory over Bournemouth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/07/bournemouth-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 as crucial to keeping them in touch with the league leaders before the vital 
game on Sunday.

Premier League: 10 talking points from this weekend’s action
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/08/premier-league-talking-points-weekend>
Arsenal are five points behind Leicester in the Premier League table but 
thrashed Claudio Ranieri’s side 5-2 in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/26/leicester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
, when Alexis Sánchez scored a hat-trick. Leicester’swin at Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/06/manchester-city-leicester-city-premier-league-match-report>
 means they go to the Emirates with a cushion above Tottenham Hotspur and 
Arsenal, the north London clubs separated only by goal difference. Ramsey 
played a key role in both Arsenal goals at Bournemouth – drifting a deep ball 
into the penalty area to create Mesut Özil’s opener and sliding a pass through 
to Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain for the second – and said the result was crucial to 
maintain his side’s title ambitions.

“It was important to bounce back from the results we have had of late,” Ramsey 
said. “So it was important to stay in touching distance of Leicester. What they 
have done this season is quite remarkable but we have got to be right on it to 
get all three points. It was important to win at Bournemouth. Hopefully now we 
can take away this momentum and come away with a victory against Leicester as 
well. We are in a good position now and hopefully we can maintain this.”

Arsène Wenger maintains Leicester are favourites for the title following their 
emphatic victory at City, which followeda win at home to Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/feb/02/leicester-city-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 in their previous match, and the Frenchman said that most neutrals across the 
country will be supporting the unlikely leaders in the coming months.

Héctor Bellerín, the Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> 
right-back, said: “It doesn’t matter who you play, you need to get the three 
points. Obviously, this will be one of the more important ones but we need to 
play it like any other game.”

Arsenal produced a solid second-half performance at Bournemouth, content to 
sit on their lead. Petr Cech was dominant in the air, while Laurent Koscielny 
and Gabriel Paulista controlled Benik Afobe.

Afobe, a former Arsenal forward, said of their chances against Leicester: “It 
is a massive one. Leicester have got the confidence and the ability to actually 
win the league. People keep waiting for them to start dropping points but they 
keep winning and winning. It is a season where no one could have believed there 
would be this many teams still in it.

“Tottenham are in it and no one would have thought they would be challenging 
for the league. Leicester as well. City, Arsenal and there might be latecomers. 
It is all to play for for the boys at the top​.”​
 