
On 11 January, a young American geek named Aaron Swartz killed himself, and 
most of the world paid no attention. In the ordinary run of things, "it was not 
an important failure", as Auden put it inMusée des Beaux Arts 
<http://english.emory.edu/classes/paintings&poems/auden.html>.

About suffering they were never wrong,
The old Masters: how well they understood 
Its human position: how it takes place
While someone else is eating or opening a window or just walking dully along

But Swartz's death came like a thunderbolt in cyberspace, because this 
insanely talented, idealistic, complex, diminutive lad was a poster boy for 
everything that we value about the networked world. He was 26 when he died, but 
from the age of 14 he had been astonishing those of us who followed him on the 
internet. In 10 yearshe had accomplished more 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Swartz> than most people do in a lifetime.

In the days following his death, the blogosphere resounded 
<http://fm.schmoller.net/2013/01/aaron-swartz-rip-links-.html> with expressions 
of grief, sadness and loss not just from people who had worked with him, but 
also from those who only knew him from afar – the users of the things he helped 
to create (the RSS web feed, social news websiteReddit <http://www.reddit.com/>
, theCreative Commons <http://creativecommons.org/> copyright licences, for 
example), or those who had followed his scarily open andthoughtful blogging 
<http://www.aaronsw.com/weblog/rawnerve>.

But in addition to the grief, there was real anger, because many people feel 
that Swartz had been hounded to his death by aggressive federal prosecutors. 
This view was most vividly expressed by his father at Aaron's funeral service 
in Chicago on Tuesday. "Aaron did not commit suicide," said Robert Swartz, "but 
was killed by the government. Someone who made the world a better place was 
pushed to his death by the government."

What lay behind this anger was United States v Aaron Swartz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz>, a prosecution launched 
in Massachusetts, charging Swartz with "wire fraud, computer fraud, unlawfully 
obtaining information from a protected computer and recklessly damaging a 
protected computer". If convicted, he could have faced 35 years in prison and a 
$1m fine. The case stemmed from something he had done in furtherance of his 
belief that academic publications should be freely available. He had 
surreptitiously hooked up a laptop to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
network and used it to download millions of articles from the JSTOR archive of 
academic publications.

Even those of us who shared his belief in open access thought this an unwise 
stunt. But what was truly astonishing – and troubling – was the vindictiveness 
of the prosecution, which went for Swartz as if he were a major cyber-criminal 
who was stealing valuable stuff for personal gain. "The outrageousness in this 
story is not just Aaron,"wrote Lawrence Lessig 
<http://lessig.tumblr.com/post/40347463044/prosecutor-as-bully>, the 
distinguished lawyer who was also one of Swartz's mentors. "It is also the 
absurdity of the prosecutor's behaviour. From the beginning, the government 
worked as hard as it could to characterise what Aaron did in the most extreme 
and absurd way. The 'property' Aaron had 'stolen', we were told, was worth 
'millions of dollars' – with the hint, and then the suggestion, that his aim 
must have been to profit from his crime. But anyone who says that there is 
money to be made in a stash ofacademic articles is either an idiot or a liar. 
It was clear what this was not, yet our government continued to push as if it 
had caught the 9/11 terrorists red-handed."

The phrase that came to mind when I first saw the indictment against Swartz 
was Alexander Pope's famous rhetorical question: "Who breaks a butterfly upon a 
wheel?" It would be possible to write off the Swartz prosecution (as some have 
done) as the action of a politically ambitious attorney general, but actually 
it fits a much more sinister pattern. It was clear that a decision had been 
made to make an example of this cheeky young hacker and in that sense this 
grotesque prosecution sits neatly alongside the treatment of Corporal Bradley 
Manning, not to mention the hysterical reaction of the US authorities to 
WikiLeaks.

What has happened, in fact, is that governments which since 9/11 have presided 
over the morphing of their democracies into national security states have 
realised that the internet represents a truly radical challenge to their 
authority, and they are absolutely determined to control it. They don't declare 
this as their intention, of course, but instead talk up "grave" threats – 
cybercrime, piracy and (of course) child pornography – as rationales for their 
action. But, in the end, this is now all about control. And if a few eggheads 
and hackers get crushed on the way well, that's too bad. RIP Aaron.
 