
Aaron Ramsey fears he will not be match fit for the beginning of the new 
Premier League season with Arsenal after his exertions at Euro 2016 for Wales. 
The midfielder, who has excelled in France, was suspended for his team’s2-0 
semi-final defeat against Portugal in Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
 on Wednesday night and he will now take three and a half weeks off.

Arsène Wenger, the Arsenal manager, normally likes to give his players a 
four-week break to recharge after a summer international tournament and Ramsey 
has been told to report back on 1 August. Arsenal kick off their campaign 
against Liverpool on 14 August, meaning that, with less than two weeks of 
pre-season training in his legs, Ramsey is unlikely to be ready.

Welsh fairytale ends as Cristiano Ronaldo takes Portugal to Euro 2016 final
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
Wenger has three other players in a similar situation – Laurent Koscielny and 
Olivier Giroud of France and Germany’s Mesut Özil. They meet in Thursday 
night’s second semi-final in Marseille. The final is in Paris on Sunday.

“I am back on 1 August, so I have a few weeks off but, obviously, it kicks off 
a couple of weeks afterwards,” Ramsey said. “A few years ago, Germany won the 
World Cup and the German players came in just a few days before the first game 
of the season, but they missed that. He [Wenger] does like to give players a 
little break and I’ll be getting the same treatment. I feel I need a few weeks 
off now.”

Ramsey produced arguably the finest performance of his career in Wales’s 3-1 
quarter-final win over Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/jul/01/aaron-ramsey-belgium-wales-euro-2016>
 – which set up their first ever semi-final appearance at a major tournament – 
and, despite the disappointment of his ban for a second yellow card, he can 
reflect on having taken his game to another level.

“Before the tournament, I was really keen to do well and stand up and be 
noticed,” Ramsey said. “I feel that I’ve done that. It helps playing in this 
team, as well, but I wanted to personally do my best and I think I have.”
 