
It’s been the worst week for Michelle Guthrie since she started as the ABC’s 
managing director in May. AtMelbourne University’s New News conference 
<http://caj.unimelb.edu.au/new-news-conference-2016-programme> last Friday she 
made a couple of remarks which had to be hosed down at the weekend by her 
corporate minders. Then on Monday she was at the centre of a last-ditch attempt 
to reverse a decision by theABC board to get rid of the award-winning science 
magazine show Catalyst 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/31/catalyst-staff-to-be-sacked-and-weekly-tv-show-format-scrapped>
, which is watched on TV and on digital platforms by 1 million people a week. 
Axing a popular show which is made in-house and which is central to the ABC 
charter is not a good look for a new MD.

First to her faux pas. Guthrie had accepted an invitation to give the keynote 
at the centre for advancing journalism’s conference in Melbourne. She announced 
that Stan Grant had been hired as Indigenous affairs editor and that the ABC 
would launch a dedicated news service on Facebook Messenger.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fabc-boss-michelle-guthrie-muddles-her-answers-then-wields-the-axe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a754b375790273baca483da9dd99ba8558be087%2F431_98_3038_1823%2F3038.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ABC%20boss%20Michelle%20Guthrie%20muddles%20her%20answers%20%E2%80%93%20then%20wields%20the%20axe%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fabc-boss-michelle-guthrie-muddles-her-answers-then-wields-the-axe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ABC%20boss%20Michelle%20Guthrie%20muddles%20her%20answers%20%E2%80%93%20then%20wields%20the%20axe%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fabc-boss-michelle-guthrie-muddles-her-answers-then-wields-the-axe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a754b375790273baca483da9dd99ba8558be087%2F431_98_3038_1823%2F3038.jpg>
 Michelle Guthrie: a long-winded answer at the News News conference had the 
audience convinced that Lateline and Foreign Correspondent were to be axed. 
Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
In the Q&A session with the centre’s director, Margaret Simons 
<http://www.wheelercentre.com/broadcasts/podcasts/the-wheeler-centre/new-news-michelle-guthrie-keynote>
, she was asked if Lateline was coming back in 2017, a question Simons had been 
trying to get answered for some time. Guthrie gave a long-winded answer which 
had the audience convinced that Tony Jones’s late-night news program had been 
axed – and also the weekly documentary series Foreign Correspondent.

Guthrie said: “Is the mission of Foreign Correspondent to come up with a 
half-hour weekly television program? No. The mission of Foreign Correspondent 
is to explain what is happening in the world to Australians and to give it 
context and analysis.” Asked again if Lateline was returning she declined to 
answer.

As the news travelled on Twitter ABC staff were desperately trying to confirm 
if their shows had been axed, only to be told it was all a mistake and the MD 
had muddled her answer.


A clearly nervous Guthrie also stumbled when asked by an audience member for 
her definition of news. “Ha, well you guys should know this better,” Guthrie 
said turning to Simons for help. “I guess, I guess, it is about what’s going on 
in the world, what’s relevant to me, what do I want to know about. I think the 
definition of news changes. What I wanted to know about when I was 20 was 
different from what I want to know about now, but I think it’s all news.”


ABC Catalyst program's staff told their roles will be made redundant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/03/abc-catalyst-programs-staff-told-they-are-being-made-redundant>
As Guthrie was speaking in Melbourne, news was leaking out to staff that she 
and the ABC chairman, Jim Spigelman, hadapproved a proposal to shut down the 
weekly Catalyst program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/31/catalyst-staff-to-be-sacked-and-weekly-tv-show-format-scrapped>
 and the internal science unit. An immediate lobbying effort was launched to 
try to change their minds. Prominent scientists including Simon Chapman from 
the School of Public Health and the director of the Australian National Centre 
for the Public Awareness of Science, Joan Leach, wrote to Guthrie and Spigelman 
pleading with them to abandon the idea. An extraordinary board meeting was held 
on Wednesday to review the original decision. “We are greatly concerned that 
the loss of a magazine-style TV science program on our national broadcaster 
will have a grave impact on the public understanding of science in Australia,” 
the letter said.


“It will reduce the number and range of Australian science stories presented, 
and by relegating science TV to a niche time slot, become less accessible to 
families and a general interest audience.”

Weekly Beast understands that Spigleman was open to reviewing the decision but 
was convinced by Guthrie and her executives it was too late. When the decision 
was confirmed to Catalyst staff on Thursday morning they were stunned to hear 
that the one-hour documentaries which were promised to replace Catalyst would 
not be run as a consecutive strand in a set time slot, but would be dropped 
into the schedule ad hoc as the schedulers see fit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fabc-boss-michelle-guthrie-muddles-her-answers-then-wields-the-axe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85df1e47a1c43ff5c828b9d27cec1fadf3a43abb%2F0_0_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ABC%20boss%20Michelle%20Guthrie%20muddles%20her%20answers%20%E2%80%93%20then%20wields%20the%20axe%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fabc-boss-michelle-guthrie-muddles-her-answers-then-wields-the-axe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ABC%20boss%20Michelle%20Guthrie%20muddles%20her%20answers%20%E2%80%93%20then%20wields%20the%20axe%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Fabc-boss-michelle-guthrie-muddles-her-answers-then-wields-the-axe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85df1e47a1c43ff5c828b9d27cec1fadf3a43abb%2F0_0_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Elias Anton as Danny Kelly in the ABC miniseries Barracuda, based on the 
Christos Tsiolkas novel of the same name 
Drama no crisis 

Not all the drama in television goes on behind the scenes. The annual drama 
report from Screen Australia has revealed thatAustralian television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australian-television> drama is at a 
record high. Not only was it a record year for Australian TV drama titles 
produced, total expenditure was up 25% to $376m. The report includes the 
growing category of online drama – drama produced for non-broadcast platforms 
incuding ABC iview (The Katering Show) and Stan (Wolf Creek). Another 
well-established trend is that short-form drama (Barracuda, Secret Daughter) is 
the standard now, with long-form series almost completely disappearing– except 
of course for the long-established shows Home and Away and Neighbours. 
Long-form drama is defined as series with 20 episodes or more. Broadcasters 
continue to pour the most money into drama but 91% of titles did receive some 
form of federal government assistance.

Seven’s up

Now that the annual corporate reporting season is over we can tell you that 
the highest paid TV executive in the country is Seven West Media’s chief 
executive, Tim Worner. Worner took home a handy $2,832,999 last financial year. 
His opposite at Nine Entertainment Co, Hugh Marks, was looking a little poorer 
with just $1,388,159 for a year’s work.

Fairfax chief on cuts and slips

Speaking of media CEOs, Fairfax’s Greg Hywood faced some curly questions at 
the Fairfax Media’s annual general meeting on Thursday. Shareholders were told 
revenue was 6% to 7% below that of a year ago and Fairfax shares fell 8% after 
the update to 74c. Hywood said cuts to the high-cost “legacy business” of 
newspapers – for that read journalists – had improved the bottom line.

“We run our newsrooms on a 24/7 digital-first basis and have evolved our 
commercial model to grow and monetise our large audiences, content and 
journalism,” he said.

“Fairfax’s publishing future will inevitably involve a stronger emphasis on 
digital publishing and major product innovation as consumer preferences demand. 
We are shaping the future of each of our publishing businesses in response to 
the unique market environments in which they operate.

“For our Australian Metro Media titles, the Sydney Morning Herald, the Age and 
the Australian Financial Review, we are developing a future model with enhanced 
digital and print propositions.

“Our strategy means we will maximise the value of print while evolving our 
business model. We have substantially reduced risk by removing $400m of costs 
over the past four years.”

Asked why there were so many grammatical errors in the paper these days he 
said it was a “trade between accuracy and speed”.

Gold Coast mayor ups the ante in campaign against 'privileged' editors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/28/gold-coast-mayor-ups-the-ante-in-campaign-against-privileged-editors>
Bolt’s blue

Andrew Bolt has once again come to the defence of his friend Cardinal George 
Pell, blaming the media in his Herald Sun column on Thursday of orchestrating a 
“vicious witch hunt”.Singling outGuardian Australia’s David Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/david-marr> as “a leading persecutor of 
Pell”, Bolt saysthe media have missed the big story 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/opinion/andrew-bolt/andrew-bolt-evidence-against-cardinal-george-pell-just-doesnt-stack-up/news-story/78c0dc91c79b77137b53059271acfaf0>
 which is that the case against Pell for covering up for paedophile priests is 
“falling to bits”. It is the latest missive on Pell from the Murdoch tabloid, 
which has gone from breaking the story that Pell was being investigated by 
Victoria police to defending him passionately.

Honi, I shrunk the kids


Further to the spoof copy of the Australian we told you about last week, we 
are happy to report that Honi Soit, the Sydney University student newspaper, 
will be digitised by the University of Sydney library: 87 years and more than 
18,000 pages from 1,530 issues in 61 volumes have been digitised. Journalists 
and politicians who got their start at Honi Soit include Clive James, Laurie 
Oakes, Bob Ellis, Robert Hughes, Malcolm Turnbull, Tony Abbott, Les Murray, and 
Germaine Greer.
 