
Egypt became African champions for a record sixth time after taming the 
Indomitable Lions of Cameroon in Ghana. Mohamed Aboutrika's 76th-minute winner 
was the 99th goal of a thrilling tournament and was enough to make Hasan 
Shehata only the second manager to win back-to-back titles.

Though hosts Ghana had been eliminated the Ohene Djan stadium was nonetheless 
almost full to its 44,000 capacity. Egyptians far outnumbered Cameroonians but 
the Ghanaian majority were supporting their fellow West Africans and almost had 
cause to 'jubilate' as early as the third minute.

Geremi raced forward from his right-back berth and fired a cross towards the 
back post, where Samuel Eto'o rose but could only head the ball wide. It did 
not take long for the Pharaohs to take control, however. In the fifth minute 
Alexandre Song was robbed in midfield by the always-alert Mohamed Aboutrika, 
who glided effortlessly forward and picked out Amr Zaky. Only the striker's 
poor first touch spared Cameroon.

With Song's knee heavily strapped Cameroon's most astute passer appeared 
hindered by the injury sustained during the semi-final win over Ghana - that 
was confirmed when he was replaced by Augustin Binya after just 16 minutes. By 
then, Egypt's five-man midfield was already well on top and Aboutrika, whose 
gift for finding and using space has helped make him the most elegant player of 
the tournament, was dominant.

Beguiled by their opponents' slick passing and movement, Cameroon players 
conferred frantically with manager Otto Pfister during every short break in 
play - to little avail. After repelling a free-kick from Hosny Abd Rabou, 
Carlos Kameni had to tip a 25-yard Aboutrika drive behind for a corner. 
Cameroon relieved the pressure momentarily in the 20th minute, Geremi bringing 
a fine save from El Hadary with a long-range free-kick. Egypt hurtled straight 
down the other end and almost opened the scoring; Moteab's powerful shot was 
parried by Kameni and Aboutrika blazed the rebound over from 14 yards.

From a rare break in the 38th minute, Samuel Eto'o wriggled free of Hani Said 
but from a tight angle pulled his shot wide. Again Egypt responded to a let-off 
by going even closer themselves, Moteab forcing yet another splendid save from 
Kameni from close-range.

A scoreless first half represented progress for Cameroon, who were 3-0 down by 
that stage when the two sides met in the group stages of the tournament. 
Perhaps that was the logic for Pfister's decision to change neither personnel 
nor tactics during the break. The course of the game did not change either, 
Kameni being compelled to save well from both Zaky and Hosny within seven 
minutes of the resumption.

In the 53rd minute constant pressure finally forced Pfister's hand. By 
withdrawing Achille Emana and stationing lanky forward Mohamadou Idrissou on 
the left of midfield, the German declared that long cross-field balls and 
knocks-downs to Eto'o would constitute the best form of defence. That was 
likely the theory anyway, but in reality Cameroon remained camped in their own 
half and almost fell behind in the 62nd minute when the increasingly prominent 
Hosny headed an Ahmed Hasan cross off the post and behind.

Ironically given their dominance, Egypt's winner came on the counter, and one 
that Rigobert Song appeared to have thwarted. But after intercepting an 
attempted through-ball, Cameroon's veteran captain dawdled and was dispossessed 
by substitute Mohamed Zidan. Though felled during the ensuing struggle, Zidan 
managed to slot the ball sideways to Aboutrika, who, as ever, had found space - 
and slammed the ball under Kameni.

The Indomitable Lions roared forward but when St√©phane Mbia shot straight at 
El Hadary from eight yards, the Pharaohs' glorious destiny was assured.

Egypt: E El Hadary; M Shady, H Said, W Gomaa; A Moawad, A Fathy, M Aboutrika 
(A Dawoud 89'), Hosny, A Hasan; E Moteab (M Zidan 54'), A Zaky (M Shawky 84')

Cameroon: C Kameni; Geremei, B Tchato, R Song (A Binya 16'), T Atouba; A Emana 
(M Idrissou 53'), S Mbia, A Song, J Epalle (M Mbami 65'); S Eto'o, A Nkong 
Referee: K Codjia (Benin)

Man of the match: M Aboutrika
 