
Egypt became African champions for a record sixth time after taming the 
Indomitable Lions of Cameroon in Ghana yesterday. Mohamed Aboutrika's 
77th-minute winner was the 99th goal of a thrilling tournament and was enough 
to make Hassan Shehata only the second manager to win back-to-back titles.

Though the hosts Ghana had been eliminated, the stadium was almost full to its 
44,000 capacity, and while Egyptians far outnumbered Cameroonians, the Ghanaian 
majority were supporting their fellow West Africans. They almost had cause to 
celebrate as early as the third minute when Geremi raced forward from 
right-back and fired a cross towards the back post, where Samuel Eto'o rose but 
could only head wide. It did not take long for the Pharaohs to take control, 
however.

In the fifth minute Alexandre Song was robbed in midfield by Aboutrika, who 
glided forward and picked out Amr Zaky. Only the striker's poor first touch 
spared Cameroon. With Song's knee strapped, Cameroon's most astute passer 
appeared to be suffering from the injury sustained during the semi-final win 
over Ghana - that was confirmed when he was replaced by Augustin Binya after 
only 16 minutes.

By then, Egypt's five-man midfield was on top and Aboutrika, whose gift for 
finding and using space has made him the most elegant player of the tournament, 
was dominant. After repelling a free-kick from Hosny Abd Rabou, Carlos Kameni 
had to tip a 25-yard Aboutrika drive behind for a corner. Cameroon relieved the 
pressure momentarily in the 20th minute, with Geremi bringing a fine save from 
El Hadari with a long-range free-kick.

Egypt hurtled straight down the other end and almost opened the scoring; Emad 
Moteab's powerful shot was parried by Kameni and Aboutrika blazed the rebound 
over from 14 yards. From a rare break in the 38th minute, Eto'o wriggled free 
of Hani Said but from a tight angle pulled his shot wide. Again Egypt responded 
to a let-off by going even closer themselves, Moteab forcing yet another 
splendid save from Kameni from close range.

The course of the game did not change after half-time as Kameni was compelled 
to save well from both Zaky and Hosny within seven minutes of the resumption. 
Cameroon remained camped in their own half and almost fell behind in the 62nd 
minute when the increasingly prominent Hosny headed an Ahmed Hasan cross off 
the post and behind.

Ironically given their dominance, Egypt's winner came on the counter, and one 
that Rigobert Song appeared to have thwarted. But after intercepting an 
attempted through-ball, Cameroon's captain dawdled and was dispossessed by 
substitute Mohamed Zidan. Though felled during the ensuing struggle, Zidan 
managed to slot the ball sideways to Aboutrika, who had found space and slammed 
the ball under Kameni.

The Indomitable Lions roared forward but when St√©phane Mbia shot straight at 
El Hadary from eight yards, the Pharaohs' glorious destiny was assured.

Man of the match Mohamed Aboutrika (Egypt)
 