
Absolute Radio chief operating officer Clive Dickens is leaving the station as 
its ownerprepares to sell up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/15/bauer-media-buy-absolute-radio>.

Dickens, who has been with the broadcaster for five years, will depart in the 
spring and is relocating to Sydney to become director of digital innovation at 
Southern Cross Austereo.

By the time he leaves Absolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio>, its parent company, Times 
of India owner Bennett, Coleman & Co, may have sold the business, with Bauer 
Media now seen as the most likely buyer after a consortium led by former Virgin 
Radio chief executive John Pearson pulled its bid this week.

Dickens' responsibilities will be spilt between chief executive Donnach 
O'Driscoll and chief financial officer Adrian Robinson. Tony Moorey, content 
director, will have greater responsibility for programming.

"I am really sad to leave, but it has always been an ambition to live closer 
to my family in Australia and this opportunity to work within the wider 
Asia-Pacific digital economy is the chance of a lifetime. Absolute Radio is in 
great shape and I will be leaving it in great hands," Dickens said.

O'Driscoll said: "We wish Clive the very best as he embarks on a new chapter 
of his life and career in Australia. His contribution to the business over the 
last five years has been nothing short of enormous. He has, in that time, 
fostered and developed a great team of people and Adrian and I look forward to 
working even more closely with them. "

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 