
Former Virgin Radio chief executive John Pearson has teamed up with Time Out 
backer Peter Dubens in a bid to buy music stationAbsolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio>.

Absolute's owner, Times of India parent Bennett, Coleman & Co, is understood 
to be exploring a sale of the station, which lost just over £4m last year.

Pearson was among a number of interested parties when the "for sale" signs 
first went up at Absolute Radio last year.

Bennett, Coleman & Co later gave the station its "long-term backing" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/sep/27/absolute-radio-no-longer-for-sale?INTCMP=SRCH>
, but losses have continued at the broadcaster, which itbought for £53.2m in 
2008 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/may/31/smg.virginrichardbranson>.

Industry insiders valued Absolute at as little as £10m, a far cry from its 
purchase price four years ago.

Last year, Pearson was said to have been working with Richard Branson's Virgin 
Radio to return the station, rebranded Absolute Radio in 2008, to its former 
name.

But the current discussions do not involve the Virgin brand, with Pearson 
seeking to take control of the business with backing from Peter Dubens, whose
venture capital firm, Oakley Capital, is a shareholder in Time Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/nov/25/time-out-sells-half-venture-capital>
.

Pearson left Virgin Radio in 2004, but has continued to consult for Branson's 
Virgin company. He is thought to be the only suitor in discussions to buy the 
business.

When the station was up for sale as part of a review by the owners of the 
business last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/apr/06/absolute-radio-review-sell-off?INTCMP=SRCH>
, there was also early interest from TalkSport parent UTV Media and Ashley 
Tabor's Global Radio.

UTV is not actively involved in a bid for the company, while Global is in the 
process of buying Smooth Radio parent GMG Radio, which would rule out a renewed 
bid on competition grounds.

Absolute's operating company, TIML Radio, reported full-year pre-tax losses of 
£4.12m for 2011, down from £4.27m in 2010. Turnover rose to £16.64m, up from 
£14.43m in 2010.

Absolute Radio's audience plummeted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/feb/03/rajars-absolute-radio-low> after 
it wasrebranded from Virgin Radio by its new owners in September 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/sep/02/commercialradio.radio>.

Four years later, it has never recovered, with an average weekly reach of 1.54 
million listeners in the third quarter of 2012 – the latest for which Rajar 
audience figures are available – compared to Virgin Radio's swansong 
listenership of 2.4 million.

Absolute management has looked to expand its appeal with a stable of new 
decade-themed digital stations, the most popular of which, Absolute 80s, has 
nearly 900,000 weekly listeners.

But three of the new stations have fewer than 200,000 weekly listeners each.

Absolute also took the radical step in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/feb/11/absolute-radio-premier-league-commentary>
 of buying up live Premier League football rights, broadcasting 32 games a 
season on Saturday afternoons.

A spokesman for Virgin Group said: "Virgin Radio and Virgin Group are not 
involved in any discussions or talks to buy Absolute Radio or licensing of the 
Virgin brand."

A spokeswoman for Absolute Radio said: "We do not comment on speculation about 
our business."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 