
Absolute Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> and Planet 
Rock, the two commercial radio stations up for sale, both showed audience gains 
in the latest Rajar listening figures.

Absolute Radio, which has been put up for sale by its owner the Times of India 
group and is expected to be bought byBauer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer> Media, was up 10.8% year on year and 
14.7% on the previous quarter to 1.77 million listeners in the final three 
months of 2012.

It remains a long way short of the 2.4 million it had when it was last known 
as Virgin Radio in 2008 and the station has racked up big losses under its new 
owners since its £53.2m purchase five years ago.

Among its six digital-only stations, Absolute 80s remained its star performer 
with 888,000 listeners, Absolute 00s its worst with just 149,000.

Digital-only station Planet Rock, which has been put up for sale by its owner 
Malcolm Bluemel, also showed gains, albeit more modest ones.

Planet Rock had 877,000 listeners, up 8.1% year on year and 1.5% on the 
previous quarter.

But despite building a decent audience, its millionaire owner Bluemel has been 
unable to make it pay, with the station said to be losing about £300,000 a year.

With Bauer linked to moves for both stations, there were mixed fortunes for 
its own existing rock brands.

Kerrang!, which broadcasts on FM in the West Midlands and on digital 
nationwide, had a UK audience of 1.28 million, down 2.4% year on year.

Music magazine spin-off Q was up 21% on the previous quarter but the 
digital-only station saw its audience fall 30.7% year on year to 196,000.

Elsewhere, Global Radio's Capital network was down 3.4% year on year (but only 
marginally down on the quarter) to a total weekly reach of 6.84m listeners.

Capital also saw its share of the market fall to 3.9% from 4.4% in the last 
quarter of 2011.

Capital is the second biggest commercial network, behind sister station Heart, 
which had 7.36m listeners, down 1.4% year on year but marginally up on the 
previous quarter, with a 5% market share.

Global talk station LBC – like Heart and Capital another brand that has gone 
national in the digital era – had 1.28m listeners, up 11.7% year on year.

The station started broadcasting a weekly phone-in with deputy prime minister 
Nick Clegg earlier this month, although it is too recent to be included in the 
latest figures.

Global's Classic FM had 5.37m listeners, marginally up on the year but down 
1.5% on the previous quarter, while the other national analogue station, UTV's 
TalkSport, was down 5.1% on the year but marginally up on the quarter, to 3.03m.

Among the commercial digital-only stations, big year-on-year risers included 
Bauer Media's Heat, up 18.4% to 767,000, and Jazz FM, up 18.8% (but down 2.6% 
on the previous quarter) to 608,000.

Not such good news at Global's golden oldie network Gold, down 8.2% year on 
year to 1.42 million.

Smooth Radio, part of the GMG Radio group of stations bought by Global Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio> – the Competition Commission 
will publish its report on the deal in March – had 3.27m listeners, up 2.7% on 
the previous quarter but down 1.2% year on year.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 