
Absolute Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> has secured 
commentary rights to England and Ireland matches and the knockout stages of the 
Euro 2012 football championship, and claims it will be the first to broadcast 
live games from the tournament on FM.

The commercial broadcaster has struck a deal for the live commentary rights to 
all six England and Ireland games in the group stage of the tournament, which 
kicks off next month in Poland and the Ukraine.

Absolute also has secured the rights to cover two of the quarter finals, one 
semi-final and the final.

The radio broadcaster is claiming a first with matches going out live on FM in 
London and the south-east, as well as nationwide over AM.

BBC Radio 5 Live and TalkSport hold radio rights for all Euro 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro2012> matches, but only broadcast on 
MW.

Absolute Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> presenter Jim 
Proudfoot, a former TalkSport commentator, will cover all the games, most of 
which kick-off about 7.45pm UK time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCMelq-aQNfE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCMelq-aQNfE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FCMelq-aQNfE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
This will dovetail with specially scheduled editions of Ian Wright's Rock 'n' 
Roll Football Show, which will start at 5pm every day of the tournament, from 8 
June to 1 July.

"Wrighty's been there, he's done it and he knows what the players will be 
going through," said Paul Sylvester, head of presentation at Absolute Radio. 
"He'll have an amazing insight and will give his views in his brilliantly 
unique way."

Live commentary of matches will also be available on digital radio, the 
internet, mobile phones and digital TV.

Absolute Radio is in the second year of a three-year Premier League deal.

The broadcaster has the rights to 32 matches and gets the second pick of 3pm 
Saturday games, but it is the first time that it has branched out toEuropean 
Championship <https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> 
rights.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 