
It is not just a mutual love of Guns n' Roses 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8SbUC-UaAxE> that Absolute Radio and Planet 
Rock have in common.

The two stations, which broadcast a diet of rock – and in Absolute's case 
occasionally pop – were among the commercial radio winners in the latest 
official Rajar listening figures for the three months to the end of June, 
published on Thursday.

Absolute Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> saw its 
total UK audience grow to 1.76 million in the second quarter of this year, up 
9.4% on the previous three months, while digital station Planet Rock was up 
10.1% to 948,000.

The broadcaster also saw a big rise in its London audience, soaring 22.2% on 
the previous three months to 974,000. Breakfast host Christian O'Connell grew 
his audience in the capital by nearly 150,000 on the previous quarter, to 
674,000.

But it was a different tune for some of Absolute's digital spinoff stations. 
While Absolute 80s, with 864,000 listeners, and Absolute Radio 90s, with an 
average weekly reach of 414,000, appear to have firmly established their 
appeal, none of Absolute Radio 60s, Absolute Radio 70s or Absolute Radio 00s 
managed more than 200,000 listeners.

Among the other national commercial stations, Global Radio's Classic FM was up 
marginally on the previous three months but down 4.4% on the year to 5.48 
million. UTV Media's TalkSport had 2.92 million listeners, down 9.7% on the 
previous three months and 9.1% year on year.

Global Radio's national commercial networks, Heart and Capital, were both down 
on the previous quarter, Capital slipping 1% to 6.98 million, and Heart 1.4% to 
7.38 million.

Heart was also down year on year, by 4%, but Capital was up, by 1.5% on the 
same period last year.

Smooth Radio, part of the GMG Radio group of stations that were bought by 
Global in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/25/global-radio-takeover-gmg>, saw 
its national audience drop by 1.7% on the previous quarter – but up 1.6% year 
on year – to 3.26 million. GMG Radio was part of the group that publishes 
MediaGuardian.

A number of national digital stations saw double-digit year-on-year drops, 
including Bauer Radio's The Hits, down 19.9% to 973,000, Global's Xfm, down 
13.2% to 882,000, and Sunrise Radio National, down 23.7% to 447,000.

Overall the popularity of digital radio continued to grow, with 31.5% of all 
radio listening now via a digital platform, up from 29.2% in the previous 
quarter and 26.9% a year ago.

Digital audio broadcasting (DAB) grew to 20.1% of all listening, up from 17.2% 
a year ago. Internet listening was also up, to a 4.6% share from 3.2% a year 
ago.

AM and FM platforms now account for 61.1% of all radio listening, down from 
65.2% in the second quarter of 2011.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 