
Justice delayed is justice denied – denied to everyone. The state is entitled 
to deport people it considers a threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/07/abu-qatada-jordan-deportation-battle>
. The British public is entitled to that justice, as is the potential victim of 
deportation. For Britain to become a haven for fallen dictators, mass killers, 
tax evaders and villains is neither right nor safe.

I have no problem in sending home people in the category of Abu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada>, who arrived on false documents, 
became an ally and counsellor to terrorists and then cited fear of torture as a 
reason for not being deported. Such people take a risk. They swim in a murky 
sea and should accept the consequences. British citizens are entitled to some 
benefit of doubt, but the state is entitled to demand good behaviour from 
visitors or potential citizens or send them home.

That said, Abu Qatada by all accounts does not fall into the ranting cleric 
category of his contemporary,Abu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/05/abu-hamza-loses-extradition-appeal>
. He is closer to the vagrant revolutionary tradition to which London has 
offered refuge throughout history. The city should be big enough to encompass 
him, even if his activities merited watching. To spend10 years and £1.7m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/07/abu-qatada-human-rights> to get 
him to a home was a waste. It arose from post-9/11 hysteria, when we now know 
that human rights were of little concern to the British and American 
governments.

The British judicial system and the home secretary, Theresa May, at least 
played the case by the book. America would have left Qatada to a red list, a 
drone attack, kidnap or Guantánamo Bay. By demanding, and apparently securing,
fair treatment for Qatada in Jordan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/feb/17/theresa-may-jordan-abu-qatada>, 
May has probably done more to improve civil rights in that country than anyone 
else.

But she should not spoil it by weakening a system 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-21489072> that has given her such a political 
coup. She constantly cites judicial oversight as cover for her multifarious 
extensions of state surveillance and control. She can hardly now claim they 
should be weakened.
 