
It’s no surprise that Nicky Morgan is in favour of the English baccalaureate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/14/schools-gcse-ebacc-ofsted-nicky-morgan>
 (EBacc). But what is genuinely puzzling is her assertion that “evidence shows” 
that sticking to “these core academic subjects…” – [a GCSE in maths, English, a 
science, a language and one of history or geography] – “… sets every child up 
for life”. Even if what she really meant was that it sets every child up for a 
job, there’s not much “evidence” to sustain the proposition. In fact, it all 
points the other way.


OK – a good fistful of the EBacc five should set you up for A-levels, and a 
good fistful of A-levels might set you up for a good university, and a good 
degree might – just might – set you up for a job that uses a tiny bit of what 
you’ve spent 10 years learning (if it’s not mostly redundant by then). But what 
successful employers, big and small, hi-tech and no-tech, are crying out for 
are recruits who are innovative and creative, who can think laterally, 
communicate clearly and work as part of a team. These are all abilities that 
are most effectively developed for children through the arts and music.


Don't stifle creativity with more cuts to arts education, say experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/may/08/dont-stifle-creativity-with-more-cuts-to-arts-education-say-experts>
But these subjects aren’t included in the EBacc measure – they’re not 
“academic” enough.


In the future being adaptable, able to learn how to learn, rather than learn 
how to remember, will be the only way of staying afloat in a swirling labour 
market. But it seems we’ve decided the future isn’t happening.

Instead, in desperation, the government is going to cling ever more tightly to 
the old certainties of pointless rote-learning of a few chosen subjects that 
are deemed – in Nicky Morgan’s word – to be “hard”, on the basis that if 
they’re hard, they must be good. Why?

What’s really hard is being creative – and that’s going to get a lot harder in 
a global economy that is itself becoming more creative – and more competitive. 
That’s why the Chinese government have made it a central part of their strategy 
to “move from made in China to designed in China”. They see where the real 
money lies along the value chain.

At the moment they’re knocking out millions of iPhones in Shenzhen and earning 
a meagre 4% of the phone’s retail cost while Apple retains 60% for imagining it 
and designing it back in Seattle. Steve Jobs, the founder of Apple, was fond of 
saying that his success was due to the fact that he didn’t hire computer geeks, 
he hired artists, musicians and poets who were fascinated by technology. No 
accident that Apple’s success is substantially due to the genius of a design 
graduate of the Royal College ofArt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/artanddesign>. But here in the UK, the 
number of students doing design and technology at GCSE has declined by 50% – 
that’s 50% in just over 10 years. And the figures for arts, drama and music, 
though not quite as shocking, are all pretty dire – and all going the wrong 
way. No EBacc GCSEs in that lot – they’re not “hard” enough.

If you want creativity, let artists and technologists work together
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jun/24/universities-need-creativity-let-artists-and-technologists-work-together>
Here’s another thing. In the course of an exhaustive analysis of some hundreds 
of entrepreneurial digital businesses in and around Brighton last year by the 
Arts and Humanities Research Council, it was discovered that the companies 
where there was a real balance between employees with an arts background and 
employees with a technology background, the businesses were growing at three 
times the rate of companies that failed to achieve a similar balance. What a 
surprise.

But forget about jobs and the economy. The real evidence, and all of us know 
it, is that the way children get set up for life is by having balance, variety 
and stimulus in their lives and in their education – well-rounded to use a very 
traditional phrase.

That can’t be achieved by consigning the arts to being a nice addition to a 
system of exam-focused academic rote-learning. In what politicians love to tell 
us is the most creative nation on Earth, we need to have creativity at the 
centre, and celebrate the fact. Lining up little empty vessels in emulation of 
Mr Gradgrind won’t do it for our kids, won’t do it for the vibrancy of our 
communities and certainly won’t do it for the future of the economy. Time to do 
some re-sits, Mrs Morgan.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.

 