
The recent Westminster Education Forum (WEF) event on the future of music 
education was, as one commentator noted, rather like the opening of A Tale of 
Two Cities. On the one hand, we had pats on the back, testimonies of success, 
words of encouragement and rallies to keep up the good work. On the other, 
there were the usual concerns over funding, policy, accessibility, training and 
progression.

The WEF bills itself as a “premier” vehicle through which stakeholders in 
education and policymakers can engage in discussion. The event featured a 
comprehensive spread of contributors, including Richard Morris, former head of
ABRSM <http://gb.abrsm.org/en/home>; Julian Lloyd Webber; national lead for 
music atOfsted <https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/ofsted>, Robin 
Hammerton; and Laura Gander-Howe, director of children, young people and 
learning atArts Council England <http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/> (ACE). There 
were also representatives from leading conservatoires, music services, hubs, 
plus schools from primary and secondary sectors, private and state. Teachers, 
academics, industry leaders and school heads were encouraged to pitch questions 
from the floor.

The result was a diverse, if perhaps sometimes too broad, platform of debate 
that captured some of the key issues in the current discourse surrounding music 
education. But it was singer-songwriterRumer 
<http://www.rumer.co.uk/splash/outnow> who left the most striking note, saying 
that access to music should be every child’s basic right.

It was the best of times

The forum often engaged in a tone of optimism. Lord Black, member of the 
All-Party Parliamentary Group for Music Education, set a decisive tone, 
appealing to the audience with a pledge that music should be at the heart of 
all children’s education. Gander-Howe took the opportunity to acknowledge the 
recent commitment of the government to support music hubs, also citing 
increased innovation among hubs in raising funds to supplement subsidy. 
Ofsted’s Hammerton, whosewell-documented report 
<http://www.northamptonshire.gov.uk/music/Info/resources/Documents/PDF%20Documents/Music%20in%20schools%20what%20hubs%20must%20do.pdf>
 (pdf) last year heavily criticised hubs for their failings, was more positive, 
citing a wonderful year and praising the work of hub leaders and ACE.

Lloyd Webber, founder of the government’s In Harmony scheme, also had words of 
encouragement, acknowledging the rolling out of the scheme to encourage musical 
engagement within deprived areas and referencing data which showed rising 
levels of literacy in parts of Liverpool where the project has been running. 
There can be no doubting the argument for the holistic benefits of a musical 
education – that debate has been won – but professor Susan Hallam from the
Institute of Education <http://www.ioe.ac.uk/> consolidated the position, 
depicting the weight of academic research that vindicates music as a powerful 
means of engendering social, psychological and intellectual wellbeing in 
children and young people.

Access to higher education was also raised. The audience learned that 80% of 
students fromTrinity Laban Conservatoire for Music and Dance 
<http://www.trinitylaban.ac.uk/> enter through the state sector. Professor 
Barry Ife from theIncorporated Society of Musicians <http://www.ism.org/> also 
rolled out a series of impressive stats concerning the contribution of the 
music industry to the economy (£3.5bn gross; more than 100,000 jobs). There was 
even a chuckle from the floor when he quoted a recruitment drive from leading 
banks for arts graduates. Lord David Lawrence Lipsey closed the conference by 
emphasising a commitment by representatives of parliament towards music 
education.

It was the worst of times

Trinity Laban’s data may appear encouraging, but this still means 20% of 
students don’t come from the state sector, significantly above the national 
average of 7% for higher education. The event saw increasing frustration over 
accessibility and progression. Morris, now chairman of governors at theYehudi 
Menuhin School <http://www.yehudimenuhinschool.co.uk/>, criticised the outcomes 
of first access schemes in some schools which, despite allowing for mass early 
provision of instrumental tuition, fail to sustain participation as subsidy 
wanes and costs for parents rise. Hammerton qualified Ofsted’s position by 
affirming that, despite progress, performance of music hubs countrywide was 
still considered patchy, while also sounding sceptical tones over the provision 
of music for pupils with special needs. Lloyd Webber pointed out anomalies in 
Ofsted’s own agenda, asking: “How should it be possible for a school to be 
regarded as ‘good’ when it fails to provide for music?”

There was tension, too, over the role of music teachers, especially in primary 
schools. Several speakers pressed for greater collaboration between 
professional musicians, musical institutions and local schools in order to fill 
what Richard Hallam, chair of theMusic Education Council 
<http://www.mec.org.uk/>, called a “skills gap” in teaching. Yet there was 
increasing concern, particularly from the floor, about the de-skilling of 
professional teachers – at one point, the panel appeared stunned by claims from 
a representative of York University that, on many PGCE courses, prospective 
teachers receive only three hours of music training.

Hammerton was also condemnatory in places, citing the quality of music 
provision in some schools as still poor. In reaction, several concerns about 
incentivising top music graduates into the profession were sustained, as 
complaints were made about squeezed music services increasingly negotiating 
staff into zero-hours contracts.

The event was a mixed bag. At one point, a fellow delegate grumbled: “It’s 
just the same old faces” – but they weren’t right. Just like in A Tale of Two 
Cities, we had a heroine: singer-songwriter Rumer, one of the country’s most 
exciting contemporary artists, who provided a keynote speech. She delivered a 
measured personal story of patchy music education but one ending in success off 
the back of high expectations and access to performance and venues. Hers was a 
message to both policymakers and stakeholders alike, and she garnered unanimous 
support for her declaration that music is beautiful and access to it should 
ultimately be “every child’s basic right”.

More like this

• How orchestras are riding the wave of change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/28/orchestras-changing-cannabis-concerts-audiences>
• Music ed must move beyond classical and become more inclusive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/11/music-education-inclusive-funding-hubs>
• A happy life is a creative life: why every child needs music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jul/03/happy-child-music-education-symposium>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 