
For many children and young people, particularly those with learning 
difficulties, attending a theatre performance can be a confusing and stressful 
experience. Sara Ryan from the University of Warwick has described the 
experience of many parents taking their children into such public places as 
being "contingent, unsatisfactory and incomplete".

She found in her discussions with parents that five key themes recurred: 
strategies, visibility of impairment, unconventional behaviour, sympathetic 
others and inclusion. Parents, carers and teachers will know that the whole 
process can be made more meaningful, enjoyable and productive if these issues 
are addressed and children are helped to prepare for the performance and given 
support during it.

There is much that theatres and theatrical companies can do to address these 
needs. Many have done so through special performances at which adjustments are 
made to lighting, sound, effects and in some cases narrative. These events are 
often advertised as autism-friendly, but it's not only children on the autism 
spectrum who may benefit.

These "relaxed" performances are a welcome development but can be difficult to 
finance where venues perhaps feel that audience numbers won't fill the theatre; 
others may feel less attracted to what they may see as a disrupted performance. 
Alongside relaxed performances then, important as they are, we need to ensure 
that all performance is made as inclusive as possible.

Just as schools moved from integration of children with disabilities – 
building ramps, converting buildings – to becoming inclusive schools with the 
needs of all considered in advance, so too must theatres and performers. For 
example, if strobe lighting creates problems for those with photo-sensitive 
epilepsy, should we simply offer one alternative performance without the strobe 
lighting; or should the lighting for all performances be adjusted so that the 
frequency of change or the type of effect does not trigger seizures or cause 
discomfort?

Some children need other kinds of support and may then be able to attend an 
inclusive performance alongside their peers. One resource that can help to make 
performances more inclusive is the use of graphic symbols. By providing support 
activities for use before or after the performance, these symbols, such as
Makaton <http://www.makaton.org/aboutMakaton/>, PCS 
<http://www.mayer-johnson.com/category/symbols-and-photos> and Widgit 
<http://www.widgit.com/>, may support the inclusion of people with a range of 
communication difficulties, not only people who use alternative and 
augmentative communication (AAC) or those who have learning disabilities.

Graphic symbols have been developed mainly within the AAC community for many 
years but have more recently migrated to other settings and are now widely used 
in mainstream schools, with young children and with those for whom English is 
an additional language. In our case, Widgit created symbol resources,available 
as free downloads 
<http://www.widgit.com/resources/popular-topics/myfirstballet/index.htm> for 
English National Ballet'sMy First Coppélia 
<http://www.ballet.org.uk/whats-on/my-first-ballet-coppelia/>.

One group of resources relates to the comic ballet in particular, with symbol 
synopses, character sheets and information about props and scenery. Other 
resources deal with ballet in general, including illustrations of the key 
positions and gestures. A third group of symbol resources deals with going to 
the theatre and are likely to be of use in many different performance contexts, 
where it may be necessary to explain to young children or to those with 
learning difficulties the particular conventions associated with theatre-going.

Developing such resources need neither be complex nor necessarily 
resource-demanding and there are many software tools such asSymwriter 
<http://www.widgit.com/products/symwriter/> and Clicker 
<http://www.cricksoft.com/uk/products/clicker/home.aspx> that can make the 
process more rapid and achievable.

The use of signing can also help to make performances more accessible for 
children with learning difficulties as well as those who areD/deaf  
<http://www.adcommunications.org.uk/our-translation-services/help/faqs/197-what-does-d-deaf-mean.html>
. This can be a welcome development for other children, since signing of 
various kinds is now familiar to many through children's television and the 
presence of units for hearing impaired in mainstream schools.

Choreographer George Williamson <http://georgewilliamson.co.uk/> worked with 
children's theatre dramaturgAdam Peck <https://twitter.com/adzpeck> to refine 
and reshape the narrative input to the stage where it was helpful rather than 
intrusive, and using one of the key danced characters, Dr Coppélius, as the 
narrator. At a later stage of rehearsals, signing consultantKatja O'Neill 
<http://www.sign2learn.co.uk/> joined the team and taught some key British Sign 
Language to the dancer/narrator, these signs being recognised by many young 
children and not only those with a hearing impairment.

Perhaps the most impressive part of the My First Coppélia project was the 
collaborative effort to improve accessibility, with symbol and signing 
consultants and ballet creatives working on a common task. The challenge for 
performance companies, however, is to move beyond specially funded projects, 
however important and successful those might be, so that accessibility becomes 
built in to everything that the company does – and without the response 
becoming formulaic or predictable. Accessibility should be part of everyday 
practice and not just a special event.

Chris Abbott is a reader in e-inclusion at King's College London 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/index.aspx>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 