
ACCIDENTAL MAYBE?

Accidental Farmer, BBC1, 9pm – The comedy drama pilot starring Ashley Jensen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2010/dec/22/tv-review-accidental-farmer>
 pulled in 4.575 million viewers, a 17.7% share between 9pm and 10pm. The 
better news was that it held on to most of its audience throughout the 
hour-long run.

It also won its slot, with ITV1's docusoap The Savoy drawing 4.002 million 
viewers, a 15.5% share, between 9pm and 10pm, with another 86,000 viewers on 
ITV1 HD.

FOOD V BOOZE

Jamie's Best Ever Christmas, Channel 4, 9pm – The second part of Jamie 
Oliver's yuletide special picked up 2.106 million viewers, an 8.1% share, 
between 9pm and 10pm, with another 175,000 viewers on Channel 4 +1.

It beat the first of BBC2's four-part Oz and Hugh Raise the Bar, with Oz 
Clarke and Hugh Dennis, which began with 1.998 million viewers, 8% of the 
audience. It drew another 4,000 viewers on BBC HD – a pity, because wine tastes 
so much better in high definition.

VROOM!

Top Gear, BBC2, 8pm – Jeremy Clarkson and Co had by some distance BBC2's 
most-watched programme of the night, and it wasn't even the Christmas special. 
The motoring show pulled in 5.354 million viewers, a 20.3% share, between 8pm 
and 9pm. That's not all – it drew another 386,000 viewers on BBC HD.

Channel 4's Time Team repeat, The Secrets of Westminster Abbey, was 
predictably left on the starting blocks, with 1.536 million viewers, a 5.9% 
share.

Channel 5's The Princess and the Press: How Kate's Life Will Change Forever, 
pulled in just 852,000 viewers, a 3.3% share, between 8pm and 9pm. Vince Cable 
and the Press: How Undercover Reporters Changed the Business Secretary's Remit 
For The Time Being At Least, has just gone into production.

The Top Gear Christmas special, since you ask, is on Boxing Day.

NURSE! THE OVERNIGHTS!

Holby City, BBC1, 8pm – With just one week to go before the dual departure of 
Faye and Connie - we're going to miss them too - the hospital drama averaged 
6.373 million viewers, a 24.3% share, one of its biggest audiences of the year.

Holby City easily won its slot, with ITV1's Children's Hospital at Christmas 
averaging 2.62 million viewers, a 10.1% share, also between 8pm and 9pm, with 
another 89,000 viewers on ITV1 HD.

All ratings are Barb <http://www.barb.co.uk/> overnight figures, including 
live and same day timeshifted (recorded) viewing, but excluding on demand, +1 
or other – unless otherwise stated. Figures for BBC1, ITV1, Channel 4 and 
Channel 5 generally include ratings for their HD simulcast services, unless 
otherwise stated

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 