
For editorial and speaker enquiries please contact Robin Hough at 
robin.hough@theguardian.com
 <mailto:robin.hough@theguardian.com>
For sponsorship enquiries please contact Matthew Race at 
matthew.race@theguardian.com <mailto:matthew.race@theguardian.com>

International Partner

UK Trade & Investment <http://www.ukti.gov.uk/home.html?guid=none>

UK Trade & Investment is the Government Department that helps UK-based 
companies succeed in the global economy. We also help overseas companies bring 
their high-quality investment to the UK's dynamic economy acknowledged as 
Europe's best place from which to succeed in global business.

UK Trade & Investment offers expertise and contacts through its extensive 
network of specialists in the UK, and in British embassies and other diplomatic 
offices around the world. We provide companies with the tools they require to 
be competitive on the world stage.

UK Trade & Investment is responsible for the delivery of the Solutions for 
Business product "Helping Your Business Grow Internationally." These 
"solutions" are available to qualifying businesses, and cover everything from 
investment and grants through to specialist advice, collaborations and 
partnerships.

Knowledge Partner

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 
<http://www.ntu.edu.sg/Pages/index.aspx>

A research-intensive public university, Nanyang Technological University (NTU) 
has 33,500 undergraduate and postgraduate students in the colleges of 
Engineering, Business, Science, and Humanities, Arts, & Social Sciences. It has 
a new medical school, the Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine, set up jointly 
with Imperial College London.

NTU is also home to four world-class autonomous institutes – the National 
Institute of Education, S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies, Earth 
Observatory of Singapore, and Singapore Centre on Environmental Life Sciences 
Engineering – and various leading research centres such as the Nanyang 
Environment & Water Research Institute (NEWRI), Energy Research Institute @ NTU 
(ERI@N) and the Institute on Asian Consumer Insight (ACI).

A fast-growing university with an international outlook, NTU is putting its 
global stamp on Five Peaks of Excellence: Sustainable Earth, Future Healthcare, 
New Media, New Silk Road, and Innovation Asia.

Besides the main Yunnan Garden campus, NTU also has a satellite campus in 
Singapore's science and tech hub, one-north, and is setting up a third campus 
in Novena, Singapore's medical district.

Event Partners

START-UP <http://www.thestartup.asia/start-up-the-site/>

START-UP is a 360 initiative by Channel NewsAsia, which includes a one-stop 
information online portal and reality program series. It offers accessible and 
practical demonstration resource for those who want to start their own business 
but aren't quite sure how. Whether you're a business veteran, first-time 
entrepreneur, aspiring start upper, fledging innovator or fresh graduate 
bursting with ideas, you'll be empowered by the knowledge of what goes on the 
playing field – delivered fresh from the START-UP. More information 
atwww.thestartup.asia.

Omidyar Network <http://www.omidyar.com/>
 s 
Omidyar Network is a philanthropic investment firm dedicated to harnessing the 
power of markets to create opportunity for people to improve their lives. 
Established in 2004 by eBay founder Pierre Omidyar and his wife Pam, the 
organization invests in and helps scale innovative organizations to catalyze 
economic and social change. To date, Omidyar Network has committed more than 
$500 million to for-profit companies and non-profit organizations that foster 
economic advancement and encourage individual participation across multiple 
investment areas, including financial inclusion, entrepreneurship, property 
rights, consumer internet, mobile and government transparency. To learn more, 
visit www.omidyar.com and follow Omidyar Network on Twitter @OmidyarNetwork.

United Nations Development Programme 
<http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home.html>

UNDP partners with people at all levels of society to help build nations that 
can withstand crisis, and drive and sustain the kind of growth that improves 
the quality of life for everyone. On the ground in 177 countries and 
territories, we offer global perspective and local insight to help empower 
lives and build resilient nations.

Our focus is helping countries build and share solutions to achieve Poverty 
Reduction and the Millennium Development Goals, Democratic Governance, Crisis 
Prevention and Recovery, Environment and Energy for Sustainable Development. 
UNDP helps developing countries attract and use aid effectively. In all our 
activities, we encourage the protection of human rights, capacity development 
and the empowerment of women.

EY <http://www.ey.com/UK/en/home>

Exclusive Regional Media Partner

Channel NewsAsia <http://www.channelnewsasia.com/>

Channel NewsAsia Singapore was established in March 1999 by MediaCorp, and is 
an English language Asian TV News channel. Positioned to "Understand Asia", it 
reports on global developments with Asian perspectives. Channel NewsAsia brings 
viewers not only the latest news but also the stories behind the headlines. 
Based in Singapore, it has correspondents in major Asian cities and key Western 
ones, including New York, Washington D.C, London and Brussels.

The channel is complemented by an online presence at channelnewsasia.com, and 
social media services like Facebook, Youtube and Twitter.

Channel NewsAsia (International), was launched in September 2000, as the 
international broadcasting arm of Channel NewsAsia Singapore. It is now viewed 
in 25 territories across Asia. The satellite footprint of the channel stretches 
across the Middle East, South Asia, Southeast Asia, Northeast Asia and 
Australia.

Channel NewsAsia's other key business is the production of news and current 
affairs content in four languages, English, Malay, Tamil and Chinese. This 
content is produced for MediaCorp's television and online platforms, such as 
mass entertainment Channels 5, 8, U, and niche language channels, Suria and 
Vasantham. MediaCorp is Singapore's leading media company with the most 
complete range of platforms, spanning television, radio, newspapers, magazines, 
movies, digital and out-of-home media.

For more information, please visit Channel NewsAsia's website at 
channelnewsasia.com.

Organisers 

About Guardian News & Media

Guardian News & Media (GNM) publishes theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international>, the third largest English-speaking 
newspaper website in the world (comScore, August 2013). Since launching its US 
and Australia digital editions in 2011 and 2013 respectively, traffic from 
outside of the UK now represents over two-thirds of the Guardian's total 
digital audience.

The Guardian, which was first published in 1821, is most recently renowned for 
its agenda-setting NSA and GCHQ revelations following disclosures by 
whistleblower Edward Snowden, its globally acclaimed investigation into phone 
hacking and the launch of its groundbreaking digital-first strategy in 2011, 
and its trailblazing partnership with WikiLeaks in 2010.

About MediaGuru

MediaGuru <http://www.mediaguru.in/en/>, an Indian MNC, is a media consulting, 
technology, and entertainment company, with expertise across television, film, 
radio, new media, and print. The company's focus areas include new launches and 
revamping of TV channels, radio stations, digital and print businesses; 
production and distribution of Hollywood and Indian films and TV shows; and 
media & knowledge process outsourcing (MPO/KPO) services. Their client 
geographies span across US, Europe, Asia, and Africa.

Click here to book your place » 
<https://www.eventsmicrosite.com/theguardian/activatesingapore/>
 