
If you'd like to nominate an individual or organisation, email 
robin.hough@theguardian.com <mailto:robin.hough@theguardian.com> 

Confirmed speakers include:

Arun Bansal, president, South East Asia and Oceania, Ericsson
 s 
Joining Ericsson in 1995, Arun has been heading Ericsson's Southeast Asia and 
Oceania region since 2010. With around 4000 employees, the region spans 41 
countries across Southeast Asia, Pacific Islands, Australia, and New Zealand.

Arun heads a diverse and dynamic region where market conditions vary from 
developing economies to mature and affluent markets. With more than 30 
customers, Ericsson supports the utilities, telecommunications, broadcast media 
and public safety sectors with communications infrastructure, systems and 
services.

Prior to leading Southeast Asia and Oceania, Arun held President and Country 
Manager roles in Indonesia and Bangladesh. As head of Bangladesh he was 
responsible for setting up the local company and developing it to become a key 
market in the region. He was also responsible for establishing the world's 
first Managed Capacity operation with the operator Bharti in India.

Arun brings with him a wealth of commercial and sales experience gained from 
roles in Malaysia, Sweden, the USA and India. Arun holds a degree in Bachelor 
of Engineering ( Electronics) and a Post Graduate Diploma in Marketing, both 
from India. He is married with two daughters and is lives in Singapore.

Keith Carter, visiting senior fellow, NUS Business School
 s 
Keith Carter lectures, writes, invents, and mentors from industry and 
corporate experience. He teaches both Executive Education and Undergraduate 
Purchasing and Materials Management. He also delivers results by leading 
several industry/academic Big Data and S&OP projects in retail, high-tech, 
transportation, and chemicals.

He is Visiting Senior Fellow of Decision Sciences at the NUS Business School. 

From 1999 to 2012 Keith worked for the Estee Lauder Companies, Global Supply 
Chain Center of Excellence, tasked to lead the strategic and tactical supply 
chain operations of global multi-plants to improve the overall performance of 
the company. Keith has established and lead Global Supply Chain initiatives: 
Supply Chain Intelligence, Knowledge Management, Transformation Governance, and 
Data Management. All to achieve end-to-end supply chain visibility.

Eddie Chau, co-founding partner, TNF Ventures
 s 
Eddie Chau formed Brandtology in 2008 after successfully incubating e-Cop, a 
company he founded in 2000, to a market leader in Info-Security Industry. e-Cop 
was acquired in 2007 by a wholly owned subsidiary of Temasek Holding Pte Ltd.

Brandtology is the leader in Business & Brand online intelligence services. 
Using proprietary technologies and proven process, combined with trained and 
experienced analysts, Brandtology helps companies analyse online conversations 
in the social media and make strategic decisions for their brands in a timely 
manner. Brandtology supports global clients in multiple countries and languages 
with more than 300 professionals in 15 countries. In February 2011, iSentia 
(formerly known as Media Monitors) with HQ in Australia acquired majority stake 
in Brandtology.

In 2011, Eddie co-founded V-Key with a key objective to make all mobile 
devices and applications more secured with cutting edge patented technology, 
and in 2012, co-founded TNF Ventures with several ICT entrepreneurs and venture 
capitalists, to incubate early stage ICT start-ups.
Before founding Brandtology, Eddie was the Founder & CEO of e-Cop. He brought 
to the organisation his extensive experience in the ICT. He led and charted all 
aspects of e-Cop group's strategic direction from product development through 
to professional consultancy services, technology development, sales and global 
expansion. Under his dynamic leadership and vision, e-Cop has grown to be the 
market leader in the Info-Security industry with international presence 
spanning more than 20 countries.

Before founding Brandtology and e-Cop, Eddie held senior positions in IBM and 
Computer Associates Inc.. Eddie has also appeared on CNBC Asia, Channel 
NewsAsia, Intelligent Enterprise, MIS Asia and Network Computing Asia, among 
others.

Married with two children, Chau holds an MSc in Communication Engineering from 
Imperial College, London

Steve Cheah, president, Global Entrepreneurship Thailand
 s 
Stephen is the founder and President of Global Entrepreneurship Thailand which 
functions as an "umbrella organization" that promotes entrepreneurship 
development and advancements in Thailand and ASEAN. Its mission and work are 
supported by strategic partners and key organizations like the ASEAN Business 
Advisory Council, Thailand's Board of Trade, Small and Medium Enterprises (SME) 
agencies and the Kauffman foundation's Global Entrepreneurship Week campaign.

Stephen is also the chairman of the Entrepreneurship Working Group at the 
Joint Foreign Chambers of Commences Thailand (JFCCT), consisting of 28 foreign 
business chambers and trade associations in Thailand. The group advocates 
entrepreneur-friendly ecosystems for the promotion of startups, trade and 
investments in the AEC. As an active contributor to business communities and an 
entrepreneur with a passion, he devotes much of his efforts to encourage 
enterprises to use their businesses as a tool for social change and economic 
development.

Viktor Cheng Choong Hung, director, Information & Communications Technology, 
Nanyang Technological University
 s 
Viktor is an inventor, innovator and entrepreneur who has patented award 
winning inventions, translated these inventions into industry strength software 
products and generated profits for the business venture.

Viktor currently serves as director of Information & Communications Technology 
at Nanyang Technological University where he oversees the research 
commercialization and industry collaboration activities of all ICT, software 
and New Media technologies. Viktor is also CEO of TechBiz Xccelerator Pte Ltd 
where he chart the efforts of transforming inventions into deployable products 
and services.

Prior to his current position, Viktor served as Deputy CEO of the Intellectual 
Property Office of Singapore (IPOS) for six years where he masterminded the 
development of IP management capabilities in the public and private sector. 
Â Before IPOS, Viktor co-founded, grew and exited a web based content 
aggregation business. Viktor also spent three years in Silicon Valley as Vice 
President of Engineering for a data warehouse start-up.

Aryaman Dalmia, author, 'Graham, Buffet & Me'
 s 
Aryaman Dalmia was born in 1997. He is a student at the Vasant Valley School 
in New Delhi. He developed an interest in investing as a result of 
conversations with his father.

He intends to pursue a career in business and investments, emulating the 
lessons from Benjamin Graham and Warren Buffett and adapting them to the 
emerging opportunities in India.

He lives in New Delhi with his parents, grandparents and two sisters. His 
other interests include cricket and guitar. He can be reached at 
aryaman.dalmia@gmail.com.

Paul Dempsey, president global markets, BBC Worldwide
 Paul Dempsey Photograph: Paul Dempsey 
Paul is responsible for BBC Worldwide's business across all the non-English 
speaking territories around the world. Recognised as a high growth opportunity 
for the company, and collectively known as Global Markets, Paul leads all BBC 
Worldwide's activities across four regionally organised businesses based in 
Asia, CEMA (Central and Eastern Europe, Middle East and Africa), Latin America 
and Western Europe.

In addition, Paul is responsible for the building and maintaining of BBC 
Worldwide's global sales capability. Paul was formerly Interim CEO of BBC 
Worldwide for the period between John Smith leaving the company and Tim Davie 
taking up the position of CEO in April 2013.

Previously, Paul was Managing Director of BBC Worldwide's Consumer Products 
division, where he led all of BBC Worldwide's consumer product businesses, 
including its global video publishing business, all merchandise licensing 
operations, music licensing and publishing, our direct-to-consumer retail 
business (bbcshop.com) and our book publishing partnerships.

Hooi Den Huan, director, Nanyang Technopreneurship Centre and associate 
professor, Nanyang Business School, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
 s 
Hooi Den Huan is the director of the Nanyang Technopreneurship Center and an 
Associate Professor at the Nanyang Business School, Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore.

Together with Philip Kotler and Hermawan Kartajaya, he co-authored two 
bestselling books, "Think ASEAN!" and "Rethinking Marketing" (also with Sandra 
Liu).

Den was a Visiting Scholar at the Sloan School of Management, MIT, a PCMPCL 
participant, Harvard Business School and a Babson College TETA Fellow.

He is advisor to the International Council for Small Business, Singapore 
Chapter and sits on the advisory board of the School of Business Management, 
ITB, Indonesia; Graduate School of Management, UPM, Malaysia; and the Times 
Higher Education, Times of India.

Apart from being an honorary consultant for the Commercial Sub-Council, China 
Center for the Promotion of International Trade, Den is also Chairman of the 
Executive Board of the Asia Marketing Federation Foundation

Max Everest-Phillips, director, UNDP Global Centre for Public Service 
Excellence, Singapore
 s 
Max Everest-Phillips is the director of the UNDP Global Centre for Public 
Service Excellence, Singapore. Until July 2013 he was Director of the 
Governance and Institutions Division of the Commonwealth Secretariat.

He started his career in the British Diplomatic Service, working as First 
Secretary in the British Embassy, Tokyo and the Second Secretary in the British 
Embassy, Helsinki, Finland.

He holds a MSc in Organisation Development, speaks Finnish and Japanese, and 
has written extensively on governance and development, including a chapter in 
the 2012 World Bank book on illicit tax flows, in the 2011 Oxford University 
Press book on politics and aid; and in 2013 published a study of Neville 
Chamberlain and The Art of Appeasement.

Nick Fawbert, head, digital enterprise, MediaCorp
 s 
As head, digital enterprise at MediaCorp, Nick brings over twenty years of 
media experience to South East Asia. At MediaCorp Nick is responsible for 
delivering the long term digital strategy of Singapore's largest television and 
radio broadcaster.

Previously as Secretary and Executive Director of the Interactive Advertising 
Bureau (IAB) in Singapore he is one of the most well known faces of the local 
industry. He looked after the digital interests of major local companies such 
as SPH and Mediacorp, alongside international blue chip brands such as Yahoo!, 
Microsoft and Google. He works closely with the MDA and IDA.

As a senior executive Nick was CEO of Third Space Consulting, Head of Sales 
for Yahoo! UK & Ireland and Vice President International for CBS Outdoor in 
China in Beijing. As COO at Aktiv Digital Nick played a leading role in the 
creation of the S$25m Singapore Digital Advertising Network industry.

Through his work at Third Space Academy, SE Asia's only dedicated digital 
media training company, Nick continued to develop the next generation of 
Digital Media specialists.

Li Gong, chairman and CEO, Mozilla Online, global senior vice president of 
mobile devices, and president of Asia operations, Mozilla
 efeef 
Li Gong is Senior Vice President of Mobile Devices and President of Asia 
Operations for Mozilla Corporation. He is also CEO of the Mozilla subsidiary 
companies in China and Taiwan. Li started the Mozilla China Foundation in 2005, 
Mozilla Online in Beijing in 2007 and Mozilla Taiwan in Taipei in 2011.

Prior to joining Mozilla, Li was with Microsoft as General Manager of MSN in 
China and Vice President of the Microsoft China R&D Group. Before Microsoft, he 
was a Distinguished Engineer and also served in senior managerial positions at 
Sun Microsystems.

Li participated (as co-founder, investor and advisor) in a number of startups 
in the Silicon Valley and in China. He was Venture Partner and Head of China 
Office for Bessemer Venture Partners. Li obtained BS/MS at Tsinghua University, 
Beijing and a PhD at the University of Cambridge, UK, all in computer science.

Li has 18 issued US patents and co-authored 3 books (published by Addison 
Wesley and O'Reilly).

Richard Harshman, head of ASEAN, Amazon Web Services
 s Photograph: Jared Froiland 
Richard Harshman is the Head of ASEAN for Amazon Web Services (AWS). Richard 
leads the team that helps businesses of all sizes across ASEAN learn about AWS 
and implement the cloud computing platform, allowing customers to save money, 
accelerate time to market and focus on their core business.

Richard has over 12 years of experience in sales, channel development and 
general management in the United States and Asia Pacific. Prior to joining 
Amazon Web Services, Richard held management positions at Akamai Technologies 
in Australia and Singapore. Richard has lived in Asia Pacific for almost 10 
years and is currently based in Singapore.

Tay Kheng Tiong, chief information officer, Nanyang Technological University
 s 
Mr. Tay Kheng Tiong has over 32- years of experience in the IT industry 
covering various sectors like Finance, Telcos, Manufacturing, Market Research 
and Education.

As Chief Information Officer of Nanyang Technological University since 2010, 
Kheng Tiong is responsible for the IT environment and IT-enabled learning 
environment of the university.

Prior to his current position, Kheng Tiong served as Director of 
Hewlett-Packard managing the transition and transformation of the SOE 
implementation (Standard Operating Environment), a $1.3 billion Singapore 
Government project funded by IDA (the Infocomm Development Authority of 
Singapore).

His other previous roles include Director School of IT at Republic 
Polytechnic, Vice President of Gartner AP (a market research company), Director 
(and co-owner) of an e-learning company as well as Chief Information Officer 
for 2 multi-national corporations in Singapore.

Steve Leonard, executive deputy chairman, Infocomm Development Authority of 
Singapore (IDA)
 s 
Mr Steve Leonard is an industry veteran with more than 28 years of experience 
working in leading global technology companies. In his position as Executive 
Deputy Chairman, he holds executive leadership responsibility for IDA, with a 
special focus in industry promotion and development. This includes spearheading 
the building of innovative start-ups and local enterprises, overseeing various 
national cross-sectoral programmes, technology and communications 
infrastructure development and the strategic planning and development of 
qualified professionals for the ICT sector.

Prior to joining IDA, Mr Leonard was the President of EMC Asia Pacific and 
Japan (APJ) where he was responsible for driving EMC's growth and market share 
leadership in APJ, enhancing partner and channel relationships and contributing 
to product-development efforts throughout the region.

Before joining EMC, he served as President of the Asia Pacific and Japan 
business for Symantec and Veritas. Prior to those executive management 
positions, Mr Leonard spent 18 years with EDS, where he focused on European and 
Asian operations for 12 years, ultimately rising to the position within EDS of 
President of Solutions Consulting for Europe, the Middle East, and Africa Mr 
Leonard currently sits on the Boards of IDA Singapore, IDA International and 
Infocomm Investments Pte Ltd.

Shauna Li Roolvink, principal consultant & trainer, YourPersonalBrand.com
 x 
Shauna is the founder & principal consultant of YourPersonalbrand.com (YPB), 
Southeast Asia's first dedicated personal branding consultancy. Shauna's 
personal branding clients include senior executives and civil servants, 
business owners and thought leaders.

Prior to finding YourPersonalBrand.com, Shauna successfully founded and 
managed BrandHub, a strategic brand consultancy in Singapore with clients such 
as Societe Generale, SingTel, Great Eastern Life, OSK, Changi Airport Group, 
etc.

She is also a guest lecturer at various tertiary institutions in Singapore 
including SMU, NUS Business School, NTU WKW School of Communications, Nanyang 
Poly, Temasek Poly etc.

A 15-year veteran of business and brand strategy, marketing communications, 
customer experience and consumer insight, Shauna is a thought leader on 
branding issues.

Dr Alex Lin, head, Infocomm Investments
 s 
As head of Infocomm Investments Pte Ltd, Dr. Alex LIN led the team of 
investment professionals to develop the infocomm start-ups ecosystem in 
Singapore, through strategic investments in promising companies. For the last 
10 years, Alex had been actively building companies, mentoring entrepreneurs 
and investing in promising start-ups.

He held entrepreneurship and investment related roles in several organizations 
working closely with Singapore universities promoting creation of 
rapid-prototyping capabilities and incubators. He invests and coaches young 
technology startups from ideation to maturity.

Regionally, Alex led several technology infrastructure investments in China, 
such as technology park development, and High Temperature Conversion of Waste 
installations.Prior to his investment and mentoring roles, Alex was the Chief 
Technology Officer and Senior Vice President of Operation & Technology in 
SembCorp Logistics, where he led teams of professionals in sales acquisition 
and maintenance of technology infrastructures.

Before his entrepreneurial journey, Alex held senior positions in global 
companies such as FedEx where he created Asian's global sales division and 
managed the starting up of Subic Bay regional logistics hub. He was the General 
Manager of Hewlett Packard Internet Business Unit during the dotcom era where 
he built the unit by aggressive acquisition of technology companies.

Alex obtained his Electrical & Computer Engineering degree at University of 
Wisconsin (Madison) and Doctorate at Stanford University.

CV Madhukar, director of investments, Omidyar Network
 s 
C V Madhukar leads investments on Governance Initiatives for Omidyar Network 
in India. He leads investments in for-profit and nonprofit organizations in 
India that enable civic participation and promote better governance.

Prior to joining Omidyar Network, Madhukar was the co-founder and director of 
PRS Legislative Research, an institution that makes India's legislative 
process, better informed, more transparent and participatory. Before PRS, 
Madhukar worked at the World Bank in Washington D.C. He began his career as an 
investment banker with ICICI Securities. During his tenure at ICICI Securities 
he volunteered much of his time contributing to the growth of Pratham, one of 
the most recognized nonprofit organizations providing basic education in India. 
In early 2000, he co-founded Akshara Foundation and helped establish the Azim 
Premji Foundation.

Madhukar earned a masters degree in public administration from the John F. 
Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University where he was an Edward S. 
Mason fellow. He also has an MBA in finance from the University of Houston and 
a bachelors degree in civil engineering from Bangalore University. He is an 
Echoing Green fellow, Ashoka fellow, and Eisenhower fellow. Madhukar is a Young 
Global Leader of the World Economic Forum.

Rohan Mahadevan, vice president, PayPal Asia Pacific
 a 
As vice president for PayPal Asia Pacific, Rohan Mahadevan provides strategic 
direction for one of the company's fastest-growing regions covering many of the 
largest commerce markets in the world, from Japan to Greater China to India to 
Southeast Asia. Based in Singapore, he is responsible for increasing the 
company's presence and local payment capabilities to capitalize on the 
explosive growth of e-commerce and m-commerce across all Asian markets. His 
deep knowledge of PayPal's products and capabilities will enable the company to 
deliver on its vision to enable secure payments anytime, anywhere and any way 
for millions of Asian consumers.

Rohan has been with PayPal since 2004 in various leadership roles. Prior to 
his current position, he held the dual roles of vice president of Global Cross 
Border Trade and vice president of Latin America. As VP of Global Cross Border 
Trade, he was responsible for defining and executing PayPal's cross-border 
strategy to enable 113 million PayPal users to conveniently and safely purchase 
from international merchants in 190 markets. As VP of Latin America, he led the 
strategy and localization of PayPal's services for domestic consumers and 
merchants and partners in Brazil and Mexico, opened up PayPal's first offices 
in these markets with Spanish and Portuguese language support, and accelerated 
cross-border trade across this region.

His passion to work and understand the challenges of growing businesses is not 
new; his career started with his own start-up where he was founder and CEO of 
Aftermind Inc., a software company in the aftermarket protection industry.

Before he started his own company, Rohan was a post-doctoral scientist at 
Cambridge University, England. He holds a Bachelor of Science in Physics from 
the California Institute of Technology and a PhD from Harvard University in the 
field of astrophysics.

Magdy MartÃ­nez-SolimÃ¡n, deputy assistant administrator and director, a.i., UN 
Development Programme's Bureau for Development Policy
 s 
Magdy MartÃ­nez-SolimÃ¡n is a lawyer by training, a former practicing barrister 
and Assistant Professor of International Law. He has worked and written on 
Political Systems and provided legal counseling in Constitutional and 
Administrative Law.

In his professional career, he has been State Secretary for Youth in the 
Spanish National Government, CEO of two public corporations and member of the 
Organising Committee of the Olympic Games in Barcelona 92. He was also Deputy 
Minister of the Prime Minister's Office, in-charge of the relations with the 
Parliament of Andalusia and elected member of the Municipal Council of his 
hometown Malaga, the fourth city of the country.

He has been working for the UN over the past fifteen years, focusing on 
Institutional Development of Legislatures, the Judiciary, Electoral 
Legislation, Anti-corruption strategies, Accountability in Public Financial 
Management and Democratic Transitions & National Dialogue. He was posted in 
Burundi, Togo, Bangladesh and Senegal. He was the UN Development Programme's 
Senior Governance Advisor for the 18 West African countries from 2000 to 2003 
and until 2006 he was the Practice Manager of UNDP's Democratic Governance 
Team. That year he was appointed by the United Nations Secretary-General as the 
first Executive Director of the UN Democracy Fund (UNDEF).

From January 2008 until February 2012, he was the UN Resident Coordinator in 
Mexico and UNDP's Resident Representative. Mr. Martinez initiated his Law 
Studies at the University Complutense of Madrid, holds a degree in Law (Juris 
Doctor) from the Universidad de Malaga and has been a Member of the Spanish Bar 
Association since 1984.

Hugh Mason, entrepreneur
 s 
Hugh Mason was born in the UK and now lives permanently in Singapore.

Most recently he co-founded JFDI. Asia, Asia's #1 business accelerator 
program, which has a 60% success rate taking groups of entrepreneurs to 
investment averaging $600,000 in 100 days.

Previously Hugh founded Narrateo, a successful independent TV production 
business which won awards including a British Academy Award nomination, making 
over 150 documentaries about science and technology for Discovery Channel, 
National Geographic and many other international broadcasters.

Ultimately, building a company around creative people turned out to be more 
fun than hands-on creative work. So, in 2001, he co-founded Pembridge Partners 
in London to provide finance and advice to marketing, media and technology 
businesses. Over a decade the company raised or directly invested USD50 million 
and Hugh personally mentored over 300 innovative companies.

Hugh is a regular public speaker, teaching at New York University Tisch School 
of the Arts (Asia) and Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD). 
His first book, Brainfruit: Turning Creativity into Cash from East to West, was 
written with Mark Chong and published by McGraw Hill in November 2011. He 
co-founded the Undergraduate Ambassadors Scheme, a UK education charity. He is 
a Liveryman of the Worshipful Company of Drapers.

Dan Neary, senior vice president, APAC, Facebook
 Dan Neary Photograph: Dan Neary 
Dan, VP at Facebook, leads the global marketing solutions teams across Asia 
Pacific and plays a key role in building and maintaining strategic 
relationships with top regional agencies and clients. He is based in Singapore.

Dan has over 20 years of executive level experience in both US-based and 
Asia-based roles. Prior to Facebook, he was the Vice President of Market 
Development at Skype, managing local marketing channels and partnerships across 
APAC, EMEA, and the Americas. During his tenure, Skype went thru a spin-off 
from eBay, ownership by a consortium led by Silver Lake PE, and was ultimately 
acquired by Microsoft in what was their largest ever acquisitions.

Prior to Skype, Dan was the Vice President of Emerging Markets at eBay where 
he managed the company's businesses in Southeast Asia, India, and the Middle 
East. Dan joined eBay in 2002 in California where he initially ran one of its 
largest business units.

In his free time, Dan is active in the entrepreneurial community and helps 
advice tech start-ups on a range of issues from fund raising to business 
development.

Dan received his MBA degree from DePaul University, USA.

Serguei Netessine, research director, INSEAD-Wharton Alliance
 s 
Serguei Netessine is the Timken Chaired Professor of Global Technology and 
Innovation and the Research Director of INSEAD-Wharton Alliance. Previously, he 
was a faculty at the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania which he joined 
in 2001.

Prof. Netessine received BS/MS degrees in Computer Science and Electrical 
Engineering from Moscow Institute of Electronic Technology and, after working 
for Motorola and Lucent Technologies, he also received MS/PhD degrees in 
Operations Management from the University of Rochester. His current research 
focuses on strategic aspects of supply chain management, incentives and 
contracting in supply chains. His current industry projects include adoption of 
performance-based logistics in US defense industry, retail store execution 
strategies as well as studies of supply chains in the automotive industry.

Professor Netessine has been the recipient of several teaching awards for 
delivering Supply Chain Management classes to MBA and Executive MBA students at 
the Wharton School. His research has been published in leading management 
journals, including Management Science, Operations Research, Marketing Science, 
and Manufacturing & Service Operations Management and it has also received 
extensive media coverage including articles in CIO Magazine, The Economist, 
Forbes, Multichannel Merchant, New York Times, US News and many others. Several 
of his papers received research excellence awards and professor Netessine is 
also a recipient of the Early Career Achievement Award from Production and 
Operations Management Society.

Serguei holds Associate Editor and Senior Editor Positions at several leading 
academic journals including Management Science, Production and Operations 
Management, Operations Research and Manufacturing & Service Operations 
Management.

Jeffrey Paine, founding partner, Golden Gate Ventures
 s 
Jeffrey Paine is the founding partner of Golden Gate Ventures, an early stage 
technology incubator based in Singapore. Jeff started and manages the Founder 
Institute in Singapore where he is currently overseeing its expansion in 
Southeast Asia. Since 2010 the Founder Institute in Singapore has graduated 
over 60 companies.

Jeff spent the first eight years of his career in early stage venture and 
private equity in the US, North and South Asia. He co-founded a China market 
entry advisory firm which was then merged with a China mid-market private 
equity firm. He is currently an investor and advisor to Redmart, Tradegecko, 
Coda Payments, AtticTV, and Flutterscape/monoco.

He is a Singapore native and graduated with a Bachelors of Business 
Administration (Information Systems) from the University of Southern California.

HE Antony Phillipson, British High Commissioner to Singapore
 s 
Antony is the British High Commissioner to Singapore since April 2011.

He joined the Civil Service in 1993 and began his career in the Department of 
Trade and Industry where his posts included Private Secretary and then 
Principal Private Secretary to the Secretary of State.

After four years in the Embassy in Washington, he was the Prime Minister's 
Private Secretary for Foreign Affairs and, most recently, Head of the Iran 
Co-ordination Group in the FCO.

Antony was educated at Keble College, Oxford (BA Hons in Modern History). He 
is married to Julie and they have three young boys.

Unmish Parthasarathi, SVP & GM (digital, sports) SE Asia & Japan, News 
Corporation
 s Photograph: puboic domain 
Unmish has worked in the media, technology and sports sectors since the mid 
1990s, for blue-chips such as News Corp, Fox International Channels, ESPN STAR 
Sports, the BBC, NDTV and IMG Media.

A former journalist and TV producer, Unmish has, over the past decade, assumed 
commercial roles creating new media products, joint ventures and strategic 
partnerships. A graduate of St. Stephen's, Cambridge and LBS, Unmish has led 
teams that vary by skillset, ethnicity and language in over a dozen countries 
across four Continents.

Sanjay Salil, managing director, MediaGuru
 s 
Sanjay graduated from a primetime TV presenter in India to a media 
entrepreneur in 2004 when he established the global media services company 
MediaGuru. Since the company's creation he has guided the launch of TV stations 
across India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Africa, working with some of the world's 
best new media players and largest media companies in the process.

Sanjay derives great pride in the fact that MediaGuru helped change the media 
landscape these countries through his work. He is, thus, one of the few people 
in media who brings to the table a varied and in-depth understanding of 
content, technology and business across the media spectrum.

Sanjay is widely invited to speak and share his cross media knowledge and 
experience on various national and international forums across the world. He 
has been featured by some of the most reputed global media brands including CNN 
and Washington post.

Badri Pillapakkam, director, investments, Omidyar Network
 s Photograph: Eric Millette 
Badri sources and executes investments across the Access to Capital initiative 
for Omidyar Network India, with a particular focus on property rights, 
financial inclusion, and consumer Internet and mobile organizations. His role 
builds on his extensive experience in the finance and investing fields.

Immediately before joining Omidyar Network, Badri served as the vice president 
of investments and fund operations at Xander Advisors, a private equity firm 
focusing on real estate investments in India. In this role, Badri identified, 
evaluated, and executed investments and acquisitions; he was also responsible 
for numerous fund operations, including legal and tax matters surrounding 
investment in India.

Previously, Badri worked in the financial risk management division at Exl 
Service, a leading provider of business process outsourcing services. He began 
his career in the assurance and business advisory services division of 
PriceWaterhouse Coopers India, where he worked on statutory and tax audits, due 
diligence reviews, and feasibility studies for Indian and multinational 
companies.

Badri is an associate member of the Institute of Chartered Accountants in 
India. He graduated with an MBA from the Indian School of Business, where he 
made the dean's list, and earned his Bachelor of Commerce from the University 
of Madras.

Nirvik Singh, chairman and CEO, Grey Group Asia Pacific
 s 
Nirvik is a 27-year marketing and communication industry veteran and has 
served as chairman and CEO of Grey Group Asia Pacific since 2009.

As chairman and CEO of Grey Asia Pacific, he oversees 20 geographies that 
include Japan, China and Australia and a staff of over 2000 people. In the past 
few years he has acquired organisations in China, India, Hong Kong and 
Singapore and expanded Grey's offerings in the digital space.

Business Today, one of India's leading business magazines, named Nirvik as one 
of 25 young rising stars in India and Media Magazine in Hong Kong named him 
'Agency Head of the Year '. He has been awarded with India's Bharat Nirman 
Rattan Award for outstanding individual achievements and distinguished services 
by the National Integration and Economic Council, amongst many other honours.

He has served as juror at Cannes Lions, Global Effies and Asian Marketing 
Effectiveness Awards. He has also served on the Delhi 2010 Commonwealth Games 
organising committee. He is a board member of India's leading retail company, 
Shoppers Stop Ltd as well as one of India's largest apparel companies, Raymond 
Apparel Ltd.

Judith Slater, deputy high commissioner and director of trade and investment, 
the British High Commission in Singapore
 s 
Judith arrived at the British High Commission, Singapore in September 2011 as 
Deputy High Commissioner and Director of Trade and Investment. She joined the 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office in 1988, and has since held a variety of Posts 
including, most recently, as Deputy High Commissioner in Pretoria, South Africa 
from 2007-2011.

Prior to this she served as British Consul-General in Houston, Texas. In the 
FCO in London, Judith's Posts have included Private Secretary to the Minister 
of State responsible for relations with Asia, and Head of Nuclear Policy 
Section in Non-Proliferation Department. She has also had overseas postings in 
New Delhi and Canberra.

Judith was educated at St John's College, Cambridge (BA Hons in Law 1987). She 
is married to Philip, a Recruitment Consultant, and has two children aged 12 
and 9.

In her spare time she enjoys golf, tennis, jogging and cinema.

Mahendra Swarup, president, IVCA (Indian Venture Capital & Private Equity 
Association)
 s 
Mr. Mahendra Swarup is the managing director and partner of AVIGO CAPITAL a 
Private Equity fund with over 450million US$ under management. He has been the 
president and member of the Executive Committee of the Indian Venture Capital 
and Private Equity Association (IVCA). Under his stewardship IVCA has become a 
major voice of the PE/VC industry .

Mr. Mahendra Swarup after over thirty years in the Corporate world is known as 
a "Strategic Insight Provider" to established companies and to start ups alike. 
He is one of the rare Corporate Chieftains who mentors entrepreneurs create 
robust organizations. His core competence is in helping turnaround "Stressed 
Ventures" and grow scale in already successful ventures.

Yinglan Tan, venture partner, Sequoia Capital
 s 
Yinglan Tan is venture partner at Sequoia Capital India and is based in 
Singapore where he set up the Singapore office and manages investments for 
Sequoia Capital.

Prior to joining Sequoia Capital, Tan Yinglan was the Head (Projects), 
National Research Foundation, Prime Minister's Office (Singapore) where he was 
in the Singapore Administrative Service. In his role, he oversaw the National 
Framework for Innovation and Enterprise, where he oversees investments in 
high-growth ventures and venture funds.

Yinglan is also a faculty member at INSEAD where he developed and teaches an 
elective MBA-course. Yinglan is also an Adjunct Assistant Professor at Nanyang 
Technological University and has also taught modules on Entrepreneurial Finance 
/ Management at Singapore Management University and for the Advanced Management 
Program.

Low Teck Seng, chief executive officer, National Research Foundation, Prime 
Minister's Office, Singapore
 s 
Prof Low Teck Seng is the Chief Executive Officer of the National Research 
Foundation (NRF), Prime Minister's Office, Singapore. The NRF sets the national 
direction for research and development (R&D) by developing policies, plans and 
strategies for research, innovation and enterprise.

Prior to joining NRF in July 2012, Prof Low served as the Managing Director of 
the Agency for Science, Technology and Research. As A*STAR's Managing Director, 
Prof Low oversaw A*STAR's strategic priorities of driving innovative research 
and developing scientific talent to support Singapore's economic and industry 
development goals.

Prof Low was instrumental in setting up the Magnetics Technology Centre (MTC) 
in NUS in 1992. The MTC is the predecessor of the Data Storage Institute (DSI), 
a leading research institute focusing on data storage technologies. He was Dean 
of Engineering at the National University of Singapore from 1998 to 2000.

Prof Low is presently a Senior Advisor to President, Nanyang Technological 
University and a tenured Professor with National University of Singapore.

Karim Temsamani, president, APAC operations, Google
 x Photograph: Weinberg-Clark Photography 
Karim Temsamani oversees all of Google's sales and operations across the 
AsiaÂ­Pacific region, determining the strategy for 16 offices and the regional 
business strategy for Google products including AdWords, AdMob, Google Maps, 
Google Apps for Business, DoubleClick Ad Exchange, YouTube and AdSense.

He was most recently Google's Vice President for New Products and Solutions 
for the Americas region, leading Google's business and strategy for its rapidly 
growing newer businesses, including mobile advertising, display advertising, 
DoubleClick platforms, YouTube, social products and new search ad formats.

From 2010 to 2012, he was Google's Global Head of Mobile. He oversaw the 
growth of Google's mobile advertising business worldwide, leading the teams 
charged with providing advertising services and solutions to thousands of 
advertisers, developers, and publishers.

From 2007 to 2010, Karim was Managing Director, Google Australia and New 
Zealand. Karim joined Google from Fairfax Media, where he was Commercial 
Director for Newspapers (responsible for agency and group sales, trade 
marketing and business development) and Group Director, Fairfax General 
Magazines.

Kath Viner, editor-in-chief, Guardian Australia and deputy editor, the Guardian
 s 
Katharine Viner is editor-in-chief of Guardian Australia and deputy editor of 
the Guardian worldwide. She joined the paper in 1997 and has worked as a 
feature writer, deputy women's editor, deputy features editor, editor of 
Weekend magazine, features editor and Saturday editor. Follow her on Twitter at
@KathViner <https://twitter.com/KathViner>

Hugo Walkinshaw, president, British Chamber of Commerce 
 s 
Hugo Walkinshaw has been serving as a Board member at the British Chamber of 
Commerce, Singapore (BCCS) for over 7 years in various capacities such as 
Treasurer and Vice President. In 2013, he was elected as the Chamber President 
at the Annual General Meeting.

Hugo is also a partner at Deloitte, and is part of the South East Asia 
Regional Consulting team. Hugo has over twenty years of management consulting 
experience and has provided assistance to clients across the Asia Pacific 
region, as well as in the US and Europe. Hugo has spent the last eighteen years 
living and working in the region, and is currently based in Singapore.

Hugo is a Management Accountant by training, and is a Modern History graduate 
from Exeter University. He currently sits on the board of the British Chamber 
of Commerce in Singapore, as well as the regional SE Asia board for the 
Chartered Institute of Management Accountants.

Dr. Robyn E. Wilson, owner, Praxis Management Consulting
 s 
Dr. Robyn E. Wilson is the Owner of Praxis Management Consulting Pte Ltd, and 
works with leaders in Asia to enable them manage and grow their organisations â 
whether they be CEOs, senior leaders, entrepreneurs and/or people with dreams! 
As a facilitator, consultant, executive coach, educator and researcher, Robyn 
helps her clients:

Achieve Clarity to gain Purpose,
Navigate Change to ensure Strategic Direction, 
Manage Relationships to secure Positive Results, and 
Develop Leaders that groom Successful People.

Her rare mix of skills and abilities along with her diverse background and 
experience gives her unique perspectives when addressing her work with 
individuals, teams and organizationsÂ­ which can take a variety of approaches.

In recent times, Robyn has co-founded Women's Startup Conversations in 
Singapore and is on the Advisory Board for The Athena Network SG & APAC, a 
network that provides a platform for female executives and entrepreneurs to 
share knowledge and experience for mutual success. In addition to her 
management consultancy business, she quietly has her own startup "cooking" in 
the background.

Robyn is Australian and originally came to Singapore in 1996 to complete her 
PhD at NUS - after spending years in a CIO-like role . Her work takes her all 
around Asia, as she works with people from everywhere. She is now very much at 
home here and has come to love the cultural diversity, richness, and the food 
of Asia!

Haoliang Xu, assistant secretary-general, United Nations
 Haoliang Xu. Photograph: Haoliang Xu 
Haoliang Xu was appointed Assistant Administrator and Director for the 
Regional Bureau for Asia and the Pacific by the United Nations 
Secretary-General in September 2013.

Previously, Mr. Xu was Deputy Regional Director of the Regional Bureau for 
Europe and the Commonwealth of Independent States in New York since 2010.

Prior to joining the UN, Mr. Xu was a computer-aided design engineer with 
Louis Berger International Inc. in New Jersey and an assistant lecturer at 
Tongji University in Shanghai, China.

Mr. Xu, a Chinese national, holds a Bachelors in Engineering from Tongji 
University in Shanghai, and a Masters' of Science in Management from the 
Stevens Institute of Technology (USA). He also holds a Masters' of 
International Affairs in Economic Development and Policy Analysis from Columbia 
University (USA).

Click here to book your place Â» 
<https://www.eventsmicrosite.com/theguardian/activatesingapore/>
 