
Activate Tech Talent Pitching Day, Thursday 16 January 2014

(For the Activate Summit main day programme click here) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/oct/15/activate-singapore-internet-programme>

A one-day pitching workshop and competition in which we invite hand-selected 
digital startups to give their five minute elevator pitches in front of a panel 
of eminent VCs, incubators, angels and successful entrepreneurs and an audience 
of their peers

09.00 - 09:40: Registration and Networking

09.40 - 09.50: Opening Remarks from The Guardian and MediaGuru

Robin Hough, editor, Guardian Media & Tech Network

Poonam Sharma, director, MediaGuru

09.50 - 10.00: Presentation

The global outlook for tech startup growth and where investment is happening

Judith Slater, deputy high commissioner and director of trade and investment, 
the British High Commission in Singapore

10.00 - 10.15: Presentation

Examining the APAC / Singapore startup market and the opportunities for 
investment, growth and international expansion from the region

Dr Alex Lin, head, Infocomm Investments

10.15 - 10.45: Networking coffee break

10.45 - 11.00: Presentation

Aryaman Dalmia, author "Graham, Buffett, and Me"

11.00 - 11.30: Panel discussion and interactive Q&A

How to pitch, grow and scale your startup: How do you give investors what they 
want?

A panel of investors looking for the next big thing in tech and entrepreneurs 
who've been there and got the t-shirt discuss what it takes to get ahead in the 
region, and internationally as a startup. This is a highly interactive session 
where the audience will get the chance to ask questions of our panel of eminent 
investors and entrepreneurs in advance of their pitches

Moderator: Dr. Robyn E. Wilson, owner, Praxis Management Consulting

Hugh Mason, entrepreneur 

Steve Cheah, president, Global Entrepreneurship Thailand 

Jeffrey Paine, founder, Golden Gate Ventures

Pieter Kemps, principal, business development and venture capital, APAC, 
Amazon Web Services

11.30 - 12.30: Category One Pitches

Category One Pitches will focus on Business Innovation Startups and is 
sponsored byNanyang Technological University - entrants will be 1-5 years old, 
with a private sector focus working on innovative solutions in business, media 
and tech

12.30 - 13.45: Networking lunch

13.45 - 14.00: Presentation

Value Creation

Professor Hooi Den Huan, director, Nanyang Technopreneurship Centre and 
associate professor, Nanyang Business School, Nanyang Technological University, 
Singapore

14.00 - 15.00: Category Three Pitches

Category Three Pitches will focus on Open Ideas and is aimed at anyone with an 
idea, from amateurs to academics to professionals who have a brand new, 
untested idea that doesn't relate to their career

15.00 - 15.15: Presentation

UNDP presentation on the use of technology in public services

Prof Anastase Shyaka, board member, UNDP Global Centre for Public Service 
Excellence

15.15 - 16.15: Category Two Pitches

Category Two Pitches will focus on Social Change Startups and is sponsored by 
the United Nations Development Programme's Global Centre for Public Service 
Excellence - entrants will be 1-5 years old, with a public sector focus working 
on empowering poor, excluded or vulnerable people in developing countries to 
better access or benefit from public services

16.15 - 16.30: Networking coffee break

16.30 - 17.00: Presentations

Personal branding: How important is it to make your own brand?

Shauna Li Roolvink, founder, consultant, trainer and mentor on startup, 
corporate and personal branding

While this final session takes place, our panel of judges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/dec/16/activate-singapore-tech-talent-judging-panel>
 will be deliberating. Each category will be judged separately and a winner 
will be chosen from each category. Judges will then choose an outright winner 
who will take home the $50,000 SGD investment from MediaGuru and the Â£100,000 
in advertising on The Guardian. All three category winners and the overall 
winner will be invited to present their ideas at the Activate Summit the next 
day alongside some of the world's most influential innovators on the Tech 
Talent day panel.

17.00 - 17.30: Winners announced and awards ceremony

17.30 - 17.35: Chair's closing remarks
 