
Activate Singapore main day programme - 17 January 2014

(For the Tech Talent day programme click here) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/dec/16/activate-singapore-tech-talent-startups>

08.15 - 09.10: Registration and networking

09.10 - 09.20: Welcome from the Guardian and MediaGuru

Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief, Guardian Australia and deputy editor, the 
Guardian

Sanjay Salil, managing director, MediaGuru

09.20 - 09.35: Opening keynote address

Steve Leonard, executive deputy chairman, Infocomm Development Authority of 
Singapore (IDA)

09.35 - 10.25: Presentations & joint Q&A

Mobile futurology: What role do mobile technologies have to play in the 
world's future?

• What does a mobile first regional and global economy look like?

• How can mobile technologies be used beyond business for social and global 
development?

Moderator: Jeremy Wagstaff, chief technology correspondent, Thomson Reuters 

Li Gong, chairman and CEO, Mozilla Online, global senior vice president of 
mobile devices, and president of Asia operations, Mozilla

Arun Bansal, president, South East Asia and Oceania, Ericsson

10.25 - 10.50: Morning networking break

10.50 - 11.05: Presentation

Paul Dempsey, president global markets, BBC Worldwide 

11.05 - 11.50: Panel discussion

How is the global, digital economy disrupting the creation, management, 
distribution and monetisation of content?

Moderator: Katharine Viner, editor-in-chief, Guardian Australia and deputy 
editor, the Guardian

Paul Dempsey, president global markets, BBC Worldwide

Sanjay Salil, managing director, MediaGuru

Nirvik Singh, chairman and CEO, Grey Group Asia

Nick Fawbert, head of digital enterprise, MediaCorp

Unmish Parthasarathi, SVP & GM (digital, sports) SE Asia & Japan, News 
Corporation

11.50 - 12.10: Presentation

Accelerating growth, innovation and global expansion with cloud computing

Richard Harshman, head of ASEAN, Amazon Web Services

12.10 - 12.30: Presentation

Karim Temsamani, president, APAC operations, Google

12.30 - 13.30: Networking lunch

13.30 - 13.50: Presentation

Digitisation: The way for media content monetisation 

Sanjay Salil, managing director, MediaGuru

13.50 - 14.05: Afternoon keynote

Technology and education

Tay Kheng Tiong, chief information officer, Nanyang Technological University

14.05 - 14.50: Panel discussion

Technology and the future of education: Can the internet educate the entire 
world?

Moderator: Karthikeyan Rajasekharan, technical lead, Cloud Platform, Asia, 
Google

Serguei Netessine, research director, INSEAD-Wharton Alliance 

Keith Carter, visiting senior fellow, NUS Business School

Tay Kheng Tiong, chief information officer, Nanyang Technological University

14.50 - 15.05: Activate Tech Talent winner's lightning presentations

The winning start ups from the Activate Tech Talent day have impressed the 
judges and now they get to impress you, our Activate audience

15.05 - 15.50: Activate Tech Talent panel session

A selection of our judges, sponsors and winners from the Tech Talent day take 
to the stage to debate what it takes to survive and thrive as a tech start up 
in today's highly competitive global market

Moderator: Low Teck Seng, CEO, National Research Foundation (NRF)

Steve Cheah, president, Global Entrepreneurship Thailand

Yinglan Tan, venture partner, Sequoia Capital 

Hugo Walkinshaw, president, British Chamber of Commerce 

Magdy Martínez-Solimán, deputy assistant administrator and director ad 
interim, Bureau for Development Policy, UNDP

15.50 - 16.10: Networking break

16.10 - 16.25: Presentation

Rohan Mahadevan, vice president, PayPal Asia

16.25 - 17.10: Panel discussion

Tech-led innovation in public services and the future of regional and global 
governance

• How can the integration of digital technologies with governance and in 
public services improve government effectiveness and citizen engagement?

• What role can data play in opening up and improving the effectiveness of 
public services?

Moderator: Max Everest-Phillips, director, UNDP Global Centre for Public 
Service Excellence, Singapore

Haoliang Xu, assistant secretary-general, United Nations

Mildred Tan, managing director / partner, EY

C. V. Madhukar, director of investments, Omidyar Network

17.10 - 17.30: Closing keynote address

Social innovation and activation: How is social media triggering business 
growth and social change?

Dan Neary, vice president, Asia Pacific, Facebook

17.30 - 17.40: Closing remarks

HE Antony Phillipson, British High Commissioner to Singapore 

17.40 - 19.00: Activate Singapore closing cocktail reception

For the Tech Talent day programme click here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/dec/16/activate-singapore-tech-talent-startups>

Click here to book your place >>  
<https://www.eventsmicrosite.com/theguardian/activatesingapore/>
 