
To enter the competition click on this link and complete the online entry form 
<https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1cIE27IiHS4qBTlCa1RYgjBbmyhmegIpfdbhQLS1EYTo/viewform>

We are looking for the brightest tech startups to submit entries for the 
Activate Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate-singapore> Tech Talent day 
competition, telling us, in no more than 300 words, why they believe their 
startup will change business and/or wider society.

You will have to demonstrate that the idea is commercially sustainable, 
scalable and it must have the use of digital technology at its heart.

Entrants will fall into the following three categories:

Category 1 - Business Innovation Startups sponsored by Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore <http://www.ntu.edu.sg/Pages/index.aspx> - entrants 
should be 1-5 years old, with a private sector focus working on innovative 
solutions in business, media and tech

Category 2 - Social Change Startups sponsored by the United Nations 
Development Programme's Global Centre for Public Service Excellence 
<http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/ourwork/capacitybuilding/publicservice/>
 - entrants should be 1-5 years old, with a public sector focus working on 
empowering poor, excluded or vulnerable people in developing countries to 
better access or benefit from public services

Category 3 - Open Ideas for anyone with an idea, from amateurs to academics to 
professionals who have a brand new, untested idea that doesn't relate to their 
career

Each category will be judged separately and a winner will be chosen from each 
category. Judges will then choose an outright winner who will take home the 
$50,000 SGD investment from MediaGuru and the Â£100,000 in advertising on The 
Guardian. All three category winners and the overall winner will be invited to 
present their ideas at the Activate Summit the next day alongside some of the 
world's most influential innovators on the Tech Talent day panel.

To enter the competition click on this link and complete the online entry form 
<https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1cIE27IiHS4qBTlCa1RYgjBbmyhmegIpfdbhQLS1EYTo/viewform>

Deadline for submissions is 05 January 2014.

More information on the Activate tech talent day

Pitching process and criteria
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/nov/05/tech-talent-pitching-process-criteria>

Tech Talent Day programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/dec/16/activate-singapore-tech-talent-startups>

Judging panel  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/dec/16/activate-singapore-tech-talent-judging-panel>

FAQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/oct/15/frequently-asked-questions-activate>

Follow us on Twitter @ActivateSummit <https://twitter.com/ActivateSummit> for 
news and updates.

Click here to book your place at Activate Singapore >> 
<https://www.eventsmicrosite.com/theguardian/activatesingapore/>
 