
As media and its measurement tools and techniques have improved, the industry, 
driven by sound desires for more accountability, has aimed to add more support 
behind the price paid for media, and in particular 'premium' media. Everything 
from views and clicks to taps and plays, are all metrics that are pulled out to 
justify the price.

What's the cover and frequency of the outdoor advertising? How many Television 
Viewer Ratings (TVRs) are we buying? What's the click-through rate? What's the 
value of a video view? These are all questions we're programmed to answer and 
report on, in the false hope that we have all the indicators of success at hand 
to guarantee it.

The problem is, as we know in life perhaps more than we do in work, the best 
things can't easily be quantified. Take a familiar example of deciding how many 
glasses of wine to have on a night out, we know from experience that it should 
always be less than we want but yet we always make the decision to go for more, 
and sometimes it's a terrible decision, and at others, it's a great one. So, 
what's the number? The answer as always is to have enough to make you do 
something silly, but not too much to regret it in the morning.

Why, then, when it comes to the planning of media and communications do we 
hold up such regard and respect to the quantity measure, rather than the bigger 
picture quality measure?

Quite simply, we are equally as clueless as the sommelier who tries to value a 
wine 'blind', as to the real price of quality. Yes we know the media 
equivalents of your Lambrini's to your Chapel Downs, but when we come across 
less familiar unknowns, such as Sky Adsmart, or new digital posters, we have no 
idea about just how much the quality is worth. While this may be putting it 
bluntly, what can't be debated is that those that pursue to justify the 
'premium' on quality, are always more informed than those who sadly give up and 
stick to the old rules of measurement â€“ where quantity tends to win. Too many 
media planners and buyers settle for this position.

What's clear is that from an advertiser's point of view, what matters is not 
just the numbers, or the advertising that the wrong people see, but more 
importantly, staying relevant in the evolving lives of the right consumers.

The digitisation of media has enabled smarter buying methods to find and 
deliver more quality, whether that be contextual, mood based, precise timing or 
reactionary. Media has always been about making comparative quality exchanges 
to maximise your quantity. The problem that many struggle with is that the 
things of the highest quality, are never comparative (see theRed Bull Stratos 
jump <http://www.redbullstratos.com/> or Nivea's Bluetooth bracelet 
<http://www.mobilemarketer.com/cms/news/advertising/17761.html>), they are 
distinctive, unique, unquantifiable and probably require that extra glass of 
wine to appreciate.

Dino Myers-Lamptey is head of strategy at the7stars 
<http://www.the7stars.co.uk/>.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 