
Around 850 people lost their jobs at the failed childrenswear chain Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/adams> today when administrators 
announced the closure of 111 stores.

The remaining 160 stores, which employ 2,350 staff, will stay open as normal 
while administrators from PricewaterhouseCoopers continue to seek a buyer for 
the business.

The administrators are hopeful that they can sell some parts of the business, 
whichwent into administration on New Year's Eve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/dec/31/adams-retail>.

Rob Hunt, joint administrator and partner at PricewaterhouseCoopers, said: "I 
am pleased to say that we have had a number of expressions of interest in the
Adams <https://www.theguardian.com/business/adams> business and brand. As a 
result, we are hopeful that we will be able sell some parts of the business."

"However, following our appointment and in light of the current downturn being 
experienced on the high street, it is with regret that it has been necessary to 
effect the closure of 111 stores throughout the UK as of today. Unfortunately, 
this will inevitably lead to a number of job losses and 850 people across the 
company will be made redundant with immediate effect. My team and I will be 
doing all we can to help these employees at this difficult time."

The closures affect sites in Glasgow, Belfast, Leeds, Birkenhead, Blackpool 
and Coventry, among others.

Operating from its base in Nuneaton, Adams is the largest independent 
childrenswear retailer in the UK with an annual turnover of £150m. It operates 
270 stores and concessions throughout the country trading under Adams Kids. The 
company also supplies a number of overseas franchises.

Adams was rescued from administration less than two years ago, but since then 
worsening sales have made it harder for the firm to shoulder some £30m of debt. 
Under fierce competition from supermarkets and other high street retailers, it 
has struggled to carve out a niche for itself.

The childrenswear retailer joins a lengthening list of retailers to have failed
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/dec/29/high-street-retailers-administration>
 in the toughest trading environment experienced by the high street in decades.

Woolworths and the furniture chain MFI are the highest profile casualties to 
date, but the list includes the entertainment chain Zavvi, tea and coffee 
merchant Whittard of Chelsea and the menswear chain Officers Club. And today
Waterford Wedgwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jan/05/retail-recession>, the 
250-year-old maker of luxury glassware and china, also announced it was going 
into administration.

• The body count in the retail sector continued to rise with nearly 200 
redundancies at specialist chain Passion for Perfume.

Management tried unsuccessfully to sell the Manchester-based business as a 
going concern but staff were told last week the search had been unsuccessful. 
Its 45 stores have now closed with 195 retail and head office staff let go. 
Administrators Deloitte were appointed today, tasked with finding a buyer for 
the stores and stock.

Bill Dawson, reorganisation services partner at Deloitte, said the retailer 
had been a victim of "challenging trading conditions and reduced consumer 
demand. We will continue to seek a buyer but do not intend to trade the 
business."
 