
His show invites the audience to play swingball and impersonate Daniel 
Day-Lewis. Now anarchic comedianAdam Riches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/adam-riches> has had the last laugh: he has 
won the most prestigious prize in UK comedy.

Riches won the Foster's Edinburgh comedy award at a lunchtime ceremony on 
Saturday, pipping to the post joint favourite Nick Helm and four other 
nominated acts.

Best known before this year's fringe for slipping on a probiotic yoghurt and 
breaking his leg onstage during his 2008 show Alpha Males, Riches has taken 
five previous solo sets to the festival.

Judges praised his "trademark mix of character comedy, anarchic stagecraft and 
a fearless level of audience engagement". Nica Burns, the West End impresario 
and producer of the awards, said of Riches that he was "utterly original, 
extremely funny and a huge talent. He will no doubt be seen on your television 
screens in the near future."

Receiving the award from veteran standup Omid Djalili, Riches said: "Today I 
was just a bundle of nerves. But to get it was fantastic and overwhelming."

Riches' victory, and the popularity of his challenger Helm, whose belligerent 
heavy-metal comedy show terrorises the audience in pursuit of laughs, suggests 
a growing appetite among audiences for in-yer-face participative comedy.

The other shortlisted acts were Andrew Maxwell, Sam Simmons, Chris Ramsey and 
the political comic Josie Long. The best newcomer award was won by Humphrey Ker 
for his second world war pastiche, Dymock Watson: Nazi Smasher. Ker is a 
veteran of the popular fringe sketch troupe The Penny Dreadfuls, but this 
year's show, loosely based on the wartime exploits of his own grandfather, was 
his first solo offering.

The panel prize, awarded to events that best invoke the so-called "spirit of 
the fringe," went to The Wrestling, a one-off, late-night event that pitched 
standup comedians against professional wrestlers. Its organiser, Max Olesker of 
the double act Max and Ivan, formerly the youngest pro-wrestler in the UK, was 
taken to A&E after breaking his ankle during the show.

The judging panel for this year's award, which included critics and industry 
figures, was chaired by Tania Harrison, head of arts and comedy atFestival 
Republic <http://www.festivalrepublic.com/>.

Formerly known as the Perriers, the Edinburgh comedy awards were first 
presented in 1981, when the victorious Cambridge Footlights troupe included the 
young Stephen Fry, Hugh Laurie and Emma Thompson.

Riches receives a Â£10,000 cash prize, and a place in the most illustrious 
pantheon in standup comedy.
 