
Addiction does discriminate: it hits hardest those who are already down or 
feel that they will never be able to rise.

In the late 1980s and early 1990s, crack cocaine, which was prevalent and 
visible in poor black communities, was said to be a great threat to the white 
middle class. In many black communities, before crack took off, unemployment 
rates had been high and rising, driven by the decline in manufacturing jobs and 
biased hiring and firing practices.

But where jobs had more stability, and where drug users weren’t victims of the 
“war on drugs” policing push, the long-predicted spread to the leafy suburbs 
never happened. While white youth took plenty of cocaine, addiction rates 
didn’t skyrocket. And when middle-class youths did get hooked, their recoveries 
were quicker.

Pregnant women with addictions need healthcare, not handcuffs | Hernandez D 
Stroud
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/12/pregnant-women-addiction-healthcare-not-handcuffs>
Now, another drug epidemic is afoot, and white America looks economically a 
lot more like black America in the 1990s: stable, well-paying jobs are 
disappearing, replaced by lower-wage positions with far more uncertainty. And 
criminalizing drug use, while proven not to work, remains the default.

But our response to today’s opioid crisis cannot be effective if it ignores 
the socioeconomic aspects of the problem. Though advocates like to claim that 
addiction is an equal opportunity destroyer, in reality, it is far less likely 
to hit people who have stable, structured lives and decent employment than it 
is those whose lives are marked by uncertainty and lack of work.

Research shows that when a country has a healthy middle class – and low or at 
least moderate levels of economic inequality – addiction rates are lowest among 
the middle class and at least half of them (excepting tobacco)end by age 30 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3644798/pdf/fpsyt-04-00031.pdf>, 
even without treatment. However, when unemployment, tenuous employment and 
inequality are high and the middle class shrinks, more people are at high risk. 
And their odds for early-life recovery decline.

Abundant data support the connection between socioeconomic factors, addiction 
and recovery.

For one, heroin addiction 
<http://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/heroin/infographic.html> is more than three 
times as common in people making less than $20,000 per year compared to those 
who make $50,000 or more, and higher levels of education are also linked with 
lower rates of addiction. The relationship between addiction rates and 
inequality has long beennoted <https://www.equalitytrust.org.uk/drug-abuse> by 
researchers who study its health effects: countries and states with higher 
levels of inequality tend to have worse mental health and addiction problems 
than those with less dramatic differences between the 1% and everyone else.

Further, decades of survey data also show that the addiction rate among the 
unemployed is usually aroundtwice as high 
<http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-DetTabs2014/NSDUH-DetTabs2014.htm#tab5-7b>
 as among those who have jobs. Some of this unemployment, of course, is 
addiction-related job loss. But areview 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21466502> of this literature suggests that 
in many cases, unemployment precedes addiction and that either way, it reduces 
the odds of recovery.

 So what explains these connections? It’s important to understand that 90% 
<http://www.centeronaddiction.org/addiction-research/reports/adolescent-substance-use>
 of all addictions begin in the teen and young adult years, a time when most 
people – especially in the middle class – are in school. Binge drinking and 
drug use are one way that teens separate themselves from their parents and 
declare independence.

 Moreover, in the high school and college years, not only are teens 
developmentally primed to move away from their families, their brains are also 
especially sensitive. The regions that push youths to take risks and seek 
romantic relationships are the same ones that drive desire for drugs during 
addiction – and these areas mature long before the regions that exert maximum 
control do. The prefrontal cortex, which is the seat of judgment and restraint, 
does not fully develop until the mid 20s, which is typically when excessive 
drinking and other drug use tends to recede.

 This healthy maturation is not only driven by genes, however; it is also 
reliant to some extent on environmental experience. For example, in a typical, 
modern middle-class life, people are completing college and starting careers 
alongside as their prefrontal cortex matures. And it’s not as easy to get away 
with not showing up or showing up hungover or stoned at work as it is to 
college classes.

Here's what it's like to lose your child to heroin addiction | Lisa Cote Johns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/22/heroin-addiction-drugs-death>
The routine and requirements of working life work against addictive behavior 
and, for many people, they are what allows it to be outgrown. Gettingmarried 
<http://monitoringthefuture.org/pubs/occpapers/occ68.pdf> is also a turning 
point into recovery for many people: being accountable to a spouse often makes 
binging harder. Finally,having a child 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2951309/> is also a major spur to 
quitting or cutting back dramatically: the demands of a baby and the love and 
purpose that parenting engenders tend to work against a lifestyle of frequent 
intoxication, to say the least.

Combined, these social and developmental factors work to keep all but the most 
severe addictions time-limited to adolescence and young adulthood.

But when decent jobs are not available, all of the social aspects of this 
process can be blocked because economic opportunity influences not only 
employment, but also coupling and childrearing. Accordingly, recovery without 
treatment is far less common among the poor and unemployed.

For over 100 years, we’ve relied on attempting to cut the drug supply by 
locking up dealers or restricting access to certain chemicals – and this has 
never remotely come close to solving the problem. If we want to fight 
addiction, we’ve got to look at what drives people to despair. And to do that, 
we can’t ignore inequality.
 