
A below-par Sydney FC have escaped a first A-League defeat but dropped another 
two points in an uninspiring goalless draw withAdelaide United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/adelaide-united>.

The Sky Blues spurned the chance to go nine points clear at the top of the 
table on Saturday night at Allianz Stadium, in a performance as anaemic as the 
scoreline.

They equalled their record nine-game undefeated streak of 2006-07 but were 
fortunate, given last-placed United played with a confidence that belied their 
winless season, in a sign a victory is close.

Wasteful Wanderers share points with Brisbane despite improvement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/25/a-league-wanderers-brisbane-match-report>
Suspended coach Guillermo Amor needn’t have worried how his defending 
champions would fare without him on the sidelines, as the Reds attacked with 
venom in and end-to-end start barely resembling its top-versus-bottom billing.

Ryan Kitto found joy on the left flank as he and Ben Garrucio targeted the 
in-form Rhyan Grant.

But the frenetic opening exchanges soon dissolved into scrappy play rife with 
turnovers that yielded few chances for either side.

Isaias and an under-performing David Carney went into the book while tough 
defender Matt Jurman suffered a horrible head clash during an aerial challenge 
with James Holland that left him bleeding heavily.

A bandaged Jurman eventually returned and earned enthusiastic cheers from the 
13,179 crowd for each of his three headers in quick succession.

That was the main first-half entertainment apart from a sole opportunity 
apiece.

The first belonged to Adelaide defender Tarek Elrich, who fired off a 20-metre 
left-footed strike that shaved the outside of the post.

Soon after, a quiet Filip Holosko burst into space but, under pressure from 
Iacopo La Rocca, applied too much angle on his finish.

In the second half, Sydney coach Graham Arnold sensed the need for change and 
replaced Holosko with skipper Alex Brosque and eventually Bobo with Matt Simon, 
while Henrique returned for Adelaide at the expense of a cramping Nikola 
Mileusnic.

Holland came closest after the break, skipping past three Sydney defenders 
only to botch his finish, while Simon sent one wide and Alex Wilkinson took a 
feeble stab that was indicative of a squad perhaps more focused on next week’s 
FFA Cup final.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmarco-rojass-double-sends-victory-to-second-in-a-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29b66f9a50f38a4c3509111020b68eb103d201d2%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20hold%20Sydney%20FC%2C%20Victory%20move%20to%20A-League%20second%20spot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmarco-rojass-double-sends-victory-to-second-in-a-league%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20hold%20Sydney%20FC%2C%20Victory%20move%20to%20A-League%20second%20spot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F26%2Fmarco-rojass-double-sends-victory-to-second-in-a-league%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29b66f9a50f38a4c3509111020b68eb103d201d2%2F0_0_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Marco Rojas celebrates his second goal against Newcastle. Photograph: Michael 
Dodge/Getty Images 
Marco Rojas’s second-half double has sent Melbourne Victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/melbourne-victory> to second on the 
A-League table, breaking the deadlock in a 2-0 win over Newcastle Jets.

The Kiwi winger transformed a contest in danger of stalemate with goals in the 
52nd and 54th minutes.

Like most of his Victory teammates, Rojas stuttered and was without polish in 
a first half of missteps rather than memorable moments.

But when Fahid Ben Khalfallah was brought down by acting Jets captain Wayne 
Brown just outside the box early in the second half, Rojas delivered from the 
set piece.

The 25-year-old’s free kick deflected off injury-replacement signing Iain Fyfe 
and into the net, leaving goalkeeper Jack Duncan cursing his luck.

If Rojas’s first goal had a touch of good fortune, his second was clinical.

Seizing on teenage defender Johnny Koutroumbis’s loose ball, he surged forward 
and ignored central options Besart Berisha and Ben Khalfallah to sidefoot home.

The only Victory figure among 18,267 fans to seemingly be displeased was the 
Albanian, who turned his back and walked towards the centre circle without 
acknowledging the goalscorer.

But the rest were delighted with a third-straight home win that has Victory 
humming in the league.

Their success was amplified given the tight history of the two sides – not 
since March 2013 had either side won this fixture by more than a single goal.

And there was relief for Kevin Muscat too, who had to turn to his signing of 
three days – Matthew Acton – in goal.

Acton was given the gloves after a finger injury to Lawrence Thomas in 
mid-week training, with second-choice gloveman Alastair Bray out with a 
dislocated shoulder.

Despite a hairy moment when he collected Devante Clut crudely outside the box, 
the 24-year-old proved himself to be a worthy shot-stopper, assisted on 89 
minutes with a clearance from James Donachie off the line.

Jets debutant Andy Brennan missed his side’s two best – from a one-on-one 
inside the first five minutes and from a cutback with 10 minutes remaining.

But on full-time, Victory could count themselves unlucky not to win with a 
greater margin.

Until Rojas’s emergence, James Troisi was the major creative force at AAMI 
Park, taking 10 of Victory’s 21 shots and setting up several others.

Berisha earlier produced a contender for miss of the season, sidefooting 
Troisi’s cross wide from three metres with an empty net beckoning.
 