
7.20am GMT 

Join us tomorrow for more live coverage from Adelaide festival
 Adelaide Festival Writers Week 2014. Author Alexander McCall Smith speaks on 
stage. Photograph: Alicia Canter 
We’ll be talking to Batsheva’s Ohad Naharin, thinking about what it’s like to 
front a one man show, reviewing Womadelaide, Morton Subotnick’s Unsound gig, 
and Wil Anderson’s new show. All that plus our first festival podcast, more 
video from Dark Heart, and pictures from the city at festival time. Do join us 
tomorrow, and in the meatime, here’s a recap of what we bought you today.

 * Alfred Hickling considered the likely highlights of this weekend’s 
Womadelaide festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/womadelaide-2014-preview-a-celebration-of-the-worlds-diversity?view=desktop>

 * Alex Needham thrilled to John Waters’ ready wit at his outrageous 
autobiographical show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/adelaide-festival-john-waters-review?view=desktop>

 * We showed you the full technicolor glory of Writers’ Week with these lovely 
pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/gallery/2014/mar/07/adelaide-festival-2014-writers-week-pictures>

 * We reviewed Snowtown Live from Adelaide Town Hall 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/snowtown-live-review-soundtrack-synonymous-death>

 * Morton Subotnick discussed synths, drugs and iPad apps with us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/morton-subotnick-silver-apples-of-moon>

 * What to see at Fringe? We gave you our top 10 shows to see in the next 
couple of weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/adelaide-fringe-festival-2014-10-shows-not-to-miss>

 * We bought you video from the Adelaide Biennial of Australian Art, as 
curator Lisa Slade discusses the Kulata Tjuta Project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/07/favourite-work-kulata-juta-lisa-slade-adelaide-biennial-video>
 * Jane Howard brought us her first Fringe festival diary from the 
genteel(ish) environs of the Royal Croquet Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/adelaide-fringe-2014-jane-howards-diary-friday-march-7>
• Guardian Australia travelled to and stayed in Adelaide courtesy of the 
Adelaide festival. Flights from the UK were provided by Emirates 
<http://www.emirates.com/>.

Updated at 7.29am GMT

7.00am GMT 

Fringe festival diary: March 7

Jane Howard’s going to be providing daily reports from the Fringe – although 
even with her fearsome work ethic, I fear we’re only going to scratch the 
surface. Here is her first dispatch: a tale of croquet, hula hoops, paper 
umbrellas – and strip-skipping. (Guardian Australia will be steering well clear 
of incidences of the latter.) You canread Jane’s diary in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/adelaide-fringe-2014-jane-howards-diary-friday-march-7>
, or catch a snippet below.

At the Panama Club, A Simple Space 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/a-simple-space/8a84f09a-583b-48d4-95e5-887ed0fa61f5>
 has energy in spades. I first saw this production at the 2013 Fringe, when it 
was a half-hour performance on a weekend afternoon. The opening game of 
strip-skipping (speed skip until you trip, only the last one standing gets to 
keep their clothing) takes on quite a different slant when playing to an 
evening, rather than family, audience. Circus performers of course often make 
mistakes with their tricks – but here the fallibility of the performer is taken 
to extremes. Everything becomes a competition: how many standing back-tucks can 
you do? How good a balloon animal can you make with your hands behind your 
back? How long can you stay in a handstand while the audience throws plastic 
balls at you? No-frills acrobatic tricks make up the bulk of the performance; 
it’s all terrific fun.

5.26am GMT 

Video – My favourite work: Kulata Tjuta Project at Adelaide Biennial 2014

Over the week we’ll be bringing you a series of videos about the Adelaide 
Biennial, in which curators and artists involved in the exhibition discuss 
their favourite works from it, and explain why they they find them so 
personally important.

Guardian Australia’s Bill Code and Alex Needham asked Lisa Slade, managing 
curator at the Adelaide Biennial of Australian Art, to tell us why the Kulata 
Tjuta Project entry is her piece of choice at the 2014 exhibition. In a corner 
of theArt <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Gallery of South 
Australia, hundreds of spears hang from the ceiling, the product of a group of 
artists from a remote indigenous community in South Australis’s APY lands. For 
Slade, the piece references contemporary artwork in a brave statement on 
colonialism, while also reviving the traditional art of spear-making
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F07%2Ffavourite-work-kulata-juta-lisa-slade-adelaide-biennial-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F7%2F1394164854171%2FKulata-Tjuta---Adelaide-B-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Kulata%20Tjuta%20Project%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F07%2Ffavourite-work-kulata-juta-lisa-slade-adelaide-biennial-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Kulata%20Tjuta%20Project%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F07%2Ffavourite-work-kulata-juta-lisa-slade-adelaide-biennial-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F7%2F1394164854171%2FKulata-Tjuta---Adelaide-B-001.jpg>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F07%2Ffavourite-work-kulata-juta-lisa-slade-adelaide-biennial-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F7%2F1394164854171%2FKulata-Tjuta---Adelaide-B-001.jpg>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Kulata%20Tjuta%20Project%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F07%2Ffavourite-work-kulata-juta-lisa-slade-adelaide-biennial-video>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20favourite%20work%3A%20Kulata%20Tjuta%20Project%20at%20Adelaide%20Biennial%202014%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F07%2Ffavourite-work-kulata-juta-lisa-slade-adelaide-biennial-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F7%2F1394164854171%2FKulata-Tjuta---Adelaide-B-001.jpg>
close 
5.08am GMT 

Adelaide Fringe – Jane Howard's top 10 picks

With more than 900 shows, the Fringe programme can seem a bit daunting. 
Usefully, Jane Howard’s ripped through it and selected her must-see shows. You 
can readher top 10 in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/adelaide-fringe-festival-2014-10-shows-not-to-miss>
, for more information on each of her recommendations, or get a quick hit to 
copy and paste to your must-do list below.


 * They Saw a Thylacine 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/they-saw-a-thylacine/f609f953-a588-4979-8a5a-0d49f34d1fb3>

 * Adrienne Truscott’s Asking for It 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/adrienne-truscotts-asking-for-it-a-one-lady-rape-about-comedy-starring-her-pussy-and-little-else/9dde21a3-376b-4f54-80ad-966c73cb6974>

 * Storytellers’ Club on the Popeye 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/storytellers-club-on-the-popeye/05cddbcc-e092-4010-a39c-c788b14ae526>

 * Adelaide Fringe Street Theatre festival 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/free-events/fringe-street-theatre-festival>

 * Katie Noonan & Circa – Love-Song-Circus 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/katie-noonan-and-circa-love-song-circus/db0daf1d-9b52-41f0-a229-11fc72b4e72d>

 * Steve Sheehan’s Little Boring Story Event 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/steve-sheehans-little-boring-story-event/4bc675bc-1f43-4544-a128-e39ab10567c9>

 * FOMO: The Fear of Missing Out 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/fomo-the-fear-of-missing-out/b5b8c2e8-9c8a-4810-b556-89288afeda47>

 * A Simple Space 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/a-simple-space/8a84f09a-583b-48d4-95e5-887ed0fa61f5>

 * Bitch Boxer 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/bitch-boxer/fb97388c-ae97-40d2-9eda-ba1ab4ec96a6>

 * Swamp Juice 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/swamp-juice/2a47ea03-e830-457e-8915-02f470b2c665>

Updated at 5.27am GMT

4.20am GMT 

You may have missed … Roman Tragedies, Skywhale and River of Fundament
 Artist Patricia Piccinini discusses her work Skywhale. The piece was part of 
Adelaide Biennial of Australian Art: Dark Heart. Photograph: Alicia Canter for 
the Guardian  Skywhale by artist Patricia Piccinini, part of Adelaide Biennial 
of Australian Art: Dark Heart. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
We’re live from the festival all this week – but we’ve also been out enjoying 
some of its opening week offerings. Alica has taken these fab pictures of the 
Skywhale, visting as part of the Adelaide Biennial of Australian art, while you 
can read Alfred’s take of Roman Tragedies and River of Fundament. Snippets and 
links to the full reviews below

Roman Tragedies – review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/02/roman-tragedies-adelaide-festival-review>

Shakespeare would have been surprised to find his Roman-themed dramas – 
Coriolanus, Julius Caesar and Antony and Cleopatra – interpreted as a trilogy. 
He would have been even more surprised at the notion of bolting all three 
together into a single, unbroken six-hour span. Yet he might conceivably have 
approved of the idea of inviting the audience to sit amid the action, tweet 
their responses@RomanTragedies 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%40romantragedies&src=typd> and make use of the 
mobile charging points provided at the side of the stage.

River of Fundament – review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/03/river-fundament-review-adelaide-festival>

Whether Barney’s barmy, allegorical phantasmagoria actually signifies 
anything, the film stands as a brilliantly rendered, giddily self-referential 
satire of contemporary American culture;though much the same could be said 
about the Lego Movie <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fZ_JOBCLF-I>, with which 
River of Fundament shares more in common than it may care to admit.

The only thing you can say with any great certainty is that Barney’s magnum 
opus is deliberately calculated to divide opinion. It’s a significant work of 
art. It’s full of shit. But as Norman Mailer consistently and maddeningly 
proved, it’s quite possible for both of these things to be true at the same 
time.

Updated at 4.22am GMT

4.00am GMT 

Morton Subotnick's Silver Apples of the Moon: 'It blew my mind!'
 Musician Morton Subotnick photographed in Adelaide. Photograph by Alicia 
Canter for the Guardian 
Fifty years ago, Morton Subotnick inadvertently invented techno with his 
“electronic music box”, the Buchla synthesiser. This evening he’s going to be 
revisiting that experience in Adelaide, performing his record Silver Apples of 
the Moon – the first electronic album ever to be commissioned by a classical 
record label – in its entirety on a modern recreation of the synthesiser. (The 
original is in the Library of Congress).
 Morton Subotnick's electronic music box looked like a miniature telephone 
exchange PR 
We’ll be reviewing the show tonight, but first Alfred Hickling has been 
talking to the composer ahead of his performance. Subotnick is showing no signs 
of slowing down – he shows Alfred his new app that enables kids to create their 
own electronic compositions on an iPad – in a really charming interview. The 
pair discuss the record’s trippy associations (“I certainly wasn’t on drugs 
when I made it. I was working too hard”), playing old music on new inventions, 
and the origins of the albums title. It’s a fantastic piece –and you can read 
it in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/morton-subotnick-silver-apples-of-moon>
. But here’s a taster


Almost 50 years on, Silver Apples of the Moon still sounds arrestingly 
contemporary. The piece is in two parts: the first is slower, moodier and full 
of profound, synthetic sighs, like a robot in despair; then in the second half, 
something extraordinary happens – the music suddenly develops a pulse and 
climaxes in the frenzied hammering of proto-club rhythms.

This had simply never been heard before. Early electronic compositions were 
mostly about sine waves, oscillations, timbre – all devoid of rhythm, by and 
large. Yet, says Subotnick, his discovery of beats happened almost by accident. 
“In the early days, it took a long, long time – sometimes even days – to 
programme a sequence. Quite unintentionally, I found I had created this 
pulsating rhythm. I started grooving with it – and it blew my mind.”

Updated at 2.55am GMT

3.09am GMT 

Snowtown Live – a review
 Snowtown Live at Adelaide Town Hall. Photograph by Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian 
Alfred Hickling went to Adelaide Town Hall last night to watch Snowtown Live – 
a perhaps rather jarring name for a piece that comprised a screening of
previously unseen footage from the Australian movie 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2014/music/unsound-snowtown_live_and_stars_of_the_lid%20>
 about the Snowtown murders, accompanied by a live rendition of the score 
composed by Jed Kurzel <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qj5C5Ptaiug>. 

That is admittedly not the most upbeat night out – and poor Alfred spent the 
evening before swotting up by watching the film in its entirety, which is quite 
a lot of time spent with a rather grim subject – but he was impressed by the 
results, as you can readin his four-star review of the show here 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/snowtown-live-review-soundtrack-synonymous-death>
. Here’s a snippet from the review:

Kurzel leads a six piece band switching between synthesiser drones, treated 
percussion and choppy guitar. It’s an edgy, electric sound with a heavy pulse 
and cumulative intensity that brings to mind thecompositions of Louis Andriessen
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2012/oct/15/louis-andriessen-classical-music-guide%20>
 and the industrial metal in vogue at the time the murders took place. It’s 
heavy, hypnotic and mostly restricted to a single key, indicative of 
demoralised community that has sunk into the poverty trap with little chance of 
escape.

Marcel Weber’s accompanying montage of cancelled footage 
<http://www.ctm-festival.de/archive/all-artists/k-o/marcel-weber-lucy-benson-mfo/%20>
 is truly disturbing. Freed from narrative responsibility, the camera dwells 
for rather too long on images of under-nourished children amusing themselves in 
joyless playgrounds or hanging listlessly around the estate. Rather creepily, 
the viewer becomes complicit with the voyeurs and predators the community is 
determined to expunge.

2.43am GMT 

EastEnd Cabaret: Late-night dirty talk

Last night I headed off to explore Adelaide Fringe, which is enormous, and 
gorgeously other-worldly and exciting. Jane Howard is going to be reporting 
from fringe all this week – she’s on a strict regime of several million shows a 
day – but first here’s a quick review from me of EastEnd Cabaret, a late-night 
show definitely worth staying up for. It’s a hoot – though, as Alex found out, 
there is also some outrageous audience participation …
 EastEnd Cabaret's Bernadette Byrne and Victor Victoria in the Garden of 
Unearthly Delights. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
When it comes to tricky social situations, taking your friend to a show where 
a performer thoroughly licks his face to a soundtrack of delighted gasps and 
giggles is at the more difficult end of the scale. As is pulling off a 
performance that leaves your victims – who have crawled down the aisle on their 
hands and knees, been mercilessly flirted with, and had their future sex lives 
discussed in great detail from the stage – almost pleased to have been singled 
out for humiliation.

That British duo EastEnd Cabaret make such delicate audience manipulation look 
effortless explains why they’re a smutty cut above (below?) their competition. 
In a cabaret world stuffed with sexy, vintage-inspired acts – a trend that 
seemingly will not stop until every performer is stuffed into a corset, eyebrow 
arched in faux amusement, audience cowering into their drinks – Jennifer Byrne 
and Victoria Falconer-Pritchard are a joyous reminder of how much fun seduction 
can be.

And this pair really are the mistresses of it. They’re irresistible as 
super-sexy chanteuse of all-purpose European origin Bernadette and her sidekick 
Victor/Victoria – the helpless desire of the latter for the former the 
essential underpinning of their relationship with the audience. It provides the 
tension, the punchlines, and most importantly that likeability that allows 
Byrne and Falconer-Pritchard to push the jokes (and the audience) a good deal 
further than anyone should strictly be comfortable with. It admittedly seems 
mean to keep dear Victy in perpetual frustration, but rarely has unrequited 
lust been so hilariously, furiously creative as here.

There’s always a particular danger with comedy song acts that they veer 
off-course and land in not-very-funny radio comedy territory. I hooted with 
delight at tales of in-the-field masturbation in DangerWank 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VKd5X68vvM4>; bendy yoga sex gods undone by 
flying flans; lusty ’80s pop-star romps and tiny sex robots. It’s shades of 
Victoria Wood and Julie Walters via Liza Minnelli and a terrifying hen’s night 
burlesque workshop. Definitely worth getting your face licked for.

The show’s in the Garden of Unearthly Delights until 16 March – buy tickets 
here 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/eastend-cabaret-dirty-talk/5e0963cb-fff5-40c0-860a-5f1a4224f35c>
 – and at Melbourne Comedy festival 27 March to 6 April.

Updated at 2.56am GMT

2.30am GMT 

Lunchtime

If you see a woman on a laptop in the Art Gallery of South Australia’s cafe, 
hungrily/ slightly wildly eyeing up all the plates of delicious food whizzing 
around, by the way, that is me. I’d say come and say hello, but you probably 
don’t want to leave your plate untended in my vicinity… We’ve eaten brilliantly 
since arriving in Adelaide. A brilliant lunch atPeel Street 
<http://www.peelst.com.au/>, and some fantastic – and cheap – tea-smoked duck 
and chinese greens from a place near the market have more than offset the night 
I had crisps for tea because everything had shut by about 9pm.

Still to come on the liveblog this afternoon, once I’ve refuelled: Alfred 
reviews Snowtown Live review, Jane Howard gives us her pick of the fringe, Alex 
looks at the Australian Biennial Dark Heart (showing here at the gallery), and 
more!

2.14am GMT 

In pictures: Writers' Week

Adelaide Writers’ Week drew to a close yesterday, with a final day programme 
that included a slightly surreal session in which Christos Tsiolkas and Jeet 
Thayil discussed how to capture the effects of opium and amphetamines on the 
page, before an outwardly genteel crowd politely sitting in a manicured garden. 
Who knows what Adelaide’s older, more literary residents get up to in their 
spare time?

It was a fascinating discussion – I love to see two authors sharing a stage to 
unpick themes and identify common themes that might have seemed hidden at first 
glance. I talked to Christos after the event for our festival podcast – you’ll 
be able to hear the fruits of that tomorrow – and Guardian photographer Alicia 
Canter caught a gorgeous portrait of the author. Alicia’s been popping into 
Writers’ Week for the last few days; you can seea whole gallery of her glorious 
pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/gallery/2014/mar/07/adelaide-festival-2014-writers-week-pictures>
. Here are a few below
 Christos Tsiolkas, author of The Slap. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the  
Crowds gather to hear authors talk in the sunshine. Photograph: Alicia Canter  
People browse inside the bookshop tent. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian  Adelaidian author Hannah Kent speaks about her book Burial Rites, 
which was nominated for the Guardian First Book Awards. Photograph: Alicia 
Canter for the Guardian 
Updated at 2.57am GMT

1.30am GMT 

John Waters: filthy/gorgeous
 John Waters 
Last night Alex Needham went to see John Walters’ talk at Elder Hall. (This 
was not, to be clear, the gig at which the performer licked his face – that 
happened later). It sounds completely uproarious and brilliant fun, as his 
earlier appearance at Writers Week promised: “It’s hard to be an anarchist with 
three homes,” he intoned, drily.

You can read Alex’s review of this fantastic raconteur in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/adelaide-festival-john-waters-review?view=desktop>
 – Walters, considering how to be bad into his 70s, seemed to do do a fine job 
of being bad in his late 60s here, commanding his audience to “come fuck on his 
grave” once he kicks the bucket. Which will make for an interesting memorial … 
Here’s Alex on the performance.

Waters is still a figurehead for a particular type of misfit – angry, 
subversive, creative and funny – though as society rightly becomes more 
inclusive, the margins Waters and his crew relished living on are getting as 
narrow as his famous moustache. Then again, as Waters recognises, human nature 
will ensure that the bizarre continues to thrive, particularly among sexual 
subcultures. In his uproarious and loosely autobiographical talk, Waters 
introduces us to the concept of a blouse (a “feminine top”, and he’s not 
talking about an item of clothing), reacquaints us with sploshers (people who 
derive sexual pleasure from being covered in custard and baked beans), and 
talks about “blossoms”, the result of an esoteric sexual practice not really 
suitable for a family website.

1.03am GMT 

Last night's twitter reviews

We have reviews of John Waters show and Snowtown Live on the way – and some 
thoughts on the social awkwardness of taking a friend to see a show where one 
of the performers forcibly licks their face. (Sorry about that, Alex Needham, I 
didn’t really intend for that to happen). But first, the view from other 
audience members…
Robert Lawton (@robert_lawton) 
#TheShadowKing <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23TheShadowKing&src=hash> takes 
King Lear to Aboriginal families under mining royalty stress. Powerful work, 
flawed people, tragic resolution#adlfest 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23adlfest&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/robert_lawton/statuses/441552070215094272> March 6, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/robert_lawton/statuses/441552070215094272> Jamie Wright 
(@JamieWrites) 
John Waters, unsurprisingly, was absolutely brilliant. Trashy, snarky and 
wicked. Laughed almost non-stop. Another great#ADLfest 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23ADLfest&src=hash> show.
 <https://twitter.com/JamieWrites/statuses/441550675957145600> March 6, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/JamieWrites/statuses/441550675957145600> Jordan Archer 
(@JordanArcher11) 
#Sadeh21 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Sadeh21&src=hash> was beautiful. The 
way some people can control their bodies… sheesh!#AdlFest 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23AdlFest&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/JordanArcher11/statuses/441571218710200320> March 6, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/JordanArcher11/statuses/441571218710200320> Five Thousand 
(@Five_Thousand) 
First Unsound festival night #1: Snowtown, good. Stars of the Lid: we didn't 
wait all these years for nothing. From another planet#adlfest 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23adlfest&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Five_Thousand/statuses/441573098555322368> March 6, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Five_Thousand/statuses/441573098555322368> 
12.47am GMT 

Womadelaide 2014 preview: a celebration of the world’s diversity
 Azadoota Photograph: Womadelaide 
Alfred Hickling is going to be hanging out at Womadelaide over the long 
weekend – lucky man! – and has been casting his eye over the line-up in 
advance. Along withArrested Development and Femi Kuti, he’s looking forward to 
Beijing-basedHanggai <http://womad.org/artists/hanggai> (who have “a punk 
attitude reminiscent of a Mongolian Pogues”) and Australian-Iraqi party band
Azadoota <http://www.azadoota.com/>. 

The band’s irrepressible leader, Robin Zirwanda, plays an ear-popping array of 
percussion while singing in ancient Assyrian. “Today the classical Arabic 
language is dying out,” Zirwanda says, “but it used to be the lingua franca of 
the civilised world. If this were 7,000 years ago, you and I would be speaking 
in Assyrian right now.”

Zirwanda, who recently celebrated his 60th birthday, left Baghdad for Sydney 
in 1971 – initially as a professional footballer – before being hired as a 
percussionist byDon McLean <http://www.don-mclean.com/>. Since Azadoota formed 
in 1971, the lineup has been in a continual state of flux, though Zirwanda’s 
greatest discovery is probably the sensational oud player,Ahmed Al Karawi 
<http://www.worldmusic.net/battle/track/azadoota-kiss-me-kiss-me/> . “I found 
him playing to an empty restaurant in Sydney, and now he’s recognised as one of 
the finest oud players in the world. Unfortunately, he’s so busy, I can’t 
always book him myself, ha ha. But for the festival we’ve got a nine-piece 
lineup representing five continents and spanning five decades in age. We’re the 
Womad festival in a single band.”

You can read Alfred’s full preview here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/womadelaide-2014-preview-a-celebration-of-the-worlds-diversity?view=desktop>
 and of course head down to Womadelaide all weekend. (Tickets here 
<http://www.womadelaide.com.au/tickets>). We’ll be liveblogging from the 
festival tomorrow and Sunday – be sure to say hello!

Updated at 2.57am GMT

12.04am GMT 

Welcome to our live coverage of Adelaide festival

Good morning! Greetings from the Art Gallery of South Australia 
<http://www.artgallery.sa.gov.au/> which will be our base for this first day of 
live coverage from Adelaide festival. I’m Vicky Frost and your host for today’s 
liveblog. For the next six days we’ll be bringing you interviews, features, 
reviews, podcasts, pictures and videos from the festival – covering 
performance, music, visual art, literature and of course fringe.

Well, that’s the idea in any case. It’s so ridiculously glorious here on the 
gallery terrace that it’s quite tempting to stretch out and bask in the 
sunshine, but first we should update you about festival events we’ve been 
enjoying so far – and those that we’re looking forward to in the next week. Do 
leave your take on that in the comments below.
vicky frost (@vickyfrost) 
My Adelaide fest liveblog seat for the day. (We're at the SA art gallery). Not 
too shabby. *applies sunscreen*pic.twitter.com/PTYfvWQhqw 
<http://t.co/PTYfvWQhqw>
 <https://twitter.com/vickyfrost/statuses/441719818907942914> March 6, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/vickyfrost/statuses/441719818907942914>  