
Everything happens in Adelaide in March – our picks of the festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/23/everything-happens-in-adelaide-in-march-our-picks-of-the-festival>
It’s a balmy night in Adelaide at the Garden of Unearthly Delights, where 
families take turns on fairground rides and friends swig local cider under 
trees. Despite the relative quiet and the marshmallow quality of the evening 
sky, Scottish “mentalist”Colin Cloud 
<https://adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/colin-cloud-kills/6bd95268-0209-4f44-bc1c-a08cd1934f98>
 is planning his perfect murder.

Using nothing but deduction – a combination of observing body language, eye 
movements, smell and language – the forensic scientist can guess what an 
audience member is thinking. That’s down to the digits of a phone number or a 
childhood sweetheart’s name.

Tonight he is dressed somewhere between a vampire and a 19th century gentleman 
from Sherlock Holmes. Cloud gives a literally heart-stopping performance – 
stopping one volunteer’s actual heartbeats, rendering him technically dead.

It’s a riveting turn, one that brings greater gasps from the audience than the 
most dazzling of acrobatic shows. Somewhere between Cloud’s quips and our gulps 
is beauty: when asked how he felt to have his heart stop, the man said before 
his eyes a thousand stars burst.

Cloud was just one of many acts to impress at Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide> fringe. Here are my 
favourites from this year’s festival.

Velvet 

Velvet – which premiered in Adelaide last year but has since toured the globe 
– is back. Thank goodness. This is sex incarnate: a sassy, brassy, bold 
showstopper. (After Adelaide it will travel to the Melbourne International 
Comedy festival and the Queensland Performing Arts Centre in Brisbane.)

Adelaide: A crash course in creative thinking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses-australia/2015/dec/08/a-crash-course-in-creative-thinking-masterclasses>
Set to live disco hits, Velvet follows singer-songwriter Brendan Maclean as he 
tries to find himself. In the process he transforms from lost boy in an 
ill-fitting suit to a man in fabulous rainbow kitsch. Joining him on stage is 
the queen of Aussie 70s pop, Marcia Hines, who belts out numbers in a 
statuesque shimmering gold dress.

Meanwhile, acrobats flip, fly and flutter. Grinning, one gives a naughty 
striptease, while balancing on a single hand atop a precarious tower of 
suitcases. Another dressed in leather shows off his rippling torso suspended 
from the ceiling as two slinky backup singers in see-through raincoats croon – 
what else but It’s Raining Men? Maclean’s rendition of Staying Alive, slowed 
down to a lament and accompanied with a sole ukulele, is strangely haunting, 
while a scene with bondage, whips and leashes brings the excitement to breaking 
point.

 * Velvet 
<https://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/velvet/f83c98a3-b2ba-4b50-b38c-9fef0824e84d>
 is at the Garden of Unearthly Delights until 13 March

Echoes by Henry Naylor 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fadelaide-fringe-2016-five-acts-that-prove-in-theatre-bigger-isnt-always-better%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e1e076b5ed536c443bb9d78b399a296ea2bc347%2F0_60_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20fringe%202016%3A%20five%20acts%20that%20prove%20in%20theatre%2C%20bigger%20isn%E2%80%99t%20always%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fadelaide-fringe-2016-five-acts-that-prove-in-theatre-bigger-isnt-always-better%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20fringe%202016%3A%20five%20acts%20that%20prove%20in%20theatre%2C%20bigger%20isn%E2%80%99t%20always%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fadelaide-fringe-2016-five-acts-that-prove-in-theatre-bigger-isnt-always-better%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9e1e076b5ed536c443bb9d78b399a296ea2bc347%2F0_60_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Two British women, born 175 years apart, in Echoes. Photograph: Adelaide 
fringe festival 
In Echoes, writer Henry Naylor relays the journeys of two British women living 
in the Middle East, born 175 years apart. Both single, lonely, feisty and 
bright, each travel to marry, in this disturbing, brilliant example of the 
power of storytelling.

2016 Adelaide Biennial of Australian Art: colour, wonder, materialism and magic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/01/2016-adelaide-biennial-of-australian-art-colour-wonder-materialism-and-magic>
Tillie (Felicity Houlbrooke), a prissy, buttoned-up Victorian, becomes a 
member of the Fishing Fleet – spinsters who wed bachelors serving the Raj in 
India. With her abusive, violent, abrasive spouse she then relocates to 
Afghanistan, where life unravels at her disgust over treatment of the locals.

Simultaneously teenage Samira (Filipa Bragança) runs away from home in 
modern-day Ipswich to become a jihadi bride in Syria with Islamic State. 
Excited at the prospect of romance and ideological purpose, she soon finds 
herself little more than a domestic slave, to be raped and beaten by her 
handsome but cruel husband.

For both women, producing children is seen as duty, their bodies viewed as 
chattel and their minds dismissed. On a bare stage they speak with compelling 
urgency until the play reaches its shocking denouement. Ultimately, the right 
to choose becomes more important than the will to live.

 * Echoes by Henry Naylor 
<https://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/Echoes-by-Henry-Naylor/dacb9dbb-70a2-4004-8066-40705ae94d89>
 is at Holden Street Theatres, The Arch until 13 March

The Adventures of Alvin Sputnik: Deep Sea Explorer
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fadelaide-fringe-2016-five-acts-that-prove-in-theatre-bigger-isnt-always-better%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3c7ca054566f710fd086ac9b6a4925e63131e39%2F0_0_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20fringe%202016%3A%20five%20acts%20that%20prove%20in%20theatre%2C%20bigger%20isn%E2%80%99t%20always%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fadelaide-fringe-2016-five-acts-that-prove-in-theatre-bigger-isnt-always-better%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20fringe%202016%3A%20five%20acts%20that%20prove%20in%20theatre%2C%20bigger%20isn%E2%80%99t%20always%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fadelaide-fringe-2016-five-acts-that-prove-in-theatre-bigger-isnt-always-better%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3c7ca054566f710fd086ac9b6a4925e63131e39%2F0_0_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Underwater adventures with Alvin Sputnik, the deep-sea explorer. Photograph: 
Adelaide Fringe 
It’s not often you see a near seven-foot man dressed in head-to-toe Lycra 
wielding a puppet in a scuba diving suit.

Taste the world: Womadelaide 2016 artists share their favourite recipes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/02/taste-the-world-womadelaide-2016-artists-share-their-favourite-recipes>
In this short one-man, multimedia play, waters have flooded an Earth that is 
in the throes of “menopausal rage”. Many people are dead, drowned, their bodies 
littering the ocean’s floor. Forlorn skyscrapers peek from the tide, reminders 
of a once-great civilisation. Young Alvin Sputnik, himself in the throes of 
grief after the death of his wife, must try and save humankind by plunging into 
the depths of the ocean.

After the show I spoke with actor Sam Longley who works the ingenious 
puppetry. He said Perth-based creator Tim Watts was inspired to make Alvin 
Sputnik while diving and witnessing the “darkness” under the seas. The theme of 
exploration features heavily in this piece: the name Sputnik was taken from the 
world’s first artificial Earth satellite, launched in the 1950s by the Soviet 
Union.

Funny, moving and brilliant in parts, this is one for children as well as 
adults. Above all it is a meditation on loneliness – and in that, at least, The 
Adventures of Alvin Sputnik is as much about loss as superheroes saving the day.

 * The Adventures of Alvin Sputnik 
<https://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/the-adventures-of-alvin-sputnik-deep-sea-explorer/b99bfe85-d9fc-45da-a5e2-9565a6f150c5>
 is at Royal Croquet Club, The Menagerie until 14 March 
Ghosts, Toast and the Things Unsaid 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fadelaide-fringe-2016-five-acts-that-prove-in-theatre-bigger-isnt-always-better%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F689ef00fc12d4fba00891c17f67b079cd78d4067%2F25_228_750_450%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20fringe%202016%3A%20five%20acts%20that%20prove%20in%20theatre%2C%20bigger%20isn%E2%80%99t%20always%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fadelaide-fringe-2016-five-acts-that-prove-in-theatre-bigger-isnt-always-better%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20fringe%202016%3A%20five%20acts%20that%20prove%20in%20theatre%2C%20bigger%20isn%E2%80%99t%20always%20better&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fadelaide-fringe-2016-five-acts-that-prove-in-theatre-bigger-isnt-always-better%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F689ef00fc12d4fba00891c17f67b079cd78d4067%2F25_228_750_450%2F750.jpg>
 Matrimonial toast gets burnt in Ghosts, Toast and the Things Unsaid. 
Photograph: Adelaide fringe festival 
In Ghosts, Toast and the Things Unsaid, the number of audience members total 
two and the play is just 20 minutes long. Upon arrival I am given a ghost 
costume to wear (really an unwieldy white sheet with two holes for eyes) and a 
letter, explaining that I am the character “Steve”. Along with the other ghost 
(who is “Maude, my wife”), I am ordered to stand in a black triangle in the 
middle of a stage. As the lights go down a series of scenes are simultaneously 
acted out in a circle around us.

These show pivotal moments in Steve and Maude’s lives in the 1950s, 70s and 
90s. In one they are young, hopeful and newly wed. Another portrays a 
middle-aged sense of disappointment and resentment, and a confession rocks the 
security of their union. In the third Steve is alone, the pair long separated, 
thinking back on what went wrong and why.

Unsound Adelaide review – breaking ground with unorthodox live sounds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/feb/29/unsound-adelaide-review-breaking-ground-with-unorthodox-live-sounds>
But here’s the catch: hidden inside each ghost costume is a smartphone that 
relays what the character you are looking at is thinking. I can only hear 
Steve’s thoughts and by swivelling can only tap into one part of the narrative 
at a time, choosing what to focus on and what to leave out. It is only when I 
emerge, blinking and stunned, that the story fully comes together by comparing 
notes with my companion.

A collaboration between Google Creative Lab in Sydney and performing company 
Sandpit and Grumpy Sailor Creative who put together the audio system, this is 
experimental theatre at its best. It asks whether stories should be, as in real 
life, nonlinear and confused, how we can incorporate technology into theatre, 
and why we never really know what another person is thinking. And though all I 
want to do is rush back in to listen to Maude, to gain her perspective and 
piece together the puzzle, I’ll have to save that for another night.

 * Ghosts, Toast and the Things Unsaid 
<https://adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/8f1d3fed-4571-4f49-a5ab-8ee139abe711> 
is at 25 Marlborough Street until 8 March
 