
Adelaide star Eddie Betts booted five goals in his 250th AFL game as the Crows 
claimed a 15-point win over a bravePort Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide> in Saturday’s Showdown. The 
Crows withstood a late surge from Port at Adelaide Oval to claim a 15.19 (109) 
to 14.10 (94) win and climb to second on the ladder as they continued their 
march towards the finals.

The game had all the feeling of a Showdown as the two sides matched physical 
intensity, the margin just a point in favour of the Power at quarter-time. Led 
by powerful onballer Ollie Wines, who had six tackles for the term, Port had 
the better of the contest in the early going.

The Crows found another gear, recording 22 inside-50s to the Power’s six, and 
would have led by more than 13 points at halftime if not for some inaccurate 
goalkicking, with captain Taylor Walker among the worst culprits.


Port fought their way back into the game with brilliant onballer Robbie Gray 
kicking one of the goals of the round, fending off Adelaide’s Luke Brown and 
snapping truly from deep in the pocket to delight the 49,541 crowd.


Late goals to Jake Neade and captain Travis Boak (26 touches) brought the 
margin back to a point at three-quarter-time. But Adelaide’s potent forward 
line proved the difference in the final term, goals to Josh Jenkins, Mitch 
McGovern and Walker ensuring the Crows claimed hometown bragging rights.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10856877d49bddbd34c6296a77c902b0f0673b96%2F0_71_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20win%20Showdown%20as%20Betts%20brings%20up%20250%20AFL%20games%20with%20five%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20win%20Showdown%20as%20Betts%20brings%20up%20250%20AFL%20games%20with%20five%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10856877d49bddbd34c6296a77c902b0f0673b96%2F0_71_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Sam Naismith of the Swans and Todd Goldstein of the Kangaroos contest for the 
ball at Bellerive Oval. Photograph: Rob Blakers/AAP 
The Sydney Swans overcame an early injury worry for star forward Lance 
Franklin to post a nine-point AFL win overNorth Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-melbourne> in Hobart. The league’s 
second-placed Swans led at every break at Bellerive Oval and finished 12.13 
(85) to 10.16 (76) victors.

Franklin managed only one behind in the southern capital but was lucky to 
remain on the field after a first-term clash with Kangaroo Scott Thompson. The 
veteran defender’s elbow met Franklin’s hip and sent him from the ground. He 
returned for a short-lived comeback before again heading to the sheds holding 
his left hip.

Banned Essendon star Michael Hibberd asks Bombers to be traded
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/banned-essendon-star-michael-hibberd-asks-bombers-to-be-traded>
While all eyes were on Franklin, who returned rejuvenated for the start of the 
second quarter, his team-mates carried the Swans to the first break. Luke 
Parker dominated with 16 disposals and seemed largely unchecked as Sydney went 
to the first break with a two-goal credit.

The pace was at times frenetic, including an even third term that produced 
five goals for each side, but the Swans maintained the upper hand. Parker was 
instrumental for Sydney and finished with 31 disposals, while Jarrad McVeigh, 
Dan Hannebery and Gary Rohan scored two goals each, and Sam Naismith, who 
shared the centre with returning ruckman Kurt Tippett, recorded 26 hitouts.

North stalwart Brent Harvey booted three goals and two behinds with 32 
disposals, while Nick Dal Santo and Ben Brown kicked two majors each. Along 
with a bringing a further blow to the confidence of North Melbourne, who have 
won only two games in the past 10 rounds, Saturday’s game also cast further 
doubt over Thompson’s fitness. Returning from a groin complaint, he was again 
sidelined from the start of the second term and was seen holding ice on his 
groin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd419e35c9652d3bd1c142ff66df34e100199586e%2F0_0_3558_2372%2F3558.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20win%20Showdown%20as%20Betts%20brings%20up%20250%20AFL%20games%20with%20five%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20win%20Showdown%20as%20Betts%20brings%20up%20250%20AFL%20games%20with%20five%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd419e35c9652d3bd1c142ff66df34e100199586e%2F0_0_3558_2372%2F3558.jpg>
 Jonathon Patton celebrates one of his goals in the Giants’ win over the 
Dockers in Sydney. Photograph: Brett Hemmings/Getty Images 
A six-goal haul from Jonathon Patton helped Greater Western Sydney to a 
club-record 92-point home win over Fremantle and kept their hopes of a spot in 
the top four alive. The Giants kicked 13 straight goals and 16 out of 17 to 
take control of the game at Spotless Stadium on Saturday, and win 19.15 (129) 
to 5.7 (37) after the Dockers led by seven points in the first quarter.

The second half was a disaster for Freo, who were outscored 11.8 to 0.2. Key 
forward Patton, who played just 33 games in his first four seasons but has 
missed just one this year, doubled his previous best of three goals in a game. 
He kicked two in each of the last three quarters and boosted his tally for the 
year to 29, which beat his previous season best of 25 in 2014.

The winning margin was one point better than the Giants’ previous best of 91 
at the same venue against Gold Coast earlier this season. It was a handy 
percentage booster for GWS, while Freo slumped to their biggest loss of the 
season and their seventh straight defeat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e0ff1b2a08b32f92ff77c3f1ba5bafb0fe99a42%2F0_91_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20win%20Showdown%20as%20Betts%20brings%20up%20250%20AFL%20games%20with%20five%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20win%20Showdown%20as%20Betts%20brings%20up%20250%20AFL%20games%20with%20five%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e0ff1b2a08b32f92ff77c3f1ba5bafb0fe99a42%2F0_91_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 Paddy McCartin sustained another unfortunate injury during the Saints loss to 
Richmond. Photograph: Scott Barbour/Getty Images 
St Kilda fought off a late challenge by Richmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richmond> to record a nine-point win, but 
their joy has been tempered by another serious injury to luckless spearhead 
Paddy McCartin. The Tigers overcame a poor first half to outscore the Saints in 
the second, but Alan Richardson’s side did enough to scrap their way to a 7.13 
(55) to 6.10 (46) win on Saturday afternoon at the MCG.

McCartin’s troubled season is over after he suffered a broken collarbone in 
the first quarter. The 20-year-old received a free kick after crashing into the 
legs of Tigers defender Nick Vlastuin, then left the ground clutching his right 
shoulder after kicking his second goal.

In perfect conditions, the listless Tigers managed just two goals in the first 
half. The Saints went inside their forward 50 28 times to 12, but spurned 
several scoring opportunities and should have led by more than 21 points at 
half-time.

Richmond attacked the contest with greater vigour after the restart, but still 
trailed by 13 points at the last change. St Kilda didn’t manage a goal in the 
third term, but majors to Nick Riewoldt and Jack Billings were enough to seal 
the Saints’ 11th win of the season. With both sides out of finals contention, 
Richmond will finish their 2016 campaign against Sydney at the SCG andSt Kilda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/st-kilda> will travel to Brisbane.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aee6910dd102a683215bd0921aeb6e0fe11992d%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20win%20Showdown%20as%20Betts%20brings%20up%20250%20AFL%20games%20with%20five%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20win%20Showdown%20as%20Betts%20brings%20up%20250%20AFL%20games%20with%20five%20goals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fswans-maintain-upper-hand-over-kangaroos-in-frenetic-afl-match%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0aee6910dd102a683215bd0921aeb6e0fe11992d%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Brodie Grundy lets the ball slip through his fingers but Collingwood still 
beat Gold Coast by a comfortable margin. Photograph: Michael Dodge/Getty Images 
Gold Coast’s season of woe continued at Etihad Stadium when Sean Lemmens was 
knocked out in the Suns’ 71-point loss to Collingwood. The visitors were 
comprehensively outclassed in a match between sides guaranteed of missing the 
finals, surrendering 16.22 (118) to 6.11 (47) in front of a crowd of just 
17,644 – the lowest attendance at aCollingwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/collingwood> home game in more than 25 years.

Gold Coast youngster Lemmens was taken from the field on a stretcher following 
a second-quarter collision with Jesse White and Collingwood were also a man 
down during the second half after forward Darcy Moore appeared to tweak his 
troublesome hamstring.

White finished with 3.4 for the Magpies, who dominated from the outset thanks 
to classy midfielders Scott Pendlebury, Steele Sidebottom and Adam Treloar, who 
celebrated his 100th game with a match-high 38 possessions, six tackles, a goal 
and potentially three Brownlow votes.

Jermey Howe, who clutched a career-best 18 marks including a trademark 
screamer, Brodie Grundy, Josh Smith and Jack Crisp were also influential for 
Collingwood.
 