
It didn’t take long after Adelaide was announced as one of the Lonely Planet’s 
2014 top 10 places 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/travel/adelaide-and-the-kimberley-make-lonely-planets-top-10-lists-for-2014/story-fnjjuxvu-1226748545144>
 to visit that the jokes started rolling in. “Sure, it’s a nice place to visit, 
but no one actually wants to live there,” goes one well-worn refrain.

Adelaide can feel perpetually trapped in the shadow of its bigger counterparts 
in the eastern states. And sure, we’re not as beautiful and shiny as Sydney 
(although I don’t think you can take all the credit for that harbour), and I’ll 
give Melbourne the crown of cultural capital (they need something to distract 
from the grey and the rain). But Adelaide is my hometown, the city I love, and 
a city that should absolutely be on that list.

I defy anyone to convince me there is a better city in the world to be in 
duringFringe – the biggest arts festival in Australia, and the second biggest 
in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/mar/13/adelaide-festival-fringe>. 
Combine fringe with thefestival of arts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/adelaide-festival-2013>, both taking place 
in a city centre blocked in to just one square mile and you feel the energy 
here in your bones.

Festivals <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/festivals> as large as 
Adelaide's capture the best and the worst of art, but at the end of the day 
it’s my favourite season because of the people. At 2am when it’s still 25 
degrees we drink local wine and beer and sit on old wooden logs or milk crates 
in driveways between city buildings. We lie on the grass and look up at the 
stars – yes, you can see them from the city – and talk for hours with friends 
we’ve known for years, or known for hours.

In small cities like Adelaide you get people mixing in ways you don’t in big 
metropolises.The Wheatsheaf Hotel <http://wheatsheafhotel.com.au/> – or the 
Wheaty – in Thebarton is just as much home to the tradies as it is to the 
roller-derby girls and to the local musos. Audiences elsewhere are never as 
diverse as those you come across at theGarden of Unearthly Delights 
<http://www.gardenofunearthlydelights.com.au/> during Fringe.

Perhaps Adelaide is a city where we keep the best bits a little too close to 
our chest. Small city streets that appear to lead only to carparks surprise you 
with galleries and bars. It can be a city of house parties rather than nights 
out. People say you need to know a local to really find your way in, but that’s 
because it’s the locals that make the city what it is.

We all know it’s not a place without problems. I can’t remember how many 
goodbye parties I’ve been to, yet can count the friends who moved here on one 
hand. The council constantly strives towards an indefinable "vibrancy", while 
small venues and organisations drown in paperwork. In some strange way, though, 
I think the fight this puts in those who stay gives this city an impassioned 
energy lost on our bigger counterparts.

Even on the Lonely Planet list, I’m still going to get asked why I live here, 
and when I’m going to move. But at the end of the day, those who can’t see what 
Adelaide is offering are the ones who are missing out. Cities are made of their 
people; and Adelaide is made of some very fine people indeed.
 