
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> sit inside the AFL’s top 
four for the first time this season after dispatching Carlton by 60 points at 
the MCG. The Crows were tested early but pulled away from Brendon Bolton’s side 
to record a 16.11 (107) to 7.6 (47) win, Adelaide’s seventh-straight victory.

Bulldogs' Tom Liberatore given all-clear after spending night in hospital
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/10/bulldogs-tom-liberatore-given-all-clear-after-spending-night-in-hospital>
Back-to-back successes at the home of football for the first time since the 
Crows claimed the 1998 grand final has Adelaide fans dreaming, with good 
reason. It’s a stage Don Pyke’s side could be set for once more given their 
well-rounded midfield and incisive attack.

Rory Sloane was the game’s dominant midfielder, Rory Laird produced a damaging 
performance from half-back but Adelaide had contributors across the board. 
Former Blues pair Eddie Betts and Sam Jacobs both kicked three goals, as did 
Josh Jenkins. The Crows led all day but it was not until late in the second 
quarter that they kicked clear.

Carlton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/carlton> found an early route to 
goal outside the 50m arc through fit-again utility Dennis Armfield, who tallied 
the Blues’ entire quarter-time score with three long bomb set shots from 
outside 50. He would finish with a career-high four goals but none were cheered 
as roundly as Jack Silvagni’s first AFL goal, in his second match.

Unfortunately for Carlton, their challenge fell away in the second term after 
Armfield’s fourth goal, with frustrated Blues forward Levi Casboult reported 
for a gut punch on Kyle Hartigan.

The Crows blanketed the young Blues and tallied nine of the last 10 goals on 
their way to a percentage-boosting victory. When David Mackay dribbled a late 
goal home, Adelaide had a score in triple figures for the seventh-straight 
week, showing their attacking prowess despite rain that set in at half-time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fadelaide-hit-afl-heights-after-casting-aside-carlton-challenge-at-mcg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc30517b19f030035be9b605d2d4d8aed22864a8%2F0_0_2836_1665%2F2836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20hit%20AFL%20heights%20after%20casting%20aside%20Carlton%20challenge%20at%20MCG&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fadelaide-hit-afl-heights-after-casting-aside-carlton-challenge-at-mcg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20hit%20AFL%20heights%20after%20casting%20aside%20Carlton%20challenge%20at%20MCG&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fadelaide-hit-afl-heights-after-casting-aside-carlton-challenge-at-mcg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc30517b19f030035be9b605d2d4d8aed22864a8%2F0_0_2836_1665%2F2836.jpg>
 The Eagles’ win over the Kangaroos featured several spiteful moments. 
Photograph: Tony Mcdonough/AAP 
West Coast gave their top-four hopes an almighty boost with a 32-point win over
North Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/north-melbourne> in a 
spiteful clash at Domain Stadium later on Sunday. Eagles forward Josh Kennedy 
booted four goals in the 16.8 (104) to 11.6 (72) win, with the victory ending 
West Coast’s losing run against top-eight sides this season.

The result saw West Coast (10-5) jump from eighth up to fifth, leaving them 
just one win adrift of second spot. The Kangaroos (10-5) were on top of the 
ladder after starting their season with nine straight wins but five losses from 
their past six games have seen them plummet to eighth.

Eagles ruckman Scott Lycett could come under strife for his head-high bump on 
Jack Ziebell in a match that featured several spiteful moments. North Melbourne 
gave away four goals from 50m penalties in an undisciplined display, and they 
lost Farren Ray (hamstring) to injury before half-time. Forward Mason Wood 
injured his knee in the third term while making a tackle, and star veteran Nick 
Dal Santo (illness) was forced out before the match.

North Melbourne ruckman Todd Goldstein tallied 65 hit-outs for the match, but 
West Coast only marginally lost the clearance battle (46-41). The Kangaroos won 
the inside-50m count 14-5 in the opening term, but West Coast made the most of 
their limited chances to open up a seven-point lead.

The second quarter was a rugged affair as the game finally lived up to its 
billing. Eagles utility Patrick McGinnity infuriated Kangaroos players when he 
bumped Sam Gibson into the fence. And West Coast players got stuck into Jack 
Ziebell after he gave Elliot Yeo a whack on the head just after the Eagle had 
marked it.

Both incidents resulted in goals but the dumbest moment of the term belonged 
to Kangaroos midfielder Trent Dumont, who gave away a 50m penalty when he threw 
the ball to a team-mate instead of Lycett after the Eagles ruckman was paid a 
free kick.

West Coast kicked away in the third quarter, opening up a 33-point lead by the 
final change before cruising to victory, and they will start favourites in 
upcoming games against Carlton (MCG), Melbourne, Collingwood (MCG) and 
Fremantle. But the last three rounds will determine their top-four hopes when 
they confront GWS (Spotless Stadium), Hawthorn, and the Crows (Adelaide Oval).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fadelaide-hit-afl-heights-after-casting-aside-carlton-challenge-at-mcg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e70ac577bf64c2f1d4126966b952d8dd064fc9%2F0_0_4273_2908%2F4273.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Adelaide%20hit%20AFL%20heights%20after%20casting%20aside%20Carlton%20challenge%20at%20MCG&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fadelaide-hit-afl-heights-after-casting-aside-carlton-challenge-at-mcg%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Adelaide%20hit%20AFL%20heights%20after%20casting%20aside%20Carlton%20challenge%20at%20MCG&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjul%2F10%2Fadelaide-hit-afl-heights-after-casting-aside-carlton-challenge-at-mcg%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91e70ac577bf64c2f1d4126966b952d8dd064fc9%2F0_0_4273_2908%2F4273.jpg>
 Joe Daniher leaps to take a mark but Essendon fell to defeat to St Kilda in 
the late game on Sunday. Photograph: Julian Smith/AAP 
St Kilda survived a huge scare from Essendon, escaping with a thrilling 
11-point win at Etihad Stadium. For long periods the Saints had the air of a 
side that just expected things to happen for them against the 
suspension-ravaged, bottom-placed Bombers. But John Worsfold’s side had all the 
momentum when they led by seven points midway through the final term before 
Maverick Weller stepped up with two late goals asSt Kilda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/st-kilda> broke Bomber hearts with a 17.7 
(109) to 14.14 (98) win.

Essendon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> trailed by nine points 
heading into the final term but appeared destined to snap their 12-game losing 
streak when Zach Merrett goaled in the 17th minute to extend their lead to 
seven points.

It had been all the Bombers to that point of the quarter, with Joe Daniher 
bringing the crowd to their feet with a soaring mark and Mitch Brown booting a 
brilliant goal in traffic to level the scores. But the Saints shook off their 
lethargy to finish the stronger side in front of 25,204 fans.

But make no mistake, Alan Richardson’s side got out of jail. Essendon blitzed 
the Saints from the opening bounce – they led the inside 50 count 11-0 at one 
stage – but managed just 1.2 for all their dominance.

St Kilda eventually found second gear to lead by two goals at the first break, 
but they struggled to pull away from the gritty Bombers. Merrett gathered 19 of 
his 36 possessions in the first half as his side trailed by just 10 points at 
half-time.

Tim Membrey kept St Kilda in it with four of his five goals coming in the 
second half, while Jack Steven was enormous with 41 possessions and 12 
clearances. Adam Cooney, Brendon Goddard and James Kelly were mainstays for 
Essendon but they had plenty of help with Anthony McDonald-Tipungwuti, Darcy 
Parish and Daniher among the younger players to chip in.
 