
6.53am GMT 

That's all from Adelaide festival this Saturday

Do come back for more action tomorrow, when we’ll be discussing the epic scale 
of many of the works here in Adelaide, hearing more from Womadelaide and 
Unsound, and reviewing the Seagull and Sadeh21 among other things.

But first a round-up of today’s content from Adelaide.

 * • Alex Needham considered what Matthew Barney’s River of Fundament was 
really all about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/matthew-barneys-river-of-fundament-what-was-that-all-about-then>

 * We reviewed a huge night at Unsound: Lee Gamble, Cut Hands, Morton 
Subotnick and Nurse With Wound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/unsound-lee-gamble-cut-hands-morton-subotnick-nurse-with-wound-review?view=desktop>

 * Alfred Hickling gave us a taste of Womadelaide, reviewing Hanggai and Neko 
Case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/womadelaide-hanggai-and-neko-case-review>

 * We talked to Christos Tsiolkas on our first festival podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/08/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-one>

 * Alicia Canter gave us this gorgeous set of pictures from Womadelaide. 
(Don’t you just want to be there?) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2014/mar/08/womadelaide-adelaide-festival-2014>

 * Jana Perkovic interviewed Batsheva choreographer Ohad Naharin  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/ohad-naharin-going-gaga-is-the-difference-between-dancer-and-gymnast?view=desktop>

 * We reviewed Stone/Castro’s Blackout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/blackout-stonecastro-adelaide-festival-review?view=desktop>

 * Bill Code made an video with Morton Subotnick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2014/mar/08/morton-subotnic-electronic-music-pioneer-video>

 * Jane Howard brought us all the news from the Fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/jane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-street-theatre-festival-a-special-day-kraken?view=desktop>

 * And she reviewed Bitch Boxer at Holden Street Theatres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/bitch-boxer-review-one-woman-show-delivers-emotional-punch>

• Guardian Australia travelled to and stayed in Adelaide courtesy of the 
Adelaide festival. Flights from the UK were provided by Emirates 
<http://www.emirates.com/>.

6.42am GMT 

Review: Bitch Boxer – this one woman show delivers some punch
 Bitch Boxer Photograph: Alex Brenner/Adelaide Fringe 
I know I promised you a Wil Anderson review, but I’m afraid we’re defeated by 
time today – in a moment I’ll be skipping off to record a podcast, and then to 
review Windmill Theatre’s festival trilogy which I’m very much looking forward 
to. So I’ll post my review of Anderson’s show tomorrow.

In the meantime, Jane has one more dispatch from Fringe for the day – a review 
of Bitch Boxer at Holden Street Theatres, the tale of a would-be female boxer 
fighting against the horrors life throws up. Youcan read Jane’s four-star 
review here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/bitch-boxer-review-one-woman-show-delivers-emotional-punch>
. Here’s an extract.

Built around Chloe’s physical approach to the world as a boxer, Holly 
Augustine’s performance is filled with energy. Director Bryony Shanahan has 
Augustine claim the stage absolutely, filling it with her body and her voice as 
she leaps and tells us of her escapades to get into her locked house.

Then the news of her father hits, and Chloe appears a smaller woman. Josephine 
plays with contrasts in energy throughout the script, and constantly toys with 
the disconnect between Chloe’s true emotions and those she allows us to see.

6.29am GMT 

Jane Howard's Fringe diary: Street Theatre festival, A Special Day, Kraken
 Hula Hoop artist Lisa Lottie performs in Rundle Street as part of the 
Adelaide Fringe Street Theatre festival. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian 
She’s one woman trying to make sense of over 900 shows and more tents than a 
Scouting jamboree. And – what’s more – succeeding. Here’sthe second instalment 
from Jane’s festival diary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/jane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-street-theatre-festival-a-special-day-kraken?view=desktop>
, in which she whizzes around Adelaide, sitting on uncomfortable seats in 
makeshift venues, in an effort to help you negotiate the programme.

• The Street Theatre festival 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/free-events/fringe-street-theatre-festival>
 kicked off yesterday, managing to pull massive crowds even on a Friday, 
slowing pedestrian traffic in Rundle Mall down to single file around the 
crowds. I first caught theLittle Red Trapeze Company 
<http://www.littleredtrapeze.com/>on their purpose-built trapeze rig, swinging 
over the delighted gasps of the crowd – they surely have the best sightlines 
you’re going to find this weekend. I only managed to see the tail end of the 
Pitts Family Circus, in which a boy about seven was pulled out of a suitcase 
and then became part of the act. It wasn’t long before his two-year-old sister 
was on stage, too.

• Away from the crowds of the city at Holden Street Theatres in Hindmarsh, I 
sawA Special Day  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/a-special-day/a5ec4941-cbc2-4510-86d5-d6b4dd97ac79>
from US’s the Play Company and Mexico’s Por Piedad Teatro. A stage version of 
the 1977Italian film by the same name 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0076085/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1>,  
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0076085/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1>the production embraces 
theatricality – the two cast members provide sound effects and supplementary 
voices, and the set is developed throughout the production with chalk drawings 
– but it never feels like anything more than a theatrical experiment where the 
text could be easily replaced. It doesn’t feel as if there’s a reason for this 
story to be onstage: its plot is insubstantial, meandering and dated, and the 
two characters are neither likable nor interesting.

• My experience of Kraken  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/kraken/c3740efd-8202-4244-bc6a-4748a71476ba>
was almost certainly different from the experience you will have. This is a 
work-in-progress from Trygve Wakenshaw, better known asSquidboy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/21/fringe-world-festival-2014-theatre>
,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/21/fringe-world-festival-2014-theatre>
and I don’t even have any idea of what sort of a work he is progressing 
towards. If there was a through-line – or anything to do with the kraken – I 
missed it completely, but we all laughed uproariously at 45 minutes of 
clowning, with the occasional audience punctuation of “what?!” and “really?!” I 
don’t know if the characters were exactly likable (I was “stabbed” in the 
forehead, getting off a lot lighter than most) but they are certainly 
interesting.

Updated at 7.10am GMT

6.10am GMT 

It's perfect weather for Womadelaide

Which makes me only sadder that I am indoors writing about it, rather than in 
a park experiencing it. On the upside, I did get to have a lunchtime dash with 
Alex Needham round Adelaide’s amazing Central Market – our haul included decent 
sushi, fruit supplies, and gelato for good behaviour on the way back. Adelaide 
dwellers, I am very, very jealous of this market. Although I did overhear a 
lady at the art gallery yesterday talking about how she and her partner had 
eaten $40 of cheese in one evening after an overzealous visit to its halls. 
Which I fear would be far too regular an event if I had unfettered access to it.

Anyway, the rest of Guardian Australia’s team are out in the Womadelaide 
sunshine. And video producer Bill Code has been very much enjoying Osaka 
Monaurail
Bill Code (@billcode) 
#Womadelaide <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Womadelaide&src=hash> is loving 
Osaka monaurail and their soul machine front manpic.twitter.com/fdcpskDfz3 
<http://t.co/fdcpskDfz3>
 <https://twitter.com/billcode/statuses/442178231689416704> March 8, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/billcode/statuses/442178231689416704> 
Updated at 6.17am GMT

5.59am GMT 

Review: Stone/Castro's Blackout
 Blackout - Adelaide festival. Photograph: rodeo.com 
Jana Perkovic has been considering the lack of physical theatre work being 
made in Australia. Stone/Castro – Jo Stone and Paulo Castro – are among the few 
practitioners creating work here, she says. So Jana was interested to see the 
duo’s new work, Blackout. Youcan read her full review of the piece here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/blackout-stonecastro-adelaide-festival-review?view=desktop>
. I’m intrigued by the premise: a group of people celebrating a wedding 
together on a boat. Seemingly happy until it becomes very clear that they are 
not.

Jana has lots of praise for Castro’s script – which is pretty unusual for this 
kind of work – but is less sure whether the audience entirely connected with 
it. Her review is nuanced and interesting, and here’s a taster of it.

The expressive possibilities of physical theatre are well deployed. 
Above-the-table visible interaction is expressed through language, with all its 
potential for understatement and deceit. Dance sequences are visceral 
expressions of characters’ emotional states, often abruptly interrupting the 
proceedings.

The contrast is often devastating: a particular early sequence, in which the 
groom, his best man and the bride’s sister perform a synchronised dance of 
sadness, while singing The Power of Love and speaking only in formalities, had 
me in tears. But I’m not sure that the audience as a whole connected with 
emotional timbre of the work. Perhaps the humour was too dark, the violence too 
bleak.

Updated at 2.48am GMT

5.36am GMT 

Video: Morton Subotnick on electronic music and Unsound
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F08%2Fmorton-subotnic-electronic-music-pioneer-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F8%2F1394245764791%2FMorton-Subotnick-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unsound%20Adelaide%20%E2%80%93%20Morton%20Subotnick%3A%20electronic%20music%E2%80%99s%20elder%20statesman%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F08%2Fmorton-subotnic-electronic-music-pioneer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unsound%20Adelaide%20%E2%80%93%20Morton%20Subotnick%3A%20electronic%20music%E2%80%99s%20elder%20statesman%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F08%2Fmorton-subotnic-electronic-music-pioneer-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F8%2F1394245764791%2FMorton-Subotnick-001.jpg>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F08%2Fmorton-subotnic-electronic-music-pioneer-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F8%2F1394245764791%2FMorton-Subotnick-001.jpg>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Unsound%20Adelaide%20%E2%80%93%20Morton%20Subotnick%3A%20electronic%20music%E2%80%99s%20elder%20statesman%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F08%2Fmorton-subotnic-electronic-music-pioneer-video>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Unsound%20Adelaide%20%E2%80%93%20Morton%20Subotnick%3A%20electronic%20music%E2%80%99s%20elder%20statesman%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmar%2F08%2Fmorton-subotnic-electronic-music-pioneer-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F8%2F1394245764791%2FMorton-Subotnick-001.jpg>
close 
5.27am GMT 

Ohad Naharin: 'Going Gaga is the difference between dancer and gymnast'
 Sadeh 21 Photograph: Tony Lewis/Adelaide festival 
Jana Perkovic has been talking to the brilliant Batsheva choreographer Ohad 
Naharin. His company are here at Adelaide festival with Sadeh21, which I saw a 
couple of weeks ago in Perth – and had a really interesting, quite emotional 
reaction to. It took me a while to process the performance, which is both 
challenging and playful, funny and quite emotionally confronting.

Jana will be reviewing that for us tonight, but in the meantime, she’s been 
talking to Ohad about the way he works, and his movement philosophy Gaga. You
can read the interview in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/ohad-naharin-going-gaga-is-the-difference-between-dancer-and-gymnast?view=desktop>
– well worth it if you’re interested in movement. And here’s a quick snippet to 
whet your appetite.

Gaga is what creates the difference between a dancer and a gymnast or athlete, 
the choreographer argues. “Sometimes you can see them doing amazing things, but 
you don’t feel that they’re listening to their bodies, you feel that they’re 
telling them.” Naharin looks to the example of animals when it comes to 
demonstrating letting go. “The way a resting cat will get into motion – it has 
a collapse-dependent quality of movement, without which it becomes locked, 
blocked and stiff.” Hearing Batsheva dancers talk about Gaga, one is struck by 
the repetition of terms such as joy, pleasure, healing properties.

3.06am GMT 

In pictures: Womadelaide looks amazing!

Guardian Australia’s Alicia Canter has been out at Womadelaide, and sent back 
these fantastic pictures. Youcan find more of them here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2014/mar/08/womadelaide-adelaide-festival-2014>
, in a lovely big gallery, and here’s a few below
 Spanish singer Concha Buika plays Womadelaide 2014. Photograph: Alicia Canter 
for the Guardian  The crowd watches Buika. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian  Hanggai play Womadelaide 2014. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian  Amie, 19 and Brenna, 20, both from Adelaide. Photograph: Alicia 
Canter for the Guardian 
Updated at 2.49am GMT

2.35am GMT 

Womadelaide: Hanggai and Neko Case

Womadelaide kicked off yesterday, with three more days of music from all parts 
of the world to come. Last night Alfred Hickling watched Hanggai and Neko Case, 
both of whom seemed to go down a storm with the assembled crowd. You canread 
his review in full here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/womadelaide-hanggai-and-neko-case-review>
 – including Neko Case’s gorgeous reaction to her fellow performers – or here’s 
a taster for you below.

Every first evening at Womad has its transformative moment – that defining 
point at which a general dispersal of picnickers is suddenly galvanised into a 
mob of open-mouthed onlookers undergoing a collective WTF? experience. This 
year the epiphany belonged toHanggai <http://www.rockinchina.com/w/HangGai>, 
the six-piece Mongolian metal outfit who engendered a passion for traditional 
throat singing that probably few knew they possessed.

It was great to see Case back on stage after a difficult few years following 
the death of her parents, says Alfred – and playing an album that is one of her 
strongest yet.

The haunting Nothing to Remember elicits perhaps the strongest reaction – its 
inclusion on theHunger Games soundtrack 
<http://www.hggirlonfire.com/2013/09/03/neko-case-opens-up-about-her-involvement-in-the-hunger-games-soundtrack-and-what-it-meant-to-her/%20>
 has made it possibly Case’s most widely-heard tune. Her fine, remarkably 
hirsute band features the impressive versatility ofJon Rauhouse 
<http://www.jonrauhouse.com/tag/neko-case/> on lap steel, guitar, banjo and a 
green trombone; though the long lay-off from the road occasionally becomes 
apparent.

2.26am GMT 

Podcast: episode one
 Christos Tsiolkas, author of The Slap, at Adelaide festival Writers' Week 
2014. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
The first instalment of our festival podcast is now available for your 
listening pleasure. You can hear Alex, Alfred, Jane and I discuss the shows 
we’ve been seeing in Adelaide, listen to festival director David Sefton talk 
about his favourite festival moments, and hear an interview with the author 
Christos Tsiolkas, who considers the subject of drugs and writing.

Listen to the podcast here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2014/mar/08/adelaide-festival-podcast-episode-one>
 – orsubscribe to it via iTunes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/au/podcast/guardian-australia-culture/id796931454?mt=2>


Updated at 7.09am GMT

2.00am GMT 

Review: Unsound – an extraordinary festival within a festival
 American electronic music composer Morton Subotnick plays at Unsound on in 
Queen's Theatre. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Unsound, Adelaide festival’s mini-festival of electronic music 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2014/music/unsound_adelaide>, kicked off 
with Snowtown Live on Thursday, and last night had a line-up that included Lee 
Gamble, Cut Hands, Morton Subotnick and headliners Nurse With Wound. (According 
to Alex Needham, their 1984 single was calledBrained by Falling Masonry 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q78XFkQOqds>).

To say experimental, electronic music is my blind spot would not really be 
doing justice to my ignorance in this area – so I’ll leave it to Alex to do the 
talking on this one. He had a brilliant night out, calling the gig “another 
vindication of this extraordinary festival-within-a-festival”. You canread his 
full, four-star review here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/08/unsound-lee-gamble-cut-hands-morton-subotnick-nurse-with-wound-review?view=desktop>
. Here’s a snippet:
 Morton Subotnick snubs laptops for something more experiemental. Photograph: 
Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Last year, Adelaide festival’s electronic music strand Unsound 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/music/unsound_adelaide> caused a 
sensation by bringing the heaviest, loudest and weirdest elements of the avant 
garde to South Australia. People from as far away as Perth flocked to see the 
likes ofBen Frost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/mar/17/unsound-adelaide-lustmord-pole-ben-frost>
 andHype Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/16/unsound-adelaide-actress-hype-williams>
 reduce the venerable Queen’s theatre, the first playhouse built in mainland 
Australia, to a shuddering mass of smoke and strobes. It was a total triumph, 
achieved against the odds, and this year it’s enjoying a victory lap.

Updated at 2.49am GMT

1.24am GMT 

Matthew Barney's River of Fundament: what was that all about then?
 Auto trader ... a still from River of Fundament. Hugo Glendinning/Gladstone 
Gallery 
Matthew Barney’s operatic film – like many other events at Adelaide festival, 
an epic event – has drawn some quite diverse reactions. Alex Needham’s been 
rounding them up. It’s a fascinating read: there’s outrage, of course, 
alongside thoughts on gender,and comparisons to the Lego Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/03/river-fundament-review-adelaide-festival>
. You canfind the article here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/matthew-barneys-river-of-fundament-what-was-that-all-about-then>
. (It also, of course, has the bonus of making you seem very informed on a very 
hot topic). And here’s a quick taste of it.

The Hollywood Reporter’s review detailed with some relish 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/review/river-fundament-film-review-680640> 
scenes that include people defecating, a close-up of an anus being licked and a 
snogging session between two pregnant women that culminates in one removing her 
glass eye and sticking it up the other one’s bottom. (The recipient is a woman 
called Bobbi Starr, who according to Barney is “a classical oboist. And one of 
the most famous anal actresses in the adult film business.” So now you know.)

However, others who have seen the film say that these are brief moments in a 
massively long work, and not indicative of its tone as a whole. Despite the 
extremity of the concept (and content), Barney has certainly amassed a starry 
cast, who are perhaps aiming for art-world immortality alongside their 
literary, viral or Hollywood fame.

12.36am GMT 

Last night's Twitter reviews

We’ll have reviews for you today from Unsound, Womadelaide and Fringe, plus 
thoughts on Blackout and Wil Anderson’s new show. But first, here’s what other 
people made of last night’s offerings
Andrew Coulson (@andrewecoulson) 
First #womadelaide <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23womadelaide&src=hash> 
experience = seeing a man with a big tuba jump around the stage and see a 
security guard paid $30 to sing#Adelaide 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Adelaide&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/andrewecoulson/statuses/441906804880982016> March 7, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/andrewecoulson/statuses/441906804880982016> Adrian Bennett
(@AdrianBennay) 
Morton Subotnick live was entirely astounding. A highlight of Unsound part of 
@adelaidefest <https://twitter.com/adelaidefest>. So very special & an honour! 
Old bah!#AdlFest <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23AdlFest&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/AdrianBennay/statuses/441909970808733696> March 7, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/AdrianBennay/statuses/441909970808733696> nick schultz 
(@nschultz) 
@NekoCase <https://twitter.com/NekoCase> + band, thanks for an awesome show at 
#womadelaide <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23womadelaide&src=hash> 60 minutes 
was waaaay too short
 <https://twitter.com/nschultz/statuses/441934076283330560> March 7, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/nschultz/statuses/441934076283330560> Fontella Koleff 
(@FontellaKoleff) 
Wonderful night last night @adelaidefest <https://twitter.com/adelaidefest> 
with An Iliad. Just brilliant! The most amazing piece of theatre.#AdlFest 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23AdlFest&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/FontellaKoleff/statuses/442028041183580161> March 7, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/FontellaKoleff/statuses/442028041183580161> 
12.29am GMT 

Welcome to Saturday's live coverage of Adelaide festival

We have a busy liveblog in store, with reviews, features, audio, video and 
pictures to come. I’m Vicky Frost and will be with you on the liveblog all day 
– but first, take a moment to catch-up with all our coverage yesterday.

 * Friday March 7 – as it happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/adelaide-festival-2014-friday-7-march-live>
 * Alfred Hickling considered the likely highlights of this weekend’s 
Womadelaide festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/womadelaide-2014-preview-a-celebration-of-the-worlds-diversity?view=desktop>

 * Alex Needham thrilled to John Waters’ ready wit at his outrageous 
autobiographical show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/adelaide-festival-john-waters-review?view=desktop>

 * We showed you the full technicolor glory of Writers’ Week with these lovely 
pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/gallery/2014/mar/07/adelaide-festival-2014-writers-week-pictures>

 * We reviewed Snowtown Live from Adelaide Town Hall 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/snowtown-live-review-soundtrack-synonymous-death>

 * Morton Subotnick discussed synths, drugs and iPad apps with us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/morton-subotnick-silver-apples-of-moon>

 * What to see at Fringe? We gave you our top 10 shows to see in the next 
couple of weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/adelaide-fringe-festival-2014-10-shows-not-to-miss>

 * We bought you video from the Adelaide Biennial of Australian Art, as 
curator Lisa Slade discusses the Kulata Tjuta Project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2014/mar/07/favourite-work-kulata-juta-lisa-slade-adelaide-biennial-video>
 * Jane Howard brought us her first Fringe festival diary from the 
genteel(ish) environs of the Royal Croquet Club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/07/adelaide-fringe-2014-jane-howards-diary-friday-march-7> 