
The big guns are back this autumn. Every year, this is the time when the major 
labels release their most important records, but 2014 sees a pile-up of A-list 
talent as a series of major artists make their returns.Pink Floyd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pinkfloyd>, presumed lost in action 
following the death of Richard Wright in 2008, will re-emerge with their cosmic 
grandeur; Adele – saviour of the music industry with her last album – will 
excite both the record-buying public and the executives, if she can get her 
album out before Christmas. Those long-rumoured Prince albums finally get a 
release. And there lurks the faint hope that one of pop’s most unpredictable 
talents – someone who has thrilled both critics and punters – might finally 
follow-up one of the most memorable albums of the 90s. It is, truly, the season 
of the comeback.

The most anticipated returnee is Adele, whose last record, 21, was the world’s 
biggest selling album of both 2011 and 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/album/e4174758-d333-4a8e-a31f-dd0edd51518e>. 
Her new album – which pretty mucheveryone in the world is certain will be 
called 25 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2014/jul/18/adele-new-album-what-we-know-so-far>
 – has been tipped to be released in November, though it may be held back to 
the new year, when there’s no competition in the charts. But given she’s 
apparently now happy and contented, and has devoted much of the past 18 months 
to motherhood, will her new songs capture the public imagination the way the 
heartbroken laments of 21 did? “I’ve been out of the loop, really,” she told
Rolling Stone in 2013 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/adele-ive-been-singing-nursery-rhymes-20130210>
. “I’ve just been singing my baby nursery rhymes, so I don’t really know what’s 
cool and what’s not.”

We know, though, that she almost certainly hasn’t made an album that will 
stray far from the very middle of the road, given that among her handpicked 
collaborators are Phil Collins and OneRepublic’s Ryan Tedder.

At the older end of the scale, this month sees three very different artists of 
huge reputation returning. On 22 September, Aphex Twin releasesSyro, his first 
album for 13 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/aug/18/aphex-twin-announces-new-album-syro-via-the-deep-web>
, with the big question being whether he can still be ahead of the curve after 
such a long absence, or whether these days he’ll sound like one of his 
imitators. For those who prefer actual songs, with melodies and lyrics, Leonard 
Cohen’s Popular Problems comes out the same day, continuing one of the few 
great career renaissances to have been necessitated by being robbed blind by 
one’s manager. Don’t expect a wild change of tack from Cohen, who turns 80 the 
day before the album comes out – Popular Problems is as laconic and gravelly as 
ever. A week later, Prince comes back with not one but two new albums, 
capitalising onthe wild excitement caused by his return to Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/18/prince-review-manchester-arena> 
earlier this year – one solo album and one with his new band 3rdEyeGirl.

Two of classic rock’s big beasts rejoin the fray, albeit both with only half 
their core members remaining. Pink Floyd – we learned from theTwitter account 
of Polly Samson, David Gilmour’s wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jul/07/pink-floyd-new-album-2014-the-endless-river>
 – will be unveiling their first studio album in 20 years, The Endless River. 
However, given its origins as a side-project to The Division Bell, arguably the 
least essential Floyd album of all, this may not be quite the event fans will 
be hoping for from Gilmour and drummer Nick Mason. Meanwhile, the Who promised 
earlier this summer that they were starting work on their first album since 
2006’s Endless Wire, and only their second since 1982. Even if that doesn’t 
emerge this year, there’s the prospect of Pete Townshend and Roger Daltrey 
taking to the road for a 50th anniversary. And while it may be easy to sneer, 
the Who remain a surprisingly compelling live spectacle.

And what of the mavericks? We can be certain that the autumn will bring more 
surprise releases, the surprise release having become as grimly predictable a 
marketing tool for superstar acts as the megabudget video was in the 1980s. You 
may wish to place money onRadiohead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/radiohead> being among those springing new 
music upon the world with no notice, given the rumblings along the group’s 
tectonic plates. At the start of September their PolyFauna app was updated to 
include the group’s first new music for three years, and – rather more 
obviously signalling their intent – Jonny Greenwood promised the quintet would 
be regrouping at the end of the summer.

But to hip-hop and R&B lovers, the most enticing prospect would be new music 
from Lauryn Hill. The former Fugees singer signed to Sony in 2013, but there’s 
been no sign of a followup to her only solo album so far, 1998’s The 
Miseducation of Lauryn Hill. But she has returned to the public eye – although 
she couldn’t really avoid a certain amount of attention, given she was 
imprisoned for three months last year for tax evasion. Immediately before her 
incarceration she released one new single, with another following during her 
time in jail. This summer, she put outa sketch of a song on SoundCloud 
<https://soundcloud.com/mslaurynhill/black-rage-sketch> – but still there’s no 
album. Could this autumn see one emerge? And might the fact Hill is touring – 
including four UK dates in September – be a clue to her intentions? It’s worth 
hoping so, if not putting your house on.
 