
My parents suck

From an anonymous male, age 16
Dear Carole, I'm sorry to have to say this but my parents suck BIG TIME. They 
want to run every part of my life – how much time I spend online, who I bring 
home (no girls!!!), smoking, the kind of clubs I go to, when I get up in the 
morning etc etc etc. The really sad thing is my Mum even thinks she has the 
right to criticise the clothes I wear and how I choose to have my hair. They 
are so completely out of touch and treat me as if I was still a child. If I had 
the money I'd be out the door like a flash, but I'm stuck with them at least 
until I finish my A levels and get a job. I feel like a prisoner. Is there any 
way I can persuade them to back off a bit and let me live my life the way I 
want to live it? I bet chimps never have these kind of problems.
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies:
At 16 you are still developing, which is why your parents remain protective of 
you. The adolescent period of our development is peculiar to the human ape. At 
around 10 years of age chimps jump straight from the juvenile stage to young 
adulthood. They do not experience the respite from societal responsibility that 
human teenagers like you have been granted.

By your age an intelligent and fit male chimp could have postured, competed, 
schemed and fought hard to have become his community's Alpha male, fathering 
many infants along the way. Human teenagers, by contrast, are biological 
mosaics of physical maturation and psychosocial immaturity.

The maturing of the brain's prefrontal cortex – which is implicated in the 
development of higher cognitive processes, emotional intelligence, 
decision-making, troubleshooting, negotiating novelty, resisting temptation and 
surviving danger –continues beyond adolescence and is completed only in early 
adulthood 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=PublicationURL&_tockey=%23TOC%234949%232006%23999829998%23614507%23FLA%23&_cdi=4949&_pubType=J&view=c&_auth=y&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=62322afaeda5a8955bac5fd8cefebbc1>
. The teenage inclination to experiment with drink and drugs can impact 
negatively on this crucial period of cognitive development.

As for girls, delaying your first sexual experiences is actually no bad thing 
in evolutionary terms. You may be saving yourself a whole load of hassle and 
even physical danger from older, stronger, more experienced rival males.

Even your acne may be conspiring to protect you from this fate, at least 
according to one evolutionary psychologist. Many teenage lads suffer from spots 
and this coincides with the development of their prefrontal cortex. Females can 
be turned off by spots, andyour spotty teenage ancestors may have survived to 
reach physical maturity because of their acne 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14975524>. 

Here's how the theory works.

Adolescent males, in spite of their sex drive, have yet to develop their full 
muscle tone or reach their full height. Males compete over females and 
adolescent lads are easily beaten or killed by jealous, mature men in a fight. 
Keeping away from fertile females may have saved the lives of your pimply 
teenage ancestors, giving them enough time to develop both their prefrontal 
cortex and their biceps. Those pimples may also have saved females from mating 
with immature males ill prepared for parenthood and provisioning potential 
offspring.

So believe it or not, acne may increase your reproductive fitness by keeping 
you out of trouble while you're still developing.

Goofing about

In the same way your mother has been taking an interest in your behaviour and 
wants you to learn from example, so chimp mothers teach their offspring 
cultural and social skills. Studies suggest thatmother chimps find their 
daughters easier to teach then their distracted sons 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v428/n6984/full/428715a.html>. Juvenile 
female chimps will sit and learn the intricacies of termite fishing from their 
mothers whereas their brothers would rather wrestle with other young males and 
goof around in the trees.

This isn't time wasted. The male-male competitive life of the adult chimp can 
be a matter of life and death, so this play fighting and male bonding may well 
prepare male chimps for the real thing.

Perhaps you should take a leaf out of your chimp cousins' book. Why not kick 
back with the other lads during your teenage years and take up wrestling or a 
competitive team sport, rather than attempting to be an alcohol-drinking, 
cigarette-smoking, sexually active adult before your time? You need to hone 
your ability to troubleshoot and survive danger, not compromise it.

You ask how you can persuade your parents back off and let you live your life 
how you want to live it. A little subtle appliance of science may do the trick.

The adolescent growth spurt many male teenagers experience happens while you 
sleep. So you could let your mum know that at weekends you need a good lie-in 
to grow and develop optimally.

You could also compliment her by letting her know you are aware that because 
she is an adult ape, she is wiser than you on the subject of cultural mores and 
social acceptability and is trying to teach you accordingly. You should add 
that, nonetheless, you want to express your developing personality through your 
choice of fashion and hairstyles.

Your parents want to protect you so that you survive this vulnerable 
adolescent period the best way you can. From your description, their protective 
behaviour, although annoying and stifling, is within the normal range. You and 
they need to understand the evolutionary programming that is motivating you 
both, and then try to give each other a break.

Goodall, J (1986) The Chimpanzees of Gombe, Harvard University Press.
Gluckman, PD, Hanson, MA (2006) Evolution, development and timing of puberty.  
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=PublicationURL&_tockey=%23TOC%234949%232006%23999829998%23614507%23FLA%23&_cdi=4949&_pubType=J&view=c&_auth=y&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=62322afaeda5a8955bac5fd8cefebbc1>
Trends in Endocrinology & Metabolism; 17(1): 7-12.
Bloom, DF (2004) Is acne really a disease?: a theory of acne as an 
evolutionarily significant, high-order psychoneuroimmune interaction timed to 
cortical development with a crucial role in mate choice. 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14975524> Medical Hypotheses; 62(3): 
462-469.
Lonsdorf, EV et al (2004) Sex differences in learning in chimpanzees.  
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v428/n6984/full/428715a.html>Nature; 428: 
715-716.
 