
There is a curious tension in the current agency landscape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/agencies> – a vast mismatch between 
what clients’ needs are and what agencies are working on, and this gap seems to 
be widening.

It seems like companies have never struggled with bigger problems, as chief 
marketing officers face the most daunting challenges of a lifetime, but 
curiously, agencies seem to offer smaller solutions than ever. Isn’t it time 
agencies stepped up to the plate?

The internet has been a mixed blessing, a volatile combination of incredible, 
new possibilities, rampant change and some of the most destructive forces the 
marketplace has ever seen. On a communications level we have a plethora of new 
media channels, memes circling the world in seconds, the app of the moment 
bursting onto the scene, and trends like content marketing, native advertising, 
and influencer marketing to navigate and leverage. The options seem more 
bewildering than ever and more abruptly changing, all in a context where 
attention is moving onto platforms which become even harder to connect with 
people.

Yet clients’ problems are much bigger than this, as problems are increasingly 
focused on what new technology and new behaviours mean to the core of their 
businesses. Car companies are worried about what electric cars and apps like
Uber could mean for the long-term business of car ownership 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2014/06/06/uber-ceo-travis-kalanick-were-doubling-revenue-every-six-months/>
. Supermarket chains are sucked into offering delivery on groceries despite
history showing that profits are elusive 
<http://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/tech-news/online-grocery-shopping-expands-rapidly-though-profits-will-lag/article19504059/>
. Over-the-top message companies like Whatsapp areundermining mobile operators’ 
ability to make money from texts <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-17111044>
, but also reducing their role to dumb data pipes. Retailers face threats from
online shopping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/feb/01/e-commerce-high-street-hmv-blockbuster>
 andshowrooming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/may/09/showrooming-retail-solution-e-commerce>
, and media owners face disappearing revenues as attention moves online. It’s a 
wonder clients ever sleep.

You would imagine this would have led to large-scale changes in the 
advertising industry. We’ve seen the press releases, the acquisitions, the new 
models on slideshows, and the constant stream of white papers, so in our hearts 
we feel like it has. But the reality of the current agency environment is that 
actually nothing has really changed, and the few things that have changed have 
become less ambitious, less valuable and more tactical in nature.

A glance at advertising agencies’ websites and their case studies show our 
centre of gravity is smaller than ever. It seems a world of cheap media, 
production and talent has led to a deflation in ambition. We see a landscape of 
small-scale social media campaigns, a plethora of videos each liked five or six 
times, user-generated competitions with a handful of entries, hashtags used by 
a few people for a few days for a small foray into real-time marketing.

We’ve created the long tail of marketing, where each campaign has ever smaller 
budgets, ever shorter lifespans, diminishing aims, all so wonderfully cheap in 
execution, so wonderfully proficient in terms of outputs, but so entirely 
pointless. It’s this maintaining excitement for a Twitter feed of 4,000 people, 
or keeping the 500 subscribers on YouTube happy that is the marketing of our 
time. It may be cheap, but it’s a pointless distraction and it’s not solving 
any of the problems that are keeping our clients up at night.

Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> people are amazing 
– we’re some of the best, brightest, funniest, hardest working people out 
there, we understand people, brands, technology, we solve problems, and we 
generate amazing ideas. Is our place really to drive Twitter followers up by 
2,000 people? Let’s collectively step up to the plate, this is not a time to 
cut staff, embrace gimmicks and indulge in ever more tactical pursuits, this is 
the time to think big, take risks, take on management consultants and lead our 
clients to a prosperous future.

Tom Goodwin is the CEO and founder of the Tomorrow Group 
<http://www.tomorrow-innovation.com/>. You can follow him on Twitter 
@tomfgoodwin <https://twitter.com/tomfgoodwin>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 