
UK media buying group Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> reported 
an 8.1% surge in organic revenue in the first quarter, as its American 
operations grew a fifth to balance Europe, which slowed to just 1.7% growth.

The performance is particularly impressive given that Aegis, which is on a 
high afterwinning the $3bn-a-year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jan/24/aegis-general-motors-ad-account?INTCMP=SRCH>
 General Motors account in January, reported 10% growth in the same quarter 
last year.

Aegis beat city consensus forecasts, which had been expecting first quarter 
revenue growth of about 7.8%.

Aegis – which owns ad networks including Carat, Isobar and Vizeum – easily 
outperformed rivals including IPG, Omincom, WPP, Havas and Publicis Groupe, 
which have reported first quarter growth of between 2.8% and 5.1%.

The driver for growth was Aegis Media, the media buying operation within the 
group, in the Americas which grew by revenues by a fifth.

"Our performance in the region benefited from an outstanding new business 
record in North America over the last two years, as well as continued strong 
results from our market-leading digital business in Brazil," the company said.

Asia Pacific grew by 12.5%, thanks to an "excellent" performance in China.

In comparison, the Europe Middle East and Africa region grew by just 1.7%, 
although Aegis said this was because in the first quarter last year the region 
grew by close to double digits.

"There were good performances from our businesses in Russia and northern 
Europe, whilst southern Europe continued to face challenging market 
conditions," the company said.

Aegis said that it would continue to target acquisitions that provided scale, 
innovation and infill with a focus on the faster growing regions, North America 
and digital.

In February, Aegis bought US company Roundarch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/22/aegis-us-digital-agency?INTCMP=SRCH>
 in a deal that could cost up to $360m (£228m).

"Aegis ended the period in a robust financial position, comfortably within its 
financial covenants, with significant undrawn capacity under its committed 
central facilities," the company said.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 