
Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> Group has reported a 20% rise 
in underlying pre-tax profits to £58.9m in the first half of 2011, as the media 
buying group prepares to free up more than £400m for acquisitions after 
offloading research division Synovate.

The company, which owns media buying agencies Carat and Vizeum and digital 
network Isobar, reported a 7.3% year-on-year increase in organic revenue growth 
to £756.8m in the first six months.

Aegis Media, the media buying rump of the company that will continue to 
operate after Synovate's sale to French firm Ipsos is completed at the end of 
next month, reported organic revenue growth of 7.8%. Aegis is in the final 
stages ofselling Synovate to Ipsos for £525m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/27/aegis-sells-synovate-to-ipsos?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

The media buying business expects the third quarter to grow at about the same 
rate and the full-year figure to be "at least" in line with the 5.8% 
year-on-year revenue growth the company reported in 2010.

Aegis is expected to earn £505m from the Synovate deal. It intends to give 
£200m back to shareholders – about £53m will go to the largest shareholder, 
Vincent Bolloré, who holds a 26.5% stake – leaving proceeds of about £300m. 
Analysts at UBS estimate that as much as £280m of that will be used for 
acquisitions.

It is understood that because of Aegis's low net debt to earnings ratio – 
which governs the financial flexibility it has to raise debt within its banking 
convenants – the group considers it has a warchest of available funds of well 
over £400m.

"Our investors have approved the sale of Synovate, our market research 
business, representing the largest structural change in the history of Aegis 
Group," said Jerry Buhlmann, chief executive of the group. "Once the sale is 
completed, Aegis will become a more focused group, with the opportunity to 
accelerate further the delivery of sustainable, profitable growth, and 
increased financial flexibility to make targeted acquisitions."

The company said that it has made 11 acquisitions so far this year spending a 
total of £65m. Net debt was £393m at the end of June.

Sir Martin Sorrell's WPP said on Wednesday that it is doubling its acquisition 
budget to £400m this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/aug/24/sir-martin-sorrell-wpp?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

The Aegis Media division grew revenues by 7.6% year on year in the first half 
of 2011 to £487m, driven by strength in its North American business and 
fast-growing markets, in particular China, Brazil and Russia. Digital revenue 
accounted for 34% of total revenues at Aegis Media.

Aegis Media's operations in Europe, the Middle East and Africa grew revenue by 
3.7% year on year to £290.7m. The Americas grew by 11.3% to £97.7m and Asia 
Pacific by 113% to £98.7m.

The Asia Pacific figures were dramatically increased due to the acquisition of 
Australia's largest marketing company, Mitchell Communication Group,in an 
A$363m (£208m) deal last July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/29/aegis-mitchell-communication-group?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

When the impact of the Mitchell business is stripped out, to give a true 
year-on-year comparison, the Asia Pacific division still reported strong 
revenue growth of 17% year on year in the first half.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 