
Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> continues to defy the tough 
economic conditions, reporting 6.3% revenue growth in the third quarter, easily 
outpacing rivals despite a dramatic slowdown in regions including Asia Pacific 
and Europe.

Overall growth at Aegis Group, which owns media agencies including Carat and 
Vizeum and digital network Isobar, is well ahead of rivals including Sir Martin 
Sorrell's WPP, Havas and Publicis, which allrecently reported third quarter 
rates of about 2% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/07/vincent-bollore-havas-growth?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

Aegis Group's growth rate slowed from 9% in the second quarter due to a marked 
slowdown in some markets.

By geographical region Aegis grew organic revenues by 15.2% in the third 
quarter in the Americas, down from 18% in the second quarter.

In Asia Pacific the growth rate slumped from 14.4% in the second quarter to 
just 4% in the third quarter.

 And Europe, Middle East and Africa slowed from 3.8% in the second quarter to 
2.8% in the third quarter.

Overall Aegis Media, the division that houses all its media buying networks, 
grew 6.3% while research arm Aztec grew by 6.7%.

"Aegis produced another strong performance in the third quarter of 2012, with 
continued market-outperformance and sector-leading organic growth," said Jerry 
Buhlmann, chief executive of Aegis.

Aegis is in the process of being taken over by Japanese advertising giant 
Dentsu, in a £3.2bn cash deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jul/12/dentsu-buys-aegis-for-3bn?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 