
UK-based media buying and research group Aegis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> has acquired Australia's largest 
marketing company, Mitchell Communication Group, in an A$363m (£208m) deal.

Aegis, which under new chief executive Jerry Buhlmann raised a £175m-plus 
warchest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/18/aegis-chief-executive-profit-fall>
 in March, said the deal would "transform" its Asia Pacific operation. 
Shareholders can accept the deal in cash, shares or a mix of both.

If the transaction is appoved Harold Mitchell, the founder and chairman of the 
agency group, will become a "significant shareholder" in Aegis and lead the 
Aegis Media Pacific operation. Mitchell, a 30% shareholder in the Australian 
group, will take his portion of the sale in shares in Aegis.

"Mitchell is the leading marketing communications group in Australia, the 
eighth largest ad spend market in the world, and this acquisition is a further 
step in transforming Aegis's operations in the Asia-Pacific region," said 
Buhlmann.

Aegis returned to organic revenue growth for the first time in two years in 
the first quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/may/18/aegis-reports-revenue-growth>.

Aegis said that the structure of the deal could potentially land Mitchell a 4% 
stake in Aegis. The group's biggest shareholder is Vincent Bolloré, the 
chairman of rival marketing services company Havas, who controls a 29.9% stake.

Buhlmann, speaking to MediaGuardian.co.uk, said that Mitchell Communication 
Group had revenues of about £135m per year and although it offers a complete 
range of advertising and marketing services derives more than 50% of income 
from digital.

"It is a very good strategic fit," he said. "Beyond Japan and China Australia 
is a signifcant player in the region. This acquisition is very much a regional 
play – while it is important in its own right, this is not just an Australian 
play."

In March chairman John Napier said that the company was looking to make a 
series of acquisitionsworth up to about £50m each and "maybe one larger than 
that" <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/mar/18/aegis-china-us-warchest>.

Buhlmann, speaking to MediaGuardian.co.uk, said that the £200m-plus deal did 
not mark a break in that strategy and that the company had plenty of headroom 
for further acquistions.

"We didn't preclude slightly larger deals," he said. "This deal comes in to 
that category [of a larger deal] but it doesn't restrict our ability to do 
further bolt-on deals or acquistions."

For example Aegis's US operation suffered a double-digit fall in revenue last 
year although Buhlmann said that parachuting in Nigel Morris, the chief 
executive of digital network Isobar, to head North America had made a major 
difference to the performance of the operation.

Aegis has plenty of headroom in terms of funding. Last year a US placement 
raised $225m. A convertible bond earlier this year raised £190.6m and the 
company renewed a five-year banking facility with access to £450m.

The company has already spent £40.2m on three new acquisitions in the first 
quarter. The most significant was the purchase of a 17.7% shareholding in Charm 
Communications, one of China's leading TV buying and advertising agencies. 
Vizeum and Charm also established a joint venture which operates as Vizeum 
China.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 