
Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis>, the UK-based media buying and 
research group, reports like-for-like revenues up 9.7% in the third quarter.

Aegis Group said that its media buying operation, which includes the Vizeum 
and Carat networks, saw organic revenues rise 8.5% in the period. Research 
operation Synovate saw net organic revenues rise 10.9%. In the nine months to 
the end of September, Aegis Group revenues are up 5.2% year-on-year.

Aegis Media said that in western Europe there were "particularly good" 
performances from the UK and Nordic businesses. Spain saw a "continued 
recovery" while there were "mixed performances" in "other continental European 
markets".

Faster growing world regions, such as China, Russia and Latin America, 
experienced "robust" organic revenue growth while North America "continued to 
gain momentum". Aegis Media said it had won $1.6bn (£1bn) in total new business 
in the first nine months of the year, with $650m in the third quarter.

The company said it would complete the A$363m deal to buy Mitchell 
Communications Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/jul/29/aegis-mitchell-communication-group>
, Australia's largest marketing company, on 17 November.

"Overall an impressive third quarter performance which should be taken well, 
supporting our upgrade thesis from earlier this week," said Bank of America 
Merrill Lynch in a note this morning. "The disappointment, if there is one, is 
that management is not raising guidance for the full year, citing a combination 
of tougher comparables and some cost inflation, while currency has also moved 
against them".

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 