
Aegis Group has won the $3bn-a-year advertising account for General Motors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/generalmotors>, the third largest global 
advertiser, in what analysts have referred to as a "game changing" win for the 
UK media buying business.

Maurice Levy's Publicis Groupe, which controlled GM's multibillion-dollar 
account in North America, is the biggest loser of the shift.

Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis>, which owns agencies including 
Carat and Vizeum, has landed a multi-year contract to handle GM's media 
planning and buying across 140 countries for ad campaigns as well as services 
including mobile communications and social media strategy, excluding India, 
China and Brazil.

Ian Whittaker at analysts Liberum said Aegis's win was a "potential game 
changer" which could easily boost the company's organic growth by 3% or more – 
perhaps £50m in annualised revenues to the bottom line.

Aegis Group already handled the European business for General Motors, 
estimated at about $500m, meaning it has won an estimated $2.5bn in new 
business snapping up the account across the rest of the world.

Publicis Groupe has taken the biggest hit from GM's move to consolidate its 
business into one media buying group, controlling more than $2bn of business in 
North America and Asia-Pacific, although India and China were excluded from the 
pitch. IPG held the business in Latin America, although the Brazilian market 
was excluded.

"This should lead to consensus upgrades of at least 4% at the earnings per 
share level, and possibly more," Whittaker said. "The fact that Aegis has won 
such a major global account should also provide a boost for its reputation and 
ability to pitch for other big global accounts and further highlights the 
turnaround in its North American operations."

The contract starts in April so should see Aegis benefit by about £35m in 2012.

"This is a defining moment for our business and the market," said Nigel 
Morris, chief executive of Aegis Media Americas.

WPP's Kantar Media puts GM's global spend at $3bn.

However, US industry publication AdAge cites GM's 10-K filing 
<http://adage.com/article/agency-news/gm-parks-3-billion-media-account-aegis-carat/231699/>
 to the US Securities and Exchange Commission which reckons that worldwide 
advertising costs were $4.26bn in 2010, and $5.1bn including sales promotions. 
A total of 67% of this spend was in the North American market.

In a statement Public Groupe played down the loss to its Starcom media buying 
operation, saying it would represent "less than 0.5%" of total group revenues.

Analysts put Publicis Groupe's 2011 revenues at about €5.7bn, making the 
supposed loss about €30m in 2012, although the group will only feel the loss of 
six months' income as it will hold the business until June.

"We're proud of the insight and high level of professionalism that Starcom has 
brought to its work on GM's image over the years, and of the support that we've 
given to GM through many ups and downs," said a spokeswoman for Publicis 
Groupe, referring to GM filing for bankruptcy in 2009. "Although we regret this 
development, Starcom is working on a great deal of new business and will 
continue to grow. Publicis Groupe will serve GM on other fronts".

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 