
UK media buying company Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> Group 
has entered into exclusive discussions with French market research firm Ipsos 
over the £500m sale of Synovate.

Aegis, which confirmed the talks with Ipsos on 6 June, is looking to hive off 
Synovate to concentrate on its core business of media planning and buying and 
digital advertising.

"The board of Aegis Group confirms that it is in exclusive discussions with 
Ipsos in relation to a potential sale of Synovate," said the company in a 
statement. "There can be no certainty that any agreement will be reached. 
Further announcements will be made as appropriate."

The move to exclusive talks comes after MediaGuardian.co.uk reported last week 
that sources with knowledge of the negotiations said a deal was"all but agreed" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/21/aegis-ipsos-vincent-bollore-synovate?INTCMP=SRCH>
 several weeks ago.

Alex DeGroote, an analyst at Panmure Gordon, said Aegis's move to announce 
exclusivity talks was "unusual practice for a UK corporate".

"It might reflect tensions on the Ipsos side about an auction scenario 
developing, with upside pressure on the Synovate valuation," he added.

The move to exclusivity follows a number of major advertising industry 
players, including Maurice Lévy's Publicis Groupe and Sir Martin Sorrell's WPP,
publicly ruling out making bids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/07/wpp-publicis-aegis-synovate?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

There was some expectation that German-listed research group Gfk, which looked 
to tie up with rival market research company TNS before WPP acquired it, would 
enter the contest. Other potential candidates included Japan's Dentsu and 
US-based Omnicom.

When news of the Aegis/Ipsos discussions become public the Aegis chairman, 
John Napier, and the chief executive of Ipsos, Didier Truchot, scrambled to 
secure meetings with Vincent Bolloré, who owns 26.5% of Aegis Group.

While any deal – which qualifies as a class one transaction according to UK 
listing authority rules on tests relating to market capitalisation and profits 
– only requires 51% shareholder approval,Bolloré is still seen as kingmaker in 
any sale process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/21/aegis-ipsos-vincent-bollore-synovate?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 