
Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> chairman John Napier and 
Didier Truchot, the chief executive of Ipsos, have met with Vincent Bolloré in 
a bid to secure the blessing of the media group's largest shareholder for the 
sale of its research arm Synovate.

Earlier this month Aegis and French market research group Ipsos confirmed talks
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/06/aegis-in-talks-on-synovate-sell-off?INTCMP=SRCH>
 about the sale of Synovate in a deal that it has been speculated could be 
worth £500m.

While both parties have been keen to downplay the level of the talks, two 
sources believe the transaction was "all but agreed" weeks ago.

When news of the discussions become public both Napier and Truchot scrambled 
to secure meetings with Bolloré, who owns 26.5% of Aegis Group.

While any deal – which qualifies as a class one transaction according to UK 
listing authority rules on tests relating to market capitalisation and profits 
– only requires 51% shareholder approval, Bolloré is still seen as the 
kingmaker in any sale process.

"On a strictly technical level Bolloré cannot block it, however he is an 
incredibly important factor for Aegis to consider and they are well advised to 
get him onside or at least know what he is thinking," said one source with 
knowledge of the deal process.

Potential rival bids could still emerge from contenders including Japan's 
Dentsu, US-based Omnicom or German-listed research group Gfk, which looked to 
tie up with rival market research company TNS before WPP acquired it.

City talk has already turned to what might happen with the £500m-plus proceeds 
of the sale of Synovate, with Bolloré once again considered to be a key factor.

"Now Synovate is in play, a deal of some sort will almost certainly get done," 
said one City source. "What I'm interested in is what leverage [Bolloré] puts 
on management regarding capital reallocation post the deal."

Bolloré's advertising assets make up just a fraction of his multi-billion 
pound empire and he has turned a lot of his focus, andconsiderable financial 
commitment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/jun/19/advertising.mediabusiness?INTCMP=SRCH>
, to launching anelectric car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2005/mar/03/motoring.shopping?INTCMP=SRCH>
. In December, Paris chose Bolloré's car firm to launch a hire car service with 
3,000 battery-powered vehicles at 1,000 self-service points across the city.

Bolloré has long-harboured designs on a deal between Aegis and Havas, the 
French advertising group which he chairs and in which he holds a 33% stake. 
Havas lacks the muscle of Aegis's media buying business.

However, he recently changed his tone, describing the holding in Aegis as no 
longer a "strategic" investment but a "financial" investment. Nevertheless he 
added that he will "keep his options open" over the future of Aegis.

Bolloré harbours ambitions for significant growth at Havas. The company 
recently outlined expansion plans, unveiling a €750m (£643m) warchest to help 
grow the business from about €1.5bn in revenue to more than €2.5bn over the 
next three years.

Analysts at Liberum reckon Aegis's "management incentive plans" favour using 
the funds from a sale to make acquisitions, rather than pay down debt, and that 
"management would benefit substantially from a breakup".

Sir Martin Sorrell's WPP and France's Publicis have ruled out mounting bids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/07/wpp-publicis-aegis-synovate?INTCMP=SRCH>
 to buy Aegis's Synovate market research business – although both could be 
interested in the UK-based group's media buying assets should the sale trigger 
a full breakup.

Liberum analyst Ian Whittaker puts Maurice Levy's Publicis as prime candidate 
to buy Aegis Group's media assets, which include the networks Vizeum, Isobar 
and Carat, in the event the Synovate sale triggers a complete breakup.

Liberum reckons WPP is "unlikely" to bid for Aegis's media assets arguing that 
there are "likely anti-trust issues".

Again Bolloré would be a key player in a wider deal for Aegis's media assets, 
given his shareholding, and one source said he "doesn't do uninvited deals".

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 