
Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> group Aegis has 
stunned analysts, reporting organic revenue growth of more than 11% year on 
year in the third quarter.

Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis>, which owns media buying 
agencies Carat and Vizeum and digital network Isobar, said the performance was 
driven by a strong performance in the key North America market, with revenues 
growing at a "double-digit" rate over the first nine months of 2011.

The company, which agreed the sale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jul/27/aegis-sells-synovate-to-ipsos?INTCMP=SRCH>
 of research business Synovate to French rival Ipsos for £528.8m in the summer, 
was expected to report organic revenue growth of 7.6% by analysts.

Ian Whittaker, an analyst at Liberum, said the company "smashed expectations".

Aegis also said its performance across the year had been fuelled by growth in 
faster-growing regions – including China, Russia and Brazil – with double-digit 
year-on-year growth levels for the first nine months of 2011.

Australia also delivered double-digit growth in the three months to the end of 
September.

Western Europe has faced "more challenging" conditions although the company 
said the UK, Germany, Scandanavia and Netherlands all delivered "strong" 
performances in the third quarter. France produced a "challenging" quarter.

Aegis maintained a conservative view of its full-year performance despite the 
strong growth reported in the third quarter, saying only that it will perform 
better than the 5.8% year-on-year increase reported for the full year in 2010. 
Analysts are expecting organic growth to be closer to 7% in 2011.

The company said it would return £200m of the proceeds of the sale of Ipsos to 
shareholders on Wednesday via a special dividend of 15.53p.

Aegis added that the retained proceeds of the sale – perhaps as much as £300m 
– will be used to make acquisitions to "accelerate our strategy by providing 
scale, in-fill and innovation, with a specific emphasis on faster-growing 
regions, North America, and on digital businesses".

The group has spent £70m on acquisitions of 15 "bolt-on" companies and 
investments so far this year.

"Aegis continues to outperform the market," said the Aegis chief executive, 
Jerry Buhlmann. "Our strong organic revenue growth performance in the third 
quarter of 2011 was driven by excellent operational results from our businesses 
in faster-growing regions and North America. However, parts of western Europe 
continue to be challenging."

Most of Aegis's main advertising rivals have reported third-quarter growth 
figures, with Omnicom up 7.2% year on year, Publicis up 6.4%, Havas up 7.3% and 
WPP up 4.5%. Only US-based IPG produced a comparable performance, with an 11.1% 
increase.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 