
UK media buying company Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> Group 
has sold Synovate to French market research firm Ipsos for £525m (€595m).

Ipsos, which entered into exclusive discussions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jun/29/aegis-ipsos-synovate?INTCMP=SRCH>
 to buy the international research operation from Aegis Group in June, said 
that the transaction will make it the third largest market research company 
globally.

Ipsos described the deal as transformational, allowing the company benefits 
from global negotiations with suppliers, pooling of production centres, 
consolidation of online panels, communication and IT.

"This deal will meet our goals to make Ipsos brand a worldwide brand, 
synonymous with excellence in each of its fields of specialisation and better 
able to attract and keep clients," said the Ipsos co-president, Didier Truchot.

Ipsos said that the deal will be funded through a new debt financing of €250m, 
a rights offering of approximately €200m to Ipsos's shareholders and existing 
facilities and available cash.

The deal is now conditional on approval by Aegis's investors and must be 
approved by a majority of the shareholders.

It is almost certain to go through as Vincent Bolloré, the largest shareholder 
in Aegis with a 26.5% stake, has given an undertaking to vote in favour .

Aegis said it intends to return £200m of the sale proceeds to shareholders by 
means of a special dividend.

The company said the balance of the proceeds will be used to provide 
"increased financial flexibility to allow for investment in value-enhancing 
acquisitions by the retained group".

"The announcement today of the proposed sale of Synovate to Ipsos represents 
the largest structural change in the history of Aegis Group," said the Aegis 
chief executive, Jerry Buhlmann. "For Aegis shareholders, the offer from Ipsos 
provides value and certainty and enables the group to increase its focus on 
delivering communications services based on media, digital and content 
creation."

UBS Investment Bank acted as financial adviser on the transaction for Ipsos. 
Aegis used advisory firm Greenhill and JP Morgan.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 