
UK media buying group Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> is in 
talks with French market research group Ipsos about a potential £500m sale of 
its Synovate division.

Synovate, Aegis's market research division, has long been considered a 
potential target for sale, with WPP and Publicis group both pursuingdeals back 
in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2005/oct/28/aegisgroupbusiness.advertising?INTCMP=SRCH>
. WPP went on to pay more than £1bn forresearch group TNS in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/oct/06/wpp.taylornelsonsofres?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

While Synovate is thought to have attracted interest from a number of 
potential buyers Aegis, which owns media buying network's including Carat and 
Vizeum, has only confirmed active talks with Ipsos Group, which owns market 
research business Ipsos Mori.

"In response to recent speculation, the board of Aegis Group confirms that it 
is in discussions with Ipsos in relation to a potential transaction regarding 
its market research business Synovate," the company said in a statement. "There 
can be no certainty that any agreement will be reached."

Now the company has officially admitted that Synovate is up for sale, interest 
could well be sparked among rival research groups including GfK and Nielsen.

The key to any deal to buy the market research group, and indeed the future of 
Aegis as a whole, is Vincent Bolloré, who holds a 26.5% stake in the group. 
Bolloré is also chairman and holder of a 33% stake in rival advertising group 
Havas.

Bolloré, who for a long period of time pursued a tie-up with Aegis to boost 
Havas, which is not a heavy-hitter in the media buying sector, recently changed 
his tone describing the holding in Aegis as no longer a "strategic" investment 
but a "financial" investment.

Bolloré said recently that it was "no longer necessary to tie Havas to Aegis" 
and that he could be open to offers for his stake, although he also added at 
the time that "everything is still possible".

Nevertheless he added that he will "keep his options open" over the future of 
Aegis.

The Aegis chief executive, Jerry Buhlmann, has made some acquisitions to 
bolster Synovate, such as buying a majority stake in Comcon in Russia, but the 
division has always been viewed as non-core to Aegis and ripe for sale if an 
attractive offer emerged.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 