
Marketing group Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> has reported a 
surge of a third in pre-tax profits to over £160m in 2011, comfortably 
outperforming its rivals with revenue growth of almost 10% to more than £1bn.

Analyst Ian Whittaker at Liberum called the revenue growth, which cruised past 
city consensus forecasts of about 7.5%, "stellar" as Aegis easily outpaced its 
top five rivals, including WPP and Publicis Groupe.

The UK media buying group, which owns networks including Carat and Isobar, 
reported a 32.3% year-on-year rise in adjusted pre tax profits to £161.8m in 
2011.

Revenues rose 20.6% – or 9.9% on the key analyst metric of organic revenue 
growth – to crack £1bn for the first time since 2007 at £1.135bn.

Sir Martin Sorrell's WPP and Maurice Levy's Publicis recently reported 
full-year revenue growth in the 5% to 6% range.

In the fourth quarter alone Aegis, which recently won the global $3bn-a-year 
account for General Motors, registered organic revenue growth of 12% versus an 
average down near 4.5% for its main rivals.

Aegis said that it pulled in $2.7bn of new business. As as well as GM, it won 
contracts for Home Depot and Disney at its US business – which had a strong 
year and reported market capitalisationof over £2bn for the first time on 1 
March.

The company closed on Thursday at 179p, up just 0.03%, at a market 
capitalisation of £2.1bn.

Aegis's Americas operation increased revenues by 14.7% to £217.3m.

"The on-going impressive performance of the US business has transformed the 
scale of our business in the largest advertising market in the world," said 
Jerry Buhlmann, Aegis Group chief executive.

Asia Pacific grew revenues by 87% to £220.6m, led by the "outstanding" 
performance of China.

The Europe, Middle East and Africa region showed slower growth by comparison, 
albeit respectable in tough conditions, of 8.8% to £631m.

Overall the company said that digital revenues now account for 35% of the 
total, up from 32% in 2010.

"We are optimistic about the outlook for the advertising sector in 2012, 
supported by key sporting events and the US presidential elections, and we 
anticipate further success for the group in the year ahead," said Jerry 
Buhlmann, Aegis Group chief executive. "We expect to continue delivering 
sector-leading organic revenue growth which we expect to convert into further 
margin progression and earnings enhancement for our shareholders over time."

Aegis, which offloaded its research arm Synovate to a French rival, Ipsos, for 
£525m, said it spent £75m on 18 "bolt on" acquisitions and investments in 2011.

Net debt was slashed to £128m at the end of December, compared to £331m at the 
close of 2010. Aegis has an undrawn banking facilities totalling £450m and cash 
of £617m.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <https://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 