
Aegis <https://www.theguardian.com/media/aegis> has reported a strong start to 
2011 with organic revenues up 9.1% in the first three months, outpacing rival 
marketing and advertising groups including WPP, Publicis and Havas.

The solid start to the year was driven by 10.1% year-on-year organic revenue 
growth at Aegis Media, the media buying business that includes operations such 
as Carat and Vizeum, with strong performances from operations in markets 
including China, Brazil, the UK, Germany and North America.

Aegis Media gained $1.6bn (£980m) of new business in the first quarter, 
fuelled by North America where the company picked up media buying accounts for 
Disney and Home Depot.

Research division Synovate reported organic revenue growth of 7.3% year on 
year, with Brazil, Russia, India and China "continuing to perform extremely 
well".

However, Aegis said trading in western Europe "remained mixed", with the UK 
"challenging", and adverse market conditions in southern Europe affecting the 
business in that region.

Jerry Buhlmann, chief executive of Aegis, said the company is on track to 
deliver organic growth "at least in line with the level achieved last year" – 
which was 5.8%.

"Aegis performed strongly in the first quarter of 2011, particularly in North 
America and faster-growing regions, building on the positive momentum achieved 
during 2010," he added. "This top line performance, underscored by our 
continued focus on costs, will ensure we further improve group underlying 
operating profit this year, compared to 2010."

Havas reported 6.8% organic growth in the first quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/apr/27/havas-q1-2011?INTCMP=SRCH>, 
French groupPublicis was up 6.5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/apr/21/publicis-groupe-q1-2011?INTCMP=SRCH>
 andWPP grew revenues 6.7% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/apr/28/wpp-q1-2011?INTCMP=SRCH>.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 