
An Afghanistan war veteran who contracted Q fever has won a landmark 
compensation claim against theMinistry of Defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> that could pave the way 
for payouts to others.

Phillip Eaglesham, a former Royal Marine commando corporal, contracted the 
chronic condition two days before he was due to return home from a tour of duty 
in 2010.

He developed flu-like symptoms, fatigue and sweating, which developed into 
muscular weakness and he is now in a wheelchair.

Eaglesham, 35, who lives with his wife and children in Taunton, Somerset, is 
likely to receive a significant sum in damages, possibly more than £1m. He 
regularly requires care to help him with needs as basic as brushing his teeth.


Q fever, caused by the bacterium Coxiella burnetii, is spread when spores from 
animals are dispersed by the wind. It was first identified in Australia in the 
1930s.

Eaglesham’s lawyers argued that the MoD should have known that the infection 
was present in southernAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> and that it could have 
prevented it causing serious illness.


Treatment with doxycycline antibiotics are effective against Q fever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2007/sep/21/health.medicineandhealth>, 
either as a preventative medication or if prescribed in the early stages of the 
condition. The US and French military were both using it in Afghanistan at the 
time, it was said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fafghanistan-veteran-wins-landmark-q-fever-compensation-claim-ministy-defence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce3da78e1127c3f9926edbde1bf31cbc01198bfa%2F0_184_3510_2106%2F3510.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afghanistan%20veteran%20wins%20landmark%20Q%20fever%20compensation%20claim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fafghanistan-veteran-wins-landmark-q-fever-compensation-claim-ministy-defence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afghanistan%20veteran%20wins%20landmark%20Q%20fever%20compensation%20claim&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fafghanistan-veteran-wins-landmark-q-fever-compensation-claim-ministy-defence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce3da78e1127c3f9926edbde1bf31cbc01198bfa%2F0_184_3510_2106%2F3510.jpg>
 Royal Marine commandos in Afghanistan in 2009. Photograph: Sean Clee/POA/Royal 
Navy/EPA 
A number of other armed forces members who contracted Q fever are understood 
to be preparing similar claims against the MoD.


Sue Bowler, a partner at the law firm Coffin Mew, which represented Eaglesham, 
said: “Phillip’s case against the Ministry of Defence has been pursued so that 
he can pay for the specialist care, equipment and housing that he will need for 
the rest of his life – and to help other military personnel who contracted the 
same illness in Afghanistan and are also pursuing claims.

“Phillip has gone from being a strong, fit Royal Marine to someone with very 
severe disability, all because of contracting Q fever. It has never been about 
the money for him, no amount could take away his suffering and that of his 
family.”

The high court ruled in Eaglesham’s favour after the MoD repeatedly failed to 
file a full defence and provide the court with copies of all documents relevant 
to the case despite being granted an additional 15 months to compile the 
materials.

Speaking after the judgment, Eaglesham told the BBC: “It would be amazing to 
have a family life again rather than my wife being my full-time carer.”

The veteran competed for Ireland at the Rio 2016 Paralympics and is 
campaigning for other servicemen and women who have fallen ill through Q fever.

An MoD spokesperson said: “We are studying the judgment and it would be 
inappropriate to comment further.”
 