
Life has not been easy for Paradise Sorouri. In the past seven years, the 
27-year-old has been forced to flee her country twice, received more death 
threats than she can count, and was brutally beaten by 10 men on the street and 
left to die. Her crime? She covers her head with a baseball cap instead of a 
hijab, raises her voice for women’s rights, and is Afghanistan’s first female 
rapper.

In a country where, according to the UN, 87% of women have endured physical or 
sexual violence 
<http://m.dw.com/en/un-violence-against-women-in-afghanistan-pandemic/a-17171157>
, Paradise’s scathing lyrics about gender inequality in post-Taliban 
Afghanistan have served as a spark for change and a lightning rod for 
controversy. She raps defiantly in Dari about how women can getacid poured on 
their faces for resisting rape 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RB_IlKTAIJs&feature=youtu.be&t=3s>, be married 
off as children 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_r2NH01Ti3s&feature=youtu.be&t=6s> to older 
men, and belong tohusbands who can set them on fire 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ED4Hj-0A-rA&feature=youtu.be&t=5s>.


“It doesn’t matter if you are a singer, an artist, or a teacher,” says 
Paradise. “If you are a woman inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>, you are a problem. I am 
speaking out and fighting for women who don’t have a voice.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DED4Hj-0A-rA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DED4Hj-0A-rA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DED4Hj-0A-rA&media=>
 Video:Faryad-e Zan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ED4Hj-0A-rA> 
Speaking out has come at a price, but it has also garnered support. Paradise 
was recognised by the UN in 2013 for promoting human rights, while she and her 
fiance Diverse – together they are known as143Band 
<https://www.youtube.com/143Bandmusic> – won the Afghan ATN network 
<http://arianatelevision.com/>’s award for best rap act in 2015. The duo are 
nominated again this year.

But as her popularity soared, so did the number of violent threats she 
received. Fearing for their safety, last year she and Diverse fled Afghanistan 
and joinedthe more than one million migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/28/germany-300000-refugees-2016-bamf>
 who arrived in Germany from the Middle East.


In the process, the pair have begun to reach an entirely new audience, writing 
and producing songs in their Berlin flat and touring throughout Germany. They 
release their first music video in two years next month for the song Bosaye 
Eshgh, they’ve just headlined at the international FeminEast festival in 
Stockholm, andRebel Beats <http://www.thelabstudios.net/rebel-beats/>, a 
documentary about Paradise’s struggle as Afghanistan’s first female rapper, 
will appear in European film festivals early next year.

I begged passersby to help me but they just urged the men to beat me to death

Born in Iran to Afghan parents who escaped the country’s civil war, Paradise 
moved back to Herat, Afghanistan’s third largest city, with her family 
following the fall of the Taliban. She grew up idolisingTupac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/14/kendrick-lamar-pays-tribute-tupac-anniversary-rappers-death>
,Eminem <https://www.theguardian.com/music/eminem> and Beyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> though didn’t know anyone who 
shared her love of hip-hop until she met Diverse – another former refugee just 
back from Iran. The two decided to start making music together in 2008, but the 
odds were against them.

“Herat is a very religious city,” says Diverse. “Sharia law forbids women to 
sing. The fact that we are not married was also a problem. Every time we’d try 
to go to a studio together, strangers would start following us.”


One night, Paradise was walking home with her younger brother when 10 men on 
six motorcycles surrounded her and started beating her with wooden rods. “They 
were shouting at me and saying I was a bad influence on other women by trying 
to make music,” Paradise says. “All I could do was to try to defend my brother. 
They passed me from one man to the next. I begged people nearby to help, but 
they just urged the men to beat me to death.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fafghanistan-first-female-rapper-paradise-sorouri-143band-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff556570aa117a9b6c45bf215a8b867602f82c7d7%2F148_430_4001_2401%2F4001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Afghanistan's%20first%20female%20rapper%3A%20'If%20I%20stay%20silent%2C%20nothing%20will%20change'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fafghanistan-first-female-rapper-paradise-sorouri-143band-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Afghanistan%27s%20first%20female%20rapper%3A%20%27If%20I%20stay%20silent%2C%20nothing%20will%20change%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fafghanistan-first-female-rapper-paradise-sorouri-143band-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff556570aa117a9b6c45bf215a8b867602f82c7d7%2F148_430_4001_2401%2F4001.jpg>
 Paradise and Diverse in Berlin, where they now live. Photograph: Eliot Stein 
When Diverse found her, Paradise’s clothes were torn and she was covered in 
blood. He immediately took her to the police. “They told me I should stop 
singing,” says Paradise. “That’s when I knew that if I stayed silent, nothing 
would change.”

Fearful of what might happen if they stayed in Herat, the couple moved to 
neighbouring Tajikistan in late 2010, where Paradise began writing songs about 
women’s rights over Diverse’s beats. The following year, they releasedFaryad-e 
Zan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=suN4jKwOv74> (Woman’s Shout), the first 
song ever to feature a female Afghan rapper. In the years since, Paradise says 
she feels “proud and honoured” to have ushered in a handful of otherfemale 
rappers 
<http://t.sidekickopen68.com/e1t/c/5/f18dQhb0S7lC8dDMPbW2n0x6l2B9nMJW7t5XYg8pTxVRW5vMG7W1p7Y8qW8qC6LR56dvMsf428w9T02?t=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2012%2Fnov%2F02%2Fafghanistan-feamle-hip-hop&si=6707596994805760&pi=58339486-885d-4b82-fa50-462042a95e0e>
, even if several have claimed to be the country’s first while simultaneously 
asking her for guidance.

During the next two years, the duo recorded nine more songs and shot five 
videos in the relative safety ofTajikistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tajikistan>. Then, in the summer of 2012, 
Paradise received horrific news: back in Herat, to avoid being married off to 
men in their 60s, her two young cousins – aged nine and 12 – had burned 
themselves alive.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F193897428&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F193897428>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F193897428&media=>
 The trailer for the Rebel Beats documentary. 
Devastated, Paradise returned to Afghanistan and recorded a song in their 
memory calledNalestan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RB_IlKTAIJs>. “I wanted 
to think and they hit me in the head,” she sang. “They burned my face in the 
name of Islam / And sold me because I’m only a woman.” The song won
international attention <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-24671094>, 
with 143Band named Afghanistan’sbest rap artist at the 2014 Rumi world music 
awards <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-29251605>.

“The success of Nalestan was both good and bad,” Paradise says. “We were 
interviewed by journalists from all over the world, but I started to get death 
threats every day. It got so bad I had to stay inside my sister’s house in 
Herat for a month like a prisoner.” Still, Paradise and Diverse were convinced 
their message of female empowerment would be more effective if they stayed in 
Afghanistan, so they relocated once more, this time to Kabul.

When Rebel Beats began filming in early 2015, a woman named Farkhunda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/08/farkhunda-murder-woman-change-afghanistan>
 – who was falsely accused of burning the Qur’an – had just been beaten to 
death and set alight by an angry mob in the street. The daily barrage of 
threats directed at Paradise had also reached a fever pitch and, throughout the 
film, she anxiously looks over her shoulder to see if she’s being watched.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRB_IlKTAIJs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRB_IlKTAIJs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRB_IlKTAIJs&media=>
 Video:Nalestan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RB_IlKTAIJs> 
At one point, the camera holds on a stony-faced Paradise as she reads message 
after message directed at her on 143Band’s Facebook page. Several men describe 
wanting to rape and behead her in front of Diverse. Another says he’ll throw 
acid on her if he ever sees her in person. The only time she breaks is when 
she’s asked about Farkhunda. “She has made me stronger,” Paradise says, 
fighting back the tears. “I will fight – not only for Farkhunda, but for all 
the Farkhundas.”

A month after the cameras stopped rolling, Paradise and Diverse left 
Afghanistan for good and began the arduous process of resettling in Berlin. 
Paradise is still fighting and is scheduled to speak at Talking Taboo,an 
international conference for women’s rights 
<https://www.facebook.com/AfghanWomenintheDiaspora/> in London on 2 December.

“The people of Afghanistan still need our voice,” she says. “From here, we can 
make it louder.”
 