
This stay-at-home has been increasingly diverted by the live transmissions on 
Eurosport of the African Nations Cup. Cocks o' the north Morocco and hosts 
Tunisia fully deserve to be contesting the final. Tunisia's impeccable penalty 
sequence which dumped Nigeria from the semi was a climax of confident and 
collective cool.

I fancy Africa's astonishing football diaspora has only just begun. Ten years 
ago there were only 20 foreign players in the Premiership, all from Europe. In 
2000 there were 250, 19 of them African, 7.4% of the foreign input. That's 
nothing - of the French league's elite players, 48.9% of the foreigners are 
Africans; in Denmark the figure is 34.2% and in Belgium 28.8. To think, it is 
just 25 years ago that Everton played in Tunisia when managed by that artless, 
lugubrious innocent Gordon Lee ("No flair in my team? What's the bottom of my 
trousers got to do with it?"). First night in the Tunis hotel, a player comes 
bustling down to supper, enthusing "Great to be in Africa, eh, boss?" to be 
corrected sternly by Gordon: "Don't be daft, laddie, this isn't Africa, it's 
Tunisia."

 Barnes shines in trailblazing Sky


If the barefaced filching of every trailblazing innovation is the sincerest 
form of flattery, then the Sky Sports' rugby production team should at least be 
smugly lolling, duly flattered, as they celebrate their station's 15th birthday 
this weekend while the BBC opens its exclusive live-rights blanket coverage of 
the complete and relishable Six Nations Championship.

Curse and chunter on as much as you like about subscription satellite 
broadcasting, the fact remains that Sky's sharp team of outside broadcast 
pathfinders - at rugby under the daring dash of director Martin Turner - have 
in their decade-and-a-half altered dramatically the coverage of sport on 
television. Just as Channel 4 wallows in the plaudits for home Test cricket, 
when all its trend-setting was Sky's, so will BBC's rugby overkill (or not) 
this spring be down to Sky's original precedents.

As well, the terrestrial commentators to a man and woman privately admit how 
the standards set by their Sky counterparts have demanded they lift their game. 
Tubby Stuart Barnes is probably the most svelte, well-turned ripe, knowing, and 
elegantly pithy of any former-player summariser across the whole business. His 
spot-on and matey astringency was much missed in the live vacuums of ITV's 
World Cup.

 A merry dance in Sarajevo


Can tomorrow's lovers' day really be the 20th since we slid in our Millets fur 
boots through the skidpan streets of Sarajevo, humming through chilblained lips 
Ravel's ruddy Bolero? Torvill and Dean's doleful diamant√© duet had sensually 
scattered the rink that night and the British Olympic Association threw a 
party. Not only were the two willed-to-be "lovebird" skaters guests of honour 
but also Princess Anne, on a stopover on her way from London to deepest Africa.

After brief regal congrats, the princess was spirited off to the airport to 
fly south, her official car dropping off on her way the gilded duo T&D - only 
minutes before one of Fleet Street's finest, having discovered us, burst in 
breathless, royal angles and headlines all a'quiver, to be told HRH had already 
left with the skaters for her next engagement. "Where to?" he implored us. "The 
Gambia," we told him - and before we could elaborate he charged out, to spend 
the rest of his desperate night whipping and tipping his bewildered local 
taxi-driver all round the snowy mountans of Bosnia, insisting he be delivered 
at the nightclub he knew existed called "The Gambia".

 Joyce's novel twist on Wisden


With G2 readers I have been invigorated by this week's hammer-and-tongs 
between Roddy Doyle and John Mullan on the joys of James Joyce. I am always 
tickled pink at unlikely heroes revealing a taste for good games and, to me 
anyway, affection for Joyce was glamorised at discovering his cricket-nut 
credentials in Finnegans Wake when, in a single erotic paragraph, he disguises 
the names of 31 cricketers. Well, how many Wisden greats can you spot in just 
these four sentences?

"At half past quick in the morning. And her lamp was all askew and a trumbly 
wick-in-her, ringeysingey. She had to spofforth, she had to kicker, too thick 
of the wick of her pixy's loomph, wide lickering jessup the smooky shiminey. 
And her duffed coverpoint of a wickedy batter, whenever she druv behind her 
stumps for a tyddlesly wink through his tunnil-clefft bagslops after the rising 
bounder's yorkers, as he studd and stoddard and trutted and trumpered, to see 
had lordherry blackham's red bobby abbels, it tickled her innings to consort 
pitch." (AB Quick, H Trumble, KS Ranjitsinhji, FR Spofforth, GL Jessop, RA 
Duff, JT Tyldesley, J Tunnicliffe, CT Studd, AE Stoddart, AE Trott, VT Trumper, 
Lord Harris, JM Blackham and R Abel).
 