
Tony Blair <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> brought his 
relentlessly upbeat persona to Busan in his role as adviser to African leaders 
to spread the message that the continent is on the move.

Founder of the Africa Governance Initiative 
<http://www.africagovernance.org/africa>, Blair performed a double act with 
Rajiv Shah, the head of the US agency for international development, USAid, at 
thefourth high-level forum on aid effectiveness 
<http://www.aideffectiveness.org/busanhlf4/>. Even the news that China is 
refusing 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/nov/29/china-pulls-out-aid-partnership-busan>
, at least for now, to join efforts on establishing common principles on 
transparency and accountability on aid policy, could not take the air out of 
the Blair balloon.

"There is a Chinese delegation here," the former UK prime minister 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/profile/tonyblair> said. "There are longstanding 
issues to be resolved and they will be ... There are formal agreements and 
there are textured discussions ... From my own conversations, I know they think 
very hard about development policy."

As for Africa, Blair and Shah issued a statement declaring their optimism 
about Africa, citing the fact that over the past decade, eight economies from 
sub-Saharan Africa have more than doubled in size. They also pointed to 
political progress with the number of democracies in sub-SaharanAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> jumping from only three in 1989 to 
23 in 2008.

The two attributed the march of progress to a new generation of leaders, 
described as "incredible men and women who are shaking the old narrative of a 
dormant Africa and replacing it with one of optimism, determination and 
progress".

Set up three years ago, AGI has positioned itself to advise leaders on how to 
implement realistic development plans and how to deliver on them. The AGI has 
so far focused on countries that, says Blair, have the political will to reform 
change. They include Liberia, Sierra Leone andRwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda>, a country he has visited a lot 
recently.

On leadership, Blair and Shah spoke about the importance of capacity and 
accountability.

"Capacity, so governments can implement development plans and tackle poverty. 
Openness and transparency, so leaders are held to account for the results," 
they said.

Given the stress on openness and transparency, Blair acknowledged that certain 
governments, including Ethiopia and Rwanda, were less than open, but what was 
important was whether they were succeeding in improving lives. "What is the 
direction of travel <>," said Blair, who once referred to Africa as "a scar on 
the world's conscience 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2002/feb/07/politics.development>".

He said both Ethiopia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ethiopia> and Rwanda 
had significantly reduced poverty, while deaths from disease had dropped. But 
he noted it was important that "politics should evolve. At a certain point the 
politics has to match the development".

Aid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> campaigners liked 
what they heard from the former prime minister, who effectively ran the press 
conference â€“ Shah at one point jokingly referred to him as the boss.

"Mr Blair's approach is in contrast to the painfully slow negotiations taking 
place here [in Busan] and the shocking failure of the donor countries to meet 
their commitments from Paris in 2005 and Accra in 2008. The governments 
negotiating here in Busan should seek to emulate the ... sense of urgency 
displayed by Mr Blair," said Concord, the aid campaign network.

They will also have been pleased by what Blair had to say about untying aid.

"In the argument about untying aid, sometimes countries see this as you asking 
them to sacrifice their own interests, but it's not really about that, he said. 
"It's about making aid effective, because the more that it's directed to 
developing those countries, the more, in time, they get off aid. The purpose of 
aid is to end dependence on aid, not to keep that dependence there, and the 
reason for untying it is to accelerate that. So I'll carry on making that 
argument and I think in time we'll win."
 