
Nineteen years ago, a Super Eagles team captained by one Stephen Okechukwu 
Keshi won theAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> Cup of Nations 
in Tunis. Will it be Keshi's time again in Soweto today?

We leave the serious predictions to the professionals. Check out the latest 
from BBC reporter Peter Okwoche (we love him) who staged a pre-final prediction 
match between a bunch of kids. Thevideo is cute, 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1LNSHDzfkdQ> but we're suspicious that Team 
Nigeria seemed to get all the bigger kids. Where was the Sowetan Burkinabés 
version of Dagano? Anyway, the game ends with an assured 3-1 victory for 
Nigeria, but then what would you expect from a game set up by a reporter named 
Okwoche?

Others aren't so sure about the Super Eagles chances. Top football analyst 
Michael Cox has detailed tactical analysis (well worth reading to get a sense 
of where today's game will be won and lost) of both teams' semi-final victories,
Burkina's over Ghana 
<http://www.zonalmarking.net/2013/02/07/burkina-faso-1-1-ghana-burkina-faso-dominate-and-win-the-game-on-penalties/>
 andNigeria's over Mali 
<http://www.zonalmarking.net/2013/02/07/nigeria-4-1-mali-a-battle-of-attacking-left-backs/>
. Cox likes Nigeria, but on the strength of what he saw in the semis, he 
reckons Burkina may be the better side: "if they play with the same level of 
cohesion and fluidity [as they did vs Ghana], Burkina Faso will defeat Nigeria 
on Sunday evening."

Cox reserves his strongest praise for Aristide Bancé, one of this blog's 
favourite players at Afcon:

"This was as good a centre-forward display as you'll see in international 
football. Bancé was involved in everything – he sprinted in behind for chances 
on the counter, he had a header saved on the goal-line from a corner, he could 
drop deep and encourage the wide players beyond him. He even showed great 
defensive ability – at one point rushing back to stop a Ghana counter-attack 
himself, when most other forwards would have left that to the midfielders."

So look out for Burkina, and watch out for Bancé.

We're just hearing Emmanuel Emenike won't start the final, a big blow for the 
Nigerians. That man has been playing like he's a cross between Wayne Rooney and 
a rhinocerous. Still, the Nigerians are confident (is anyone surprised?)

Just seen a Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> fan wearing a 
loaf on his head, bearing the message "Eat them like bread."

— Jonathan Wilson (@jonawils) February 10, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/jonawils/status/300638127045881859>
 