
Memorabilia: Going, going, throne 

The "magnificently kitsch" gold-and-purple throne 
<http://www.grahambuddauctions.co.uk/BidCat/detail.asp?SaleRef=GB22&LotRef=448> 
upon which Bradley Wiggins perched after his gold-medal-winning performance in 
the Olympic time trial is to be sold at Sotheby's in New Bond Street on Monday 
, with an estimate of £10,000-£15,000. Also available is one of seven 
custom-builtdressage judging huts 
<http://www.grahambuddauctions.co.uk/BidCat/detail.asp?SaleRef=GB22&LotRef=448>
, described in the sale catalogue as being "ideal for re-use as a garden 
office" and a bargain at £3,000-£5,000.

Volunteering: Glasgow seeking Games Makers of their own

Any former Games Makers in need of a volunteering fix will be pleased to learn 
thatGlasgow's search for 15,000 helpers 
<http://www.glasgow2014.com/join/volunteering> ahead of the 2014 Commonwealth 
Games begins on Monday when registration officially opens. Hopefuls will then 
be able to submit full applications in January, although 400 positions as 
"frontrunner" volunteers are already being filled.

Film: First showing for First 

The premiere of First, the official film of the 2012 Olympics, is to take 
place on Tuesday. Written, produced and directed by Caroline Rowland, who was 
also behind two films used in London's bid for the Games,Sport at Heart 
<http://vimeo.com/28381929> and Inspiration <http://vimeo.com/37234758>, First 
follows 12 athletes as they competed in their first Olympics, including the 
swimmer Missy Franklin, the Irish boxer Katie Taylor, the Kenyan runner David 
Rudisha and the British cyclist Laura Trott. Rowland said earlier this year 
that "the film is unashamedly aimed at the teen and young adult audience".

Parades: Darwin's delayed display 

The Australian city of Darwin staged perhaps the Olympics' most belated 
welcome-home parade on Friday, 82 days after the last fireworks fizzed from the 
Stratford stadium to mark the end of the Games. While Olympians toured many of 
Australia's big cities soon after their return from London in August, Darwin 
was left off the list because the Northern Territory was busy holding a general 
election. "It's so great to be in Darwin," said the canoe slalom silver 
medallist Jessica Fox, one of six Olympians involved, adding: "They asked me if 
I would paddle in one of the local rivers but apparently there are crocs in all 
of them, so … no way!" Meanwhile, on Wednesday India's successful Olympians 
were each presented with massive solid gold replica medals by a sponsor. The 
winners of the country's two silvers each got a 3kg gong, worth more than 
£100,000, and bronze medallists got a 2kg medal. Had any of them finished first 
in London, a 5kg slab would have been their reward.

And finally …

A section of the Wilmslow Bypass is to be renamed Craig MacLean Way in honour 
of the local gold medal-winning Paralympic cyclist …Sir Chris Hoy and canoeist 
Tim Baillie will lead a parade of Scottish Olympians and Paralympians at the 
rugby union Test against New Zealand at Murrayfield a week on Sunday … 
Paralympic medallists Graeme Ballard, Natalie Jones and Rik Waddon will turn on 
theChristmas lights in Chorley, Lancashire on 24 November.
 