
Wheelchair tennis: Reid aims to defend Nottingham crown 

Seven of Britain's 10 wheelchair tennis Paralympians were in action at the 
Nottingham Indoor tournament, including the defending champion, world No9 and 
British No1, Gordon Reid. The Scot will face the world No2, Maikel Scheffers, 
in a repeat of last year's final, a three-hour epic in which each set went to a 
tie-break. The highest-ranked competitor in the women's field is the German 
world No3, Sabine Ellerbrock. Reid on Saturday defeated the world No23 David 
Phillipson of Nottinghamshire. Entry to Sunday's finals, at the City of 
NottinghamTennis <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tennis> Centre, is free.

Swimming: Payne set for pool return

Keri-Anne Payne will return to the swimming pool to try to qualify for the 
2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow. Payne came fourth by 0.4sec in the Olympic 
10km open-water swimming event but the event is not on the Glasgow programme.

"I'll try for the pool and see how it goes," she said. "I'm quite keen on 
[individual] medley again after having a two-year break from that." Payne won 
Commonwealth bronze in 2010. She also said she is relocating from Stockport to 
Edinburgh with her husband, David Carry, who retired after the 400m freestyle 
final in London.

Equestrianism: Fox-Pitt holds out for a Hero

Last year's winner of the Pau four-star event in France, William Fox-Pitt, 
proved an assured pathfinder on Chilli Morning, on which he has risen seven 
places to sixth. He also had a great round on the nine-year-old Bay My Hero, 
now in fifth. "I've had quite an interrupted season with Chilli, but he is 
accepting me more now. He gave me a lovely ride," Fox-Pitt said. "And with Bay 
My Hero it's a bit like riding my old pony. He knows where to go and is clever 
and cat-like, despite the fact that the ground was more slippery by the time I 
went on him."

Postboxes: Manchester goes gold again

Manchester has been granted another gold postbox, to honour the city's role in 
nurturing Britain's successful cycling team. The postbox, in Piccadilly 
Gardens, was unveiled on Friday as part of an Olympic celebration featuring, 
among others, the cyclists Laura Trott and Sarah Storey, the Manchester-based 
taekwondo gold medallist Jade Jones and a lot of fireworks. Storey and Jones 
will reunite on Thursday to help McFly turn on the Trafford Centre Christmas 
lights.

… and finally

Scottish councils spent at least £800,000 on the torch relay, with North 
Lanarkshire splashing £7,000 on "branded street-dressing materials", Stirling 
£791 on "Olympic hand flags" and Aberdeen £244 on "balloon modellers" … 
Paralympic gold medallist Jonnie Peacock has opened a new Bedfordshire 
municipal facility, Luton Sports Village … Rowing gold medallistKat Copeland 
confirmed her intention to compete in Rio and opened a £130,000 all-weather 
sports ground at Hartburn Primary School in Stockton … Boxing gold medallist
Luke Campbellhas opened a new home for Tamworth Amateur Boxing Club. "It's 
brilliant here," he said … Eastbourne's diving centre has seen a 65% increase 
in participation since the Olympics. 
 