
Archery: Brown back with a silver 

Already the first disabled archer to represent her country at the Commonwealth 
Games, the Paralympic gold medallist Danielle Brown went further when she 
became the first disabled archer to take part in an ableâ€‘bodied World Cup grand 
final. Putting in an outstanding performance, she won silver in the individual 
compound in Tokyo on Saturday.

Brown, who won gold medals at the Paralympic Games in both Beijing and London, 
was invited to take part after Venezuela's Olga Bosch had to pull out. She beat 
Britain's Mel Clarke in the final this summer and has since been honoured with 
a gold postbox but had not been expecting to take part in Japan.

"After the Paralympic Games, I put my bow away, and was expecting to take it 
easy for a couple of weeks," she said. "Then I got a call from World Archery 
inviting me over to Japan, and the bow was back out in a flash." She beat 
Marcella Tonioli and Christie Colin, the archers ranked two and three in the 
world, before losing in the final by just one point to American Jamie Van Natta.

Cycling: Zanardi to race again?

Alex Zanardi, who won two golds and a silver medal at the Paralympic Games, is 
in discussions to return to motor racing after the acclaim he received in the 
wake of his London success.

The 45-year-old, who lost his legs in an accident in 2001, won two Cart titles 
with Chip Ganassi Racing and team chief Ganassi is keen for him to return in 
the IndyCar series. "To have him there would be one thing; to have a Paralympic 
gold medallist is another," he said. "But to have somebody with his personality 
and all those wrapped up in one would be a team's dream."

Jimmy Vasser, who drove with Zanardi at Ganassi, confirmed that the Italian 
said he wanted to race at the Indy 500 next year, while BMW are also in talks 
with the driver over a drive in 2013.

Early start for Rio

A great chance to see potential Olympians in action amid the thrill of a live 
velodrome again at the British Track Championships in the National Cycling 
Centre, Manchester, from Wednesday.

Lucy Garner, the 2011 junior road race world and European champion and the 
2012 junior team pursuit European champion will be racing, as well as Jon 
Dibben, who won silver in the omnium at the junior track world championships.

That these are serious pointers for Rio cannot be underestimated, it was at 
this very point after the Beijing games that London medallists Lizzie 
Armitstead and Joanna Rowsell sprung to prominence.

Athletics: London's last medal

The New Zealand shot putter Valerie Adams finally received her Olympic gold 
medal this week in the wake of Belarus's Nadezhda Ostapchuk being stripped of 
her title after failing a dope test. Fireworks and the national anthem 
accompanied 2,500 fans and a London medallist guard of honour on Auckland's 
waterfront for the ceremony.

Adams, who also won gold in Beijing, intends to defend her title again in Rio 
but felt for the moment she could finally relax. "It's been a very humbling 
evening and it's been one hell of a year," she said. "My party starts now."
 