
The Durban conference on climate change ended with a much better deal than 
most experts expected, but so much remains to be worked out that it is hard to 
say how much real progress has been made.

The same could be said for the Busan conference on development co-operation 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/fourth-high-level-forum-on-aid-effectiveness>
, which ran concurrently across the Indian Ocean.

Noticeably, there was little reference between the two events. The Busan 
outcome document mentions climate finance as an afterthought, clearly wanting 
to avoid stepping on the toes of another international process.

There is clearly a rationale for both processes. One focuses on development 
co-operation, the other on global climate change. But there is also a danger 
the two agendas will grow apart if they are not brought together. After all, it 
was the Indian representative's impassioned speech on equity and the right to 
develop that made such an impact in Durban,according to reports 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/dec/12/durban-climate-change-conference-2011-southafrica>
.

The Busan conference recast aid in terms of "development effectiveness". It's 
not a new term, but it has returned to the limelight as a result of the overly 
technocratic aid effectiveness agenda, and also thanks in no small part to 
advocacy fromBetterAid <http://www.betteraid.org/campaign/> and those civil 
society organisations that have been banging the drum for years.

In similar vein, Tom Mitchell, head of the climate change, environment and 
forests programme 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/work/programmes/climate-environment-forests/default.asp> 
at the Overseas Development Institute, has coined the term "climate 
effectiveness".

Yet, as climate finance continues to live its bizarre parallel (but 
non-additional) existence to aid, isn't it time the two agendas became fully 
integrated? Rather then set up a new partnership to ensure the "development 
effectiveness" of development finance, it would seem sensible to bring 
development and climate finance together, monitoring the efficacy of both. 
There is little practical difference in reality; one and the same national 
development plan needs to respond to poverty, inequality, climate change and 
limited resources.

The Busan conference tentatively set out plans to build a new "global 
partnership for development effectiveness", the modalities of which will be 
worked on in the months leading up to June 2012. Whether by coincidence or 
design (probably the former), that is when the next major international 
conference takes place, and it is the perfect place to rebuild the links 
between the environmental and development agendas.

Called Rio+20 in homage to the Rio conference of 1992 – which was, in many 
ways, the mother of all international conferences – the summit is again taking 
place in the Brazilian city. It is the last major conference before the 
millennium development goals come up for renewal in 2015.

One of Rio+20's two main objectives is to "improve international co-ordination 
for sustainable development". The organisers could start by getting on the 
phone to the UNDP and OECD representatives charged with taking forward the 
Busan partnership.

More generally, Rio is an opportunity to put the concept of sustainable 
development back at the heart of the modern global development discourse. 
Sustainable development means taking into account what has been called the 
"triple bottom line": the economy, the environment, and social equity and 
poverty.

Western politicians, leading their countries through a period of slow-to-no 
growth, may find it harder to focus on poverty and the environment. Southern 
politicians will be happier to talk about poverty and international equity, but 
national equity and the environment may not resonate in some core 
constituencies. Aware that growth is still the one concept that draws all major 
political strands together, Ban Ki Moon, the UN secretary general, claims that 
"the sustainable development agenda is the growth agenda for the 21st century".

But the Rio+20 conference must be careful that its decision to focus on the 
term "green economy" does not obscure the balance implicit in the well-worn but 
still vital concept of sustainable development. No idea has yet garnered so 
much political and academic support, and separating the three core factors is 
as unsatisfactory theoretically and practically as it may be attractive 
politically. The idea of sustainable development goals,first floated by the 
Colombian government <http://sd.defra.gov.uk/2011/12/preparing-for-rio20/> and 
seemingly gathering momentum <http://ipsnews.net/news.asp?idnews=106111> as 
Rio+20 approaches, could be a way of embedding the concept into international 
dialogue, as well as binding together disparate processes such as Busan, Durban 
and the MDGs.

Countries in the north are tempted to give in to vested interests and protect 
the dirty economy, as Canada appears to be doingby pulling out of the Kyoto 
protocol 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/dec/13/canada-pulls-out-kyoto-protocol>
. Rio could be the arena to remind them that a green economy will be better for 
jobs and growth, as well as the planet, if they only have the vision to look 
beyond the dangerous comforts of the growth model with which we have so far 
been stuck.
 