
Paralympics: Return of the Weirwolf 

Already crowned British Paralympic Athlete of the Year, David Weir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-weir>, who had said he intended to 
retire after the Games having won four more gold medals, says he will try to 
win the London Marathon for a seventh time next year and hopes to compete in 
the 2014 Commonwealth Games in Glasgow.

The 37-year-old, who won two golds in Beijing, did not rule out competing at 
Rio in 2016. He had "pretty much decided" to retire after London but admitted: 
"I changed my mind straight after the Games," and hopes to surpass Dame Tanni 
Grey‑Thompson's six London Marathon wins next year. But he is aware that the 
task will not be easy. "I have been thinking about getting back into training 
for the last month. I know it is going to kill me on the first day when I get 
back to it, but I am already preparing for it."

Legacy: Olympic Park open again 

For anyone who did not make it to the Olympic Park this summer, there is now 
another chance to see the venue, as the London Legacy Development Corporation 
has reopened the Greenway cycle and footpath that runs alongside the park and 
the View Tube visitor centre that sits opposite, which offers fine views of 
venues such as the Olympic Stadium and the Aquatics Centre.

Many fans were disappointed not to have a chance too see the park in the 
aftermath of the Games but may now view it as it is, currently in 
mid-redevelopment. Bus tours have also reopened; for details, email: 
parktours@springboard-marketing.co.uk.

BBC Sport's Personality: Runners and riders

With 11 of the 12 Sports Personality of the Year nominations going to Olympic 
and Paralympic athletes, here is the final part of our guide, as anaide-mémoire 
for when voting begins on Sunday evening.

MO FARAH Double gold medal-winner

Skills Bathing in ice, being impossibly likable – making racists nervous

Personality Crowd pleaser, dedicated, confident and seemingly fearless Odds 
13-2

Other honours Prince Charles and Usain Bolt performing the "mobot"

On his side Mobots. Exactly one-quarter of all the people dancing to YMCA

JESSICA ENNIS Heptathlon gold

Skills 2012 poster girl, actually delivering on being the 2012 poster girl

Personality Quiet, determined, cool under pressure Odds 7-1

Other honours Stand named after her at Bramall Lane

On her side Sheffield, teenagers of both sexes infatuated by talent and looks

SARAH STOREY Four, count 'em, FOUR cycling gold medals

Skills With a swimming gold at 14, Britain's greatest modern Paralympian

Personality Charming, uncompromising. Having crushed the women's road race 
field she continued at a pace that saw her pass some of the menOdds 200-1

Other honours Honorary degree from the University of Manchester

On her side Nervous male cyclists hopeful a gong may see her retire (it won't)

RORY McILROY Won the US PGA Championship, Ryder Cup stalwart

Skills Only non-Olympian on the shortlist

Personality Modest, determined, infectiously optimistic Odds 100-1

Other honours No2 in Golf Club Management's 2012 power list, beaten by R&A 
chief executive Peter Dawson

On his side Golfers looking for Olympic-based schadenfreude 
 