
Republican presidential candidates Marco Rubio and Carly Fiorina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/carly-fiorina> took the momentum each 
earned in Thursday’s night’s debates and carried it on to an Atlanta stage at 
RedState Gathering, a conference of conservative activists, on Friday.

Marco Rubio passes critical debate test, but abortion answer hands Democrats 
gift
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/07/marco-rubio-withdtand-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-debate>
Fiorina and Rubio came to the event directly from Cleveland, where they had 
debated the previous night. Fiorina, a former CEO of Hewlett-Packard, appeared 
in the early-evening debate for second tier candidates while Rubio was on stage 
for the main event held in primetime.

Although both candidates were enthusiastically received by the crowd in a 
darkened hotel ballroom inAtlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta>
, Fiorina did show some indications about why she had been relegated to the 
second tier so far.


With a gaggle of reporters afterwards, the former Hewlett Packard CEO became 
testy when she was asked how she could criticize Donald Trump for talking a 
phone call from Bill Clinton before running when she had appeared as recently 
as last year at the Clinton Global Initiative.

Fiorina was visibly annoyed at the question, firing back: “So you really don’t 
understand the difference between getting a personal phone call from Bill 
Clinton and showing up at a conference where the Clintons have for years 
invited a bipartisan group of guests?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fmarco-rubio-carly-fiorina-redstate-atlanta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1baebbbc4d71653bc754a2e2ac381b6ac63b5b7a%2F0_89_3821_2297%2F3821.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20debate%20success%2C%20Rubio%20and%20Fiorina%20given%20warm%20welcome%20in%20Atlanta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fmarco-rubio-carly-fiorina-redstate-atlanta%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20debate%20success%2C%20Rubio%20and%20Fiorina%20given%20warm%20welcome%20in%20Atlanta&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2015%2Faug%2F07%2Fmarco-rubio-carly-fiorina-redstate-atlanta%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1baebbbc4d71653bc754a2e2ac381b6ac63b5b7a%2F0_89_3821_2297%2F3821.jpg>
 Carly Fiorina speaks at the RedState Gathering on Friday. Photograph: David 
Goldman/AP 
It was a show of irritation that the normally composed and on-message Fiorina 
had rarely displayed on the campaign trail so far. She also had to backtrack, 
both to reporters and via an announcement after her appearance, for 
misunderstanding a question. Fiorina said that she had thought that a question 
about the US Chamber of Commerce, the powerful pro-business lobby, was actually 
about the US Department of Commerce.

Yet these were relatively minor hiccups for Fiorina, who came on to the stage 
at RedState with all the swagger one would expect from someone introduced as 
the winner of her debate. “I think we kind of rumbled last night, what do you 
think?” she asked the crowd.

She then went on to hammer home her message attacking “progressivism” and 
Hillary Clinton – and got big applause for calling the Democratic frontrunner a 
liar. “She did lie about Benghazi. She did lie about her emails. She did lie 
about her servers,” said the Republican candidate, referring to two 
well-publicized controversies over Clinton.

Rubio was more understated, spending more energy trying to emphasize his 
credentials as a social conservative. He compared the zeal of Democrats to use 
federal money to fund the reproductive health organization Planned Parenthood 
to the idea ofRepublicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> 
trying to divert government funds to the NRA. The Florida senator also 
emphasized the importance of family. While he rehashed his familiar story of 
being the son of an immigrant bartender, he noted that he did “come from 
privilege”. After all, he said, he was raised in a two-parent, stable household.

The Florida senator also tried to woo the crowd with some corny jokes. After 
reading a question in Spanish, he translated it as: “It means I know how to 
save you a bunch of money on your car insurance by switching to Geico” to the 
mostly older and white crowd.

The only time he visibly struggled was when he got a softball question about 
hip-hop, a genre of music of which Rubio is one of the most prominent fans in 
American politics. Rubio said he was excited to see the upcoming NWA biopic 
Straight Outta Compton and had heard the new Eminem album was supposed to be 
“pretty good” but seemed ill at ease and eventually asked for the “next 
question”.

The crowd was enthused about both candidates. Debbie Georgatos, a talk show 
host from Dallas, said: “I thoughtMarco Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio> was fabulous,” and Fiorina 
“informed, impassioned and couldn’t be better prepared”.

Andrew Carlton of Atlanta was far more impressed by Rubio’s performance at the 
conference than that on the debate stage. The Florida senator “seemed very down 
to Earth and spoke intelligently”, he said. But Fiorina had made an even bigger 
impact in his opinion during her debate. “If she’s at the next top tier debate, 
there’s a big problem.”
 