
In the village of Juujärvi, just inside the Arctic circle, northern Finland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/finland>, the weather is not usually this 
forgiving. The day I visit it is a balmy -5, when typically one can expect -15. 
A deep crust of snow covers everything for seven months of the year. Cousins 
Irja and Seppo Juujärvi, who have lived here all their lives, share coffee and 
blueberry cake with me in a cosy converted cow shed.

“There used to be 200 people living here,” Irja says of her home village, 90km 
from the nearest town, Rovaniemi. “Now it’s closer to 50.” The average age is 
65. Irja and Seppo are 76 and 78.

Death is life's finale and should not be cut short
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/02/assisted-dying-death-lifes-finale>
“Our family has lived here for 400 years, from the 1600s until now,” says 
Seppo, explaining why they – and many in the region – share their surname with 
the name of the village. However, they are most likely the last generation to 
do so. “I have two daughters, one lives in Helsinki and one in Rovaniemi,” says 
Seppo. “They aren’t interested in living here. They have their own lives.”

Europe is ageing fast, and nowhere more so than rural Scandinavia. While 15.8% 
of Finns were aged 65 or over in 2002, by 2012 this had risen to 18.8% – one of 
the fastest rates inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. 
Global questions regarding how society treats its old people, and whether rural 
communities can be sustained, are an urgent and pressing reality here.

Juujärvi used to have a school, shops and weekly village dances. Now it has 
none. Seppo insists that “it’s good living here”. He can leave his front door 
to hunt and return with 400kg of meat from one elk. I meet another resident, 
Eero Niemi, who does the same aged 89.

But under a hardy surface lies an acceptance that this way of life is 
disappearing. Their children left to study and didn’t return. Employment once 
provided by fishing and logging has been in steady decline; the local 
hydroelectric company Kemijoki offered employment booms during construction 
phases, but now gets by with just 45 staff. Public services are also 
diminishing. The nearest GP is 45km away; the hospital, 90km.

“If I got sick and needed to see a doctor often I would have to move,” says 
Niemi, the hunter. “Every year, someone else goes, and the village gets smaller 
… because the doctors will not come and see you here. People want to live here 
as long as possible but at some point they need to move to the city.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fageing-finland-remote-airbnb-education-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F10%2F1426008174290%2Fd72947c0-613e-4b50-9cd0-20029aba0c86-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ageing%20villages%20of%20northern%20Finland%20where%20ancient%20way%20of%20life%20is%20dying%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fageing-finland-remote-airbnb-education-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ageing%20villages%20of%20northern%20Finland%20where%20ancient%20way%20of%20life%20is%20dying%20out&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fmar%2F11%2Fageing-finland-remote-airbnb-education-healthcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F10%2F1426008174290%2Fd72947c0-613e-4b50-9cd0-20029aba0c86-2060x1236.jpeg>
 There used to be 200 people living in Irja Juujarvi’s (centre) village. Now 
it’s closer to 50. Photograph: Antti Raatikainen 
The neighbouring village, Autti, has the same problems. Its population is 100, 
also with an average age of 65; its school has stood closed since the mid-1990s 
and is now used as a meeting hall. Shelves of children’s books remain but there 
are no children to read them.

The reality is these villages will die out in a very short space of time if 
nothing changes.
Ossi Korhonen 
There are efforts, however, to attract new people to the area. Autti and 
Juujärvi, along with two villages closer to town, Oikarainen and Hirvas, have 
been recent recipients of a design competition as part of Arctic Design Week. 
Four multi-disciplinary teams of students from the University of Lapland were 
assigned to design solutions that could improve the lives of village residents, 
and in turn help secure the long-term future of the area.

Päivi Tahkokallio, chief executive of design agency Tahkokallio Design+ and 
co-producer of Arctic Design Week, explained: “Political power in the small 
villages is not strong enough compared to the city. So the best way to make a 
change is to be as innovative as possible and find new ways to do things, 
otherwise, the feeling here is that there might be a hidden plan to let at 
least some of the villages die out.”

Industrial design student Ossi Korhonen worked with Autti’s residents. His 
team’s winning proposal was to promote Autti as a tourist destination by 
renting bicycles and kick sledges (a popular winter form of transport). In 
addition, young families could be attracted to stay with residents in a format 
similar to Airbnb; they would also be asked to help with rural chores such as 
wood chopping and snow shovelling.

“The idea is to go beyond just somewhere to stay, to include having an 
authentic experience – to be hosted and feel part of a community”, says 
Korhonen. Other student proposals ranged from bespoke community apps for 
tablets to local craft workshops.

But all conceded the scale of the challenge. “The reality is these villages 
will die out in a very short space of time if nothing changes”, says Korhonen. 
“[Any solution] can’t just be about looking back and using the old ways, but 
looking ahead and using modern opportunities.”

The village of Hirvas appears a success story – more than 700 residents, and 
growing, with 11% of them over 60 years old (roughly the Finnish national 
average). It has a school, even a gym. Oikarainen, too, boasts young families, 
a school and 500 residents. Yet these villages benefit from proximity to the 
city, being just 15km and 20km away from Rovaniemi. Residents are commuters, 
now. The schools are also marked for closure, deemed too small for even 
relatively rich Finnish authorities to afford. If this happens, residents fear 
that families will quickly move away.

We want to preserve our environment and the way we live, but of course it’s 
unfair – we need services too.
Enni Yliraudanjoki 
“The future looks bad for small villages”, says Oikarainen resident Enni 
Yliraudanjoki, 76. However, like many others in the area, she believes there’s 
reason for optimism. People are becoming dissatisfied with urban living and the 
tide will turn back to a connection with nature, she says. “We are waiting for 
people to realise how perfect life can be out here.”

However, if the authorities do cut off education and healthcare, they will 
sever the arteries keeping these communities alive.

I ask Yliraudanjoki if such villages are simply too expensive for Europe’s 
governments to maintain. “It is a common problem the world over,” she agrees. 
“But the world should be for people, for human beings. We want to preserve our 
environment and the way we live, but of course it’s unfair – we need services 
too. We are not so proud that we want to do everything by ourselves. But 
everyone should have a right to certain services.”
 