
I recall working at the University of Western Australia in the 1990s and being 
delighted at the bravery and sheer elegance ofA Fair Chance for All 
<http://www.voced.edu.au/content/ngv2270>, the national plan to ensure better 
access, participation and success for all Australians into higher education.

Almost a quarter of a century on and these principles still resonate, still 
matter.

For most people, a post-school education provides a better, longer life and a 
better shot at employment. It gives you greater power to make decisions about 
your life.

Today in Australia, like the UK, the debate around access to, and cost of, 
higher education is back in the national spotlight. Who should have access and 
who should pay – is higher education a public good or a private benefit?

The first budget from prime minister Tony Abbott's new government outlined 
sweeping changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/08/christopher-pyne-flags-major-changes-to-higher-education-in-budget>
 to the university sector. Some argue this is long overdue, others are 
mortified.

I have long argued that a world-class and equitable higher education system 
requires strong and consistent policy and long-term government investment.

The global academy has been watching the unintended consequences of the 
erosion in government investment in England and Wales. A particular fascination 
has been the very significant escalation in fees associated with a repayment 
system that has a capacity to wipe out debt after a period. None of it has been 
pretty, but the resultingbrain drain to Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/nov/06/british-brain-drain-skills-shortages>
 has been beneficial and helpful.

But we must heed the warnings or we will follow down that same murky path.

Unlike the UK, Australia does not have a cap on tuition fees. We have taken 
the private benefit of education one step further. Thechanges now proposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/budget-university-students-to-pay-more-with-removal-of-caps-on-fees>
 in Australia include allowing universities to charge students whatever fees 
they like for courses. This is likely to create a university class structure, 
similar to the US, and attracting many new, private providers to Australia.

The new market will limit choice

This new market is expected to alter behaviour and perhaps limit choice as 
price is a more significant consideration. The US Nobel laureate and 
world-leading economist professor Joseph Stiglitz isoutspoken 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/nobel-prizewinning-economist-joseph-stiglitz-says-abbott-government-budget-changes-are-a-crime-20140702-3b8vb.html>
 on the trend in the US that has the poor mostly locked into low-quality, 
high-debt, poor employment education cycles.

All of this has been brought about by the Australian government's decision to 
cut its contribution to the cost of undergraduate student education byaround 20%
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/budget-university-students-to-pay-more-with-removal-of-caps-on-fees>
, the thinking being that the private benefit of education for many justifies 
lower public investment.

These are big cuts. Fees will have to go up to ensure we maintain our 
standards of education, keep our ability to attract the very best staff and 
ensure we live up to our community engagement obligations.

A risk of job losses

What we now have in common with our English colleagues is a risk of 
significant job losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2014/jun/05/kings-college-london-cut-jobs-to-fund-university-buildings>
 and downwardpressure on salaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/oct/30/university-staff-why-we-are-striking-higher-education-pay>
. Worse still, people who may have chosen academia as a career will either 
direct their talents to something else or leave the country.

The evidence from institutions in England and Wales is compelling: they are 
already cutting programmes and teaching budgets in order to protect research 
funds. In Australia, the reduction inResearch Training Scheme 
<http://www.education.gov.au/research-training-scheme> funding is an unexpected 
and surprising change and a potential blow to the nation's innovation system. 
Not least, the signal is sent that we do not value the growth and nurturing of 
our next generation of innovators and researchers.

Competition with other providers is not the issue. Generally Australian 
universities are good at competing as our prominence on the international stage 
and all the ranking tables will attest. The big and very disappointing signal 
is that public investment in research and education in Australia is no longer 
valued as a competitive advantage.

All of those around us in our region – China, Singapore, Korea – and in the 
OECD are increasing investment while we look on with despair as we decline.

More debt for the poor

There are also plans in the budget to index student debt payments (which are 
repaid once employment begins) at the 10-year government bond rate instead of 
the more benign Consumer Price Index.

This is both punitive and unfair, as compound interest will have many 
unintended consequences: the poor will acquire more debt, while others will be 
indifferent to course fees as they simply defer payment, never work, or leave 
Australia, with many only realising the error of the decisions when it is too 
late to do anything about it.

Like the UK, we face the prospect of debts that are never repaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/11/student-loans-may-never-be-repaid>
. Unlike the UK, there is no proposal in Australia to have a moratorium on old 
debt.

None of the proposed changes are through the Australian Senate yet and we hope 
the extraordinarily aggressive changes to funding cuts and the interest rate on 
student loans in particular will not make it to the other side intact.

Surely there is room for a more moderate approach and for a better signal to 
our nation about education, both its public good and private benefit?

Surely Australia can learn from the UK and the US experiences?

We all know that, in the new knowledge economy, change is essential – for all 
nations. If Australia is to prosper and be a force for innovation, for public 
good and for the values and activities that are in our national interest, then 
we must embrace the transformations wrought by digital disruption that shows no 
mercy on any nation or individual.

It is a disappointment that changes to higher education appear to be coming at 
a high cost to the public good in both of our nations.

Whatever the future holds, we must remain true to our promise of educating the 
next generation, our most precious asset. Those future students deserve that 
privilege, and our countries deserve a smart and well-educated population if we 
are to continue to prosper and achieve on the world stage.

Professor Jane den Hollander is vice-chancellor of Deakin University 
<http://www.deakin.edu.au/>, Australia.

Australian and UK universities mimic each other's strategies when it comes to 
higher education funding and policy. But who's leading the way, and are they 
going in the right direction?We spend two weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/australia-fortnight> 
debating, sharing stories and opening up the discussion.

Join the Higher Education Network  
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/>for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 