
Model Agyness Deyn  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/jan/11/agyness-deyn-model> is to 
swap the catwalk for the boards, making her stage debut next year in Fran√ßois 
Archambault's dinner party comedy The Leisure Society.

The 28-year-old, who made a brief appearance as Greek goddess Aphrodite in the 
filmClash of the Titans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/apr/01/clash-of-the-titans-review> last 
year, will play Paula, a "promiscuous free spirit" invited to dinner by a 
self-obsessed "yuppie" couple, when the "toxic comedy" plays at the Trafalgar 
Studios in the West End from March 2012.

Deyn's modelling career reportedly began when she was spotted shopping in 
north London, but took off in earnest when she was featured on the cover of 
Vogue USA. In 2009, the Daily Mirror reported that she had given up modelling 
to focus on her acting career 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/celebs/news/2009/06/16/she-s-ag-it-up-to-here-115875-21444569/>
. She is due to play a major role in the forthcoming remake of Danish film 
Pusher, a drug-deal narrative set in London's gangland, which is currently in 
post-production.

On stage, she will star alongside Ed Stoppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/may/17/ed-stoppard-tom-arcadia-play>, a 
former Hamlet and star of the BBC's recent remake of Upstairs Downstairs, and 
relative newcomer Melanie Gray in the play, which will be directed by Harry 
Burton for Hillscape Productions.

Deyn is far from the first model to make the leap to straight drama: she 
follows in the footsteps of Lily Cole, who took part in this year's 24 Hour 
Plays at the Old Vic in November, while Jerry Hall appeared on stage in bothThe 
Graduate <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/aug/01/artsfeatures7> and 
Calendar Girls.
 