
As the leisurewear outfit Lacoste discovered during the trial of Anders 
Breivik, there is such a thing as negative publicity. Breivik’s proud displays 
of their pullovers, as he explained his reasoning for murdering 77 people, 
mostly children, led toLacoste requesting police intervention to end his 
remorseless product placement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/09/anders-breivik-clothes-lacoste-police>
.

Bad news for Lacoste, good news for Chanel, as it threw people off the scent 
of Breivik’s other big brand passion:Platinum Egoiste 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/167682/breiviks-monstrous-dream-and-why-it-failed#>
, Chanel’s cologne “expressing energy, light and virility, with the warmth of 
exotic woods”. His followers still ship him bottles in prison along with books 
and CDs and Knights Templar cufflinks, though one chap on the Commander Breivik 
Report online forum did express some queasiness:“I wouldn’t feel entirely 
comfortable sending another man some perfume.” 
<https://breivikreport.wordpress.com/2013/02/01/breivik-files-complaint-about-his-prison-conditions/>

At the weekend an unlikely nasal-mate for Breivik was revealed: senior Islamic 
State commander Abou Bilel, who, it turns out, is also a fan of Chanel’s virile 
spritz – albeit Egoiste original, the non-Platinum version.A French journalist 
posing as a potential jihadi bride 
<http://www.pressreader.com/australia/the-australian/20150303/281513634611564/TextView>
 was asked to pick him up a couple of duty-free bottles en route to Syria.

To have one terrorist endorsing your product may be regarded as unfortunate. 
To have two looks downright creepy. That both are at opposite ends of the 
ideological spectrum somehow adds to the infelicity. Two men, divided by 
belief, united by scent – and a horrific list of crimes.

So what exactly is Egoiste’s special allure? From a quick sniff of Platinum in 
Boots I didn’t detect much more than lemons, with a top note of Toilet Duck. 
More expert opinion can be found in Luca Turin and Tania Sanchez’s fabulously 
catty 2008 fragrance guide,Perfume 
<http://www.perfumestheguide.com/Perfumes_The_A-Z_Guide_-_Luca_Turin_and_Tania_Sanchez/Home.html>
. Though there’s praise for the original, the diffusion is, they say, 
“extraordinarily bad … reeks of the sad male clone it was intended for”, while 
that name is “like a credit card for tight-fisted sugar daddies”. It’s true: 
you would have to be a special type of self-aggrandiser to say “I’m wearing 
Platinum Egoiste” without gagging.

Life’s a beach with Ukip

There’s much to enjoy in the pictures of a Ukip prospective parliamentary 
candidate being hauled to safety off Margate beach 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/emilyashton/right-in-the-thick-of-it> at the party 
conference. Sam Gould, who’ll be standing in Caerphilly, had been inscribing 
the slogan “We love Nige” smitten-teen-style in the sand (there’s even a heart 
round “Nige”). But he lost track of the tide, the beach flooded, and the only 
way up was via the harbour wall, slippery with bladderwrack. Other than the 
glee to be found in such a photo opportunity fail, it’s lovely to see Margate 
sands in all their golden glory. In fact, the reality may come as a shock to 
those who’ve watched recent movies set there. Dickens biopicThe Invisible Woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/09/invisible-woman-mark-kermode-review>
 recast the town as a chocolate box rural village, and added Camber-ish dunes 
where the prom should have been.Mike Leigh’s JMW Turner biopic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mr-turner> couldn’t shoot on site as the 
construction of theTurner Contemporary art gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2011/apr/07/turner-contemporary-gallery-david-chipperfield-pictures>
 had obstructed the very view the painter so loved.

Programmed to fail 

Groggy after the Oscars nightshift I watched an afternoon of daytime telly. 
I’d forgotten how compelling property and dating programmes are; but a marathon 
watch proves a curiously deflating experience. The setup of each show is 
strictly task-based: get this bloke a girlfriend, find this couple a 
three-bedroom bungalow with a utility room near Maidstone station for under 
£240,000. Yet the end-credits conclusion after an hour of trying is almost 
always anti-climatic: these people are still single, those ones are still 
house-hunting. It’s lucky people are quite so eager for fleeting fame. Because 
you certainly shouldn’t turn to these shows on account of their success rates.
 