
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, the Iranian hardliner who presided over a period of 
deepening and damaging sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/sanctions-against-iran-to-be-lifted-after-compliance-with-nuclear-deal>
, has been blocked from running for president in Iran’s elections next year.


The former president’s hopes were dashed after the supreme leader, Ayatollah 
Ali Khamenei <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>, 
indicated in public that he did not see the prospect of his candidacy as being 
in the interests of the country.


In a letter published on Tuesday, Ahmadinejad announced he would not be 
running, submitting to the wishes of the 77-year-old ayatollah.


It comes after months of speculation that Ahmadinejad had been building up a 
campaign to confront the current president, the moderate clericHassan Rouhani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani>, in next year’s vote. 
Rouhani has to seek re-election if he wants to remain in power for another four 
years. Under Iranian law, presidents are only allowed two consecutive terms.

Earlier this month, the semi-official Fars news agency reported that the 
supreme leader had explicitly told Ahmadinejad he should not run. Later, two 
conservative politicians confirmed those reports.

On Monday, Khamenei’s official website, in an apparent move to put his opinion 
on the record, published the transcription of his speech during a meeting with 
a group of his followers.

“Someone came to see me and considering his own interests and the interests of 
the country, I told him he should not participate in that matter [elections],” 
Khamenei is quoted as saying. “I didn’t tell him not to participate, I told him 
I won’t recommend him participating.”

In his letter on Tuesday, which was addressed to Khamenei, Ahmadinejad 
revealed he had a meeting with the leader at the end of last month, during 
which he was told not to run.

“You recommended that it was not in [my] interests to run in the elections and 
I stated my obedience,” he wrote.


In theory, Ahmadinejad can still put his name on the list as a nominee and the 
supreme leader does not have the automatic power to block him. In practice, 
however, the ayatollah has the ultimate power in all state matters.

The Guardian Council, a body of jurists and clerics who are close to Khamenei, 
vets all candidates before any elections inIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>, in a process that has been the 
subject of much controversy. There has been a heated debate over whether the 
Guardian Council has the constitutional footing to block candidates but in 
recent years, it has blocked many reformists and independents, as well as 
conservatives, from running in parliamentary and presidential elections.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fahmadinejad-blocked-running-iran-presidential-elections-ali-khamenei%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe96ac69e166e52fc1177b9018ac39be58bf27cb1%2F0_80_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ahmadinejad%20blocked%20from%20running%20in%20Iran%20presidential%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fahmadinejad-blocked-running-iran-presidential-elections-ali-khamenei%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ahmadinejad%20blocked%20from%20running%20in%20Iran%20presidential%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fahmadinejad-blocked-running-iran-presidential-elections-ali-khamenei%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe96ac69e166e52fc1177b9018ac39be58bf27cb1%2F0_80_2400_1440%2F2400.jpg>
 Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, indicated he did not see the 
prospect of Ahmadinejad’s candidacy as being in the interests of the country. 
Photograph: HO/AFP/Getty Images 
After the nuclear deal, the west should not disappoint Iranians for the third 
time | Saeed Kamali Dehghan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/18/life-iranians-nuclear-deal>
Despite the vetting process, which has raised questions about the fairness of 
Iranian elections, turnouts are usually high in presidential elections. Iranian 
leaders say the level of participation means the elections are legitimate.

The 2013 vote that put Rouhani in power was a contest between six candidates, 
all of whom were approved by the Guardian Council.


In the months leading up to this week’s news, Ahmadinejad had indicated that 
he wanted to run, including by visiting provinces, becoming more active online 
and speaking at more occasions.


It is not clear why Khamenei decided to make the issue public, but Ahmadinejad 
seemed to have continued his activities despite their meeting.

The relationship between the two was fraught in the final years of 
Ahmadinejad’s presidency because of a power struggle at the height of the 
Islamic Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/19/ahmadinejad-iran-power-struggle>
. Ahmadinejad took extraordinary measures to confront Khamenei, including 
threatening to resign. He was sidelined as Rouhani took office in 2013 but has 
become active.

Iranian elections have been full of surprises in recent years and it is not 
clear if Rouhani would face similar difficulties if he seeks re-election.

Khamenei has his own differences with Rouhani – he appears concerned about 
Rouhani’s associates, particularly his brother, Hossein Fereydoun.


 The ayatollah has made several controversial interventions, most notably in 
2009 when he sided with Ahmadinejad against allegations of fraud, which led to 
a turbulent time in Iran.

The reverberations of that event are felt even today, with two of the four 
presidential candidates in the 2009 vote, who alleged the elections were 
stolen, still placed under arrest at the wishes of the leader.


Ahmadinejad and Rouhani are at odds over multiple domestic and foreign 
policies, particularly over last year’s landmark nuclear deal, which the latter 
agreed to. Some believe that as a relatively young politician in Iran, 
Ahmadinejad and his inner circle may have their eyes on the period after 
Khamenei,who underwent prostate surgery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/31/iran-ayatollah-ali-khamenei-succession-supreme-leader>
 in 2014.
 