
The artists Ai Weiwei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/11/ai-weiwei-tells-of-his-lack-of-support-from-the-british-government>
 and Anish Kapoor joined hands as they strode down London’s Piccadilly at the 
beginning of an eight-mile walk to show solidarity with refugees around the 
world.

“This is a walk of compassion, a walk together as if we were walking to the 
studio,” Kapoor said. “Peaceful. Quiet. Creative.”

A chilly grey morning turned into a pleasant autumn day as the sun came out at 
9.55am, five minutes before the pair set off from the Royal Academy of Arts 
joined by around 100 kindred spirits – and probably as many journalists.

The artists hope that by the time they reach their destination, Kapoor’s Orbit 
in the Olympic park at Stratford, many more people will have joined them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fai-weiwei-anish-kapoor-london-walk-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ae019a9fb8baeda10bd12d780fa1e3e17c7b0da%2F0_126_4581_2748%2F4581.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ai%20Weiwei%20and%20Anish%20Kapoor%20lead%20London%20walk%20of%20compassion%20for%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fai-weiwei-anish-kapoor-london-walk-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ai%20Weiwei%20and%20Anish%20Kapoor%20lead%20London%20walk%20of%20compassion%20for%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fai-weiwei-anish-kapoor-london-walk-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ae019a9fb8baeda10bd12d780fa1e3e17c7b0da%2F0_126_4581_2748%2F4581.jpg>
 Ai Weiwei and Anish Kapoor (obscured) in central London. Photograph: Peter 
Nicholls/Reuters 
It was easy to join, said Kapoor. “It is an act of solidarity and minimal 
action – we like that spirit.”

Ai, who has a show at the Royal Academy opening to the public on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/14/ai-weiwei-royal-academy-review-momentous-and-moving>
, said the walk was not a one-off and they would repeat it in other cities for 
as long was necessary.


“We are artists, we are part of the whole situation,” he said. “This problem 
has such a long history, a human history. We are all refugees somehow, 
somewhere and at some moment.”


Kapoor said the walk was a creative act. “We are demanding creativity of 
others, recognising that those who leave their country and go on a journey 
across the water full of danger or who walk hundreds of miles across land are 
also making a creative act.

“It is important that artists are not outside the equation, we don’t stand on 
the sidelines. Artists are part of the story of a response, we cannot stand 
aside and let others make the response.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fai-weiwei-anish-kapoor-london-walk-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee02407e4844bc6f0ded79524ca8b19c4ec68cdd%2F0_0_2791_1674%2F2791.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ai%20Weiwei%20and%20Anish%20Kapoor%20lead%20London%20walk%20of%20compassion%20for%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fai-weiwei-anish-kapoor-london-walk-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ai%20Weiwei%20and%20Anish%20Kapoor%20lead%20London%20walk%20of%20compassion%20for%20refugees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fsep%2F17%2Fai-weiwei-anish-kapoor-london-walk-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee02407e4844bc6f0ded79524ca8b19c4ec68cdd%2F0_0_2791_1674%2F2791.jpg>
 The artists wave as they walk in London. Photograph: Niklas Halle'N/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Apart from Germany opening its doors, the whole story had been overwhelmingly 
negative, he said. “We are trying to do positive action: by opening a certain 
spirit, a certain poetic space, we can at least hope to change how we think 
about the problem.”

Ai added: “Let us show the world we are involved.” 

The walk was due to take in Whitehall and St Paul’s, heading east to Brick 
Lane and Mile End Road.

Aylar Farrokhzad and Matilda Ellis, two London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> students, were among the early joiners. 
“It is such a good cause and it is the little things that can sometimes be 
really powerful,” said Farrokhzad. “You look at the news and then you look at 
how you’re living.”

Ellis said it was a simple but positive thing to do. “It seems so distant, you 
watch it on the news and it is hard to get it to relate to yourself, so this 
brings it to the front of people’s lives.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fai-weiwei-beijing-prison-freedom-of-speech&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440781834237%2FKP_407338_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ai%20Weiwei%20on%20Beijing%3A%20'It's%20a%20prison%20for%20freedom%20of%20speech'%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fai-weiwei-beijing-prison-freedom-of-speech>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ai%20Weiwei%20on%20Beijing%3A%20%27It%27s%20a%20prison%20for%20freedom%20of%20speech%27%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fai-weiwei-beijing-prison-freedom-of-speech&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F28%2F1440781834237%2FKP_407338_crop_640x360.jpg>
Ai Weiwei on Beijing: ‘It’s a prison for freedom of speech’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/video/2015/sep/08/ai-weiwei-beijing-prison-freedom-of-speech>
Eliza Bonham Carter, curator of the Royal Academy Schools, was also on the 
walk. “We all need to pay attention to what those people who are on the move 
are facing,” she said. “It is very easy for us to lie in our comfy beds and 
forget about it. We need to remember what they are going through.

“I woke up this morning realising how incredibly gorgeous my bed was. So many 
people are waking up, or probably not having slept, on the streets.”

Can events like this do any good? “It can’t do any harm,” Bonham Carter said. 
“The more we show our support, the more the government might understand that 
people have very wide views about migration and immigration.”

The walk finished at 1.30pm with Ai and Kapoor leading around 150 people to 
Kapoor’s Orbit - the UK’s largest piece of public art - in the Olympic park at 
Stratford.
 