
Aidan Gillen <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/aidan-gillen> is perched on 
an oversized sofa, head-to-toe in black save for brown boots and the two 
splashes of silver among his short dark curls. His face is pointedly handsome. 
The definitive word on his unblinking gaze comes in his best film, The Low 
Down, in which his co-star tells him: “You’ve got, um, quite starey eyes, 
haven’t you?”

Gillen isn’t accustomed to being the centre of attention. Even after taking a 
prominent role inGame of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> – as Littlefinger, 
the calculating brothel owner – the 47-year-old has refused to be defined by 
the pop-culture colossus. “I enjoy being part of that world,” he says in a 
voice scarcely louder than falling snow. “It’s a phenomenon, but I’m not 
slap-bang in the middle.” The same could be said of an earlier HBO show,The Wire
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire>, in which he played a Baltimore 
politician whose idealism took a bruising.

How we made Queer as Folk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/06/how-we-made-queer-as-folk-russell-t-davies>
Now and then, he’ll turn up in something glossy – The Dark Knight Rises, or 
the latestMaze Runner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/13/maze-runner-scorch-trials-review-aidan-gillen-lili-taylor>
 film. But you would need to go all the way back to Channel 4’sQueer as Folk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jan/06/how-we-made-queer-as-folk-russell-t-davies>
 in 1999 to find him fully in the spotlight. That’s how he likes it: “If you 
can walk into a room where there are 20 people who don’t know what to expect 
from you, then you can pretend better.”

Over the coming weeks, he will be almost alone on stage, accompanied only by 
the pianist Feargal Murray, for a series of candlelit readings of James Joyce’s 
masterful short storyThe Dead 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/theatre/whats-on/concerts-by-candlelight/james-joyces-the-dead-read-by-aidan-gillen>
. Set at a bustling party on the feast of the epiphany, the story sifts through 
the trifling worries of a professor who will, by the end of the night, have 
experienced an epiphany of his own.

The idea of the reading was sold to Gillen as “Jackanory for adults”. Yes, 
he’ll have the 16,000-word story in front of him on stage. “But it has a lot of 
dialogue. People talking at the same time. It’s full of characters and you have 
to inhabit them. You can’t just be stuck in a book.” His accent sees to it that 
“stuck” rhymes with “book”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Faidan-gillen-i-hate-fame-but-id-miss-it-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce653ecbb83c8be065a04aaea90a612d768f159a%2F0_184_4928_2959%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aidan%20Gillen%3A%20'I%20hate%20fame%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20I'd%20miss%20it%20too'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Faidan-gillen-i-hate-fame-but-id-miss-it-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aidan%20Gillen%3A%20%27I%20hate%20fame%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20I%27d%20miss%20it%20too%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Faidan-gillen-i-hate-fame-but-id-miss-it-too%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce653ecbb83c8be065a04aaea90a612d768f159a%2F0_184_4928_2959%2F4928.jpg>
 ‘I enjoy being part of that world, but I’m not slap-bang in the middle of it’ 
… Gillen with Sophie Turner in Game of Thrones. Photograph: HBO 
It isn’t far removed from reading a bedtime story to his kids, he says. “I 
suppose children usually haven’t paid. Maybe they should. They might pay more 
attention.” The idea amuses him; a smile flickers on his lips. “I think people 
who don’t know the story will be pleasantly surprised. They might come along 
expecting Finnegans Wake, but this is very accessible; it has more in common 
with Chekhov and Dickens.”

Like Joyce, Gillen also left his motherland, though his own departure wasn’t 
stormy, and he still has a home there. “I don’t know if I could’ve stayed and 
worked as an actor. Actors in Ireland tended to come from other professions. 
Brendan Gleeson and Gabriel Byrne had both been teachers. But I was ready to go 
when I left school. I didn’t want to spend five years doing something else.” He 
had never been outside Ireland when he hopped on a boat at the age of 18. “I 
grew up in Dublin. But I grew up in London, too. It was here that I found out 
who I was and what I was going to do.”

Stage and film work followed, but Gillen’s arrival was announced most 
emphatically in 1993 withSafe <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rQfbB4GjX6c>, 
Antonia Bird’s BBC2 film about London’s homeless youngsters. He played Gypo, 
who could be wildly self-destructive and achingly tender, often in the same 
scene. “We shot it in three weeks. I had this feeling of elation. I never 
wanted to sleep. I probably didn’t, either.” His performance looks today like a 
statement of intent. “Well, I had the intent but no technique. Imeant what I 
was doing. I just didn’t know how to do it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Faidan-gillen-i-hate-fame-but-id-miss-it-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3073cc0ad90add006100da29b2af1d6afd6b1237%2F0_263_1796_2693%2F1796.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aidan%20Gillen%3A%20'I%20hate%20fame%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20I'd%20miss%20it%20too'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Faidan-gillen-i-hate-fame-but-id-miss-it-too%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aidan%20Gillen%3A%20%27I%20hate%20fame%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0but%20I%27d%20miss%20it%20too%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fdec%2F09%2Faidan-gillen-i-hate-fame-but-id-miss-it-too%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3073cc0ad90add006100da29b2af1d6afd6b1237%2F0_263_1796_2693%2F1796.jpg>
 ‘You get to live all these lives and it feels real’ … Gillen with Craig Kelly 
and Charlie Hunnam in Channel 4’s Queer As Folk Photograph: CHANNEL 4 
Gillen’s co-star, Kate Hardie <http://katehardie.info>, spent the entire shoot 
with him. “Aidan’s really tricky because sometimes he doesn’t say much,” she 
tells me. “He might just growl at you and you’re thinking: ‘You’re quite 
peculiar.’ It took me a long time to work out that he’s very shy. But he was 
always a brilliant, surprising person. Once we were in a bar at four in the 
morning and some guy came up and wanted a fight. I was terrified, but Aidan 
immediately stood up and said to him: ‘Do you wanna dance?’ And he started 
dancing with this guy! It was one of the best things I’d ever seen.”

In the years since Safe, there has been no shortage of work, some of the 
sparkiest of it on stage – in the original production ofJez Butterworth’s Mojo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/nov/04/jez-butterworth-mojo-jerusalem>, 
or on Broadway in Pinter’s The Caretaker (after whichBen Brantley in the New 
York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/11/10/theater/theater-review-forces-cruel-kindly-and-shifty-in-pinterland.html>
 said that Gillen gave off “the subliminal hum of an electric generator”). He 
has no compunction about being bells-and-whistles bonkers when it suits him: he 
was at his most inspired as a hammer-wielding cop-killer in the Jason Statham 
thrillerBlitz <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/19/blitz-review>. To 
prepare for that part, he made apocalyptic videos and tried to buy a hammer 
while in costume and in character. “They wouldn’t sell me one,” he says 
proudly. “That’s when I knew it was working.”

But it’s striking that he has rarely collaborated on film with a director of 
longstanding repute: no Loach, no Leigh, no Stephen Frears or Neil Jordan. My 
theory is that he wanted to remain footloose, to work with emerging, 
experimental talents, but he puts me straight. “They never asked!” he protests. 
“If Gus Van Sant or Paul Thomas Anderson were to offer me a part, of course I’d 
do it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0yYblB0xkUk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0yYblB0xkUk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0yYblB0xkUk&media=>
 ‘Me in someone else’s jacket’ … the trailer for The Low Down 
His most fruitful collaboration has been with the British film-maker Jamie 
Thraves <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/30/jamie-thraves-treacle-jr>
, with whom he has made three movies. In their first,The Low Down <http:>, he 
played an introverted, borderline-depressed dreamer. “That character was just 
me in someone else’s jacket,” he grins. Thraves recalls the audition: “Aidan 
said his lines so quietly that my producers and I had to lean forward to hear 
him. You couldn’t take your eyes off him.

“It was so powerful. He has that classic quality that only the best actors 
have: you’re not sure what he’s thinking. He’s very unpredictable.” The pair 
reunited in 2010 on the bittersweet comedyTreacle Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/14/treacle-jr-review>, and are now 
putting the finishing touches to Pickups, in which Gillen, who also co-wrote 
the script, plays himself: a method actor who keeps being recognised as “that 
man off the TV” in public.

“It’s a version of me,” he explains when I ask if the film expresses any 
ambivalence about fame. “There’s a sense of ‘I hate it and I’d miss it too’. 
It’s not a moany-whiny thing. I love my life and what I get to do. But it’s a 
weird job.” What makes him do it? “You get to experience all the most exciting 
things from a whole lifetime condensed into two hours. You get to live all 
these lives and it feels real – it’s the same chemicals inside you as if these 
things were really happening to you. It’s almost like an illness, you know?”

• The Dead 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/theatre/whats-on/concerts-by-candlelight/james-joyces-the-dead-read-by-aidan-gillen>
 is at the Sam Wanamaker Playhouse at Shakespeare’s Globe, London SE1, 14-28 
December.
 