
Airbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> has told its staff that a 
vote to leave the EU could choke off future investment in the UK.

Airbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus>, which employs 15,000 
people in the UK to design and manufacture aircraft wings, said it was 
committed to its British operations regardless of thereferendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> result. But it said a vote 
to leave could make it rethink future decisions about where to invest the 
group’s money. In a letter signed by six senior Airbus executives, the company 
said: “We simply don’t know what ‘out’ looks like.”

The aerospace giant’s letter came as a survey of Lloyd’s insurance workers 
found an overwhelming majority believe a British exit would be bad for the 
country’s £60bn insurance industry, and the chief executive of the London Stock 
Exchange gave vocal support for the EU.

Boeing to cut 4,000 jobs as battle with Airbus continues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/30/boeing-to-cut-4000-jobs-as-battle-with-airbus-wages-on>
The Airbus letter, whose signatories include the firm’s UK president, Paul 
Kahn, said senior staff “firmly believe that it makes good economic sense to 
stay inside the EU”.

The letter said: “Should the British electorate have a different view then 
clearly we wouldn’t cease our activities in the UK, which are highly important 
and very prominent. However, our business model is entirely based on our 
ability to move products, people and ideas aroundEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> without any restriction and we 
do not believe leaving will increase the competitiveness of our British-based 
operations. We all need to keep in the back of our minds that future 
investments depend very much on the economic environment in which the company 
operates.”

Airbus UK designs and engineers wings for aircraft, including the giant A380 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/28/airbus-a380-future-in-doubt> 
“superjumbo”, at a facility in Filton, south Gloucestershire. The wings are 
made on the Welsh side of the border with England, at Broughton, near Chester.

Airbus estimates that its wing operations support about 100,000 jobs through 
the supply chain.

About 70% of insurance professionals said leaving the EU would either hurt or 
severely damage 300-year-old Lloyd’s of London, the world’s biggest insurance 
market. But 6.2% said that leaving the EU would benefit the industry, according 
to a survey by City of London consultancy Haggie Partners.

The campaign to remain in Europe also won vociferous support from Xavier 
Rolet, the French chief executive of London Stock Exchange, which isin the 
midst of a merger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/23/london-stock-exchange-in-merger-talks-with-deutsche-borse>
 with Germany’s Deutsche Börse. Rolet said a Brexit would not only do damage 
the UK economy but could also cause economic problems around the world.

“I think this would be a geopolitical event that would reverberate way beyond 
the European Union,” he said. “I think it would be devastating to the economy 
of the United Kingdom, and would not be good for anyone with their headquarters 
in theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. The gaze of the 
United States would have to move back towards Europe, with a view to putting 
Humpty Dumpty back together again,” he told The Daily Telegraph.

Chief executives of 36 British major companies including easyJet, BAE Systems 
and Shellsigned a letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/22/brexit-eu-referendum-top-firms-sign-letter-times-pro-eu-shell-easyjet-bae-systems-supermarkets-sainsbury-morrisons-tesco>
 in February, in support of the UK’s continued membership of the EU. But 
advocates of the UK leaving the EU point to support from around250 business 
figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/26/250-business-leaders-sign-up-as-backers-of-vote-leave>
, including former HSBC chief executive Michael Geoghegan and Carphone 
Warehouse founder David Ross.
 