
The plane crash in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/russian-plane-crashes-in-sinai-egyptian-pm-says>
 has focused attention on the safety record of the plane involved.

The Airbus A321 had just taken off from the Red Sea resort of Sharm el-Sheikh, 
on its way to St Petersburg,Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, 
a route it covered regularly.

The plane is one of the A320 fleet, which includes the A318 and A319. A jet 
from the A320 family, of which there are about 6,200, takes off or lands every 
2.5 seconds somewhere in the world

The A321 is the largest member of the A320 family. The company says the 
aircraft “offers airline customers the best seat-mile costs of any single-aisle 
aircraft and seating capacities comparable to that of a widebody jetliner”.

Russian plane crash: investigation begins into cause of A321 crash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/russian-plane-crash-investigators-seek-cause-of-a321-crash>
The plane first started flying in 1993 and went into commercial operation the 
following year. More than 900 have been made. The two-engine jet can carry up 
to 220 passengers and is capable of flying up to 3,000 nautical miles while 
carrying a maximum passenger payload. “Like each member in Airbus’ A320 family 
of jetliners, the A321 offers the lowest fuel burn, emissions and noise 
footprint in its class,”Airbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> 
says.

The last high-profile incident involving an A320 jet was in March, when 
Germanwings flight 4U9525 crashed in the French Alps with the loss of 150 
passengers and crew. In this case theplane was deliberately crashed by the 
co-pilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/26/germanwings-flight-4u9525-deliberately-flown-into-mountain-says-prosecutor>
, Andreas Lubitz.

The previous November a Lufthansa A321 plane had lost altitude over Spain.

The Aviation Safety Network says there have been 16 serious incidents 
involving the A321 since 1996, only one of which was fatal. In 2010 an Airblue 
A321 with 152 passengers crashed in Islamabad.

AeroInside, which gathers data on aviation incidents and accidents, has 212 
incidents involving an A321 on file 
<http://www.aeroinside.com/incidents/type/a321/airbus-a-321>, most involving 
relatively minor technical issues.

In September, a Thomas Cook Airbus A321-200 flying from Manchester to Izmir in 
Turkey reported a hydraulic problem and returned to Manchester where it landed 
safely.

The same month two fires were detected in the toilet of a Monarch Airlines 
Airbus A321-200, flying from Birmingham to Sharm el-Sheikh. In both cases the 
crew extinguished the fires and the flight continued.
 