
Airbus has claimed to have edged ahead in its battle with rival Boeing last 
year as it won orders for more than 1,000 new planes, althoughBoeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/boeing> made and delivered more aircraft.

The aircraft manufacturer said it now had 57% of the market overall by units 
ordered, with the 1,036 orders in 2015 making its cumulative order book total 
more than $1tn (£693bn), securing production for a decade to come.

Airbus said its improved, fuel-efficient A320neo family 
<http://www.airbus.com/aircraftfamilies/passengeraircraft/a320family/> of 
planes was securing it a dominant position in the single-aisle market for 
smaller short-haul aircraft. The first such plane will be delivered this month, 
but 861 are on order, comfortably outselling Boeing’s competitor, the 737 MAX.

Europe has the edge in fashion and luxury - and cars do OK, too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/06/europe-edge-aerospace-oil-cars-drugs>
However, its US rival is selling more widebody planes – and delivering more 
aircraft overall. Boeing delivered 762 planes in 2015 for revenues of $125.bn 
compared with Airbus’s 635 aircraft, earning $91.6bn.

Airbus’s sales boss, chief operating officer John Leahy, said Boeing achieved 
higher deliveries because it had “several years’ headstart on ramping up its 
787 programme” while Airbus’s widebody equivalent, the A350, delivered its 
first planes about a year ago.

Both manufacturers recorded a substantial drop in orders last year as demand 
slowed in the aviation market after a short boom. Leahy said the aircraft 
leasing market was financing an increasing proportion ofAirbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> orders, with lessors now 
sometimes buying out production slots from airlines and lending back the planes 
to make the acquisitions viable.

Airbus announced a sliver of good news on its totemic superjumbo, the A380, 
which was once seen as acrucial development for congested airports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/04/british-airways-airbus-a380-heathrow>
, but has been said by some – not least rivals Boeing – to be in danger of
becoming a white elephant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/29/boeing-787-dreamliner-airbus-a380-battle-for-skies>
.

Airbus said the plane broke even financially last year, with 27 A380s 
delivered – it also took an order for three aircraft from a new, unnamed global 
airline. Leahy said more new customers would be announced this year and 
insisted the A380 had a future, saying passenger numbers would double by 2030: 
“How are we going to get into Heathrow or JFK without larger aircraft?”

The delivery figure of 635 planes 
<http://www.airbus.com/newsevents/news-events-single/detail/airbus-exceeds-targets-in-2015-delivers-the-most-aircraft-ever/>
 last year was a record high for Airbus, with 491 A320 family, 103 A330s and 14 
A350s making up the rest of the total.
 