
From that first night renting an airbed in 2008, Airbnb 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/> has grown; person to person, block by block, city 
by city. In just over five years, people have spent more than 10m nights in 
properties around the world and hundreds of thousands of ordinary people with 
extraordinary stories have become hosts, opening their homes to travellers in 
192 countries.

These hosts are teachers, artists, students and retired people who love 
sharing their home and their city. In the process, they've also become thenext 
generation of micro-entrepreneurs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/activate>.

Take Tessa, one of our hosts in London. She has a chronic illness which leaves 
her largely housebound. But she's now able to bring the world to her, welcoming 
travellers to her home from around the world. She's an unofficial ambassador to 
London's neighbourhoods, sending people to parts of city they might have 
missed. Maybe most importantly, she's earned extra money and stayed 
self-sufficient and in the home she's lived in for years.

Tessa and the hundreds of thousands of people embracing the new trend of 
sharing are more than just a collection of stories. They are part of a new 
economic engine that is generating prosperity for neighbourhoods and local 
businesses, and helping families stay in their homes and people to pursue their 
dreams.

The results are profound. According to a new analysis, the Airbnb community 
generated more than £502m in economic activity in one year in the UK alone 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/press/news/new-study-airbnb-community-generates-502-million-in-economic-activity-in-the-uk>
.

By renting their homes to travellers, 14,424 hosts in the UK earned essential 
extra income. Many of these homes are located in neighbourhoods that haven't 
benefited from tourism in the past: 72% of Airbnb properties in London are 
outside the main hotel districts. This influx of new tourism is helping to grow 
communities and rebuild neighbourhoods across the UK.

All of this adds up to jobs and opportunity and I've heard from countless 
people who said the money they earned through sharing has given them the 
freedom to start a new business or pursue their passion.

These economic benefits are impressive, but they are just the beginning. 
Around the world, more people are sharing their homes, cars, time, skills and 
knowledge, and new business models such asLiftshare 
<https://www.liftshare.com/uk/>, Taskhub <https://taskhub.co.uk/> and Lyft 
<http://www.lyft.me/> are also not only inspiring trust between strangers, but 
also offering new and unique experiences across the UK.

Of course, we've learnt that sharing isn't always easy. For too long, 
countries in Europe and around the world have had laws for people and laws for 
businesses. The sharing economy is creating a new third category – people as 
businesses – and policymakers worldwide are examining how to encourage these 
new activities and put them on a sound, clear legal footing.

Some regulators want to make it more difficult for people to do business with 
other people, and require instead that big business or onerous regulations 
mediate these interactions. That won't help anyone. But completely eliminating 
rules that protect the public interest isn't a solution either.

Instead, we should work together on sensible regulations to ensure that the 
sharing economy makes people more financially independent, communities more 
resilient, and all neighbourhoods even better places to live and visit. We've 
already seen governments in Hamburg, Amsterdam and Seoul embrace sharing with 
great success and we want this to reflect the future of the sharing economy, 
globally.

The British government has begun conversations with sharing economy companies 
of all kinds to see what they can do to help this activity thrive even further 
in the UK. If we keep at it, we can address these matters and deliver even more 
economic benefits to cities around the world. And we won't just be generating 
economic prosperity; the future of the sharing economy will be the beginning of 
a more interconnected world where you can be at home, no matter where you are.

Nathan Blecharczyk is the co-founder and chief technology officer at Airbnb. 
He is a keynote speaker at this year'sChanging Media Summit 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/series/changing-media-summit-2014?INTCMP=mic_232285>
.

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <https://register.theguardian.com/media/> to the Guardian Media 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> – this content is brought 
to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. 
 