
Akram Khan is one of Britain’s most successful and prolific choreographers; 
his work exudes a sculpted beauty and calm certainty. His dancing, combining 
the training of his youth in the Indian classical dance form of kathak with 
contemporary mores, has an almost transcendent complexity. And yet, he says: “I 
am becoming more and more afraid.” He smiles and points to his smoothly shaved 
head. “I am ageing here much quicker than in my body,” he explains. “I’m 
terrified that in a simple movement my body will give in and I won’t be able to 
do it. I can do it, and can do it really fast, but it’s psychological.” This 
sense of frailty accelerated when he tore his achilles tendon in 2012. He was 
rehearsingSacred Monsters <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/sep/21/dance>
, the piece he created for and performed withSylvie Guillem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sylvie-guillem>, when he felt it snap; the 
resulting 4cm gap could have ended his career. But he fought back to full 
dancing strength, leaving doubts only in his own mind. “When I am stressed or 
excited, I still walk with a limp,” he says. He stands up to demonstrate, 
laughing at his own fallibility.

Akram Khan returns to the Mahabharata: autumn at Sadler’s Wells
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2015/may/05/sadlers-wells-new-season-programme-akram-khan>
We are talking in a rehearsal room in Kensington, west London, where he is 
putting the finishing touches to his latest creation,Until the Lions, based on 
a story from the epic Hindu poemThe Mahabharata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/aug/16/fiction>. It stars Khan and two 
dancers from his company, Ching-Ying Chien and Christine Joy. With designs by 
Tim Yip, lighting byMichael Hulls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2015/oct/26/dancing-with-light-russell-maliphant-and-michael-hulls-in-pictures>
 – both regular collaborators – and a score by Vincenzo Lamagna, it is an 
ambitious, striking work, performed in the round.

At an early run-through at the Leicester Curve in August, Khan created the 
structure of the piece; now he is working on the detail of the choreography, 
twisting and turning as he experiments with different shapes and steps. The 
work reveals a compelling sweep and ferocity as it tells the story of Amba, a 
princess abducted by the prince Bhishma on her wedding day. She seeks revenge 
on her captor, eventually killing herself and returning from death in the shape 
of a woman who becomes a male warrior in order to exact punishment.

Although choreographically Until the Lions is a complex synthesis of the 
traditional and the contemporary, drawing on all Khan has absorbed in his 
career, it also represents a return to his roots. From the age of 13 to 15, he 
spent two years performing inPeter Brook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/peter-brook>’s nine-hour version of The 
Mahabharata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/1985/jul/16/peter-brook-mahabharata-theatre> 
as it toured the world. The experience left its mark.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F191e64b1d753786390ff715f338ca8e90ad72b18%2F0_0_2481_1654%2F2481.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20terrified%20that%20my%20body%20will%20give%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20terrified%20that%20my%20body%20will%20give%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F191e64b1d753786390ff715f338ca8e90ad72b18%2F0_0_2481_1654%2F2481.jpg>
 Christine Joy Ritter, Ching-Ying Chien and Akram Khan rehearsingUntil the Lions
. Photograph: Jean Louis Fernandez 
“If you feed a child McDonald’s every day that child will start to look 
different. You feed them only vegetables, the child will feel and think 
differently. If you feed them a diet ofThe Mahabharata, it stays with you. 
Spending all that time withPeter Brook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/peter-brook>, and looking and listening and 
learning, also influenced me a lot. He showed me how to get rid of the fat, go 
to the essence of things. Simplicity is a sophistication and he is a genius at 
it.”

Yet Khan’s exploration of the story of Amba owes just as much to other 
influences, particularly that of the poetKarthika Nair 
<http://poetry.sangamhouse.org/2013/05/karthika-nair/>, whose book of poetry 
based on the female characters in the epic saga, also calledUntil the Lions 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/364918//?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
, provided Khan’s principle inspiration. “She planted a seed in my head. In 
Brook’s version the male characters are more dominant than the female 
characters. I realised that when I was doing that version I was motherless 
because I was on tour for two years. I am very close to my mother but I was 
without her, so I became very close to the actresses, who were playing heavy 
roles – but they were not the heroes, they were not celebrated. It’s generally 
like that in myths, because the hunter is always going to tell the story. In 
battles, the victors write history not the losers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2500c883f06f29e2afbe1a3386da8796ebf97082%2F0_0_2432_1621%2F2432.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20terrified%20that%20my%20body%20will%20give%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20terrified%20that%20my%20body%20will%20give%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2500c883f06f29e2afbe1a3386da8796ebf97082%2F0_0_2432_1621%2F2432.jpg>
 Ching-Ying Chien in rehearsal forUntil the Lions at the Roundhouse. 
Photograph: Jean Louis Fernandez 
The title of Nair’s poems is taken from an African proverb that suggests a 
story is not complete “until the lions have their say”. The lions, in this 
case, are the women. Khan was also fascinated by the gender roles, the way a 
character is transformed from female to male. “As a contemporary dancer I am a 
bit more masculine and animalistic,” he says, “but when I do kathak I am 
shifting between femininity and masculinity because somehow the form itself 
gives you permission to be androgynous, to move between yin and yang.”

Although Until the Lions is by no means a conventional narrative – the words 
of the story are used as part of the soundscape, and the telling is 
impressionistic rather than literal – Khan has reached a point in his career at 
which it is the storytelling that interests him. “I started abstract – I wanted 
to create a vocabulary, a way of moving that incorporated Indian dance. That 
was my focus,” he explains. “Now, for me, mathematics is a means to an end. 
There has to be a connection to a human narrative, otherwise it’s just numbers. 
I’ve moved from being a scientist to being a theatre-maker.”

Born in Wimbledon, in south-west London, he trained in kathak from the age of 
seven, and became obsessed with being a better dancer than his equally talented 
sister. But he also loved dancing to Michael Jackson and trained as a 
contemporary dancer, forging a rich blend of styles and creating 
ground-breaking works such asZero Degrees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/jul/13/dance> in collaboratons and 
alone. Many commissions came his way, from creating and starring inTorobaka 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/04/torobaka-akram-khan-israel-galvan-sadlers-wells-review>
 with the flamenco starIsrael Galván 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/26/israel-galvan-review>, to making 
pieces such asVertical Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/sep/17/akram-khan-company-review> and 
Kaash <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/may/13/dance.artsfeatures> for 
his own company, and moulding intricate narratives such as the autobiographical
Desh <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/17/desh-akram-khan-review>, 
which explored his father’s origins in Bangladesh.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59b885dde4bdbe86c7569f1c89d78e596de2428e%2F0_0_3372_2472%2F3372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20terrified%20that%20my%20body%20will%20give%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20terrified%20that%20my%20body%20will%20give%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59b885dde4bdbe86c7569f1c89d78e596de2428e%2F0_0_3372_2472%2F3372.jpg>
 Akram Khan and Tamara Rojo inDust by Akram Khan from Lest We Forget by English 
National Ballet, 2014. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
He has also taken on other high-profile projects such as devising a solo for 
Guillem’s farewell tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/nov/04/prima-ballerina-sylvie-guillem-prepares-take-final-bow>
 at Christmas and fashioning a haunting contribution to theopening ceremony of 
the 2012 London Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/27/olympic-opening-ceremony>. His 
latest challenge is a full-scale version ofGiselle for English National Ballet 
<http://www.ballet.org.uk/whats-on/akram-khan-giselle/>, which will premiere 
later this year.

Now 41, Khan has two children under the age of three with his wife Yuko Inoue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/30/akram-khan-interview>. It 
is hard to imagine how he copes with all his commitments. “I don’t balance them 
very well,” he says, ruefully. He has learned to use what he describes as 
“fluff time” – the hours when he is touring but neither rehearsing nor 
performing – to develop ideas. “When I am travelling withTorobaka, I am not 
with my children, so I use that opportunity to work onGiselle.”

As he talks, you sense a longing for a time when choreographers had less on 
their plate. “Before, the artist just worried about the art. I miss that. Life 
has become fuller for everyone. Every five minutes you are fitting in things, 
otherwise you feel you are wasting your time.

Q&A: Akram Khan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/30/akram-khan-interview> 
“There was a period in Japanese art where they started to empty the canvas 
just as in Europe everyone was filling the canvas. We are filling the canvas, 
and that sense of space to reflect is missing. We are not choreographers any 
more, we’re politicians. That never used to be the case.”

While he acknowledges his fees are high in dance terms, that doesn’t mean he 
can afford to take time off. “Doing well as an artist in dance is not the same 
as doing well in pop or football or film,” he says. “Those are different money 
brackets because then you can take a year off because you have made a huge 
amount on one film. We don’t operate on those terms. There is a culture here 
that thinks money is bad, that it stops you being an artist – but actually 
money buys me time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee80ad1bd52ee8126ed3d3ed91e610c139bf0e6a%2F0_0_4371_2685%2F4371.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20terrified%20that%20my%20body%20will%20give%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%3A%20I%E2%80%99m%20terrified%20that%20my%20body%20will%20give%20in&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Fakram-khan-until-the-lions-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee80ad1bd52ee8126ed3d3ed91e610c139bf0e6a%2F0_0_4371_2685%2F4371.jpg>
 Honji Wang and Akram Khan and inThe Pursuit Of Now at Sadler’s Wells, March 
2015. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
After 2018, he will stop dancing as a solo artist. “I will retire as a 
full-time performer. I may do little cameo roles because I think I would be 
sick if I didn’t have a reason to go to a studio each morning, emotionally and 
psychologically. But I would rather people say, ‘Why are you stopping?’ than 
‘Why aren’t you?’”

He laughs. But the wistfulness in his tone vanishes when he returns to talking 
about his plans forGiselle – in an entirely new version, with the original 
Adolphe Adam music adapted by the contemporary composerBen Frost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/11/ben-frost-aurora-interview-sydney-festival-mofo>
. “It is a big project,“ he says. “I’m using most of the dancers in the company 
and I’m really excited about that.

“I think the hugeness of it is that it’s really British. Britain owns Giselle, 
it’s been so special here, ever sinceAlicia Markova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/dec/03/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
 started performing the role in the 1930s. When you take something so sacred, 
you have to hold it carefully so as not to drop it but at the same time you 
have to put your voice in.”

He has felt that Until the Lions and Giselle are companion pieces – variations 
on similar themes. “I can’t separate them to a certain degree. They are 
interlocked. It’s all about the woman,” he says, before heading off to create 
another duet of revenge, love, death and betrayal.

• Until the Lions <http://www.roundhouse.org.uk/whats-on/2016/until-the-lions/>
 is at the Roundhouse, London NW1, until 24 January, and then tours 
internationally.
 