
Moves from the Mahabharata: Akram Khan's Until the Lions – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2016/jan/12/mahabharata-akram-khan-until-the-lions-in-pictures>
Danny Boyle: Tell us why you are returning to the Mahabharata 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/08/akram-khan-until-the-lions-interview>
 for your new production, Until the Lions?

Akram Khan: A female poet called Karthika Naïr, who created Desh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/16/akram-khan-desh-review> with us, 
approached me because she has written a collection of poems on female 
characters from the Mahabharata. When I appeared in Peter Brook’s version I was 
13, and I don’t remember the women being super celebrated. They were not the 
main protagonists. Looking back, I can see that it gave a very male 
perspective, which is often the case with mythology. I remember the women in 
the company being incredible actors but also treating me like a son because I 
was missing my mum a lot. I got very close to these wonderful actors and it 
left me fascinated.


DB: OK, so you were 13, and in Peter Brook’s theatre version of the 
Mahabharata? How did you find it?


AK: Since I was the youngest actor, he would always ask me to run to the back 
of the auditorium to give me comments. I would expect revolutionary or 
constructive pieces of criticism, but he would usually say something like, 
‘Akram, just step to your left a little,’ and then send me back down. That’s 
just one anecdote but what was beautiful aboutPeter as a director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/19/peter-brook-theatre-director-at-90>
 was the stories he would tell after the show. This was very special. For the 
benefit of the actors, he would connect the Mahabharata to something he had 
experienced personally or a story he had heard. He would make things happening 
in present-day New York, for example, relevant to the Mahabharata – and he 
would tell them in such a phenomenal way.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a9fb36e18f90de1afa5defbf51959e81d7a37dc%2F79_793_3244_4267%2F3244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan%20talks%20to%20Danny%20Boyle%3A%20'Everything%20has%20to%20serve%20the%20body'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%20talks%20to%20Danny%20Boyle%3A%20%27Everything%20has%20to%20serve%20the%20body%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a9fb36e18f90de1afa5defbf51959e81d7a37dc%2F79_793_3244_4267%2F3244.jpg>
 Akram Khan in Desh, 2011. Photograph: Richard Haughton 
The Mahabharata, through Karthika’s poems, reveals so much about how females 
are regarded

DB: So, he would tell stories to inspire the story you were all doing?

AK: Yes, he didn’t want the Mahabharata to feel mythological. Even though we 
were wearing costumes that were aesthetically of that period, he wanted to make 
it feel relevant. He played a lot with time.

DB: Did you learn anything from him, his techniques? 

Akram: I learnt as much as I could at that young age. I recently discovered 
that Joe Wright [the film director] and I were in the audition for the same 
role. Marie-Hélène [Estienne], Peter’s right hand, auditioned us both. I had no 
acting training while Joe was busy training as an actor. I was very physical, 
though, and I think Marie-Hélène chose me because she knew Peter would be able 
to mould me. I was formless; I didn’t have a way of speaking then but I was 
very comfortable in my body. The way I see things now, a lot of this has been 
inspired by Peter.

DB: The last time I saw you rehearsing was for the opening ceremony of the 
Olympics. For those of us who don’t know enough about contemporary dance, how 
do you go about inspiring your dancers – is it through vocabulary or by example?

AK: Intention, especially narrative intention. When I’m rehearsing a new work, 
I do look at the technicality but all the performances must have an intention. 
They can’t just be a series of steps or movements. There has to be a meaning 
behind what the dancers are doing, they have to know where they are going and 
how they exit. It’s very theatre-driven. Having said that, one of the questions 
that constantly challenges me is how literal I should make the work versus how 
much I leave ambiguous or suggestive. Does that bother you when you make a 
piece of theatre?

DB: Well, one of the joys I find about going down to Sadler’s Wells or 
somewhere similar to see dance is that I can let that go. Narrative structure 
is a very strict discipline in the world I work in – which is theatre, film or 
television – and you can only get away without it for a couple of minutes 
before you’re lost … So, did you read Karthika Naïr’s book before you conceived 
the production for the Roundhouse?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F47486368&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F47486368> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvimeo.com%2F47486368&media=>
 Akram Khan dances at the London Olympics opening ceremony in 2012. 
AK: She sent me a couple of poems from her book written from the character 
Amba’s perspective. What really inspired me is that the poems are written in a 
mathematical, physical, visceral way. They are phenomenally written but also 
phenomenally designed.

DB: What I’m really interested in is how you start to work from there. In film 
or television we begin with a read-through, where we all share the text. I 
don’t know how useful it is but it is the tradition, it settles everyone in, 
making them feel as though they’re on the same page, literally. Do you do that?

When I was young, my school friends, who were more macho, regarded me as 
ambiguous

AK: Well, we sent the poems around to everybody and Karthika was also in the 
collaborators’ meetings, so we all started from the same place. But what is 
challenging is finding the right time to let go of the poetry. When you start a 
process like this, the work has to change and leave the page at some point. The 
words are there to inspire us but we’re not serving them. We’ve had to free 
ourselves from the words so it’s not too specific to Hindu mythology. It has to 
be universal. Basically, the piece is about love, betrayal, revenge …. That’s 
it: that’s the essence.

The other thing is that the Mahabharata, through Karthika’s poems, reveals so 
much about the way in which females are regarded in that society. The title of 
her book, Until the Lions, comes from an African proverb. The hunter will 
always tell the story until the lions can have their say. The victorious always 
write history – never the losers. What I loved about her approach is that she’s 
taken it from the female characters, the unsung heroes, if you like. Amba is 
not necessarily a hero but she’s a strong woman who defies what society has – 
out of fear – come to regard as right and wrong. Isn’t that so relevant to what 
is happening in the world today? Where people decide fundamentally what’s right 
and wrong? In Amba’s story, the character Bheeshma abducts her and puts her in 
a situation where nobody will marry her – he himself has made a vow of 
celibacy. She expects him to marry her. But he won’t break his vow. She asks if 
his vow is more important than her life. Many years later, he reflects on the 
fact that, since he didn’t marry Amba, he could never marry anybody else. He’s 
kind of acknowledging her as his equal, saying: ‘She’s the one who tried to 
make an immovable object like me transform.’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5973959197cdf0c27261ced69ff823833b0c8255%2F0_315_5367_3223%2F5367.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan%20talks%20to%20Danny%20Boyle%3A%20'Everything%20has%20to%20serve%20the%20body'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%20talks%20to%20Danny%20Boyle%3A%20%27Everything%20has%20to%20serve%20the%20body%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5973959197cdf0c27261ced69ff823833b0c8255%2F0_315_5367_3223%2F5367.jpg>
 Ching-Ying Chien in Until The Lions. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
DB: It’s an amazing story, but keep talking, because I remember reading that 
Amba then changes into the male form, Shikhandi. Is that right?

AK: First, she goes to the mountain and prays. She’s so still, though, that it 
affects the world and creates chaos. Shiva, the supreme god, descends and asks 
what she wants because her stillness is unbalancing. She replies that she wants 
the tool to kill Bheeshma, who has made another vow never to kill women and 
children. Shiva directs her to commit suicide so she can be reborn as a girl 
but trained in a particular way to behave like a man. Then the night before she 
goes into battle with Bheeshma, she makes love to a spirit and they exchange 
genders. Only Shikhandi can kill Bheeshma, and the only way he wants to die is 
by her arrow. When he sees Shikhandi, he knows it is Amba. He knows this is 
someone who has thought of him across the course of two lifetimes.

DB: Wow. So, how many people are you performing this with?

AK: I play Bheeshma. There’s this wonderful creature-dancer, Ching-Ying Chien, 
who’s playing Amba, and another female artist, Christine Joy Ritter, performing 
Shikhandi. And then there are four musicians. My dramaturg, Ruth Little, and I 
are constantly debating and questioning how much of the story to tell. We have 
to ask how we can simplify it without losing its complexity. When Ruth spent 
time withDavid Lan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/11/director-david-lan-young-vic-olivier-awards>
 [artistic director] of the Young Vic, he told her that if people don’t feel 
connected to a performance in the first 10 minutes, you’ve lost them.

DB: The great British film director, David Lean, also said that you have to 
declare your intentions in the first 10 minutes.

AK: Originally, I was going to play this as a solo, all three characters, 
because I am fascinated by gender. When I was young, my school friends, who 
were more macho and played football, regarded me as ambiguous. I danced, I used 
to put on makeup and sometimes I’d wear my mum’s sari to play female roles. Do 
you find actors can be similarly ambiguous, shifting from female to male, or 
vice-versa?

DB: It’s funny hearing you talk about your background because it’s basically 
Billy Elliot <https://www.theguardian.com/film/billy-elliot>. And I come from a 
similar community to Billy Elliot: quite macho and working-class. And our fear 
was always ballet. When you move into the arts, though, you get a chance to 
embrace the female side of yourself and there’s a lack of posturing. I think 
great actors often have access to both genders and I’ve worked with many who’ve 
shown this quality. Recently it was Michael Fassbender, who is known as a very 
intense, male actor but I found his movement to be quite female. I remember 
reading somewhere that young children can always tell the gender of another 
child, that they reveal gender through movement. And little children who have 
no real programming just instinctively understand that. I’ve no idea whether 
that’s true but it made me think of your script, when your character Bheeshma 
recognises that Shikhandi is actually female. How will you dramatise that?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40ecbddaa4ac8f0d930d898c08ea8442fbc721e1%2F0_0_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan%20talks%20to%20Danny%20Boyle%3A%20'Everything%20has%20to%20serve%20the%20body'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%20talks%20to%20Danny%20Boyle%3A%20%27Everything%20has%20to%20serve%20the%20body%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40ecbddaa4ac8f0d930d898c08ea8442fbc721e1%2F0_0_3264_1960%2F3264.jpg>
 Jamie Bell in the film Billy Elliot, 2000. Photograph: Moviestore Collection / 
Rex Feat 
AK: We’re struggling right now. When we theatricalise the scenario, it’s very 
clear but it lacks choreography. It’s a real challenge to reveal these 
characters through dance, especially for people who don’t know the story. 
Without words to hold on to, everything becomes ambiguous so the choreography 
has to speak of this in some way – it’s a really challenging piece to take into 
movement.

DB: But when you watch dance, it’s a relief not to have to hang on to 
narrative quite so rigidly. There’s a feeling that you can watch something, and 
zone in and out with a wonderful freedom. You reset your brain and enjoy the 
experience of the story being told through the physicality of the performers in 
front of you. It’s not quite like film or theatre actors, who have to disappear 
into the story. With dance, you’re always aware that this is being expressed 
through a dancer and I think that’s a beautiful part of the process. You 
abandon yourself to it. I think the struggle that you’re in is very important 
and has to continue, otherwise the work is just indulgence. The very act of 
struggling with it all highlights your role. How do you do it, though, when 
you’re both performing a role and directing the work? Do you film yourself and 
watch it back?

AK: Yes, but I also have a rehearsal director, Jose Agudo, who learns my role. 
He can swap with me and step in and out of my role. And we film everything.

DB: So, he will dance the section for you during rehearsals?

AK: Yes, but my ego always gets the better of me because I know I can do it 
better. That isn’t true, actually. It’s just that when he does a section, and 
does it better, then I feel I have to do it better. He’s a really strong dancer 
and makes me go one step further. What’s incredible in this piece are the 
female dancers. They are really special. I’m 41 and enjoying taking a step 
back. The story is not told through my eyes – it’s through Amba’s eyes. I’ve 
never told a story with a female perspective in this way before.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd233449e0ba241dae50551dd6ce2c5d1efab97b5%2F0_686_5461_3277%2F5461.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan%20talks%20to%20Danny%20Boyle%3A%20'Everything%20has%20to%20serve%20the%20body'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%20talks%20to%20Danny%20Boyle%3A%20%27Everything%20has%20to%20serve%20the%20body%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjan%2F20%2Fakram-khan-talks-to-danny-boyle-the-body-is-the-script%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd233449e0ba241dae50551dd6ce2c5d1efab97b5%2F0_686_5461_3277%2F5461.jpg>
 Akram Khan, centre, in Until the Lions. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the 
Guardian 
DB: How did you find those dancers?

AK: I have worked with them previously on iTMOi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/30/akram-khan-itmoi-review>. The 
dancer who plays Amba has both innocence and a dark side to her. And the dancer 
performing Shikhandi can really shift from female to masculine. They make me 
feel old when I’m near them.

DB: I’ve recently worked with this extraordinary singer called FKA twigs, also 
a dancer. I keep thinking you must meet or collaborate.

AK: Danny, have you ever worked on a play with just dancers?

DB: No but I have a strong idea of doing a Shakespeare with dancers. I’d like 
to have a dancing chorus with this particular Shakespeare in mind. One of the 
other things I wanted to ask you is how you determine the length of your work – 
does the music dictate length or something else?

AK: What dictates the length of a scene is what is happening with the bodies. 
Has what the body has to say stopped being interesting? The music then follows, 
the set, and everything else. Everything has to serve the body – the body is 
the script. We label scenes and each night we try different orders, treating it 
like a musical form. Some scenes needs to be big, some less so. Two films – 
Timbuktu and Birdman – have fascinated me recently because of how their scenes 
roll choreographically from one to the other. This way of interconnecting 
different worlds and seeing the interconnection, well, I think we’re trying to 
embrace a little of this in Until the Lions.

DB: What’s your favourite dance in a film or musical? Who do you admire?


AK: I really enjoyed Billy Elliot … there’s Charlie Chaplin … I love Fred 
Astaire, Buster Keaton, Michael Jackson.

DB: I’d love to film a musical. I love Carlos Saura and Bob Fosse’s stuff.

AK: They’re genius, of course. So, you want to film a musical?

DB: For a film director, if you can make an original story musical where 
characters break into song, that’s the most difficult thing to do. Song can be 
more challenging than dance, because people do dance as part of normal life, 
but to sing is so vulnerable and open. We once did a film called Millions about 
two kids growing up in the northwest and we should have turned that into a 
musical.

So, last question for now, have you worked in the round before?

AK: No, it’s very exciting yet bloody frustrating because it’s easier to see a 
performance from one perspective. In the round, somebody will always see a 
different angle from the one you want him or her to see. That can be 
frustrating yet at the same time, you get to look at choreography three 
dimensionally. The Olympics was good preparation for this because it was also 
360 degrees.

DB: Hey, listen, it’s a wonderful experience for the audience. Theatre in the 
proscenium arch remains theatre as spectacle – it’s not really that immersive. 
In the round, it becomes immersive. You really feel part of it as the audience.

 * This interview was first published in the Roundhouse programme for Until 
the Lions (9–24 January 2016, Roundhouse 
<http://www.roundhouse.org.uk/whats-on/2016/until-the-lions/>. Tickets: 0300 
6789 222).
 