
It would be misleading to describe Sadler’s Wells’ 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com> new autumn season as cautious. The programme 
features plenty of new and ambitious work, not least the world premiere of 
Gravity Fatigue, a production that will seefashion designer Hussein Chalayan 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hussein_Chalayan> make his dance-theatre debut, 
in collaboration with choreographer Damien Jalet and that’s sure to be visually 
astonishing. But in general, the emphasis in this autumn season is less on the 
surprising than on on the tried and trusted, with much of the work presented 
either by the Wells’ associate artists or by regular guests.

Among the quartet of associates’ premieres, the headline event will probably be
Akram Khan’s <http://www.akramkhancompany.net> Until the Lions. It’s a work 
that sees Khan returning to his classical roots, based in kathak technique and 
inspired by the Mahabharata – the epic drama in which Khan made his debut as a 
child performer, touring in the legendary Peter Brook production. While it will 
be taking Khan into the new territory of the Roundhouse stage, Until the Lions 
will be created with some of his familiar collaborators including the writer 
Karthika Naïr, visual artist Tim Yip, lighting designer Michael Hulls and 
dramaturg Ruth Little.

Fellow Wells associate Hofesh Shechter <http://www.hofesh.co.uk> presents his 
new trilogy, Barbarians. The first part, Barbarians in Love,was previewed at 
the Wells earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/08/sadlers-wells-associates-pite-prince-schechter-review>
 and admirers of Shechter choreography will be hoping that the full evening 
will lift his work back to the level of productions like Political Mother.
Russell Maliphant <http://www.russellmaliphant.com> marks the 20th anniversary 
of his collaboration with the lighting genius Michael Hulls, in a special 
showcase of works. Vintage pieces such as Broken Fall are revived alongside 
brand new ones, including a solo that brings the excellent Dana Fouras back to 
the stage. Finally, fromSidi Larbi Cherkaoui 
<http://www.east-man.be/en/35/Sidi-Larbi-Cherkaoui> comes Genesis, a 
characteristically ambitious meditation on life and death, which he’s created 
in collaboration withYabin Wang <http://www.east-man.be/en/people/1008/>, the 
Chinese dancer featured in the film House of Flying Daggers and one of three 
choreographers who will feature in English National Ballet’s forthcoming 
programme of all–female work.

Kahn’s choreography gets a second showing in Chotto Desh, a version of his 
masterly solo DESH which has been specially adapted for young children. This 
production forms part of the Wells’ increasingly imaginative strand of 
family-oriented works, and this season there is a Christmas rerun of Arthur 
Pita’s marvellously funny and fantastical The Little Match Girl as well as 
Tiger Tale by Barrowland Ballet (a fine Scottish company whose adult works also 
deserve UK-wide exposure).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fsadlers-wells-new-season-programme-akram-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430842725230%2Ffa267a6e-842e-43f1-9bce-7a9abcc18ad0-1410x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Akram%20Khan%20returns%20to%20the%20Mahabharata%3A%20autumn%20at%20Sadler%E2%80%99s%20Wells&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fsadlers-wells-new-season-programme-akram-khan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Akram%20Khan%20returns%20to%20the%20Mahabharata%3A%20autumn%20at%20Sadler%E2%80%99s%20Wells&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F05%2Fsadlers-wells-new-season-programme-akram-khan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F5%2F1430842725230%2Ffa267a6e-842e-43f1-9bce-7a9abcc18ad0-1410x2040.jpeg>
 Tamara Rojo and Akram Khan in Dust by Akram Khan from Lest We Forget by 
English National Ballet at the Barbican in 2014. Photograph: Tristram Kenton 
The Lilian Baylis Studio, where most of these family works are presented, is 
itself being nicely used this season, with a programme that includes Falling in 
Love, Caroline Bowditch’s meditation on the life and career of Frida Kahlo; 
Clare Cunningham’s Give Me a Reason to Live, a powerful assault on the abuse 
suffered by disabled people; and a marvellous experiment in which the drolly 
subversive work of Jonathan Burrows and Matteo Fargion is reimagined for two 
female dancers, Eleanor Sikorski and Flora Wellesley Wesley.

Back on the main stage, the new association between English National Ballet 
and the Wells is marked by a revival of ENB’s masterfulLest We Forget 
<http://www.ballet.org.uk/whats-on/lestweforget/> programme, with war-themed 
work by Khan, Maliphant and Liam Scarlett (George Williamson’s Firebird, which 
used to sit rather uncomfortably in this programme, has now sensibly been 
dropped). There’s a week-long season fromBirmingham Royal Ballet 
<http://www.brb.org.uk>, which includes the London premiere of David Bintley’s 
new Louis XIV-inspired work, The King Dances.Rambert <http://www.rambert.org.uk>
 also make their regular autumn visit with new works from Didy Veldman and Kim 
Brandstrup, the latter a setting of Schoenberg’s hauntingly strange score, 
Transfigured Night.

Given this concentration of work by British and associate companies, there are 
fewer standout foreign guests. But the German choreographerSasha Waltz 
<http://www.sashawaltz.de/en/> brings Sacre, her tensely angular setting of 
Stravinsky’s Rite of Spring; there’s a welcome chance to see Borderline, by the 
fascinatingly hip hop-inspired choreographic duoSebastian Ramirez and Honji Wang
 <http://www.culturalweekly.com/wang-ramirez-borderline-interview/>; the 
Shaolin Monks return with their heartstopping mastery of Kung Fu; and Les 
Ballets Trockadero des Monte Carlo also return with their own heartwarming 
mastery of the camp comic classical sublime.

 * Tickets for the autumn season are available from Monday 11 May
 