
Al-Muhajiroun's first public outing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/jun/18/islamist-al-muhajiroun-meeting-chaos>
 after the Islamist group's reincarnation was supposed to take the shape of a 
debate betweenAnjem Choudary <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anjem_Choudary> and 
Douglas Murray, the director of the Centre for Social Cohesion, and was billed 
as The Great Debate: Sharia Law v British Law.

I was rather surprised that Murray had agreed to the debate as it seemed to 
cement the view that he was the secular equivalent of Choudary but apparently 
he believed that "his opinions had to be countered". As it happens, Murray did 
not even make it to the podium and the entire event was overshadowed by a 
conflict over male-female segregation. I was led upstairs the moment I entered 
the hall, unaware that there was a gender apartheid policy in effect. I was 
attending the event with a male friend who promised to save me a seat but a 
wave in greeting had to suffice as we were confined to two different sections, 
with the women suspended in a gallery overlooking the men and podium below. I 
could not help but think that the segregation held a symbolic significance, 
perhaps an indication of the group's vision of women under sharia law.

The audience seemed exclusively to consist of either al-Muhajiroun supporters 
or non-Muslim journo types. A skirmish developed downstairs at the entrance of 
the men's section and as the women did not have a view of the area I texted my 
friend asking what was going on to which he replied, "ex-Muslims apparently". 
It appeared that a mixed group of attendees was forbidden from entering the 
main hall after they refused to split up.

Shortly after the disturbance died down two men entered the women's section 
and deposited themselves next to me. One of the female organisers challenged 
them and demanded that they leave as they "were not allowed in here". They 
responded that gender segregation was not enforceable in Britain and that they 
would not respect it, at one point, one of the men said "did you respect racial 
segregation in South Africa"? At this juncture, Giles Enders, the chairman of 
theSouth Place Ethical Society <http://www.ethicalsoc.org.uk/>, the owners of 
Conway Hall where the meeting was held, came on stage and declared the meeting 
cancelled as the group had broken the terms and conditions of the hire.

Choudary then launched into a speech branding Murray a coward. His refusal to 
ascend the platform due to his realisation that "the debate was not neutral" 
was seized upon as evidence of Murray's moral bankruptcy and inability to 
counter the group's motion. Choudary then declared the debate won by default 
and managed to sneak in a dig against Jews and Christians. The hall emptied to 
the chants of the crowd who were met with members of the Metropolitan police 
outside.

I am not sure that this is the coup that the group obviously thought that it 
was. To listen to their protestations to the press and police, one would think 
that they were innocent victims of an assault orchestrated by extremist 
non-Muslim elements who had hijacked the event and free speech but the members 
of the group proved themselves to be intransigent, obstreperous, aggressive and 
childish. When Enders attempted to clear the hall he was met with intimidating 
juvenile jeers, taunts and laughter from the crowd.

It seems al-Muhajiroun is only interested in positioning itself as 
antithetical and subversive, from outside mainstream society, its manifesto 
underpinned by the rejection, nay, loathing of that society. Being the 
political amateurs that they are, the way in which they dealt with the 
"gatecrashers" proved that they are not concerned with achieving anything 
tangible but in appointing an unrealistic goal to justify extreme means.

However I am loth to dismiss them as the joke that they manifestly are, the 
power they wield is not to be measured by the numbers (or lack thereof) of 
active supporters they boast but by how attractive their approach is to the 
angry, disenfranchised and disempowered. It is their unapologetic address, 
rather than the end they have in mind, that is potent.

As we left the building members of the group were speaking to the press, 
lapping up the limelight. Part of me resented the publicity and felt that 
al-Muhajiroun's opponents had played right into their hands by being as 
confrontational, but I couldn't help but be heartened that irrespective of the 
means or agenda of those who disrupted the meeting, the group had been 
precluded from applying their values and laws in the heart of central London.Â 
 