
The latest publicity stunt organised by some former members of the banned 
al-Muhajiroun <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Al-Muhajiroun> outfit in Luton 
yesterday appears to have gone exactly to plan. It is a simple formula – hold 
up some offensive placards designed to get people's backs up and call a local 
reporter to come along and capture some footage - that has reliably generated 
acres of media coverage for them in recent years.

Our TV channels and today's newspapers have very obligingly given over 
<http://news.google.co.uk/news?pz=1&ncl=dslv1utqjK8y2DMFMLH_kVZ_8NpJM&topic=n> 
a huge amount of precious broadcast time and expensive newsprint to report the 
antics of the tiny group of hooligans.

Leaflets had been distributed during the past week by the former al-Muhajiroun 
activists in Luton urging people to protest at the parade of soldiers returning 
from Iraq. There are over 20,000 Muslims living inLuton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/luton> and tellingly less than 20 people heeded 
their call. And yet the irresponsible actions of this tiny few seem to command 
the airwaves.

Al-Muhajiroun <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-muhajiroun> and its variously 
named successor organisations have always craved media attention in order to 
help further their goal of creating discord and polarising relations between 
communities in the UK. Although our news channels and newspapers have adopted a 
very disapproving tone, the truth is that they have been very much complicit in 
promoting the divisive agenda of al-Muhajiroun all this time.

Yesterday afternoon, I got a call from GMTV inviting me on to their Newshour 
show in the morning. "We want to do a balanced piece making clear to our 
viewers that these people do not represent the views of all Muslims," said the 
woman. Oh, and did I know who these people were? Yes, they are the same morons 
who have organised similar stunts in the past – one of their representatives 
Anjem Choudaryhas been on your programme 
<http://www.gm.tv/index.cfm?articleid=33679> repeatedly over the years.

A few hours later, I got another call from GMTV. They had managed to get hold 
ofAnjem Choudary <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anjem_Choudary>, who was, of 
course, totally supportive of the actions of the protestors, and he had agreed 
to come on to the show to say so publicly. So, er, they would not now need me 
to come on to the programme. Well, so much for seeking to do a "balanced piece"!

The success the protestors have had in attracting news coverage in the past 
and now only further encourages them to carry on and seek out additional new 
opportunities to inflame passions and stir up mischief. Would it not be a 
better strategy for our media not to give al-Muhajiroun airtime in order to 
frustrate their ignoble aims? And if the protestors resort to ever more 
ludicrous antics to try and gain attention and actually step over the line into 
breaking the law, then they can always be hauled before a court of law and 
prosecuted.

This course of action would require our media executives to adopt a more 
responsible and less sensationalist attitude, however. I am not convinced that 
they want to, though.
 