
David Gordon Green, the director of Manglehorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/30/venice-film-festival-al-pacino-manglehorn>
, which stars Al Pacino as a small-town locksmith dodging sex, death and 
violence, has won an appeal to overturn the film’s original R rating. It’ll be 
released in the States as a PG-13,according to the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/al-pacinos-manglehorn-wins-appeal-792624>
.


The “restricted” classification, as decided by the Motion Picture Association 
of America (MPAA), dictates that under-17s must see the film with a parent or 
guardian. It can hobble a film’s chances at the box office, with many US 
cinemas refusing to show R-rated films.

Manglehorn, which debuted at last year’s Venice film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/30/venice-film-festival-al-pacino-manglehorn>
, has been given the PG-13 rating “for sexual content, language and for 
accident and surgery images”. The film’s centrepiece is a shot of Pacino 
wandering past the site of a car accident, in which bloodied, injured people 
lie next to smashed watermelons. Other scenes, featuring Pacino’s co-star, the 
director Harmony Korine, are set in a strip club.


Manglehorn review – Renaissance man Al Pacino delivers a masterclass as a lion 
in winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/30/venice-film-festival-al-pacino-manglehorn>
The R rating is often contested by film-makers looking to get their movie in 
front of as wide an audience as possible. In 2013, the Weinstein Company 
successfully appealed against the R rating given toPhilomena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/philomena>, which stars Judi Dench in the 
real-life story of a woman’s search for the son she gave up for adoption at 
birth. The film was originally given the restricted rating for two uses of the 
word “fuck”.

Recently the MPAA has courted controversy by giving Love Is Strange, a 
sex-free drama about a long-term relationship between two men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/22/mpaa-love-is-strange-r-rated-gay-romance-no-sex>
, the R rating. They gave thesame classification to the gay-rights drama Pride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/02/pride-us-censors-accused-of-homophobia>
 last year, despite the lack of sex or violence in the film. Gay rights 
campaigner Peter Tatchell called the MPAA’s decision “outrageous, knee-jerk 
homophobia”.

 