
This year’s Kennedy Center honorees, the prize that awards artists for 
influencing American culture through their lifetimes, have been announced.

The John F Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts revealed on 
<http://www.kennedy-center.org/pages/specialevents/honors> Thursday that 
Godfather actor Al Pacino, Argentinian pianist Martha Argerich, blues singer 
Mavis Staples, singer/songwriter James Taylor and rock band the Eagles will be 
the recipients of the 2016 Kennedy Center Honors, which will be broadcast on 
CBS in the US on 27 December.

Al Pacino: ‘What’s the point of quitting?’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/23/al-pacino-whats-the-point-of-quitting>
The Eagles were set to be honored last year, but delayed it due to the health 
of co-founder Glenn Frey,who died in January at age 67 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/19/glenn-frey-death-the-eagles-los-angeles-music>
.

For Pacino, the honor might seem overdue: many of his peers who came up around 
the same period in the 70s, when Pacino earned four Oscar nominations (for The 
Godfather, Serpico, The Godfather: Part II and Dog Day Afternoon), have already 
taken the prize, including Robert De Niro, Dustin Hoffman, Jack Nicholson and 
Robert Redford.

Pacino has hardly been short of gongs, however; he has received the Golden 
Globes’ Cecil B DeMille award for lifetime achievement, the AFI life 
achievement award, as well as the National Merit of Arts, given to him byBarack 
Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> in 2011. The president 
and first lady are also regular guests at the Kennedy Center event, and are set 
to attend this year’s gala and performance, after receiving the honorees, along 
with the center’s board of trustees, at the White House.

Last year, the Kennedy Center Honors hosted by Stephen Colbert, awarded George 
Lucas, Rita Moreno, Cicely Tyson, Seiji Ozawa and Carole King, withperformances 
and tributes from Aretha Franklin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/dec/30/president-barack-obama-cries-aretha-franklin-kennedy-center>
, Stephen Spielberg, Viola Davis and Miranda Lambert.

This year’s special guests have yet to be announced, as has the host.
 