
In 2011, Al Pacino roasted himself. In the Adam Sandler comedy Jack & Jill, he 
falls for the twin sister of a Los Angeles advertising executive (Sandler), the 
buxom, boorish Bronxite Jill (also Sandler). Pacino plays himself as a sell-out 
and a creep, mocking the roles that made him famous byrapping for Dunkin’ 
Donuts coffee <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2S6eUFbOfIU> (“You want creamy 
goodness? I’m your friend. Say hello to my chocolate blend”),carelessly 
allowing his Oscar to be smashed <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S3dGxhlUUTo> 
while trying to impress Jill during an impromptu game of stickball. He is 
befuddled, paranoid, pretentious and hopeless. He’s confused by LA and adrift 
within his own celebrity.

Jack & Jill bombed <http://www.boxofficemojo.com/movies/?id=jackandjill.htm>, 
but Pacino’s performance is extraordinary: an icon’s twist on his image that 
shrugs at fans as it ravages his past. The film’s director, Dennis Dugan, says: 
“He was as dedicated playing Al Pacino in our movie as he would be if he were 
at the Globe playing Macbeth.”

Manglehorn review – Renaissance man Al Pacino delivers a masterclass as a lion 
in winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/30/venice-film-festival-al-pacino-manglehorn>
Some would offer Jack & Jill as evidence that, at 75, Pacino, is surfing his 
reputation <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/may/06/filmnews.arts>. But dig 
deeper and it feels as if this is a man still working out a way to carry on 
creating in a world that will for ever see him as Michael Corleone (The 
Godfather movies) or Tony Montana (Scarface). Two recent releases –Danny Collins
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/10/first-look-review-danny-collins-al-pacino-dan-fogelman>
 and The Humbling – pigeonholed him as an ageing burnout: a hollow pop singer 
loved only for his early hits (Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/31/danny-collins-observer-film-review>
) and a knackered thesp whose mojo has abandoned him (The Humbling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/30/the-humbling-al-pacino-venice-review-philip-roth>
). His latest film –Manglehorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/30/venice-film-festival-al-pacino-manglehorn>
, directed byDavid Gordon Green, who’s  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-gordon-green>flipped from lyrical 
dramas (George Washington) to stoner comedies (Your Highness) and back again 
(Joe) - is less direct in its analogy, but more interesting for it.

Pacino plays the title character, a locksmith still grieving for a 
relationship that soured years back. He lives alone in a rickety Austin pile 
where the lights blow out and trains shake pictures from the wall. His best 
friend is a cat, and a sick one at that; he’s at loggerheads with his son and 
he’s primed to sabotage a romance with a sweet-natured bank cashier (played by 
Holly Hunter). Yet there’s an adolescent innocence to Manglehorn, a 
self-destructive refusal to give up on past love. The film, which was written 
for Pacino after he and Green first met (“Soft spoken, gentle, sensitive, 
vulnerable,” were the director’s first impressions), is strange, ethereal and 
oddly lovely. A fog of remorse clears to reveal Pacino’s best performance in a 
decade.

“I’m in the middle of this new world,” says Pacino, sweeping an arm to map the 
imaginary landscape. “It’s interesting to find a way in it, and adjust. The 
movie world now is moving surprisingly fast. The stage is more rigorous. I 
prefer long, arduous, hopeless rehearsals.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fal-pacino-whats-the-point-of-quitting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437671898166%2Fb584ed61-4426-45fb-ad7c-0b520030f3be-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Al%20Pacino%3A%20%E2%80%98What%E2%80%99s%20the%20point%20of%20quitting%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fal-pacino-whats-the-point-of-quitting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Al%20Pacino%3A%20%E2%80%98What%E2%80%99s%20the%20point%20of%20quitting%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fal-pacino-whats-the-point-of-quitting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437671898166%2Fb584ed61-4426-45fb-ad7c-0b520030f3be-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Pacino as Tony Montana in the 1983 film Scarface. Photograph: 
Allstar/Universal/Sportsphoto 
In person, Pacino is by turns playful and mournful, not quite the wide-eyed 
buffoon of the talkshow circuit <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x_jM9FBENro>, 
nor the fiery grump ofWilde Salomé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/18/wilde-salome-review-al-pacino-documentary>
, the documentary he made about directing Oscar Wilde’s Salomé on Broadway. He 
has a shock of thick, dark hair that wafts every which-way when he talks. He 
wears many layers of black, and chunky silver rings. Two good-luck pendants 
dangle into an open shirt front. He looks like a goth Rod Stewart.

Pacino leans forward. His intense stare is weakened by his sunglasses. He 
apologises for wearing them indoors: “I have an allergy and it’s come out.”

What is he allergic to?

“Who knows? Interviews …?” There is a long pause. “Just kidding,” he says.

The sunglasses don’t last long. He takes them off in the midst of a 
complicated ramble, which, it turns out, is a bit of a speciality (“You have to 
be with me 50 years before you can get a sense of what I’m talking about,” he
once said <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2004/dec/03/2>). He looks tired, 
but kindly. I was nervous about meeting him. I didn’t know which Pacino I was 
going to get. There’s a scene in Wilde Salomé where the actor gripes about the 
promotional material for the show’s run. “PACINO IS BACK!,” screams a poster’s 
banner headline. “Pacino is back?!,” he yells. “This is the problem with my 
whole life. What the hell does that mean?! How am I going to live up to that?”

The real guy – for the half hour I am with him, at least – is canny, patient, 
riled only once.

Let’s tentatively call Manglehorn a return to form. It is, at least, a 
refreshing break from a run of lumpy crime dramas (The Recruit, 88 Minutes, 
Righteous Kill) and awkward cameos (Gigli, Ocean’s Thirteen). It’s a low-key 
movie, shot on-the-fly, requiring Pacino to leave New York and decamp to 
Austin. Which, he says, is tough: “I like sleeping in my own bed. I like to be 
near my kids” [14-year old twins Anton and Olivia (he shares custody with 
Beverly D’Angelou) and another daughter, 25-year-old Julie]. He’s paternal, in 
a distant way. I mention to him that I’m going to be a dad soon. “Oh my! You 
got a wife you like? That’s good. That’s a start. It does change you in a way 
that’s unexpected. If you like that sort of thing … it’s a great thing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fal-pacino-whats-the-point-of-quitting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437672206955%2F25f49d9c-252c-4789-b16c-d8adf1b18e3f-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Al%20Pacino%3A%20%E2%80%98What%E2%80%99s%20the%20point%20of%20quitting%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fal-pacino-whats-the-point-of-quitting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Al%20Pacino%3A%20%E2%80%98What%E2%80%99s%20the%20point%20of%20quitting%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fal-pacino-whats-the-point-of-quitting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437672206955%2F25f49d9c-252c-4789-b16c-d8adf1b18e3f-1020x612.jpeg>
 Pacino as Michael Corleone in The Godfather Part II, 1974. Photograph: 
Cinetext/Allstar Colle 
You hire Pacino, you get his reputation. Manglehorn is not immune to the 
actor’s influence. The furniture of the bank set mimics that in Dog Day 
Afternoon (in which he played a luckless thief caught stealing to pay for his 
transsexual lover’s sex-reassignment surgery). “The world is yours,” Manglehorn 
tells a security guard as he slumps out to face another day. The film is 
intended as “an insider’s love letter to people who know his career”, says 
Green, and such homage also emphasises the difficulty in shelving those roles 
that came to define cinema culture and Pacino himself: Michael Corleone in The 
Godfather andThe Godfather <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-godfather> 
Part II, Sonny in Dog Day Afternoon, Frank Serpico, Scarface’s Tony Montana and 
Frank Keller in Sea of Love.

I ask Pacino if we should read anything into his recent film choices. Does he 
ever feel, like the actor in The Humbling, that his talent has deserted him? 
After all, he has been doing this for so long now and …

“OK.”

“I didn’t mean that as an insult.”

“I’m not insulted. I’m sitting here with you. How long is long? Four hundred 
years? Five hundred years? I don’t know what you’re talking about when you say 
long. What are you supposed to do? Quit?”

“Would you?”

“I have no desire to quit. Sorry. Why? Why didn’t I quit 20 years ago, 40 
years ago? What’s the point of quitting?”

There is a pause as he decides which way to take it, then decides to be 
magnanimous.

“Listen, I’m trying to tell you something. I had a friend who died of cancer 
at 35. Thirty-five is young. I was sitting with him a good deal of the time and 
at one point he said to me: ‘I want to tell you something I’ve learned: three 
months, 30 years.’ No difference. That was the insight that he got when he was 
close to death. And I understand that.”

Pacino’s voice is gentler than you would expect, even exasperated. It doesn’t 
rocket up in volume as the impressionistssuggest 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nideg3ttOiU>. We are sitting in a glass dining 
room in a hotel canteen in Toronto. The familiar Bronx growl bounces gently 
around the room, just loud enough to attract the attention of a passing waiter, 
who flits back and forth, peeping at Pacino.

“A painter can be 100 and paint a group of college kids playing football,” 
Pacino says. “It doesn’t matter, because he’s not playing football. He just 
grabs a brush and does the strokes. That’s the difference [with age]. That’s 
really all it is.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fal-pacino-whats-the-point-of-quitting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437672480996%2Ffbd12e56-1633-47f7-9ebe-906450dd55f0-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Al%20Pacino%3A%20%E2%80%98What%E2%80%99s%20the%20point%20of%20quitting%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fal-pacino-whats-the-point-of-quitting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Al%20Pacino%3A%20%E2%80%98What%E2%80%99s%20the%20point%20of%20quitting%3F%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fjul%2F23%2Fal-pacino-whats-the-point-of-quitting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F23%2F1437672480996%2Ffbd12e56-1633-47f7-9ebe-906450dd55f0-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Pacino in Manglehorn. 
It’s unfair to expect the actor to remain as distinctive as he was 40 years 
back, says Karina Longworth, author ofAl Pacino: Anatomy of an Actor 
<http://www.amazon.com/Al-Pacino-Anatomy-Karina-Longworth/dp/0714866644>. 
“People think they have an idea of Al Pacino based on performances in movies 
like Scarface, but most people forget the moments of grace that make those 
performances interesting,” she says. “His career encompasses so much more than 
the six or seven films that are associated with catchphrases, but the sheer 
repeatability of something like ‘Hoo-ah!’ allows those performances to 
overshadow everything else.”

Still, it’s an odd time to be a Pacino fan. He has remained a method actor, 
even if he dispensed a while ago with the actorly intensity. In public, he is 
garrulous and a little eccentric, rich pickings for the fans who delight in 
seeing that outrageousness up close. In the past few years, he has topped up 
his crust by flogging seats on his private jet, passes to backstage meet and 
greets and tickets to the world tour of an onstage Q&A series called An Evening 
with Pacino that paved the way for other stars –Schwarzenegger, Stallone, 
Travolta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/04/ill-be-backstage-would-you-pay-2k-for-a-drink-with-arnie-sly-or-john>
 – to follow suit. He is a veteran artist forced into a modern celebrity – 
something he distills brilliantly in Wilde Salomé. One minute he’s raging at 
the producers for putting pressure on his rehearsal time (“Fuck them”), the 
next he is gamely pretending to machine-gun a fan who is doing a Scarface 
impression.

“When you’re Al Pacino <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alpacino> people want 
you to be larger than life,” says Green. “But he’s never going to be everybody 
for everybody. He told me he admires The Rock because The Rock knows how to 
switch it on for his fans.”

Pacino says his attitude to working now is inspired by a mantra that method 
acting guruLee Strasberg <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lee_Strasberg> drilled 
into him when Pacino’s profile exploded in the 70s: “Darling, you simply have 
to adjust.”

How far might he flex? There has been speculation that he would appear in a 
Marvel film. It was spurred by news of a meeting with studio head Kevin Feige, 
after Pacino said heenjoyed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/10/al-pacino-talks-guardians-of-the-galaxy-studio-marvel>
 Guardians of the Galaxy.Mark Millar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/08/mark-miller-kick-ass>, who wrote 
the comic on which the next Marvel blockuster will be based, approves.

“We actually talked about Pacino for the first Kick-Ass film,” Millar says. “I 
remember sitting in the pub with Matthew [Vaughn], running through who could 
play the crime boss Hit-Girl takes down. The first three names were: Pacino, De 
Niro and Jack Nicholson. Then we realised how physical the part was going to be 
and decided to go a generation younger. But can you imagine how mental that 
would have been?Scarface <https://www.theguardian.com/film/scarface> getting 
kicked to death by a 10-year old girl and then blown up with a rocket-launcher?”

Michael Radford, who directed Pacino as Shylock in the 2004 film of The 
Merchant of Venice, is gathering finance for a Napoleon biopic, starring Pacino 
(he’s an inch taller than Boney, and 25 years older than the general was when 
he died). “Al is not somebody who interests the younger generation unless 
they’re film fanatics,” Radford says. “My kids and their friends? He doesn’t 
appear on their radar. Michael Fassbender and Tom Hardy do. At the same time, 
he’s a star for three-quarters of the world. Scarface has … become a kind of 
totem for all immigrant populations everywhere.”

Radford caught one of Pacino’s Q&A sessions. It wasn’t the onstage banter that 
stuck with him. “He tells the Al Pacino story,” he says. “It’s very 
entertaining, but it’s preceded by a montage of all his roles that shows how 
staggering he is.”

I see the Pacino roadshow in full effect a couple of weeks after we meet. He 
is being presented with a BFI Fellowship at a black-tie bash. A ragbag of 
talent – Joan Collins, Richard E Grant, Tom Hooper – clog the reception room. 
Pacino ambles in and acts delighted. Works the room, plays the part. But it is, 
despite the glamour, sentimental in a way that Pacino isn’t.

I ask him about death in our interview. He is very matter of fact about it. 
“You don’t think about it yet, but it will come to you,” he says. “It’s a 
tunnel, see? And when you’re about 36, for the first time in your life, you 
look andway down in the distance there’s this tiny, tiny light and you say: 
‘Oh! I didn’t know what was there!’ It’s an awareness that comes to us.”

At the reception, the montage of clips from his classic films (mostly 
pre-1980, no Jack & Jill here) is played before dinner. It’s the same kind of 
showreel you’d see any given year at any honorary ceremony, but Radford’s 
right: something clicks.

The young Pacino collects the gun, smooths his hair and walks back to the 
table tofinish dinner with Sollozzo 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ppjyB2MpxBU>. He pleads for the captain to air 
the department’s dirty laundry <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MBZMTHsTQic>. He
tells that flunky pig to get back <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kYt24hq5nbM>
. The dining room goes quiet. The genius cuts through the glitz. “He wants to 
kill me so bad he can taste it!” screams the onscreen Pacino. “Attica! Attica! 
Attica!” For a brief moment, the art is alive again.

• Manglehorn is released in the UK on 7 August. Karina Longworth’s Hollywood 
history podcastYou Must Remember This <http://youmustrememberthispodcast.com/>, 
is out weekly. Wilde Salomé isavailable on DVD now 
<http://www.cinestage.co.uk/store/p11/SalomÃ©_%26_Wilde_SalomÃ©_DVD%2A.html>.

 