
While his latter career choices have suggested someone with a lot of residual 
anger and some hefty debts to pay off, there was a long time whenAl Pacino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alpacino> was one of the most respected 
actors in the business.

This week sees a slight return to form for the Oscar-winner, with the release 
of amiable comedy Danny Collins, in which he plays an ageing rocker trying to 
reconnect with his family. It’s Pacino’s best for years, and to make the most 
of our renewed respect for him, here are five of his greatest career highs:

The Godfather
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DppjyB2MpxBU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DppjyB2MpxBU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DppjyB2MpxBU&media=>
Watching a 31-year-old Pacino give such a confident performance in only his 
third film is a rather intimidating lesson for any actor still finding his or 
her feet. As Michael Corleone, Pacino found his footing impressively fast, and 
this scene, arguably the best of the entire trilogy, sees him transform into 
the gangster who will haunt him throughout the rest of the saga.


Dog Day Afternoon 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkYt24hq5nbM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkYt24hq5nbM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkYt24hq5nbM&media=>
His role in The Godfather <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-godfather> 
gave his career an expected boost, but rather than sticking with the mob genre, 
Pacino branched out. After checking out life on the right side of the law in 
Serpico, he headed back to a life (or rather, a day) of crime in Sidney Lumet’s 
Oscar-winning drama. He played a desperate man who attempts to rob a bank to 
pay for his boyfriend’s sex-change operation – which was a daring storyline 
back in 1975. This scene shows him losing his cool and then winning over the 
crowd gathered outside the bank in the same breath.

Glengarry Glen Ross
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqa9dttNx1S8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqa9dttNx1S8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dqa9dttNx1S8&media=>
While Pacino might have won the best actor Oscar in 1992 for his role in the 
saccharine mess that was Scent of a Woman, his other nominated performance from 
that year was more worthy of an award. In this adaptation of David Mamet’s 
swear-heavy office-based play, Pacino was arguably the standout member of an 
impeccable cast – and this monologue shows why.

Heat
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmZjraQagtTo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmZjraQagtTo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmZjraQagtTo&media=>
There was a great deal of hype about the prospect of Pacino starring alongside 
Robert De Niro in a second film – especially given that their first was The 
Godfather Part II, in which they never actually share a scene. Heat also kept 
them apart for most of the duration, but brought them together for this tense 
restaurant meeting which, as well as the novelty of having them onscreen 
together, bristles with tension. Sadly, the pair later expanded on this dynamic 
in the incompetent thriller Righteous Kill, an entire film in which they’re 
together, but which makes you wish they’d never even met.

Insomnia
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dznc5Rj8xi-4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dznc5Rj8xi-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dznc5Rj8xi-4&media=>
Pacino’s later performances became the stuff of parody, due to his frequent 
inability to control the VOLUME of his VOICE. But in 2002, he teamed with a 
pre-Batman Christopher Nolan for a thriller that gave him his best role in 
years. As a tortured cop struggling with guilt and a lack of sleep, Pacino 
dialled it down, and this final, spoiler-heavy scene provides a devastating yet 
emotionally satisfying end to his character’s journey.
 