
Alaa al-Aswany is several people, rolled into one. He is Egypt's 
biggest-selling novelist. He is a dentist. And as of this summer, he is also 
one of the most vocal cheerleaders for the Egyptian army's bloody crackdown on
the Muslim Brotherhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/02/who-are-the-muslim-brotherhood> 
– the Islamist group that propelled now-ousted president Mohamed Morsi to power 
in Egypt's first post-revolution elections.

"I cannot defend killing," says Aswany, of a crackdown that has seen over 
1,000 Morsi supporters killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/jul/18/cairo-republican-guard-shooting-full-story>
 and thousands more arrested and detained without trial. "But in the end, there 
is a very big difference between when you use excessive force during a war – 
and when you use excessive force during an ordinary, peaceful situation.

"We are in a state of war," he claims when we meet at his home outside Cairo. 
Morsi's Muslim Brothers "are not the peaceful, democratic force that they said 
they were for 40 years," he argues. "They are a group of terrorists and 
fascists."

It is a startling assertion for anyone who has read Aswany's best-known book, 
The Yacoubian Building 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/feb/17/fiction.featuresreviews>. 
Published in 2002, and laterturned into a film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/sep/14/worldcinema.drama>, the 
state-of-the-nation novel follows the inhabitants of an apartment block in 
downtown Cairo. One of the book's more memorable narratives involves the 
sympathetic and nuanced portrayal of a young Islamist terrorist called Taha el 
Shazli. Rather than depicting Taha as evil incarnate, Aswany shows how Taha 
only turns to extremism after being raped and tortured in police custody. If 
there is a lesson from Taha's tale, it is that people are not born extremists, 
and that state-sponsored brutality provokes terrorism – not the other way 
around.

A decade on, Aswany seems to have forgotten Taha's story – or at least doesn't 
see the parallels between his descent into extremism and the potential for 
something similar among contemporary Islamists. "The story of Taha is very 
different," smiles Aswany, a big and kindly man, built like a boxer. "He is 
someone who was treated from the very beginning on an unfair basis. But the 
situation here is different: you're talking about an organisation that has had 
[a militant] infrastructure for 40 years. The Brothers used violence from the 
very beginning."

By Aswany's account, the Brothers never moved on from the practices of their 
forebears in the 40s and 50s – when the group's armed wing assassinated an 
Egyptian prime minister andattempted to kill President Gamal Abdel Nasser 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gamal_Abdel_Nasser>. Many Brotherhood historians 
argue that the group has almost exclusively been a humanitarian organisation 
since the 70s. But Aswany claims their charity work was just a front – and 
blames them for the violence of more extreme spin-off groups.

Aswany also argues that this summer's brutal clearance of two pro-Morsi 
protest camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/12/egypt-cairo-mohamed-morsi-camps> 
was specifically justified by Islamist violence at the sit-ins and elsewhere in 
Egypt. He cites reports of torture at the camps – and points to the sacking of 
dozens of police stations and churches, allegedly by Islamist extremists. But 
while it would be naive to deny that any violence took place inside a camp of 
20,000, the torture allegations remain unproven; journalists who reported from 
the sites found them to be largely peaceful, full of women and children. The
destruction of churches and police stations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/16/egyptian-police-recapture-islamist-town-delga>
 – though indefensible – took place after the camps' clearance, and the exact 
instigators remain unknown.

Aswany argues that the Islamists who unleashed such terror mistakenly blamed 
all state officials for the wrongdoing of a few individuals. "I won many 
literary awards in the west – all of them after 9/11," he reasons. "I was not 
considered in common responsibility with the terrorists who did 9/11. I was 
considered as an individual, as myself. But I would accuse the Brothers of 
practising [the opposite] on the state." Yet the same accusation could be 
made of the way Aswany justifies attacks on the Brotherhood.

Aswany's position is emblematic of the way that many of those known as 
liberals in Egypt have swung behind the actions of the country's new 
military-installed regime 
<http://www.madamasr.com/content/voice-dissent-joins-nationalist-chorus>. 
Somewhere between a fifth and a third of the country may still back Morsi (and
some of their allies shouted down a talk Aswany recently gave in Paris, forcing 
him to escape through a trapdoor 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?v=595657410475952>). And a small minority 
openly criticise the authoritarianism of both the Brotherhood and the army. But
the vast majority of Egyptians back the military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/16/egypt-nationalism-muslim-brotherhood-crackdown>
. They thank the army for saving the country from what they saw as an 
autocratic Islamist president who wanted to transform Egypt's moderate national 
character, who bypassed legal protocols to install an Islamist-slanted 
constitution, and whoallegedly set his own militias against protesters outside 
the presidential palace last December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/dec/05/egypt-clashes-protesters-muslim-supporters>
.

But while Aswany may back the army's crackdown on the Brotherhood, he does not 
want a return to a military president. Still a practising dentist, he compares 
the choice of governance currently offered to Egyptians to the choice of 
horrifying dental tools he once offered a little boy in his clinic. "You had 
Mubarak, who was terrible. But now you have been scratched by the Ikhwan [the 
Arabic name for the Brotherhood] – and what do you prefer? The return of the 
old regime, or staying with the Ikhwan?" In Aswany's story, the little boy sees 
through the false dichotomy, and turns down both operations.

"I would love to answer as the little boy answered," concludes Aswany. "We 
don't want the Ikhwan, and we don't want the old regime. We want a democratic 
state."
 