
‘Those 18 days were the most beautiful days of my life,” Egyptian novelist 
Alaa al-Aswany says of the January 2011demonstrations in Cairo’s Tahrir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/25/egypt-protests-mubarak> Square 
that swept his country into revolution, and forced dictator-presidentHosni 
Mubarak <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hosni-mubarak> to resign at the 
extraordinary, euphoric high point of theArab spring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2011/mar/22/middle-east-protest-interactive-timeline>
.

“When you live through such a big event, you are not able – or I am not able – 
to write a novel about it directly. You should have a distance. I have this 
distance now and I’m writing a novel about the revolution,” Aswany says in his 
deep-voiced, accented English, as we talk over glasses of hot chocolate in a 
cafe on Edgware Road, London.

At first glance, his new novel – a belated arrival in its English translation, 
having been published in Egypt three years ago – looks like something quite 
different: a retreat, perhaps, from the maelstrom of Egypt’s present. Set in 
the 1940s,The Automobile Club of Egypt  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/360338/s/automobile-club-of-egypt/>
is a Middle Eastern upstairs-downstairs tale of servants and masters, Egyptians 
and colonials, decadent royals and family life.

The club, like the Yacoubian Building that gave its name to his first novel, 
is a real place, and when Aswany was a child, his father was its lawyer. As a 
boy Alaa saw King Farouk’s playing cards, kept as a relic from the days when he 
gambled there, and the stories told by the servants stayed with him. But the 
novel, which uses the stirrings of the independence movement as a backdrop, and 
is ostensibly a period drama about a revolt by cleaners, cooks and bar staff 
against their despotic overseer, also has an allegorical meaning that its 
author is keen to point out.

“Is everybody really prepared to pay the price of freedom? Do people who have 
been living in a dictatorship for decades miss freedom, or have they adapted? 
That’s the question in the novel, and in Egypt,” he explains. One reviewer 
called it “the novel of the Arab spring”.

Its answer to that question - are people prepared to pay the price of freedom? 
– is a resounding no. While a few rebels, led by an employee planted by a 
nationalist cell, sow seeds of rebellion in the club’s terrorised workforce, 
most prefer the status quo: “They too wished that Alku [the king’s henchman] 
would put an end to the beatings, but they were certain that would never 
happen. They knew they would never see justice reign. Abdoun [the rebel] had 
spoken the truth, but of what value was that? When had the truth ever changed 
anything in their lives?... They longed to see Abdoun receiving his due and a 
taste of the stick, screaming and begging Alku to forgive him. That would make 
them feel safe again.”

It is a dispiriting view of his countrymen, perhaps of brutalised and sadistic 
humanity in general. But Aswany, who is 58, declares himself filled with hope 
for the future. He says that, while the revolution – by which he means the 
movement for a secular, liberal, democratic state – currently enjoys the 
support of less than 20% of the population, he expects it be a reality before 
he dies.

Fresh from an early morning appearance on the radio as part of a publicity 
tour that also takes him to Holland and France, Aswany cuts an urbane figure: 
cosmopolitan, fluent in Spanish as well as Arabic, French and English, 
historical examples at his fingertips.

There is just the occasional flash of a man who does not expect to be crossed. 
When I ask how he can be sure that “the Egyptians living now are no longer the 
Egyptians living under Mubarak”, given the country has more than 90 million 
inhabitants, he replies: “Because I am a novelist, my job is to understand the 
people.” When I ask him about the “human values”, and where they came from, he 
rejects the question – “I don’t think human values need a definition” – though 
he goes on to mention dignity, freedom and justice, and to claim that “we had 
human values centuries before Europe – in our old, pharaonic history”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falaa-al-aswany-interview-politically-egyptian-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b1ad699d8b0e2b53edd40156dd4358bc7fa15e4%2F0_118_2480_1487%2F2480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alaa%20al-Aswany%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20do%20not%20believe%20the%20revolution%20is%20a%20political%20change%3B%20it%20is%20a%20human%20change%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falaa-al-aswany-interview-politically-egyptian-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alaa%20al-Aswany%20interview%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20do%20not%20believe%20the%20revolution%20is%20a%20political%20change%3B%20it%20is%20a%20human%20change%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Falaa-al-aswany-interview-politically-egyptian-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b1ad699d8b0e2b53edd40156dd4358bc7fa15e4%2F0_118_2480_1487%2F2480.jpg>
 The 2006 film adaptation of The Yacoubian Building. Photograph: 
Strand/Everett/Rex Features 
“Of course, politically we haven’t achieved anything,” he says of the failures 
of the past five years, sounding remarkably sanguine about it. “But I do not 
believe the revolution is a political change; I believe it is a human change. 
People have overcome the barrier of fear and this is irreversible. Accordingly 
I’m very optimistic. What we are living through now has happened in all 
revolutions without a single exception. The counter-revolution arrives when the 
revolution becomes less attractive to the people.”

Born in 1957, Aswany was the only child of wealthy and well-educated parents 
who had government officials in the family on both sides. He went to Cairo’s 
French lycee, decided aged 11 that he wanted to be a writer, and once drove his 
mother to worried tears by reading continuously for more than 24 hours. He 
talks of his parents with great affection, but felt the absence of siblings: 
“First you feel lonely, then you learn how to make friends better [than other 
people] because you need your friends more than anybody else, and also you get 
to stay with the grownups more so you listen to things which are useful but 
that if you had sisters and brothers you might not have heard.”

On his father’s advice, and believing it would be impossible to make a living 
as an author (even the Nobel prize-winning Egyptian writer Naguib Mahfouz had a 
job), he trained as a dentist, dissecting cockroaches as well as studying teeth 
as part of a curriculum designed by the British. He still has a clinic in 
Cairo, and says it has served him well: “I have been able to make my living 
through dentistry. I was never paid one single Egyptian pound by any 
government, and that enables me to say what I think. Second, it’s a wonderful 
way to communicate with people. I see the question in your eyes: ‘How can you 
communicate with people sitting with their mouths open?’” He chuckles. “But I 
am not a typical dentist. I listen to my patients, they become friends.” For 
six years he was the company dentist in a cement factory, which he likens to 
visiting another planet – memories of it may yet surface, along with dentistry, 
in his fiction.

I was never paid one single Egyptian pound by any government, and that enables 
me to say what I think

He married an accountant, with whom he now has three children, and continued 
to write and read, particularly the South American novels he admired more than 
the French ones he studied at school. His literary ambitions were frustrated, 
however, and he was on the verge of emigrating to New Zealand when success 
changed his life:

“I was desperate, because I had been rejected for publication three times in 
the 1990s. I said to my wife, ‘That’s enough literature, I have been working 
very hard for 10 years and I can’t even get published.’ I said I would finish 
the novel I was working on, pay as usual to have 500 copies printed for friends 
and critics, and then stop.”

That novel was The Yacoubian Building, and when a friend he describes as an 
“avant-garde communist” published it in 2002, the first edition sold out. “I’m 
not sure I would really have been able to stop writing, but I was very angry,” 
Aswany says, “The Yacoubian Building saved me.” Its defiantly uninhibited 
portrait of the lives and loves of modern Cairo people – including an account 
of the anal rape by a family servant of a nine-year-old boy, and the journey of 
another character from would-be policeman to jihadist – made it a sensation. 
More than 1m copies were sold in 35 languages and a film version broke Egyptian 
records. Aswany is justifiably proud.

With the distancing mechanism of a historical setting, a translation 
criticised for clumsiness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/26/the-automobile-club-of-egypt-alaa-al-aswany-review>
, and a crude subplot involving two young men selling sex to rich widows,The 
Automobile Club of Egypt lacks the freshness of its predecessor. Its strongest 
passages are the more prosaic ones, dealing with the Gaafar family’s 
difficulties, the relations between the siblings and Saleha’s disastrous 
marriage.

Aswany says these personal and individual stories are where his strongest 
interest lies: “In any fiction you have what we call the now element, dealing 
with the problems of now. But the most important element in fiction is the 
human element, and this is why we are able now to readDostoevsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fyodordostoevsky>, Dickens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/charlesdickens> and Balzac, because the now 
element is no more relevant but the human element still exists.”

“To me a novel should be enjoyable – it should have characters,” he adds. 
“This is my challenge: as a reader, when you finish a novel you must feel that 
you become to some extent a different person, you have a kind of transmitted 
human experience.”

Aswany, who backed the secular, leftwing candidate Hamdeen Sabahi in Egypt’s 
2012 election [see footnote], is implacably opposed to any form of political 
Islam which he believes is incompatible with democracy. To the consternation of 
those who took the opposite view, in 2013 he argued that a return to military 
rule was the lesser of two evils, supported former president Mohamed Morsi’s 
removal from office (Morsi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/01/mohamed-morsi-execution-death-sentence-egypt>
 is now fighting a death sentence), and offered a partial justification for the 
killing of thousands of his supporters, calling them“terrorists and fascists” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/29/alaa-al-aswany-egypt-muslim-brotherhood>
.

But he is a vocal critic too of the current regime, and for the past 15 months 
has been prevented from writing what used to be a regular, pro-democracy 
newspaper column.Last month, a seminar he had planned to hold in Alexandria was 
banned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/11/egypt-shuts-down-novelist-alaa-al-aswanys-public-event-and-media-work>
. He says he isn’t scared.

Although literature is his priority, it does not absolve him of other 
responsibilities. Like his heroGabriel García Márquez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gabrielgarciamarquez>, Aswany believes the 
writer, especially perhaps the rich and successful one, has a duty to speak 
out: “My concept of literature is as an artistic defence of human values. You 
cannot be committed to the defence of human values and, when you have millions 
of people in the street and people dying, stay at home. I don’t think I’m 
exceptional – there is a long history of novelists who took action to defend 
revolutions and human values in writing and in the street as well.”

• This footnote was appended on 26 January 2016 to clarify the fact that as 
well as supporting Hamdeen Sabahi in the 2012 presidential election,Alaa 
al-Aswany <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alaa-al-aswany> also later 
supported him against Abdel Fatah Sisi; and that while Aswany justified the 
clearance of pro-Morsi camps, he also told the Guardian in 2013: “I cannot 
defend killing.”
 