
Award-winning playwright Alan Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanbennett> has launched a withering attack 
on the Tories, describing their style of government as “quite close to a 
totalitarian attitude”.

In an interview with the Guardian’s Weekend magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/31/alan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-in>
, Bennett said of the Conservatives: “It’s not merely that they want to be the 
governing party, but theonly party, and that’s never been a part of British 
political tradition,” he said. “That stems from Mrs Thatcher: she did believe 
that Labour was wicked.”

The Talking Heads writer, 81, has come out in support of the Labour leader, 
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, saying: “I 
approve of him. If only because it brings Labour back to what they ought to be 
thinking about.”

Alan Bennett: ‘I didn’t see the point of coming out'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/31/alan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview>
He accepted the former veteran backbencher was a risk for the party, but 
added: “I’m sure Corbyn is a risk, but I very much approve of him – everything 
he’s said seems to me to ring bells.

 “The notion that they [Labour] were wanting to choose somebody who would win 
the election when we are three, four years away from one, regardless of what 
half the nation wants – that seems to me far more risky than what they have 
done.”

Bennett, a regular passenger on the east coast mainline, said the opposition 
leader was “absolutely right”to want to nationalise the railways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/20/jeremy-corbyn-rail-nationalisation-policy-labour-conference>
 and that privatising it the “was pure ideology” of the Conservative-led 
coalition government. “It was making a profit and there was no reason to sell 
it back again,” Bennett explained. “No good arguments have been advanced for 
it.”

He attributed his sympathy for leftwing politics to his experience in the 
national service when he was a young man . “I was quite conservative and 
Christian and rather priggish when I went into the army,” he said.

In the wide-ranging and open interview before the release of his new film, the 
Lady in the Van, starring Maggie Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/lady-in-the-van-shoots-camden-town-alan-bennett-maggie-smith>
, Bennett also talked about life with his partner of 23 years, Rupert Thomas, 
and explains he would not have come out as gay while his parents were still 
alive for fear it would have “distressed both of them”. Bennett also revealed 
his love of comedian Stewart Lee and the TV show The Big Bang Theory.

The History Boys playwright has previously spoken out against private education
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/17/alan-bennett-attack-private-education-lecture-wrong>
. He said: “Private education is not fair … Those who provide it know it. Those 
who pay for it know it. Those who have to sacrifice in order to purchase it 
know it. And those who receive it know it, or should.”

He said in the same address to King’s College Cambridge: “There has been so 
little that has happened to England since the 1980s that I have been happy 
about or felt able to endorse. One has only had to stand still to become a 
radical.”

 But he reserved his staunchest criticism for the state of British politics 
and the press, and attacked the Daily Mail for their coverage of Corbyn not 
singing the national anthem. “Half the royal family don’t even sing the anthem 
… they don’t even seem to know the words to Jerusalem. The notion that you are 
required to sing the national anthem in order to prove your patriotism, and if 
you don’t you’re not patriotic, is so absurd.”

“The lies on the front page of the Mail are so vulgar and glaring. 
Occasionally people say they like my work and then I see they have a copy of 
the Mail, and you think, ‘Well, how can you?’”
 