
Alan Bennett <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanbennett>, now 81, is as 
dapper as you like in knitted tie and red-soled grey suede shoes. He still has 
that schoolboy mop of blond hair, and were it not for a little stiffness as he 
rises from his chair, and deep veins on his hands, you would take him for a 
much younger man. We are talking in his front room in Primrose Hill in London. 
His partner of 23 years, Rupert Thomas, is the editor of the World Of Interiors 
magazine and it shows – the room is a comfortable cave of 18th-century 
pictures, a mantelpiece loaded up with cards (one handmade in the shape of a 
red-soled grey shoe) and a wall lined with books: fat Pevsner architectural 
guides, the journals of Anthony Powell, Virginia Woolf and John Cheever, Claire 
Tomalin’s Thomas Hardy biography, and volumes on the history of blue-and-white 
china.

In Bennett’s plays, bookshelves often loom up to intimidate or overwhelm 
characters. They are also useful decrypters of taste, and this famous literary 
diarist is clearly a connoisseur of other literary diarists. (The tone of his 
journals, excerpts from which are printedin the London Review Of Books each 
January <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v36/n01/alan-bennett/diary>, is nicely 
encapsulated by the headline given to the 2010 batch: “Alan Bennett eats a 
poached egg.”)

What dates Bennett is not his appearance or indeed his bookshelves, but his 
grasp of technology. His new film, The Lady In The Van, is about the 
extraordinary figure of Miss Shepherd, who for 15 years, from 1974-89, made her 
home in a van parked in the driveway of the house where he used to live, a few 
streets from his current home in Camden Town. Bennett himself is played byAlex 
Jennings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/08/alex-jennings-monologue-my-fair-lady-henry-higgins>
, who is seen at various points stabbing ineffectually with two fingers at a 
manual typewriter. This, I assume, is a little cruel. “No, no, it’s absolutely 
true,” Bennett says, in that blissfully mournful voice that could have been 
designed for voicing Eeyore (which, of course, he has done, reading the Winnie 
the Pooh books for BBC radio). The action of the film takes place in the 1970s 
and 80s, so I assume that he has long since moved on into the digital world. 
“Well, we had a computer, but we were burgled and that was the one thing that 
was taken,” he says. “I was relieved, really. There was nothing on it. I didn’t 
know how to put work on it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOA8tMziteZM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOA8tMziteZM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DOA8tMziteZM&media=>
 The Lady In The Van trailer 
Surely he at least uses an electric typewriter? “Well, electric typewriters, 
they hum. They are waiting, you see, for the next note.” So an AEG Traveller de 
Luxe manual typewriter it is – lacking both expectant hum and flickering 
cursor. As we speak, a memory about Bennett surfaces, something that Thomas 
told me when, nearly 20 years ago, he and I worked together on the World Of 
Interiors. Is it really true, I ask, that you keep your work-in-progress in the 
fridge for safekeeping? He giggles. “I used to. But then a friend in New York 
said, that’s the first thing that goes up – it’s the real hotspot in a domestic 
fire, and you’d be roasting your manuscripts.” He used to know he was getting 
somewhere with a project when the urge took him to pop his pages in the salad 
crisper. His old manuscripts (nowmostly in the Bodleian Library 
<https://www.bodleian.ox.ac.uk/news/2008/2008_oct_24> in Oxford) are stained, 
he says, by various unnamed drips and spillages: “If anybody’s foolish enough 
to go through them, they’ll be able to see.”

The Lady In The Van began as a series of diary entries. Assembled into a 
single narrative, they were first published in theLRB <http://www.lrb.co.uk/> 
after Miss Shepherd’s death. Later he turned the story into a stage play, 
starring Maggie Smith, and now comes the film, directed by Nicholas Hytner, 
also starring Smith. Jennings does a lovely version of the writer, a role he 
first took in 2012 in another Bennett play, Cocktail Sticks, at the National 
Theatre. “My feeling is that probably he’d been doing imitations of me for 
years and when he did Cocktail Sticks he was simply going public,” Bennett 
says. In the film the author is trapped between the demands of two elderly 
women: his mother, declining up in Yorkshire, and Miss Shepherd, whose unruly 
presence tests the liberal principles of the new generation of artists, 
television people and journalists who, Bennett among them, had moved into 
Camden Town and done up the big old Victorian villas there (the 
“knockers-through”, Bennett has called them).

Bringing Miss Shepherd into the drive might seem as though it was 
humanitarian, but the larger part was pure selfishness

I tell him I still don’t understand why Miss Shepherd ended up in his 
driveway; for years, visitors to the house were obliged to sidle past her 
parked van. “It wasn’t, at the time, a humanitarian gesture,” Bennett says. The 
van had been parked at various points along the road, and at length “drifted 
down” to his house. “I worked at the front window. There were so many incidents 
when she was not actually physically roughed up, but people banged on the side 
of the van, hoping to get her out and waving her stick, that I always had one 
eye on her and it stopped me working. Bringing her into the drive was a way of 
getting rid of that and enabling me to find a way to work. In retrospect, it 
might seem as though it was humanitarian, but the larger part was pure 
selfishness.”

He says it’s exactly the same with a robin that nested this spring in the 
garden. “It raised two fledglings: one fell out of the nest and was killed. 
Then there was the other one, which came out of the nest too soon and had to be 
fed by the robin. I was writing overlooking the garden and it was exactly as it 
was with Miss Shepherd: half my eye was on this bird because there were jays 
about, and seagulls. If I could have taken the bird inside, I would, not 
because of the bird but because of me. I’m sure that’s not goodness, really.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445959788184%2F08919aa6-9a39-4054-bf1a-a27fa4b20b40-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20the%20point%20of%20coming%20out'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20the%20point%20of%20coming%20out%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445959788184%2F08919aa6-9a39-4054-bf1a-a27fa4b20b40-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Alan Bennett (left) with Maggie Smith and Alex Jennings, during the filming of 
The Lady In The Van. Photograph: Antony Crolla 
In the film, there are two Alan Bennetts. One sits at his desk, pen poised, 
and issues barbed remarks to the other Bennett, who flutters about timidly, not 
knowing quite what to do. The Bennett at the desk knows, on some level, that 
Miss Shepherd may well end up providing him with “good material” (though, he 
points out, “I wasn’t nurturing her as a possible subject”). This sense of 
doubleness runs through Bennett’s writing: in the diaries, there is often a 
part of him taking critical notice of what he is (or isn’t) doing, a kind of 
extreme self-awareness. For example this, from an 80s fly-on-the-wall 
documentary he collaborated on, about a hotel in Harrogate: “For years, hotels 
and restaurants were for me theatres of humiliation and the business of eating 
in public every bit as fraught with risk and shame as taking one’s clothes 
off.” The performance of going to a cafe would include his parents ordering a 
pot of tea, then smuggling bits of bread and butter, brought from home, to the 
young Bennett and his brother under the table while the waitress wasn’t looking 
– enough to turn any boy self-conscious. Bennett’s work is full of timid 
characters overwhelmed by and attracted to bolder, flashier types: Kenneth 
Halliwell and Joe Orton in the film Prick Up Your Ears, for example; Benjamin 
Britten and WH Auden inthe play The Habit Of Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/nov/18/alan-bennett-the-habit-of-art>; 
even Bennett and Miss Shepherd in The Lady In The Van.

Bennett’s life has been scattered with larger-than-life types, such as Russell 
Harty, the broadcaster who died in 1988. Their Yorkshire childhoods were 
similar but Harty had, according to Bennett’s address at his memorial service, 
“learned ... by the age of 20 a lesson it took me half a lifetime to learn, 
namely that there was nothing that could not be said and no one to whom one 
could not say it”. (As a student, Harty invited Vivien Leigh round to his rooms 
for drinks, a most unBennett-like act.) Bennett portrays his fellow performers 
in Beyond The Fringe (Peter Cook, Jonathan Miller and Dudley Moore, with whom 
he made his breakthrough on Broadway in 1962) as larger, more vivid figures; 
he, in his own accounts, tends to be waiting in the wings nervously while the 
audience laughs itself silly at Cook’s jokes.

“My parents were quite shy and, looking back, it felt they had made ‘shy’ into 
a virtue and I believed that,” he tells me. “Then as I got older I realised 
it’s an affliction, really, and if you’re shy you are just as self-centred as 
anyone who is outgoing and the life and soul of the party.” But perhaps also 
more watchful; the one more likely to be making pungent little notes in the 
day’s journal, or transforming his close observations into works of art such as 
the Talking Heads monologues of the 1980s and 90s, or The Madness Of George III.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445960318590%2F8a128ab6-f396-4104-935f-9bafd4cc3ea6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20the%20point%20of%20coming%20out'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20the%20point%20of%20coming%20out%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445960318590%2F8a128ab6-f396-4104-935f-9bafd4cc3ea6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A production by the Theatre Royal, Bath, of The Madness Of George III, in 
2011. Photograph: Robert Day/Theatre Royal 
I visit on the day Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> gives his first speech as 
Labour leader to the party conference; I ask Bennett if he caught any of it. 
No, but he is a strong supporter. “I approve of him, if only because it brings 
Labour back to what they ought to be thinking about. The notion that they were 
wanting to choose somebody who would win the election when we are three, four 
years away from one, regardless of what half the nation wants – that seems to 
me far more risky than what they have done. I’m sure Corbyn is a risk, but I 
very much approve of him.”

Bennett reckons the opposition leader is “absolutely right” about 
nationalising the railways. He and Thomas use the east coast mainline regularly 
to visit their house in Yorkshire; the line was renationalised after the 
financial crisis in 2009, but privatised again early in 2015, which he says 
“was pure ideology” on the part of the Conservative-led coalition. “It was 
making a profit and there was no reason to sell it back again. No good 
arguments have been advanced for it. And obviously the National Health and so 
forth: everything Corbyn’s said seems to me to ring bells. The other candidates 
had stopped talking about these things.”

The Conservatives, meanwhile, are “quite close to a totalitarian attitude”, he 
says. “It’s not merely that they want to be the governing party, but theonly 
party, and that’s never been part of the British political tradition. That 
stems originally from Mrs Thatcher: she did believe that Labour was wicked.” In 
an addresshe gave last year at King’s College, Cambridge 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v36/n12/alan-bennett/fair-play>, Bennett raged (quietly, 
but it was rage none the less) against private education, suggesting that it 
ought to be phased out: “Private education is not fair… Those who provide it 
know it. Those who pay for it know it. Those who have to sacrifice in order to 
purchase it know it. And those who receive it know it, or should.” In the same 
sermon, he wrote: “There has been so little that has happened to England since 
the 1980s that I have been happy about or felt able to endorse. One has only 
had to stand still to become a radical.”

The Uncommon Reader by Alan Bennett – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/29/uncommon-reader-alan-bennett-review>
He is a royalist as well as a socialist. In Bennett’s very funny story The 
Uncommon Reader, the Queen discovers a taste for novels – and thereby an inner 
existence. “The Queen comes upon herself, comes upon having a private life that 
she has never really thought about,” he explains now. “She’s a joy to write 
about, because you don’t have to do very much. Everybody knows how she speaks, 
what her circumstances are, so you’ve only got to do a tiny bit. She’s a gift.” 
In his 1988 play A Question Of Attribution, about the art historian and spy 
Anthony Blunt, the Queen was played on stage by Prunella Scales. “I think 
Prunella Scales got her precisely right on the stage. The glamorising of her 
that has happened has nothing to do with anything, really – it’s just 
exploiting her.” I assume he means Helen Mirren’s more recent take – in the film
The Queen <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/queen>, and on stage in The Audience. 
“I don’t mean Helen Mirren herself isn’t good – it’s just that it’s such a 
construction, really.”

Mirren was a good egg, he says, last time he performed on stage. For the 
National’s 50th anniversary gala <http://50.nationaltheatre.org.uk/> in 2013, 
he performed an excerpt from The History Boys, in which he took on the part of 
the wayward teacher Hector, originally played by the late Richard Griffiths. “I 
was so nervous it was painful, really. They did it twice and the first time I 
slightly messed it up – though since the lines were in French hardly anyone 
knew. But I knew. And then the next night I did it properly and it was all 
right, but oh, I wouldn’t want to do it again. And when I came off that first 
time, Helen Mirren said, ‘Oh, fuck ’em, fuck ’em.’ Which is really all you 
want, someone to say that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445960723812%2F3909910f-f810-4b32-84d1-817f89af8809-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20the%20point%20of%20coming%20out'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20the%20point%20of%20coming%20out%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445960723812%2F3909910f-f810-4b32-84d1-817f89af8809-1020x612.jpeg>
 On the set of The History Boys, which was filmed in 2006. Photograph: Snap 
Stills/Rex Shutterstock 
I wonder what he makes of the fuss surrounding Corbyn’s not singing the 
national anthem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/16/jeremy-corbyn-national-anthem-authenticity-queen-republican>
 at the Battle of Britain memorial service in September. “Oh,” he says, “that 
was the Daily Mail. The lies on the front page of the Mail are so vulgar and 
glaring. Occasionally people say they like my work and then I see they have a 
copy of the Mail, and you think, ‘Well, how can you?’” The irony is, he says, 
that “half the royal family don’t even sing the anthem… they don’t even seem to 
know the words to Jerusalem. The notion that you are required to sing the 
national anthem in order to prove your patriotism, and if you don’t you’re not 
patriotic, is so absurd.”

Like all men of his generation, Bennett did national service. He was sent to 
train with an infantry platoon in Pontefract that was going to be sent to the 
war in Korea; not unreasonably, he didn’t want to go. He worried because he had 
made the mistake of being an extremely good shot – not with a rifle (“I would 
shut my eyes because of the recoil”) but with a Bren, a light machine gun.

Everyone at his school knew there was a possible get-out clause that could be 
invoked by bright boys: the Russian course, an intensive language training 
aimed at providing interpreters, translators and sometimes intelligence 
officers. Writers Michael Frayn and Dennis Potter did it, as did the late John 
Drummond, controller of the BBC Proms in the 90s, who ended up working in 
intelligence; Bennett applied and got on.

They would never have asked me to be a spy – I am the wrong class, you see

I had harboured a small and ludicrous fantasy that Bennett might also have 
ended up spying, but am swiftly disabused. “They would never have asked me to 
be a spy – I am the wrong class, you see,” he says. The course, though, was 
“lovely, idyllic”. He had never been away from home before (he was raised in 
Leeds, except for a brief period when his parents moved to Guildford). And 
there he was, in Cambridge, and with a bit of money, too. Having already been 
offered a place to study at the university the following year, he realised that 
other people on the Russian course had won scholarships – so he reapplied, this 
time to Oxford. Neglecting his Russian in favour of preparing for the 
scholarship exam (in history), he ended up “busted back to private”, on 
standard national service duties. It was the mindless, repetitive and demeaning 
nature of that work that put “the iron into my soul,” he says. “I became more 
leftwing. I was quite conservative and Christian and rather priggish when I 
went into the army. That began to go, I hope.”

Bennett has written that he gave Guy Burgess some of his own sentiments in his 
one-act play and film about the spy, An Englishman Abroad – lines such as: “I 
can say I love London. I can say I love England. I can’t say I love my country, 
because I don’t know what that means.” Does he think patriotism is a necessary 
virtue? “Well, I don’t really,” he says. “To be patriotic – to be English – is 
partly to be sceptical of one’s country, and of patriotism itself. That is true 
of me, I think. Burgess and Blunt wanted a kind of moral solitude, which is a 
very different thing. They didn’t want to be beholden to country. Being 
sceptical about patriotism is a part of patriotism – a refined sense of 
patriotism, I think. Demonstrations of patriotism always make me uncomfortable, 
but I don’t think that makes me less of an Englishman.” He laughs. “I don’t 
know. It makes you sound so pompous if you put it like that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab1e0b5adbba8e2c4942103fe69dc667a0afef86%2F0_121_1776_1065%2F1776.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20the%20point%20of%20coming%20out'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20the%20point%20of%20coming%20out%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab1e0b5adbba8e2c4942103fe69dc667a0afef86%2F0_121_1776_1065%2F1776.jpg>
 Bennett as Anthony Blunt, with Prunella Scales as the Queen, in A Question Of 
Attribution. Photograph: Alastair Muir/Rex Shutterstock 
While Bennett’s audiences and readers have come to know all kinds of 
apparently intimate things about him – the pigskin suitcases his Aunty Myra 
brought back from India during the war, the particular smell of his 
grandmother’s dresser – he has kept much of himself back. Despite the sense of 
familiarity that comes from having watched his television plays of the 70s and 
80s, or read his autobiographical stories, he is not in any real sense 
knowable. Or rather, he is easily mistaken: those wry Yorkshire tones and an 
art that tends to dwell on matters domestic and provincial mean he is 
frequently regarded as rather cosy – when, in fact, plays such as The History 
Boys andPeople 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/nov/08/people-alan-bennett-lyttelton> 
only thinly disguise his political anger.

When I ask him about this gap between public and private, he talks, 
unprompted, about his sexuality. “It’s a thing about being beholden, about not 
being beholden to anyone,” he says. “I didn’t want to be in anybody’s pocket, 
that’s why I didn’t want to be thought to be gay, particularly. Pigeonholed. 
And then as you get older it just ceases to matter. The times changed and 
then... Rupert and I have been together for 23 years, you see, so it’s never 
been an issue since then.”

He wouldn’t have come out while his parents were alive, anyway. “It would have 
distressed both of them. People talk about coming out to their parents, and I 
just didn’t see the point of that. In my case, coming out about what? Nothing 
was happening – I might be gay but I didn’t have a partner or anything, so 
there was no point.” There was also, anyway, a decade-long relationship with a 
woman, Anne Davies, who died in 2009. “It started off just as a fling, really, 
but we became very fond of each other. She overlapped with Rupert and so it 
ended, and then she came to Yorkshire and lived next door. To begin with, not 
surprisingly, she didn’t get on with Rupert, but then she became ill and she 
became closer to Rupert than she was to me, really.” She was, he says, “very 
beautiful”. At the time of the relationship he enjoyed the sense of 
wrongfooting people: “I think I probably got some satisfaction from thinking, 
‘Well, everyone assumes I am gay.’”

These days he doesn’t go out all that much, certainly not to the theatre. “I 
used to go to the National when Nick [Hytner] was the boss because I could go 
in and sit in the producer’s box and watch an act, and then you could go home, 
if you wanted. I don’t like being imprisoned in an audience now, partly because 
I often want to go to the loo.” Hytner throws two big parties a year, one in 
the summer and one in winter, which Bennett enjoys, preferring theatre people 
to literary people, and enjoying catching up with the actors he has worked 
with. “It’s a much kinder world, is the theatre, than literature. It seems to 
me that they are more forgiving of one another.” Either through loyalty or 
innate conservatism or a bit of both, Hytner has directed all Bennett’s recent 
plays and films, and his professional relationships are exceptionally enduring: 
his diaries and essays are almost invariably published in the LRB, edited by 
Mary-Kay Wilmers, a former neighbour in Camden Town, another of the 
knockers-through.

“Nick chose me, rather than the other way round,” he says of Hytner. The 
director approached him in 1989 to write an adaptation of The Wind In The 
Willows for the NationalTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, 
then run by Richard Eyre. Their first meeting was in a restaurant in Primrose 
Hill, and Bennett spent much of the dinner explaining the area to him. The 
intensely contained Hytner never owned up to living streets away himself. 
Professionally, Hytner “gets the mixture of encouragement and criticism exactly 
right,” Bennett says. “So that when you show him something, he is enthusiastic 
about it but he nevertheless has reservations. Both those things make you want 
to go on with it – both the praise and the criticism. I don’t know whether he 
does it instinctively or whether he does it with other people, but it always 
works for me.” It used to be like that at the BBC: Bennett worked for 20 years 
with the late producer Innes Lloyd, on dramas such as A Day Out (his first play 
for television, broadcast in 1972) and Talking Heads. “I wanted to please him 
in the way that I want to please Nick. Innes was exactly what was good about 
the BBC. You told him what you wanted to do, and he would arrange things 
without letting you know there was any problem at all. The other producer like 
that, in a different way, was Ned Sherrin: he understood about giving you space 
and not letting you know there was a row on. I’ve never really been able to do 
much at the BBC since.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445964749446%2F3f802750-242e-464e-bca2-ba1cd077cada-1542x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20the%20point%20of%20coming%20out'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Bennett%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20didn%E2%80%99t%20see%20the%20point%20of%20coming%20out%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F31%2Falan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445964749446%2F3f802750-242e-464e-bca2-ba1cd077cada-1542x2040.jpeg>
 With his partner of 23 years, Rupert Thomas. Photograph: Antony Crolla 
He watches telly: he enjoyed the recent adaptations of Cider With Rosie and An 
Inspector Calls. The latter is one of two JB Priestley plays he would like to 
have written himself, he says, the other being When We Are Married. He loves 
the comedy of Stewart Lee, and the geeky sitcom The Big Bang Theory, and the 
“funny but so savage” playwright Martin McDonagh. He got into trouble a few 
years back when he said in an interview that he didn’t read contemporary 
British fiction, which “was taken as being an affront to AS Byatt and everybody 
else – but I just read other things”. Recently, it’s beenThe Shepherd’s Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/04/the-shepherds-life-tale-lake-district-james-rebanks-review>
, a memoir of farming in the Lake District by James Rebanks (“a very good 
book”). But he is also reading some new British fiction –Grief Is The Thing 
With Feathers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/18/grief-is-the-thing-with-feathers-by-max-porter-review-ted-hughes>
, Max Porter’s debut novella, inspired by Ted Hughes’ Crow. “More poetry than 
anything else but it’s good,” he says. Bennett is more of a Larkin than a 
Hughes man, finding Hughes’ work “a bit Lawrentian” and the man himself, when 
he met him, “condescending. He obviously thought I was a bit showbiz and 
corrupt”. Of Hughes’ and Plath’s poetry, he says: “I slightly felt with the 
pair of them that if anyone had cracked a joke the whole thing would have split 
wide open. The whole thing was just so ‘poetic’, in inverted commas. Larkin is 
about things I recognise. I see that poems like [Hughes’] The Pike are 
wonderful, but they aren’t about the life I lead.”

His own work continues “slowly”: he goes to his desk each morning at 10.30am; 
and Hytner has an old screenplay of his, once written for John Schlesinger but 
never made, that might turn into something. Things are somewhat becalmed as 
Hytner, having left the National, has not yet started uphis new venture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/21/former-national-director-nicholas-hytner-new-theatre-london>
, a London theatre near Tower Bridge, planned to open in 2017.

Sources of domestic tension, meantime, are few. “I’m one for being early, and 
Rupert’s one for being last-minute. It’s never settled. If we were ever to 
split up it would be about that, really. I’m chary of saying to people that I’m 
very happy or even that I’m happy. You tell people that you’re happy and they 
are bored by that. But we are.”

• The Lady In The Van is released on 13 November
 