
Alan Davies is to return as magician and detective Jonathan Creek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathan-creek> after a three-year 
break, in a BBC1 special that will air next year.

The one-off 90-minute special, called The Clue of the Savant's Thumb, will be 
broadcast next Easter.

Creek's sidekick Joey Ross, once again played by Sheridan Smith, will also 
return for the special in a plot involving a secret society, supposedly 
supernatural events at a girls' boarding school and the disappearance of a body 
in front of witnesses.

"The new story has more than the usual amount of twists and surprises, and I'm 
very much looking forward to sleuthing again," said Davies. "It's nearly 17 
years since I first auditioned for the part; the duffle coat is always on 
standby, even if the periods of duffle hibernation are quite long these days."

Jonathan Creek was last on screens in 2010 in a feature-length special, also 
broadcast over the Easter weekend, whichattracted an average of 5.45 million 
viewers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/apr/06/malaysian-grand-prix?INTCMP=SRCH>
 in overnight ratings figures.

The show originally aired between 1997 and 2004 with Caroline Quentin as 
Davies's original collaborator. Quentin was replaced by Julia Sawalha in 2001.

Sheridan joined the show when it returned for a one-off special in early 2009.

The latest outing has once again been written by the show's creator David 
Renwick, and will be executive produced by Pete Thornton. It is to be produced 
in-house by theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>.

Jonathan Creek's latest outing was commissioned by BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> controller Danny Cohen and Cheryl 
Taylor, the former controller of comedy commissioning at the BBC.

"A new [Jonathan] Creek script from David is always a joy, and this one is 
especially brilliant," said Thornton, creative head at BBC in-house comedy. 
"With the dream team ofAlan Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/alan-davies> and Sheridan Smith back 
on board, we're looking forward to delivering a really special Easter treat for 
BBC1 audiences next year."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 