
From a host of previously unseen diary entries, to a broadside against the 
injustice of private education and a previously unpublished radio play, a new 
prose collection byAlan Bennett <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanbennett> 
due out this autumn looks set to be one of next Christmas’s bestsellers.

Called Keeping On Keeping On, the collection of Bennett’s diaries from 2005 to 
2015 is due out in October, its joint publishers Faber and Profile have 
announced. The title is the writer’s third prose collection, following Writing 
Home and Untold Stories. To date, Bennett has sold more than 1.5m books in the 
UK alone, according to his publishers.

“I hope that like its two predecessors this is a book that one can dip in and 
out of,” said Bennett. “My readers will know what to expect – indeed I thought 
of calling it More of the Same.”

The latest collection will feature, said Profile, “a large percentage of diary 
entries which have not been seen before”, covering a decade that saw the films 
of The History Boys and The Lady in the Van, as well as four premieres at the
National Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/national-theatre>.

As well as his reflections on a quarter of a century’s collaborations with 
Nicholas Hytner <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/nicholas-hytner>, Keeping On 
Keeping On will also include the lecture on private education Bennett gave at 
Cambridge, in which he told his audience that “to educate not according to 
ability, but according to the social situation of the parents, is both wrong 
and a waste”.

“Private education is not fair,” said the author in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jun/17/alan-bennett-attack-private-education-lecture-wrong>
. “Those who provide it know it. Those who pay for it know it. Those who have 
to sacrifice in order to purchase it know it. And those who receive it know it, 
or should. And if their education ends without it dawning on them, then that 
education has been wasted.”

Baffled at a Bookcase, his defence of the institution of the public library 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v33/n15/alan-bennett/baffled-at-a-bookcase>, which is 
also included in the collection, sees Bennett argue that “it’s hard not to 
think that like other Tory policies, privatising the libraries has been lying 
dormant for 15 years, just waiting for a convenient crisis to smuggle it 
through”.

The collection will also include Bennett’s radio play Denmark Hill, set in 
suburban south London, which has been performed but not previously published.

Describing Bennett as inimitable, Faber and Profile announced their joint 
acquisition of a book they described as an “engaging, humane, sharp, funny and 
unforgettable record of life”.

 “I would read Alan Bennett’s shopping list, so what a happy day to be allowed 
to read his latest diaries,” said Profile commissioning editor Rebecca Gray. 
“His knowledge and experience are so wide and deep, from an unexpected film or 
the sinister aspects of an organic cafe to the pleasure of ancient 
architecture. His eye for detail and ear for a joke are ever acute, and of 
course his greatest strength is to make us laugh and cry at the same time, with 
just a few lines.”

 Faber editorial director of drama Dinah Wood added that the book “contains 
everything one could wish for: wonderful jokes, social commentary, acute local 
observation, lyrical description”, calling it “a tapestry of delights; the 
perfect prose anthology”.
 