
The broadcaster Alan Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> has 
congratulated the NSW premier for overturning the ban on greyhound racing, 
endorsing him as “the man to lead the state” again.

“A very, very gutsy performance by Michael Baird,” Jones said on his popular 
2GB breakfast program on Wednesday. “He was the Michael Baird we knew we had 
and we haven’t seen for a while.

“The little battler has had a win that’s the key. We are here to help those 
who can’t help themselves, the voice of the voiceless that’s who we are.”

After taking talkback calls on the “outstanding” and “brave” decision by the 
premier, Jones welcomed the man himself for his first interview post-ban, 
assuring him it was to be a friendly one: “I am not going to cross-examine you 
today.”

Greyhound racing ban overturned: animal welfare groups blast Mike Baird
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/11/greyhound-racing-ban-overturned-animal-welfare-groups-blast-mike-baird>
The conservative broadcaster began: “Well, there is no better antidote to a 
barrage of criticism than a barrage of much-deserved praise. He’s on the line. 
Premier good morning.”

It was a big pat on the back for the Liberal premier from the shockjock who 
just last month labelled him “King Jong Baird” 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/business/work/2gb-radio-host-alan-jones-slams-nsw-premier-as-kim-jong-baird/news-story/a223dbfb954c873c3f6f5fe72f97b549>
 and accused him of driving people to suicide with the imminent shut-down of 
the industry.

“Michael Baird, if you have one shred of decency in your hypocritical body, 
withdraw the [greyhound] legislation and start again,” Jones had thundered in 
September. “The business of the Baird government is to drive people to take 
your own lives. It’s beyond disgrace.”

But after a cosy dinner with Baird and Brad Hazzard, the family and community 
services minister, at his Sydney harbourside apartment on Tuesday night, the 
premier had exercised the about-turn that Jones had campaigned on for three 
months.

“Well done, congratulations, not easy to do that sort of stuff but you did 
it,” Jones said.

While he has not directly claimed victory, a day earlier Jones said that at 
the private dinner – which was reported on the front page of the Daily 
Telegraph – he told Baird that if he did not overturn the ban “his government 
would be dead in the water”.

Jones’ stablemate at 2GB, the former race caller Ray Hadley, has also been a 
loud critic of the ban, adding his voice on morning radio and in an opinion 
piece in the Australian. He even played a songMike Did a Bad Baird Thing 
<http://www.2gb.com/audioplayer/201906> “shutting down the greyhound industry”. 
On Wednesday they were playing a very different song:Bairdy Came Back 
<http://www.2gb.com/audioplayer/210136>. 

Mike Baird says no change planned yet for Sydney's lockout laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/12/mike-baird-says-no-change-planned-yet-for-sydneys-lockout-laws>
Jones isn’t the only media giant praising Baird. The Daily Telegraph, which 
also campaigned against the ban, was predicting the “embarrassing backflip” may 
“­turn into a positive for this government”.

“Mike Baird is the best person to be premier in the parliament,” state 
political reporter Andrew Clennell said on Wednesday.

Only a week ago Clennell had even suggested a course of action 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/opinion/mike-baird-and-troy-grant-dog-paddling-over-really-unpopular-ban/news-story/f5f7b1ffcc5ae15e915365a211acae5a>
 the government should take: “Reverse the ban but put in strict conditions for 
the industry and a crack squad of investigators to crack down on live baiting 
and wastage. If the industry does not meet the targets by 2020, shut it then.

“Mike Baird and Troy Grant – over to you.”

And with popularity polls plummeting and the Nationals party leader and deputy 
premier, Troy Grant, at risk of being unseated by his own MPs, Baird acted.

The Telegraph’s Rupert Murdoch stablemate, the Australian, was also praising 
Baird on Wednesday – and blaming Twitter for its role in the ban.

“It was a heavy-handed response to the animal-rights agenda of inner-city 
green-left activists,” the Australian said. “It went down a treat on Twitter 
but like a lead balloon in Dapto.

“Traditional media, including this newspaper, showed a connection to 
mainstream people and their views.”

Next step? The lockout laws. 

Jones was straight on to his next campaign asking Baird: “May it be, premier, 
that you don’t need lockout laws?

“Like the greyhounds you don’t want innocent people being punished along with 
the guilty.”
 