
He might have a reputation for being cantankerous, but a letter has emerged 
online that reveals a softer side to comics heavyweightAlan Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-moore>.

The Letters of Note website 
<http://www.lettersofnote.com/2016/07/you-are-best-author-in-human-history.html>
 has published correspondence from 2013 between Moore, now 62, and a 
primary-school boy, then aged nine, who calls the writer of Watchmen and V for 
Vendetta “the greatest author in human history”.
 Joshua’s letter to Alan Moore. Photograph: Provided by Joshua's family 
Nine-year-old Joshua was taking part in a class exercise at his primary 
school, in Moore’s native Northamptonshire, in which pupils were asked to write 
a letter to their favourite author.

Joshua’s letter read: “I am writing because I want to know more about your 
comics including V for Vendetta, Watchmen, League of Extraordinary Gentlemen 
and Swamp Thing. I also want to say thank you for making such amazing graphic 
novels and how did you make such wonderful things?”

Joshua added that the first Moore book he read was V for Vendetta, about a 
masked anarchist in a totalitarian near-future Britain. He said it was “very 
cool when he blows up Parliament”. He also listed his favourite Watchmen 
characters in order: Rorschach, Dr Manhattan and the Comedian. (“I like the way 
he uses a flamethrower as a cigar lighter and a smiley face for a badge.”) The 
letter ended: “All in all you are the best author in human history. Please 
write back.”

Moore obliged: after initially saying his reply would be short because he was 
busy, he revealed he was “really pleased that you’ve enjoyed so much of my 
stuff, and especially because most of my readers these days are people almost 
as old as I am”.

Moore added: “Of course, I appreciate my audience however old they are, but 
it’s particularly gratifying to think that I’ve got intelligent and adventurous 
readers of your own age out there. It’s the kind of thing, when I’m taking my 
vitamin pills and swilling them down with Lemsip, that makes me feel like I’m 
still ‘down with the kids’.”

Moore also pointed out the necessity for any writer to be a voracious reader – 
“this is why libraries are so important” – and included some of his opinions 
about large comic book companies. Moore famously clashed with DC Comics over 
its perceived interference in his work, includingtheir pulping of an entire run 
of The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen 
<http://www.recalledcomics.com/LeagueOfExtraOrdinaryGentlemen5RecalledMarvelAd.php>
 because of an advertisement for a douche by Marvel, their main competitor, in 
the background of one panel.

“Although I’m still very proud of the work that I did on all the books 
mentioned above, the fact that I no longer own any of those titles (I’m afraid 
they’re all owned by perhaps-less-than-scrupulous big comic-book companies) 
means that I’m always most interested in my most recent work, so I was glad 
that you’d liked The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen,” wrote Moore.

In addition to his reply, Moore sent Joshua a copy of the just published 
League book Heart of Ice, and some art by Kevin O’Neill for the then unreleased 
follow-up, The Roses of Berlin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Falan-moore-uses-nine-year-olds-fan-letter-on-new-books-cover%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5195f88e98ea49d166ab3c6257dd0b81031b6d01%2F0_0_801_1149%2F801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Moore%20uses%20nine-year-old's%20fan%20letter%20on%20new%20book's%20cover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Falan-moore-uses-nine-year-olds-fan-letter-on-new-books-cover%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Moore%20uses%20nine-year-old%27s%20fan%20letter%20on%20new%20book%27s%20cover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjul%2F21%2Falan-moore-uses-nine-year-olds-fan-letter-on-new-books-cover%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5195f88e98ea49d166ab3c6257dd0b81031b6d01%2F0_0_801_1149%2F801.jpg>
 The back of the cover for Alan Moore’s Jerusalem, with Joshua’s quote at the 
end. Photograph: Knockabout Books 
The author closed by telling Joshua that he has to get into Northampton to buy 
his wife Melinda a wedding anniversary present and said: “Thanks for calling me 
the best author in human history, which I don’t necessarily agree is completely 
true but which I may well end up using as a quote on the back of one of my 
books some day.”

Moore has kept that promise; his massive novel Jerusalem, which is published 
in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/19/alan-moore-jerusalem-spring-2016-publication>
, will feature Joshua’s endorsement as a blurb.

The letter ends: “Take care of yourself, Joshua. You’re obviously a young man 
of extraordinary good taste and intelligence, and you confirm my suspicion that 
Northamptonshire is a county touched by the gods.” The sign-off is from: “Alan 
Moore. Best Author in Human History. In your face, Shakespeare, Joyce and 
Cervantes!”

The correspondence was passed by Joshua’s father to the Letters of Note editor 
Shaun Usher, who contacted Moore to get his permission to reproduce it.
 