
It was “weird” to be making the film version of The Lady in the Van 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lady-in-the-van> in his old house in Camden 
Town, London, playwright Alan Bennett said, although “if we hadn’t had the 
house [to shoot in], I don’t suppose we would have been able to make the film”.

Bennett was speaking before the UK premiere of the film at the London film 
festival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/londonfilmfestival>. It stars Maggie 
Smith as the woman known as Miss Shepherd, who lived in a vehicle parked on 
Bennett’s driveway in Gloucester Crescent between 1974 and 1989. Alex Jennings 
plays Bennett, and the writer himself has a cameo appearance on his famous 
bicycle.

Lady in the Van review: Maggie Smith makes another pitstop at Oscars drive-thru
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/12/lady-in-the-van-review-maggie-smith-makes-pitstop-at-oscars-drive-thru>
However, as he had moved away, he “didn’t have any pangs about it”. “If I had 
still lived there, it would have been a nightmare; with the best will in the 
world, film crews always cause chaos.” However, he did suggest that, 
“occasionally we used it as a green room. Sometimes when I was sitting there 
and saw Alex pass the door, that seemed quite weird really.”

The film’s director Nicholas Hytner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/nicholas-hytner> said that the film-makers 
“never considered doing it anywhere else”, and that “it was entertaining to see 
the look on all the residents’ faces, many of whom were there when the van 
drove down the crescent, and had mixed feelings about it”.

Smith said that the filming had been a difficult experience for her, as she 
had spent most of it confined to one van or another. “The van wasn’t the most 
comfortable place,” she said. Smith, who appeared in Bennett’s 1999 stage 
version (adapted from his own book, first published in 1989) as well as a Radio 
4 play in 2009, joked that “not a lot of method [acting] was required when you 
were dressed as I was, and in a van”.

“The film was much more concentrated [than the play],” she added. “The stage 
version was more physically demanding, but it was a long time ago and I could 
handle it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWlN1b0ok4D0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWlN1b0ok4D0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DWlN1b0ok4D0&media=>
Both Bennett and Smith reflected on the issues surrounding their ages, 81 and 
80 respectively. Bennett said: “I feel every minute of my 81 years ... [but] 
it’s a blessing to be able to go on working, and that the public still has an 
appetite for what we do. Playwrights tend to have a short life. They often have 
a vogue and then people go off them, so I am lucky people still want to read 
stuff I write.”

London film festival 2015 will be 'year of strong women'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/01/london-film-festival-2015-will-be-year-of-strong-women>
Smith, on the other hand, said: “There’s always this endless thing about there 
[not being] any parts for women over a certain age – I have reached the upper 
limit. The energy comes from people around you and your director. But I can’t 
say it’s easy at the age I am.”

However, she said she found playing Miss Shepherd less physically difficult 
than her star turn as Lady Violet inDownton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey>. “It was much easier 
to be Miss Shepherd, as an actor, because she didn’t mind how she looked. It 
was a relief: Lady Violet was always wearing corsets and things. For comfort 
alone, it was nicer to be Miss Shepherd.”

However, filming on location in Camden Town had its consequences. Hytner 
revealed that one morning they arrived to find the van had been broken into, 
and that two people had spent the weekend inside it “having a good time with 
each other”. This necessitated the removal of all the van’s contents – which 
had been dirtied up for artistic reasons – to be “deep-cleaned, and then made 
filthy again”.

The Lady in the Van has its UK premiere on 13 October at the London film 
festival, and is released on 13 November in the UK and 15 January in the US.
 