
Alan Moore is writing a new comics series set in the world of Garth Ennis’s 
Crossed <http://www.crossedcomic.com/>, in which an epidemic infects humanity 
with the desire to carry out the worst crimes of which it is capable.

Ennis’s multi-volume adult horror comic from Avatar Press sees the infected, 
inflicted with a cross-like mark on their faces, “gleefully [break] into 
unthinkable acts of violence”, as the uninfected struggle to survive in small 
groups. Moore has just been announced as the sole author of a new six-issue 
Crossed series, set in the universe but moving the action 100 years into the 
future.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fsep%2F18%2Falan-moore-takes-cult-horror-comic-crossed-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F18%2F1411037654001%2F40843a8c-08a7-4ed3-b90e-0bdb4d04cf18-660x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Moore%20takes%20cult%20horror%20comic%20Crossed%20into%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fsep%2F18%2Falan-moore-takes-cult-horror-comic-crossed-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Moore%20takes%20cult%20horror%20comic%20Crossed%20into%20the%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Fsep%2F18%2Falan-moore-takes-cult-horror-comic-crossed-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F18%2F1411037654001%2F40843a8c-08a7-4ed3-b90e-0bdb4d04cf18-660x1020.jpeg>
 Crossed+100 by Alan Moore and Gabriel Andrade: a publicity cover released by 
the comic’s publisher Photograph: Avatar Press 
The author, who last week finished the first draft of his million-plus word 
novel Jerusalem, admitted that the world of Crossed was “extremely horrible”. 
“I think people think of Crossed as a horror story, and I can see why,” said 
Moore in an announcement published by Avatar’s subsidiary, thecomics news site 
Bleeding Cool 
<http://www.bleedingcool.com/2014/09/15/avatar-press-announces-crossed-100-an-ingenious-future-set-series-by-alan-moore-and-gabriel-andrade/>
. “But actually I’ve always had my problems with genre, and I am coming to the 
conclusion that genre has really only ever been a convenience.

“Now, looking at Crossed, I was actually thinking that this, for my purposes, 
is a horror story, but it’s also a science fiction story. I was thinking that 
Crossed is actually a science fiction story that has got a really, really high 
horror quotient. So that was the way that I started approaching it. I was 
treated Crossed as a ‘What if?’ story, which is the premise of most science 
fiction.”

Avatar said that Moore was moved to take on the new monthly comic “through a 
series of increasingly piquant conversations with his friend Garth Ennis about 
the implications of the Crossed series for humanity’s future”. The author has 
created 100 years of “missing” history for his six-part story arc, which will 
be drawn by Gabriel Andrade, as well as creating “an entirely new world”, said 
the publisher.

Ennis said Moore’s decision was like finding out that “Jimi Hendrix wants to 
play in my band. He wants to sing my songs. I don’t usually worry about 
vindication, but Alan is probably the one person whose opinion would be enough 
to change my mind about what I do,” said Ennis. “He’s the most talented 
individual the medium’s ever seen or ever will; that he’s writing Crossed means 
everything to me.”

Avatar revealed that Crossed+100, which is out from December, would centre on 
an enclave of survivors, many of whom have never seen an infected individual, 
and in particular on female archivist Future Taylor. Intrigued by the science 
fiction of the past, Taylor and her reclamation team stumble across a group of 
Crossed, and set out to find out why the infected seem to be increasing.

Moore, the mind behind the comics classics V for Vendetta and Watchmen, 
revealed last week that Jerusalem, his novel set in a small area of 
Northampton, wasnearing completion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/10/alan-moore-finishes-million-word-novel-watchmen-v-for-vendetta>
. His daughter, Leah Moore, has said that the book will be released by 
Knockabout, the press which also copublishes all of Moore’s The League Of 
Extraordinary Gentlemen comic books.
 