
Question 1: Angela's Ashes deals with the subject of poverty. How important is 
the issue of poverty today for you?

AP: Apparently there are 15m people in this country whose families are living 
below the minimum wage. One in four kids in California live in poverty. It's 
absolutely a problem of today, the thing is if you make a film that is relevant 
right now we find it hard to take, but when you set it in a period that's gone 
by people find that a little more acceptable. I remember that when I did 
Mississippi Burning that opened up a controversy, and suddenly I wasn't 
answering questions relevant to Mississippi Burning and the black civil rights 
movement in the 60s, I was talking about racism in the US now. Every film you 
do, even if it is set in the past, still has to have its echoes and resonances 
for now, and maybe that's its value.

Question 2: Where do you think the British film industry is at now?

AP: We need a lot of help: without government support the film industry could 
collapse. We're very small fry compared to the cinema of the US. There is a 
colossal amount of talent in this country with regard to directors, actors, 
writers, producers and the technical infrastructure is fantastic - as good as 
anywhere in the world - what we don't have is any kind of corporate structures 
or business acumen, and that makes us very, very vulnerable.

We've always been this weird cottage industry and nothing has changed in 20 
years. This government is [helping] and we're grateful for that, however film 
is a sexy business, it's an easy political thing, that's why they like us. 
Every time the Oscars come around we'll have one or two successes that will be 
lauded - it becomes a matter of national pride to do that. World cinema is 
totally and utterly dominated by American cinema, and for us to make inroads 
into it is very, very difficult, but we are able to do that more than any other 
country and we're doing that. We're strong because we're strong creatively, 
we're fiscally weak - that's why we need government support, but I'm 
optimistic, every day there's another director, another writer, another actor 
who comes along.

BN: We're not so strong on the writing line are we? We make too many films 
which go into production before the script is right, either because the money 
will be withdrawn unless they start production now, or because we haven't got 
the screenwriters. We don't respect screenwriters as much as the Americans do, 
do we? We're still into playwrights and novelists much more than screenwriters.

AP: It's very interesting - in America they're starting to respect them far 
too much. Next year the possessive credit is going to be the biggest single, 
solitary battleground in that American film directors will possibly go on 
strike yet again to retain the possessive credit. Writers totally and utterly 
disagree with it in the US. But although we're a literary nation we're very 
poor at screenwriting. It's the weakest area with regards to infrastructure: 
our scripts are bad. And a lot of it is to do with philosophy in so much as we 
have very strong theatre, and if someone writes for the theatre they can 
succeed because of the auteur theory - which has also rubbed off on people who 
write screenplays in this country, which is that it's not allowed to be 
interfered with when it's actually at its most formative time. There's not a 
screenplay ever written in history that wasn't actually made better than its 
first draft, but with so many films here somebody writes something and they get 
it made. And no one's allowed to comment on it, and that's a lot of the reason 
why a lot of bad films have been made in this country.

Question 3: Do you need any special skills to work with young actors? How do 
you achieve such great results?

AP: The secret is in the casting. If you don't cast it correctly you can't get 
the performances from them, and I put more effort into the casting than 
anything. For [Angela's Ashes] we went all over Ireland looking for the kids, 
and all you can do is to create an environment where they can be at their best. 
If it's an unpleasant atmosphere they won't perform, so you end up sometimes 
being very strict with them but most of the time I think I was a friend to 
them. Joe [Breen] did a press conference where they said to him, "What was it 
like working withAlan Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker>?" 
and he said, "Oh it was fine, he doesn't mean to lose his temper." So however 
kind I think I am, I'm probably not sometimes.

BN: Rumour has it that 15,000 kids were looked at for the film. Is that true?

AP: Yes, on tape - it's not that difficult to do on fast forward actually.

Question 4: Do you agree that one of the problems for British screenwriters is 
the lack of means of getting their scripts read?

AP: If you haven't got production companies who are healthy and can invest in 
treatments, in rough scripts even, that makes it much harder for the writers to 
know where they're going to go. With theatre there is a structure so that you 
can go to theatre in Liverpool or wherever and somebody might give you a chance 
to do a play by reading what you've written. Film is very different because 
although it ought not to be expensive to write a screenplay, it's actually very 
expensive to make a film and we don't have that infrastructure outside our 
television companies where you have a script editor who can take a young writer 
with a good idea and develop it.

The television companies who have those resources have not been particularly 
interested in cinema, outside Channel 4; the BBC have just got back into doing 
it, but very belatedly considering the power they have. Sky don't need to do it 
because they are owned by Fox which is Murdoch so that's already covered, but 
Granada - the biggest company in this country - don't have this. And that's the 
greatest sadness because Granada is actually the healthiest and richest and 
most responsible company in many ways, and from an industry point of view 
they're not interested in us.

Question 5: What was your most memorable moment making Angela's Ashes?

AP: I just remember being wet most of the time! And for three months I didn't 
talk to anybody without them blowing their nose. I love little Joe, I have four 
kids of my own but if I could have adopted him I would have done so 
immediately. Unfortunately he has a really nice Mum and Dad so it's very 
difficult. There's a scene very early on in the film where he goes to Aunt 
Aggie's where he's eating porridge and he could not eat it. On take eight he 
refused to eat it and I had words with him, and if you look very closely he's 
actually cried quite a lot because it took about an hour and a half for us to 
get him back to the set. I remember him saying to me, "I don't care if you're a 
famous film director, I'm not eating any more porridge!"

Sound clips

 The difficulties of filming classic novels 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker1.RA>

 How the people of Limerick reacted 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker2.RA>

 The issue of poverty today 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker3.RA>

 The British film industry 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker4.RA>
 