
BN: Moving away from Angela's Ashes, one of your criticisms in the past 
concerned the British Film Institute and the establishment, and then all of a 
sudden here'sAlan Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker>, who 
slagged off Peter Greenaway and Derek Jarman, becoming the chairman of the 
board of the BFI, and from that you go on to an even loftier establishment post 
as the head of the Film Council. How did this all come about, and why?

AP: It sounds terribly cliched but I love film and I'll fight for anybody who 
wants to make any kind of film and have done and will do. But I think at the 
time of films like Greenaway's The Draughtsman's Contract there were a lot of 
us doing different kinds of films, and the people at the BFI were very 
articulate and very aggressive about their opinions, and there was an argument 
that that it was that kind of film that was acceptable and we were arguing for 
a different kind of cinema.

My view is that cinema is quite complicated. There are fancy phrases like 
pluralism, but in the end film changes from year to year, from decade to decade 
and people had got stuck in a certain groove, the French philosophy of the 
Cahiers du Cinema which is that there is only one kind of cinema. The truth is 
there had never been one kind of cinema ever since cinema began. And all I 
argued was that we were every bit as good as those other people who were being 
lauded and praised in regards to the art of cinema. Whether you lot here like 
what I do or not I don't give a tuppenny toss, but it's as much an art form as 
anything you would see at the NFT, and I will always argue for that. It's not 
important that you like it. The way I go about it is no different to Derek 
Jarman in the way that he went about it or Peter Greenaway goes about doing 
what he does or Tim Burton in what he does or Martin Scorsese ... we all do it 
the same way, actually, and the reason why this art form is so rich and so 
beautiful and so fantastically effective is because it's so very different and 
everybody has that opportunity. It's all changed now, but 20 years ago that's 
where the anger came from.

BN: In your time at the BFI what do you think you achieved?

AP: I was only there for a very brief time and I was only the chairman of the 
board of governors, and I think what was achieved by the BFI was achieved by 
the people who worked there.

BN: But what were you setting out to do?

AP: When I became chairman, the BFI was a much-unloved organisation and that 
was sad because they had done, and were doing, and continue to do, 
extraordinarily important and good work, so it was to get them to be loved 
again. They were trying to be all things to all people, they were speaking for 
the British film industry - which they are not. [I set out to] refocus it to 
its cultural remit and its educational responsibility.

Today I happen to believe that the NFT is suddenly the hippest cinema in the 
whole of London and that's great. I open my programme for February and I think 
there's all those things I can't do and I never ever did that before. This 
wonderful, fantastic notion is hugely important and the fact that we are in a 
building that is kind of shabby compared to what we do here still has to be 
fought for. You have the museum next door which has to be fought for to exist 
again in another form.

BN: You have quite a lot of influence over the funding of films at the Film 
Council, and you're not entirely happy with the state of the British film 
industry at the moment, are you? Do you think you can do anything about that at 
the Council?

AP: We're not really responsible for the film industry and I know that's a 
kind of drastic thing to say. We have very little amount of money. We're 
supposed to have £150m for three years. One year's has gone because they took 
so long to set up the Film Council. We have £50m per year basically, but the 
gigantic chunk of it is taken up with grant in aid, which is direct money from 
the government (which is actually responsible for running the most important 
things ie running the BFI), and that will not change, not while I'm chairman, 
so the cultural remit is safe.

We're also responsible for the Film Commission, which is inward investment 
into this country, and I think that that also won't change. The big area, the 
most contentious area, is that there is public money involved with regards to 
the lottery, and the lottery money is, in the main, where people like yourself 
are most critical because we have made a lot of films in the last four years 
which aren't good enough. That's got to change, and we will change that.

That's what people are looking to us to do but it's such a small part of what 
we do. In the end all the Film Council is is the means to create an environment 
where we can create a film industry. You can't create a film industry, an 
industry has to create itself, and we're only involved with the money that 
comes from the government and the public sector.

BN: What I respect very much about your film career is that every time there's 
an Alan Parker film it's a different kind of film. You were never tempted to 
follow a genre.

AP: It would have been a lot easier to have done that. My first film was Bugsy 
Malone, which was a pragmatic exercise because every script I had written up to 
that point came back with a stamp on it saying, 'Parochial, parochial' and 
nobody wanted to make it, so I thought I'd make an American film. I hadn't been 
even been to America at that point, it was 1974, so I made a film about 
American films - it was a gangster film and it was a musical. But having done 
that it was nothing to do with the films I wanted to make, or who I was, so I 
thought so I had to do a different film and so I did Midnight Express. That was 
so controversial that I thought "I don't want to do that anymore" so I was 
forced to do different things.

I've realised that that was quite important because from a creative point of 
view it's good to do different things. Sometimes you succeed, sometimes you 
fail, but you do stretch yourself.

Sound clips

 The difficulties of filming classic novels 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker1.RA>

 How the people of Limerick reacted 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker2.RA>

 The issue of poverty today 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker3.RA>

 The British film industry 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker4.RA>
 