
The Brazilian 20-year-old double amputee who sprinted from nowhere to shock 
the world's most famous Paralympian has said he felt "let down" by claims by
Oscar Pistorius <https://www.theguardian.com/world/oscar-pistorius> that he had 
won his gold medal unfairly.

Alan Oliveira <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alan-oliveira> revealed that 
he switched to taller prosthetic legs that remained within the legal limit just 
three weeks before overtaking Pistorius in the final 20m of their 200m T43/44 
final, but put his gold medal down to hard work and dedication rather than 
blade technology.

As Pistorius apologised for the timing of claims that rivals gained unfair 
advantage by using blades that made them unnaturally tall, it emerged the South 
African had first raised concerns with the International Paralympic Committee 
(IPC) in January 2011.

The IPC, which confirmed the prosthetics of all eight finalists were within 
the legal limits before the final, said it would meet Pistorius and his camp 
after the Games but defended its rules.

"I was let down by how much he wanted to take away from me the merit for 
winning gold," said Oliveira. "All the speculation about my growth, he used 
that to try and take away from me the merit of winning.

"In 2008, Pistorius was the only guy who could run under 22 seconds at 200m. 
So I said I would run as fast as that in London. I practised, I trained."

The South African "Blade Runner", who also competed in the Olympics after a 
groundbreaking legal battle to be accepted in non-disabled competition, has 
concerns about the formula employed by the IPC to calculate the maximum 
possible height of the prosthetic blades used by his competitors.

Under IPC rules he would be allowed to run at a height of 193cm but has 
consistently competed on blades that make him 184cm, partly because they were 
the ones sanctioned by the International Association ofAthletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> Federations (IAAF) for use in 
non-disabled competition.

But by airing his criticism on the London track after being beaten in the 200m 
for the first time in nine years, Pistorius has opened himself up to criticism 
for being a sore loser and contradicting himself after arguing at length that 
he should be judged on athletic ability rather than technology.

Pistorius, who will face Oliveira again in the 100m and 400m, was said to be 
contrite after realising his outburst had overshadowed not only his young rival 
but also the British wheelchair racer David Weir's dramatic 5,000m victory.

But the South African also refused to back down. The IPC argues that its 
rules, based on a formula that determines the likely height of the competitor 
and adds a variance of 3.5% to take into account the fact athletes run on their 
toes rather than their heels, are fair and longstanding.

"He was hotheaded," said a remarkably composed Oliveira, who was surrounded by 
a scrum of Brazilian media at an impromptu press conference at the gates to the 
athletes' village. "I was upset with the comments and disappointed. But he 
apologised afterwards through the press and I felt better. He remains an idol 
to me."

"Nobody who has even kicked a ball in the street likes losing. I don't like 
losing, Pistorius doesn't like losing. But we have to be prepared for 
everything in life. I found his reaction strange," he said, noting that when 
the South African lost his 100m title at the world championships in 
Christchurch last year he did not make a similar public complaint.

However, it is understood that the South African did in fact complain 
privately. He then aired concerns about one particular athlete (not Oliveira) 
six weeks before the Games in a phone call to IPC communications director Craig 
Spence and his advisers also called the organisation two days before the Games.

Oliveira, who lost his legs at the age of two months to septicemia after 
contracting an intestinal infection, said he was inspired to start running 
when, as an eight-year-old, he saw the Brazilian sprinter Robson Caetano da 
Silva on television.

He was so keen to compete that he initially began running on wooden legs 
totally unsuited to sprinting and only started competing on carbon fibre blades 
shortly before his first Paralympic Games in Beijing four years ago.

He moved from his Amazonian hometown of Belem, where his family and friends 
gathered around the television to watch his victory, to Sao Paulo a year ago to 
train with the elite Brazilian squad.

His coaches said it was that intensive training, more than his new blades, 
that resulted in his improving times. And they reiterated that he had done 
nothing wrong within the IPC rules.

The runner said that he measured 177cm in his non-racing prosthetics, but 
changed to 181cm Ossur blades three weeks before theParalympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics>.

Under the International Paralympic Committee's rules he is allowed to run on 
blades that take his height up to a maximum of 184.5cm.

"The coaches and I decided to try a higher blade. I tried the new height for 
the first time last year and it was difficult to get used to them. I decided to 
try them again earlier this year and it went a little bit better. Three weeks 
ago, we decided to really go for it," he explained. "The prosthetics don't run 
alone. Of course they are good for an improvement but there is not a 
significant time difference."

Oliveira's fastest time on his old blades was 22.45 seconds at the Brazilian 
National Championships last year â€“ a full second slower than his winning time 
in London.

But Brazil's team leader, Ciro Winckler, said his improvement was also the 
result of better coaching and facilities in Sao Paulo, together with his 
physical maturity.

One of Pistorius's complaints is that the rules as they stand allow athletes 
to chop and change their height at will, as long as they remain within the 
legal limits determined by an IPC formula.

Along with questions over classification, the march of technology is a key 
issue for the IPC to grapple with as the Paralympics becomes ever more high 
profile.

Winckler likened the momentarily stunned silence in the Olympic Stadium when 
Oliveira crossed the line to the match known as the Maracanazo when Uruguay 
shocked Brazil in their own stadium at the 1950 World Cup. He believed 
Pistorius, faced with a wave of young challengers, may have backed himself into 
a corner. "[Blake] Leeper and Alan were teenagers. Now they are mature. Perhaps 
it's a problem for Oscar. It was not a good moment for Oscar."

Having done so much to promote the Paralympic movement, Pistorius now faces 
being overtaken by those he helped inspire. "People used to name me the 
Brazilian Pistorius. Thank God I'm not the Brazilian Pistorius any more. I'm 
Alan," said Oliveira.
 