
In film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/nov/29/top-10-film-noir> and 
writing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/20/top-10-rural-noir-novels-american-fiction>
, noir – not a colour but a vital absence of the same – is nonetheless a 
necessary hue. The stark radiance of a composition becomes evident only when it 
lacks distractions of the spectrum and its gaudy splashes of attached 
sensation, just as a morally abysmal ground makes any human light displayed 
against it the more brilliant in the narrative.

Chris Petit <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chrispetit>, as an author, is 
of a variety that could not have existed prior to the later 20th century and is 
still exotic – namely someone whose approach to crafting literature commences 
from a starting point of cinema, where the priorities and processes are very 
different. Time jumps its sequential tracks and is dismantled, fracturing in 
the stuck-needle repetition of the retake, shuffled into new chronologies by 
the demands of shooting schedules, with the semblance of a continuity or plot 
emerging only in the edit, this being as true of daily news as of a Jason 
Statham vehicle. Authorial sleights of hand allowed by moving pictures – all 
that visual background to hide details in; the fleeting blink-and-miss-it 
nature of the medium itself – cannot be replicated in prose fiction, where 
there is no background beyond the flat surface of the words, and where those 
words stay frozen on their paper screen allowing for examination. Text requires 
its own illusionist’s devices.

Clearly recognising this, it is a testament to Petit’s keen intelligence and 
versatility that he gains such a lot in the transition from one medium to 
another, meanwhile forfeiting so little. If he cannot reproduce the stunning 
coal-and-chromium luminosity of his groundbreaking 1979 B-road visionRadio On, 
he can still silver streets with moral drizzle and reduce the passing sodium 
lamps to lens flare, smears of phosphorus as seen through travelling black 
glass. Adjusting his techniques and strategies to the demands of a new form, 
his x-ray eye and crystallising gaze are unaffected. And in compensation for 
the absent lustre formerly supplied by celluloid, there is the rich seam of 
night language to which the harsh, stuttering neon genre grants him access.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchris-petit-the-psalm-killer-rereading-alan-moore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F115fe19e20fff4f8943d9ec821bd39c0c04af39b%2F0_193_1417_850%2F1417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Moore%20celebrates%20Chris%20Petit%E2%80%99s%20The%20Psalm%20Killer%20%E2%80%93%20a%20nerve-shredding%20Irish%20noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchris-petit-the-psalm-killer-rereading-alan-moore%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Moore%20celebrates%20Chris%20Petit%E2%80%99s%20The%20Psalm%20Killer%20%E2%80%93%20a%20nerve-shredding%20Irish%20noir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fchris-petit-the-psalm-killer-rereading-alan-moore%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F115fe19e20fff4f8943d9ec821bd39c0c04af39b%2F0_193_1417_850%2F1417.jpg>
 David Beames and Sting inRadio On in 1979. Photograph: BFI 
Noir, more of an ethical and atmospheric filter for a story, more an 
existential colour grade than a collection of venetian-slatted cliches, is a 
neighbourhood where Petit has considerable previous. His startling 1993 debut 
novel,Robinson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2001/sep/01/fiction.reviews6>
, takes its wrong turn into a backroom in Soho with no postcode, a delirious 
sump of sour pornography and sudden Stanley-knife redundancy announcements. It 
is haunted by the beret-sporting skull of premature cadaver writer Derek 
Raymond, on loan from his own brutal Factory novels or else leaked through from 
his Ivan Albright cameo in Petit’s filmThe Cardinal and the Corpse. The queasy 
bad-dream ambience ofRobinson is soaked up from the district’s gutters with 
their residue of Francis Bacon’s screaming abdabs and Thomas De Quincey’s 
opiated yearnings, yet the novel is only a first excursion into the displaced 
director’s chosen territory. With his second foray into darkness,The Psalm 
Killer 
<https://www.kirkusreviews.com/book-reviews/chris-petit/the-psalm-killer/> in 
1997, he presents noir of a different colour, having new agendas and extended 
reach; exchanging the steep, reeling gradients south of Oxford Street for the 
tight-knotted intestinal maze of Belfast, and trading a toxic hallucinogenic 
rush for the unwanted clarity of hangover, withdrawal, comedown.

If in Robinson we see the author’s first engagement with this tarry, viscous 
genre – an examination of its shapes and textures, an initial handling to test 
its weight – then inThe Psalm Killer we see Petit putting noir to use as a 
specialised instrument for a specific purpose, making genre a sophisticated 
tool for talking about something else; perhaps its only serious application. 
With his narrative placed pointedly against the backdrop of a thoroughly 
researched and referenced 1980s Northern Ireland, Petit takes the opportunity 
to look more closely at the psychological and sociopolitical substructure of 
that place, those times, with fiction as a means of penetrating sealed-off 
areas of reality where documentary journalism cannot reach. Given that noir is, 
glaringly, the only mode of fiction that’s appropriate to or capable of 
navigating intractable moral black spots like the Belfast of that period, this 
serious investigative usage might be looked on as almost an obligation of the 
genre, though it’s rarely put to such a purpose.
 Crafting literature from a starting point of cinema … Chris Petit 
In The Psalm Killer, that obligation is resoundingly fulfilled. Unflinchingly, 
the novel charts a ground of national history sewed with unpalatable truths, 
buried like landmines or post-abduction bodies, who knows where? The region’s 
simmering religiosity infects even the names allotted to the tale’s main 
adversaries, Cross and Candlestick, and in the interstices of the furious plot 
another story of equivalent atrocity is haltingly unfolded; vectors of betrayal 
and assassination reaching from the Shankill Road to Downing Street. For all 
the toweringMurnau <https://www.theguardian.com/film/fw-murnau> shadows that it 
casts upon contemporary events and on the fatal puppet shows of national 
security, the book unerringly maintains a pin-sharp focus on the fine grain of 
its characters’ emotional conditions, and through them the scarred and 
traumatised condition of the landscape they inhabit. Despite its razor insights 
into the political dimensions of the Northern Irish situation, Petit’s cool, 
authoritative text insists that we consider the domestic converse of those 
insights, the commonplace indoor violence and frustration buried in 
communities, invisible yet both facilitating and informing the widescreen 
outrages that inevitably come to comprise any conflict’s general public 
perception – its official tabloid record.

The serial killer is depicted against endless violence and attrition, saying 
something different and new

One of The Psalm Killer’s numerous achievements is the seamless continuity it 
manufactures between the remote, somehow fictitious world of headlines and the 
visceral, immediate human realities that underpin that world. As somebody alive 
during that era, I remember – or think I remember – being on my way through the 
Westminster area back in 1979, a London jaunt when on the outskirts of my 
subsequent career. Crossing a road, halfway between one trivial non-observation 
and the next, the sound of something massive stifling a sneeze – perhaps a 
nearby demolition – barely registered; the detonation only unpacked and 
part-comprehended later on with the assistance of the evening news. Whereas the 
customary scenery and set-dressings of noir, like any other genre, seem to 
suggest realms contrived entirely for the furtherance of a requisite 
atmosphere, Petit’s uncomfortable and mesmerising thriller manages to never 
step beyond the here-and-now reality shared by the author and his audience. 
Would that it did, and that its monsters and their implications were thus 
easier to dismiss, to wave away like the remaining Marlboro and bourbon fug 
left over from a spittle-fleckedMike Hammer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mike_Hammer> rant, rather than listed as 
established facts in the work’s useful and unsettling glossary.

And yet for all the ways it manages to transcend genre or to extend genre’s 
remit into ominous new areas,The Psalm Killer remains at its black, beating 
heart a piece of classic, textbook modern noir, presenting all the elements 
that are expected of the form but with changed lighting, altered meanings. That 
great standby of recent detective yarns, the serial killer – an acceptable 
Grand Guignol gothic horror for a rational age – is here depicted against the 
relentless violence and attrition of interminable conflict, noisy background 
that breaks up the outline of the predator just as effectively as first world 
war dazzle camouflage: we know it’s there, but we can’t tell how fast it’s 
moving or in which direction. The clearly delineated psychopathic murderer is 
only a peacetime phenomenon. Placed in a context of sectarian combat, this 
contemporary bogeyman means something different and is saying something new.

Sabahattin Ali’s Madonna in a Fur Coat – the surprise Turkish bestseller
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/21/sabahattin-ali-madonna-fur-coat-rereading>
Then there are Petit’s women, women being as much a staple of the genre as its 
volatile, hair-trigger butchers, and once more we find that in the pages ofThe 
Psalm Killer its female presences are put to other ends and have another 
function, anchoring the chiefly male-driven chaos of the narrative in vivid, 
tactile human consequence. With inner lives as full and complex as (if more 
self-comprehended than) their male counterparts, they hover a pragmatic pace 
back from the bloody business and wait their moment. Subjects and not objects, 
they have agency, possess their own momentum, and are spared the adjectival 
fondling to which noir not infrequently subjects its dames, broads and 
tomatoes. By the novel’s end, our mental snapshot of WPC Westerby amounts to 
little more than a blonde with a hairstyle reminiscent of the way that women 
wore their hair in 1950s films, and yet we’re troubled by our sense of being 
her. Never McGuffins of desire, the women ofThe Psalm Killer aren’t there to 
ogle, but to keep an eye on.

In this searing and extraordinary book, Petit has served up a perfectly judged 
piece of Northern Irish blackness, as compelling and nerve-shredding as 
anything this seam of fiction has to offer. Simultaneously he has modified that 
midnight genre, making it a vehicle for speculative social and political 
investigation, while retaining all the pain and rain and furious energy.The 
Psalm Killer turns an unblinking eye on the unmentionable wound, the damage in 
our national past and likely future, to reveal streets meaner and goodbyes far 
more protracted, if they come at all. Open this gripping tour de force and, 
like its title character, diffuse into the Belfast of three decades ago like 
blood blossoming in water. History as unsolved homicide, the damp and dread of 
Petit’s harrowing account will never leave you. An abysmal triumph.

• The Psalm Killer 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407478/s/the-psalm-killer/>
 by Chris Petit will be published as a Picador Classic this month.The Butchers 
of Berlin by Petit is published by Simon & Schuster. To order a copy of The 
Pslam Killer for £6.99 (RRP £8.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407478/s/the-psalm-killer/>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.

• This article was amended on 6 June to correct the Radio On picture caption. 
It was not Chris Petit but David Beames with Sting.
 