
BN: How, and why, did you get involved with Angela's Ashes in the first place?

AP: It was sent to me as a manuscript of a book before it was published, and I 
quite liked it and enquired about acquiring the rights but they'd gone to Scott 
Rudin - one of the producers - who buys every single book that's published in 
New York, so to get a book ahead of him is very difficult. It finally came back 
to me, and I was asked to do it by Scott and David Brown, the other producer.

BN: The book was a hugely successful and lots of people have read it and have 
their own image of what the film should be like. Is there a danger that those 
people going to see your film will be looking not for the film you've actually 
made but for the film you should have made? Were you conscious of that danger?

AP: I was, I think that's been the difficulty for film-makers throughout 
history really when you take a great literary work - and this is [a great 
work]. It's not just that it won the Pulitzer Prize, it's been a publishing 
phenomenon everywhere around the world. It had won the Pulitzer Prize by the 
time it came to me and it was a number one bestseller in the New York Times 
bestseller list. In Hollywood they always say, "Well, that's okay, that's 
people who read but there's not many of those are there?" .... To be honest 
this kind of film is the hardest to make, in that I needed to build sets but 
it's a very small story. It's based on someone's life, it's an Irish story and 
American studios are very reluctant to give to you money [for something], but 
because of the success of the book we were able to make the film.

I loved it when it was sent to me in manuscript form, and you can be 
intimidated by it - all of you here who've probably read the book before you 
saw the film have a different film in your head, and I can never ever do it as 
good as that.

My great mentor Fred Zinnemann did From Here to Eternity which had terrible, 
terrible reviews when it came out because it could never be as good as the 
book. But when it came down to it, his work was as important as the book 
because film is an organic process and maybe more people get to see the film, 
that's just by virtue of the different art forms. But you are nervous about 
anyone who has read the book - can I do justice to it? - I hope I have, and 
there are people who've read it and maybe thought I haven't.

BN: I would think that one of the great difficulties was that the book is told 
in the present tense by the young Frank at various ages. There was a script 
already in existence by Laura Jones, an Australian writer. Was it she who 
decided that instead of doing the young boy's voice going all the way through 
the film you should do it a little time afterwards, in retrospect, by the 
grown-up Frank, or was that your decision?

AP: Scott Rudin and David Brown developed the script with Laura Jones and she 
was able to take what was a very difficult and complex book and pare it down to 
the very bare minimum. I thought she'd probably been too strict with paring it 
down, and I tried to flesh it out. One of things I did was to go back to the 
book because there's always so much more in the book than you could possibly 
put in a film. A film of the entire book would have been 5 - 8 hours long and 
that's a bit long really! [Laura Jones] did a really good job, it was a 
blueprint for what the film became.

BN: You cast Robert Carlyle and Emily Watson, two non-Irish actors. Why did 
you choose those two?

AP: Most directors have little lists in their heads of people they really want 
to work with. I had seen Emily in Breaking the Waves and I'd seen her in The 
Boxer - I hadn't seen her in Hilary and Jackie at that point - and I met her 
and she's an Arsenal supporter which was...

BN: ...that's the worst thing you've said about Emily Watson! 

AP: I know, but we are at the NFT so we have to give intellectual reasons for 
choosing actors. [Laughter] She grew up in Islington and is an Arsenal 
supporter so she got the job. [Laughter] Robert Carlyle, for some strange 
reason, supports a Scottish team. No, Emily Watson and Robert Carlyle were the 
first choices for the film.

BN: What about Irish actors though? You can't be too popular with the Irish 
acting fraternity?

AP: Well, there are 350 cast and crew who made that film who are Irish and 
it's their film.

BN: But the main characters weren't [Irish].

AP: I suppose so, but every other actor is Irish. If there was somebody else 
better there to do it I would have gone with it. The reason the film got made 
was because the American studios thought it was a good bet because it was a 
hugely successful book, simple as that, and they allocate X amount of money for 
me to make it. It wasn't necessary to have a movie star, it was my decision to 
go with the actors that I was comfortable with and so it's my fault. I chose 
them because I thought they were the best for it. I actually did think of all 
the Irish actors who were available to do it and decided on those two, and I 
can't blame anybody but me really.

BN: The more you look at the film the more you realise how difficult it was to 
make because your central character changes twice. That must have caused 
problems because the audience is involved in little Joe Breen [young Frank], 
then suddenly it's somebody else in his place. How did you overcome that?

AP: It's the hardest thing when you've got a young child growing up - when you 
read the book you can go day by day, week by week, month by month, year by year 
and you don't even notice it. On a film you have to be much more specific. But 
really the only way to do it is to break the whole film down into the classic 
three-act structure, and therefore I needed three boys. It's very difficult, I 
tried to make the transitions as smooth as possible. The problem is that there 
is the young Frank who is very sweet and loveable and in whom, as an audience, 
you invest so much, then suddenly you see the middle boy and the big worry was 
that the audience would then groan, "Oh, I'm not going to see that little boy 
anymore, he's gone."

Ciaran Owens - who plays the middle boy - is also very good and he has his 
amount of charm, and so Michael Legge - who plays the older Frank - has a very 
hard job because he's got to follow those [younger] boys who have so much 
natural charm, but there's no other way of doing it. I don't know how you can 
show such time difference really.

BN: I gather Joe Breen has been a huge hit in America. How old is he? 9?

AP: He was eight when he made the film. He's a farmer's son from Wexford 
before he came to the audition he had to milk the cows! He did the David 
Letterman show in New York and was a huge hit and he's been asked back. His 
parents have asked me if I could talk to him because you take a kid from 
nowhere and you are totally changing their lives and the reason he's so lovely 
is because he's unspoiled, and what we do is spoil him by putting him on 
American chat shows. For him to stay normal is very difficult, and it's very 
hard for him because I care more about him staying normal than him doing all 
the new chat shows. He's stayed pretty normal, mostly because he's got a really 
good Mum and Dad and because he's been brought up in a very nice way.

BN: Was Joe Breen overawed by David Letterman?

AP: No, Joe destroyed David Letterman! Letterman did not know how to deal with 
him because he totally and utterly told the truth. Apparently half-way through 
the questions Joe said to him, "You bite your nails". It takes a 9-year-old 
Irish kid to say that.

BN: What about the making of the film, because it looks cold and wet. Was that 
deliberate, or was it wet and cold while you were making it?

AP: Both, it was pretty cold and pretty wet, and in the book Frank talks about 
"The damp, the damp, the damp". It was a reason for a lot of the illnesses and 
the deaths of the children at the beginning of the film; there's not a page 
that goes by where it doesn't talk about the damp. But damp is quite a 
difficult thing to film because you feel it, you don't see it. Rain is also 
very difficult to film, particularly in Ireland because it's quite fine, so 
fine that the Irish don't even acknowledge that it exists. [Laughter]

So if you have rain machines like we did you have to have heavy rain in order 
to photograph it, and it has to be back lit, even heavy rain. So you get into 
the mechanics of that to give an impression of damp because I can't do that in 
film - you have to see it and experience it but you can't feel it, not yet you 
can't.

BN: The cold comes across in the colour of the film, the colours are sharp but 
they are cold - you're under no illusion that this is a warm place in which 
this film has been made.

AP: Period recreation is very difficult unless you make a black and white 
movie, which in a way would have been easier to do but I wouldn't have made it 
in black and white even if we'd been allowed to, which we were not. What you do 
is narrow the colour palette and so the costume designer, the production 
designer and the cinematographer are all working in the same colour palette, 
which is to get rid of all those primary colours, and then the moment you put 
the rain in it automatically mutes the colours even more. You get back to that 
monochromatic which gives you a period feel, but is still real because it's 
still in colour.

BN: Those dreadful alleys were recreated?

AP: The main lane, Roden Lane - the centrepiece of the film - was a big set 
actually in Dublin, the interiors were at the studios but the big lane was 
built in the middle of Dublin in a bit of waste ground that we found.

BN: How did the people of Limerick react? From what I've heard half the people 
of Limerick say, "Oh God, it was nothing like that at all", and the other half 
claim to have lived next door to the family. Was there opposition or support 
for you when you went to film there?

AP: There are a lot of people in Limerick who have opinions about Frank 
McCourt's book, it's made Limerick very famous now. When you have that kind of 
publishing phenomenon which is about a place called Limerick then suddenly 
Limerick becomes very famous. In the contemporary sense Limerick isn't really, 
no one ever cares about Limerick in Ireland, it's called 'Stab City'. There are 
a lot of people in Limerick who feel that Frank exaggerated the poverty of his 
childhood, which he refutes. I made a film of his book, so I believe the things 
that he did.

There were more people in Limerick who were sceptical than I would have hoped, 
particularly the Church. You'd think 50 years later they would be a bit more 
forgiving, but they really weren't. The main church where [Frank McCourt] went 
when he was a kid, called St Joseph's, certainly wouldn't let us in, they 
wouldn't even let us paint the railings outside. Five minutes from there is the 
Redemptonist church which figures in the masturbation scene. They - for very 
obvious reasons - wouldn't let us in [Laughter], and then there is the 
Franciscan church which figures at the end where the priest is one of the very 
few people who is kind to him. It's such a wonderful moment in the fact that 
this kid never lost his faith and I thought it was very beautifully explained 
in the film and in the book, and so you think that the Franciscans and that 
church would have been a bit kinder to us and would have allowed us to film in 
it. They did say yes, but a bit later on they said no.

Sound clips

 The difficulties of filming classic novels 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker1.RA>

 How the people of Limerick reacted 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker2.RA>

 The issue of poverty today 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker3.RA>

 The British film industry 
<http://www.pixunlimited.co.uk:7080/ramgen/film/Parker/Parker4.RA>
 