
What do former CIA chief David Petraeus, former Your Face or Mine? presenter 
June Sarpong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/05/women-eu-referendum-male-dominated-leave-remain>
, and current brother of Jeremy Corbyn,Piers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/24/piers-corbyn-other-rebel-in-the-family-jeremy-corbyn-climate-change>
, have in common? They all have opinions about Brexit that I’m not interested 
in. And it’s not just them. Just look atthis Wikipedia page 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endorsements_in_the_United_Kingdom_European_Union_membership_referendum,_2016>
, which helpfully lists a selection of celebrity endorsements in the debate 
since the campaign began: it features dozens of people on both sides, any one 
of whom may have fondly thought that their intervention would move the needle 
in the debate, without realising that it wouldn’t, because they areTheo Paphitis
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-21367311>, or Clémence Poésy 
<http://www.elle.com/beauty/makeup-skin-care/news/a26971/clemence-poesy-talks-books-beauty-and-your-obsession-with-french-women/>
, orFrederick Forsyth <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-34101822>.

Brexit: the Queen is a powerful asset, but she is being exploited | Jonathan 
Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/12/queen-elizabeth-brexit-sun-nick-clegg-eu-referendum>
Well, I defy anyone to remember which side Theo Paphitis is on. I looked it up 
about three minutes ago and already I’ve got no idea. It’s not that any of 
these people should be denied the right to a view, or the right to express it 
in public, or to join the leave or remain campaigns. But with every passing 
day, the value of such interventions to either side, or to the public’s general 
enlightenment, diminishes. Yesterday we had Petraeus joined by confirmed 
stay-er Jeremy Hunt in a front page newspaper pile-in; meanwhile, two 
entrepreneurs listed on a leave letter denied ever signing it 
<http://news.sky.com/story/1667598/vote-leave-apologises-over-wrong-names-on-list>
. That echoeda remain cock-up last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/24/no-10-apologises-special-forces-chief-eu-letter-gen-sir-michael-rose>
, when another general was mistakenly included as a signatory to one oftheir 
letters. At this point, I’m becoming a little offended not to have seen my own 
name mistakenly appended to a list of Journalists No-One’s Heard of for Leave. 
It’s not even as if they’d have to check with me first.

You can understand why these choreographed declarations remain popular with 
the spin doctors on each side. In most political campaigns you have the 
opportunity to announce bold new policies on a regular basis, even if you’re 
likely to ditch them after election day, thereby setting the agenda. In this 
one, all that counts is the same argument that we’ve all been rehearsing for 
decades. It’s terribly hard to come up with something new. A flash or even 
semi-flash new name at least offers the chance of wresting control of am bit of 
the news cycle.

No one conducts their own forensic analysis. They just see a new B-lister on 
the news, and tune out

Sadly, though, I don’t think it’s terribly effective – particularly for the 
remain camp. If you actually think the opinions of the great and good are 
important and conduct your own forensic analysis, you will probably find that a 
majority lean away from Brexit. But no one conducts their own forensic 
analysis. They just see a new B-lister on the news, and tune out. When these 
names are pumped into the political atmosphere so regularly, that superiority 
in numbers and seriousness is made hazy, and the fundamental questions about 
Europe are displaced by a beauty contest betweenAlan Sugar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/alan-sugar> and Bernie Ecclestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone>. You can see how people 
might not find that juxtaposition exactly inspiring.

A celebrity moratorium would be frightening because it would be hard for the 
campaigners to think of what to do instead. But with three months left to go, I 
can’t believe that all that many big hitters are yet to come out. Instead of a 
constant trickle of minor players, it would surely be more effective to focus a 
smaller number of PR blasts on the few remaining opinion-former people actually 
care about hearing from. (I know we’re all agog for the Beckham intervention.) 
The alternative - letting your boring political figureheads relentlessly 
rehearse the same arguments until even they are sick of the sound of their 
voices - might sound unappealing. And the public might not listen that closely. 
But in the end, who will you trust: the boring old farts who keep telling you 
the facts and figures, or the opportunist chancers triumphantly wheeling out
Joan Collins <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/joan-collins> and Michael 
Caine?
 