
There is a certain degree of swagger, a sudden interruption of panache, as 
Alan Moore enters the rather sterile Waterstones office where he has agreed to 
speak to me. The jut of beard, the ringed fingers, the walking stick one feels 
he could use as a wand or a cudgel at any moment: he looks like Hagrid's 
wayward brother or Gandalf's louche cousin. He has a laugh that might topple 
buildings, though I doubt the man who reinvented the superhero comic would want 
such powers. He is here to promoteFashion Beast, a project that is unusual even 
in terms of a career that has been exceptionally idiosyncratic.Fashion Beast, 
an idea initiated by punk legendMalcolm McLaren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/apr/09/malcolm-mclaren-obituary>, was 
to have been a film. It is now – 28 years later – a comic book. The story 
charts the relationship between a reclusive fashion designer, Celestine, an 
apprentice, Jonni Tare, and their favourite model, Doll. As one might expect 
from the author ofV For Vendetta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/nov/14/v-for-vendetta-politcal-resonance>
,Watchmen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2008/oct/27/watchmen-alan-moore-dave-gibbons>
,The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/23/league-of-extraordinary-gentlemen-century>
 andLost Girls <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jan/05/comics>, it 
combines satiric wit and furious philippic, the politically radical with the 
sexually ambiguous. Perhaps strangest of all, Moore can barely remember writing 
it.

I tell Moore how delightful it is to be speaking to him about an unmade film 
that turned into a comic, rather than a comic of his turned into a film. Moore 
has been outspoken in the past about his disdain for the latter. He makes a 
characteristic cross between a laugh and a harrumph, and says: "It was 
certainly a lot more agreeable from my point of view. My main point about films 
is that I don't like the adaptation process, and I particularly don't like the 
modern way of comic book-film adaptations, where, essentially, the central 
characters are just franchises that can be worked endlessly to no apparent 
point. In most cases, the original comic books were far superior to the film. 
With this, it started out as my first-ever film script or attempt at one. I was 
pleased with the results and I think that Malcolm was quite pleased with the 
results, but through circumstances quite unconnected to either of us the film 
never got made. So it was kind of existing in a weird hinterland of my memory."

"It was probably never going to be realised," he continues, "but when my 
publisher said he'd managed to find a copy of the screenplay and suggested that 
perhaps he get the excellent writerAnthony Johnson 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antony_Johnston> to do the adaptation … I didn't 
know whether it would work but it sounded very handy in that I wouldn't have to 
do any labour at all. That was what attracted me to the project. But then when 
the material started to come in, it was very unusual. For one thing, the 
adaptation had been really smooth. And when I started to see what Facundo 
Percio had done with the artwork, it was a fantastic experience because I'd 
completely forgotten everything to do withFashion Beast. It really was like 
reading something that was by somebody else, and I was quietly impressed with 
myself. I was pretty pleased with it," he beams.
 Alan Moore and Kevin O'Neill's The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen 
For a story conceived in 1985, Fashion Beast both foreshadows later Moore 
works and seems eerily as if it were written with foreknowledge of what would 
transpire in the world in the intervening years. "1985? Blimey!" he bellows, 
with a startled look in his eyes. "Was it that early? I hadn't remembered it 
was 85, but I had accepted it was probably late 80s and I was very surprised 
because there is a lot of the politics that would be expanded on in other 
works, the sexual politics certainly. There's also some precursors to my 
magical thinking; we're talking about fashion as an almost shamanistic 
activity, so I was very surprised to find that I'd been thinking about all 
these things back then."

McLaren, Moore says, was pitching the film as "a mash-up of Beauty and the 
Beast and the life of Christian Dior. He had these other elements as well – 
a bit likeChinatown and a bit like Flashdance, which I was bowled over by. I 
think he was expecting me to bring political depth and sexual politics to the 
mix.

"It was Malcolm who suggested that the main characters be a boy who looks like 
a girl who looks like a boy and vice versa. What was strange was that, 
actually, in 1985 this was nobody's vision of the fashion industry. Since then, 
fashion and fascism have crept closer: you've gotJohn Galliano 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/john-galliano> doing his promotional bits 
for the Third Reich, you've got Alexander McQueen killing himself, you've got 
Versace and that horrible, violent stalker coming for him. Since it was 
written, almost all of it has come true apart from the nuclear winter, but I 
think we're working on that. The actual society that the story happens in is 
much more like the society we have now than culture was in 1985."

McLaren was described as a "couturier situationniste", and I wondered what 
Moore felt aboutthe movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/14/guy-debord-society-spectacle-will-self>
. A few moments of trading slogans commenced ("It is forbidden to forbid", "Be 
rational: demand the impossible", "A mental disease has swept the planet: 
banalisation"), and Moore was in full flow. "I'm a lot of things," he says. 
"I've got a great deal of sympathy with the situationist position. Situationism 
is one of the roots of psychogeography.

"I like Jacques Derrida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/oct/11/guardianobituaries.france>, I 
think he's funny. I like my philosophy with a few jokes and puns. I know that 
that offends other philosophers; they think he's not taking things seriously, 
but he comes up with some marvellous puns. Why shouldn't you have a bit of fun 
while dealing with the deepest issues of the mind? The situationists – I like 
their style, I like their attitude, I like the 'below the street the beach'; 
I like that it was basically a more intellectual take and a more artistic take 
on anarchist principles. Malcolm was a situationist: the last time I was 
talking to him, he was trying to make music with some people out ofGame Boy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Game_Boy> chips. It sounded like it might be 
rubbish, but I liked the spirit he brought to everything. He was fiery, he was 
subversive and I think he meant it."

One underestimates Moore at one's peril: yes, he may have written Swamp Thing 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Swamp_Thing>, but he did so while reading 
continental philosophy.Fashion Beast is about oedipal influences – who can 
inhabit and subvert the master's voice? Several writers have acknowledged Moore 
as a key influence:Neil Gaiman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman> 
told me Moore made a whole generation possible.Fashion Beast is about 
apprentices and masters, pupils and teachers. So how does he feel about this? 
"I don't generally read very much at all. I've got no problem with people 
taking certain inspirations or perhaps being interested in one of my ideas, but 
it's important they make it their own voice, not my voice or an echo of my 
voice. If being influenced by my work is part of a process leading them to 
develop their own proper voices, then I'm glad. I believeChina Miéville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/china-mieville> gets a lot of respect; I've 
not read his stuff, but I've heard he's done that.Grant Morrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/jul/21/supergods-grant-morrison-review-jonathan-ross>
 has actually self-confessedly made a tactic of not only basing some of his 
narratives on my style or my work but also trying to make himself more famous 
by slagging me off at every opportunity. I have nothing to do with him."
 Alan Moore's V for Vendetta 
When I mention that Geoff Johns has done a whole series of Green Lantern based 
on his story "Tygers", he gets tetchy. "Now, see," he says, "I haven't read any 
superhero comics since I finished withWatchmen. I hate superheroes. I think 
they're abominations. They don't mean what they used to mean. They were 
originally in the hands of writers who would actively expand the imagination of 
their nine- to 13-year-old audience. That was completely what they were meant 
to do and they were doing it excellently. These days, superhero comics think 
the audience is certainly not nine to 13, it's nothing to do with them. It's an 
audience largely of 30-, 40-, 50-, 60-year old men, usually men. Someone came 
up with the term graphic novel. These readers latched on to it; they were 
simply interested in a way that could validate their continued love ofGreen 
Lantern or Spider-Man without appearing in some way emotionally subnormal. 
This is a significant rump of the superhero-addicted, mainstream-addicted 
audience. I don't think the superhero stands for anything good. I think it's a 
rather alarming sign if we've got audiences of adults going to see the Avengers 
movie and delighting in concepts and characters meant to entertain the 
12-year-old boys of the 1950s."

Having seen comics turned into movies, and film-scripts turned into comics, 
Moore is most concerned with Jerusalem, his fiction.

"I am currently on the last official chapter, which I am doing somewhat in the 
style of Dos Passos. It should be finished by the end of the year or close to 
it. I don't know if anyone else will like it at all," he muses. I say that I 
can't wait, and that it strikes me that the style he and the likes of
Iain Sinclair <https://www.theguardian.com/books/iain-sinclair> and Michael 
Moorcock <https://www.theguardian.com/books/michael-moorcock> pioneered has 
become central to literary culture. He sighs, shaking the walls: "Oh God, have 
we? Oh no, we're the mainstream!"
 