
Tony Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> was 
echoing the pub conversations of everyday Australians when he said all cultures 
were not equal, the radio announcer and staunch Abbott supporter Alan Jones has 
argued.

The former prime minister continued his media blitz on Friday, speaking to 
Jones on Macquarie Radio.

Tony Abbott calls on western nations to consider ground troops in war on Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/10/tony-abbott-calls-on-western-nations-to-consider-ground-troops-in-war-on-isis>
He claimed credit for the passage of legislation that would strip dual 
nationals of their Australian citizenship if convicted of terrorism offences, 
or go abroad to fight for terrorist organisations.

“This is a strong statement by the Australian community that if you are a 
terrorist, if you want to kill your fellow Australians for no other reason than 
that they don’t share your particular religious views, well, you’re not one of 
us,” Abbott said. “You’re beyond the pale.”

Abbott has been criticised by members of the Islamic community, and rebuked by 
the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, for hisincreasingly divisive language 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/09/abbott-compared-to-trump-by-labor-as-turnbull-condemns-his-attack-on-islam>
 on the role of Islam in terrorism.

In an interview with Sky News on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/08/tony-abbott-political-future-not-resolved-but-hints-he-will-stay-in-parliament>
, Abbott said “all cultures are not equal” and that western cultures needed to 
assert their dominance over cultures that believe they can “kill in the name of 
God”.

Jones backed the comments.

“He said, and I said at the time, in language that would be endorsed by nearly 
everyone in every pub, cultures are not equal,” he said.

“These comments, we’re told, are ill-informed. Well who is generating fear and 
hatred? There is plenty of it [that] is being generated at Tony Abbott.”

But a prominent Lebanese Australian, Jamal Rifi, who is often cited by members 
of the Coalition as a moderate leader in the Muslim community, was scathing.

Tony Abbott says political future not ‘entirely resolved’, but hints he will 
stay in parliament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/08/tony-abbott-political-future-not-resolved-but-hints-he-will-stay-in-parliament>
“It is not a fit thing for a prime minister or an ex-prime minister to say, to 
be honest, and probably that mentality is why we are in such difficult 
situation right now,” he told ABC TV on Friday. “Because Tony Abbott as prime 
minister, he put all the emphasis on punitive actions but he did not put or 
invest anything about preventative actions.”

That changed after Turnbull became leader of the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> in September.

“To be frank, what happened during the leadership of Tony Abbott – we did have 
a lot of meetings, we were talking [but] they were not hearing, they were not 
listening, they were not acting,” Rifi said. “I think since Tony Abbott is no 
longer the prime minister and we have Malcolm Turnbull, we definitely feel it 
has changed.”

Jones praised Abbott’s contribution to the conversation on terrorism and 
deradicalisation, saying it was “world class”.


“He’s one of the few people who’s not on a holiday from reality,” he said. 
“Yes, we get on with life. Malcolm Turnbull is the prime minister and we want 
him to be the best there can be. But we sure as hell don’t want Tony Abbott to 
shut up.”

Abbott, who vowed not to undermine Turnbull’s government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/15/tony-abbott-takes-swipe-at-febrile-media-in-last-speech-as-prime-minister>
 after losing the leadership, has been in the headlines all week. The language 
he has used during media interviews is a marked departure from Turnbull’s, who 
stressed theneed for mutual respect with the Muslim community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/09/malcolm-turnbull-urges-australians-to-show-mutual-respect-in-battle-against-extremism>
 in the terrorism debate.

Abbott reiterated his desire to stay on the backbench until the next federal 
election, saying that holding public office is a “noble calling”.

“There’d be nothing wrong, I think, with continuing to do that in the 
parliament,” he said. “Now, whether that’s the ultimate decision, time will 
tell. But I am determined to serve the people of Warringah and Australia for 
the rest of this parliament.”

Abbott told Jones he had been heartened by the “absolute avalanche of letters 
and emails” he had received since losing the leadership to Turnbull in 
September.
 