
Comic book writer Alan Moore has endorsed Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> as Labour leader and has 
urged voters to “put all of your mind and all of your muscle” into supporting 
the embattled Labour leader – although he himself is an avowed anarchist who 
doesn’t vote.

In a piece written for the Northampton branch of Momentum 
<http://momentumnorthants.org.uk/alan-moore-statement/>, the grassroots 
movement set up in support of Corbyn’s leadership, Moore sets out his family’s 
history of voting Labour because a Labour government introduced the NHS and 
provided free education for children: “I was raised with the probably 
simplistic but heartfelt belief that it was the duty of our family and people 
like us to vote Labour since Labour, unambiguously, was the party of the 
working people.”

Moore, whose iconic use of a Guy Fawkes mask in his comic V For Vendetta was 
later adopted as a global symbol of protest and anti-establishment movements, 
says that although he insists “repeatedly and annoyingly” that he doesn’t vote, 
he feels his parents would have voted Corbyn: “Jeremy Corbyn is about the only 
current political figure that the working class that I grew up among could have 
recognised as such.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Falan-moore-gives-heartfelt-backing-to-jeremy-corbyn-but-wont-vote-for-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc53691a9f6e54c0f0d87e139a1a69992ae1922ab%2F0_222_4128_2478%2F4128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Moore%20gives%20heartfelt%20backing%20to%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20(but%20won't%20vote%20for%20him)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Falan-moore-gives-heartfelt-backing-to-jeremy-corbyn-but-wont-vote-for-him%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Moore%20gives%20heartfelt%20backing%20to%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20%28but%20won%27t%20vote%20for%20him%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Falan-moore-gives-heartfelt-backing-to-jeremy-corbyn-but-wont-vote-for-him%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc53691a9f6e54c0f0d87e139a1a69992ae1922ab%2F0_222_4128_2478%2F4128.jpg>
 An Occupy protester wears a V for Vendetta mask in 2011. Photograph: Action 
Press / Rex Features 
Moore reveals he is “somehow glad” his parents “never lived to have their 
hearts broken by the advent of Tony Blair and his rebranded Diet-Tory New 
Labour party. In the decades since then, had they witnessed this country’s 
purported left wing, I’m confident that they wouldn’t have had the first idea 
what they were looking at. The thing that they believed in and fought for has 
become unrecognisable and completely inimical to all working-class principles 
and values.”

Jeremy Corbyn plans Sanders-style campaign for next general election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/29/jeremy-corbyn-bernie-sanders-style-campaign-next-2020-general-election-labour>
Both Corbyn and Bernie Sanders in the US have been dismissed by some as 
unelectable, a term Moore says is “shorthand for the phrase ‘You are henceforth 
only permitted to elect conservatives’.”

“And yet,” he adds, “from the laughably disproportionate torrent of ridicule 
and demonisation that politicians like Corbyn are being subjected to, one has 
to suspect that their opponents are increasingly afraid that they are anything 
but unelectable.

“If we sincerely believe that Jeremy Corbyn is unelectable, why bother saying 
another word about Jeremy Corbyn? In fact, why bother pointing out his 
unelectable status in the first place? It’s worth remembering that vested 
powers and authorities, throughout time and across the world, are always at 
their most vicious when they are also at their most frightened. To a degree, 
every media barb and embarrassing bout of … recriminations can be seen as a 
measure of your man’s unprecedented success.”

Moore cites several concerns, including environmental damage, international 
austerity, Donald Trump and “a horrific abyss that threatens to make the 
English civil war look like a Sunday-school outing” and says Corbyn has emerged 
to “propose a far more humane and workable direction for society”.

As an anarchist who prefers political action without “an elected 
intermediary”, Moore says that if he did vote, “I would try to vote with the 
way that viable human history appeared to be going rather than against it”.

He ends the letter urging voters to “put all of your mind and all of your 
muscle into supporting someone who offers a future that ordinary people could 
actually live in … It is time for this horrific and inhuman nonsense to stop, 
and if you’re going to vote then I suggest you vote for someone who looks 
willing to stop it.”

In a 2011 interview with the New Statesmen 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/helen-lewis-hasteley/2011/06/alan-moore-jerusalem>
, Moore revealed he had only ever voted once, for Labour prime minister Jim 
Callaghan in the 1979 general election, and regretted his decision later: “I 
don’t like to vote because I don’t believe in the democratic process, and I 
don’t believe that it is democracy. Democracy as I understand it isdemos – the 
people shall rule.”

• This article was amended on 20 September 2016. An earlier version referred 
to a general election in 1976. This has been corrected.
 