
Unmissable show?

Fargo. It’s part homage, but it also opens up a whole new world. It sails a 
little bit close to the wind in terms of the tangential monologues sometimes. 
It can feel a bit like self-parody. But the thing about American drama is that 
the acting is always so good. Even the smallest characters are perfect. And Ted 
Danson is among my favourite of all actors. I’ve loved him in everything he’s 
been in, fromCheers to Bored To Death.

Earliest TV memory?

The TV was never off in our house. My favourite was Grange Hill with Trisha 
Yates, who I had a bit of a thing for. One of them went to my school. One of 
Zammo’s friends – I can’t remember which one. It was miserable for him. Every 
break, someone was on at him about Grange Hill.

Bring back?

You mourn shows when they finish but you lament the end of comedies more than 
dramas. There’s always good dramas around but it’s harder to find great 
comedies. I missSeinfeld, Cheers, Frasier and One Foot In The Grave mainly. In 
the 90s, people didn’t mind doing them in front of an audience and things are 
funnier in front of an audience. Performances feed off real laughter. You’d 
never get comic performances like the ones in Seinfeld without a studio 
audience. With things like The IT Crowd, where the actors have exquisite comic 
timing, the audience help that timing.

Pitch us a TV show…

Obviously a sitcom with Ted Danson, Richard Ayoade and Victor Meldrew, filmed 
in front of a live studio audience!

Turn off?

I can’t do soaps. I know a lot of good actors and great writers work on them. 
I used to loveCoronation Street when it was two episodes a week and they were 
like sitcoms. But I can’t be doing with it now people are getting buried alive 
and so on. That’s not family entertainment! We used to have Terry And June on 
at half-seven when I was a kid!

Alan Davies: As Yet Untitled airs Tuesday 17 November, 10pm, Dave
 