
Broadcaster Alan Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> says he 
opposes a plebiscite on same-sex marriage because it could be “angry and 
spiteful and divisive” and gay and lesbian Australians have suffered enough.

The 74-year-old said on his 2GB radio show on Tuesday he was “totally opposed” 
to the government’s plans to put the question of marriage equality to a 
national vote.

Alan Jones says Australia needs another stolen generation 'to protect' 
children'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/15/alan-jones-says-australia-needs-another-stolen-generation-to-protect-children>
“That means there must be a case presented for and against,” he said. “It 
could be angry and spiteful and divisive, the last thing we need. Many 
Australians have suffered enough as a result of their sexuality.”

The conservative firebrand, who most recently courted controversy by declaring 
Australia neededanother Indigenous stolen generation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/15/alan-jones-says-australia-needs-another-stolen-generation-to-protect-children>
, first declaredhis support for marriage equality 
<http://www.perthnow.com.au/entertainment/alan-jones-speaks-openly-on-his-view-on-homosexuality/story-e6frg30l-1226242043418>
 in 2012.

He repeated that position on Tuesday, saying love was “an elusive thing”.

“If people find it they should be able to celebrate it. If that celebration 
manifests itself in same-sex marriage, then the world’s not going to fall in. I 
think people are tired of all this,” he said.

Jones said the plebiscite, estimated to cost $160m and take at least nine 
months’ preparation, was a waste of time and money, calling instead for a 
parliamentary vote.

Same-sex marriage plebiscite: Brandis insist he and Turnbull agree on timing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/07/same-sex-marriage-plebiscite-brandis-insist-he-and-turnbull-agree-on-timing>
“The bill could be drafted tomorrow in five minutes, and the nation could get 
on with its life … How much more anguish are we going to impose people over an 
issue of intense privacy,” he said.

He said Malcolm Turnbull, then the communications minister, had called him in 
September after the Abbott government first announced a plebiscite on the issue.

“He rang me to tell me that, quote, Tony is wrong on this issue of a 
plebiscite Alan, and he went on to say the matter should be resolved before an 
election,” Jones said.

(“Malcolm was always ringing around on anything that might pull the rug out 
from under Tony Abbott,” he added.)

Turnbull backed the idea of a plebiscite soon after taking power from Abbott 
in September, but key details of the process – including the date, the question 
posed to the public and whether or not the result will be binding –remain 
unclear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/07/same-sex-marriage-plebiscite-brandis-insist-he-and-turnbull-agree-on-timing>
.


Q&A recap: Alan Jones 'hopes' he's a feminist, but Michaelia Cash rejects label
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/08/qa-recap-alan-jones-hopes-hes-a-feminist-but-michealia-cash-rejects-label>
The attorney-general, George Brandis, suggested on Sunday a vote would take 
place before the end of the year, a timetable the prime minister’s office did 
not back.

The national director of Australian Marriage Equality, Rodney Croome, said he 
welcomed Jones’ opposition “to an unnecessary, divisive and expensive 
plebiscite” and reiterated his call for Turnbull to drop the idea.

“There is majority support for marriage equality in parliament so we could 
resolve this issue next week if the government simply allowed a free vote.”

Jones also appeared on ABC’s Q+A program on Monday night, where he surprised 
some viewers by sayinghe hoped he was a feminist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/08/qa-recap-alan-jones-hopes-hes-a-feminist-but-michealia-cash-rejects-label>
. “I hope so. I certainly believe in gender equality, I can tell you,” he said.
 