
Alan Sugar <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/alan-sugar> is quitting Labour, 
denouncing the party’s perceived shift to the left in the runup to last week’s 
general election, as two potential leadership candidates criticised the party 
and its campaign’s lack of business appeal.

The star of the BBC’s business reality show The Apprentice, who was the 
government’s official “enterprise champion” during Gordon Brown’s premiership, 
said party chiefs had accepted his resignation “as they had been aware of my 
disillusionment for some time”.

Labour was widely seen by business leaders as charting an anti-business course 
ahead of the election, in which the Conservative party defied opinion poll 
predictions to win an outright majority. Two potential contenders for theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leadership have already called 
for the party to be more pro-business. Chuka Umunna and Liz Kendall, both seen 
as Blairites, have also called for the party to reach out to middle England.

Labour's soul-searching begins as modernisers attack Miliband 'mistakes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/10/labour-soul-searching-modernisers-attack-miliband-mistakes>
The battle for the future of the Labour party after its devastating defeat in 
the election rumbled on on Monday with Sadiq Khan and Jon Cruddas resigning 
from the Labour shadow cabinet. Khan is understood to be preparing to fight for 
the party’s nomination as Labour’s candidate for London mayor, while Cruddas 
announced he was setting up a review independent of the party leadership into 
how Labour lost the election.


In a mini shadow cabinet reshuffle, Khan has been replaced by Lord Falconer as 
shadow justice secretary. Hilary Benn has been promoted to shadow foreign 
secretary, replacing Douglas Alexander, who lost his seat in the election. 
Chris Leslie, the shadow chief secretary, has been promoted to the post of 
shadow chancellor, replacing Ed Balls after his defeat at the ballot box.

The appointments are temporary until a new party leader is elected by the 
summer or at the autumn party conference. The party national executive is 
meeting on Wednesday to agree the timetable, and in the interim Harriet Harman 
is acting as temporary leader.

Announcing he was quitting the party, Lord Sugar said he no longer agreed with 
many of Labour’s policies after Ed Miliband, the Labour leader who resigned in 
the wake of defeat, moved the party “back to what old Labour stood for”.

Sugar said he had intended to step down as a Labour peer whatever the outcome 
of the election but had kept quiet about his plans to avoid harming the party’s 
chances.He said in a statement on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/Lord_Sugar/status/597722928235618304>: “In the past year I 
found myself losing confidence in the party due to their negative business 
policies and the general anti-enterprise concepts they were considering if they 
were to be elected. I expressed this to the most senior figures in the party 
several times.
Lord Sugar (@Lord_Sugar) 
I have resigned today from the Labour party. Full statement here... 
pic.twitter.com/bzpQsmhVXG <http://t.co/bzpQsmhVXG>
 <https://twitter.com/Lord_Sugar/status/597722928235618304> May 11, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/Lord_Sugar/status/597722928235618304> 
“I was originally brought into the party by Gordon Brown during an era where 
true enterprise was being supported by the party. I signed on to New Labour in 
1997 but more recently, particularly in relation to business, I sensed a policy 
shift moving back towards what old Labour stood for. By the start of this year, 
I had made my decision to resign from the party whatever the outcome of the 
general election.”

He added: “I have no wish to stick the boot into the party. There are many 
good people in Labour working hard every day to serve the public, and I wish 
them all the best of luck. I am grateful for all the experiences being a member 
of Labour has brought me.

“I intend to continue in the House of Lords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords>, representing the interests of 
business and enterprise in the UK. I will be making no further comment at this 
time.”
Steve Reed (@SteveReedMP) 
Sorry @lord_sugar <https://twitter.com/Lord_Sugar> leaving Labour, had hoped 
he'd stay & help us change it. Hope we can welcome him back before long.
 <https://twitter.com/SteveReedMP/status/597734052494516228> May 11, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/SteveReedMP/status/597734052494516228> 
Two Labour MPs have already responded with dismay to Sugar’s surprise 
announcement. Steve Reed, MP for Croydon North, said in a tweet that he hoped 
the businessman would stay in the party and “help us change it”.

Ben Bradshaw, MP for Exeter, used the microblogging site to tell Sugar: “This 
is the timenot to leave but to stay and help us back to sanity.”

Ben Bradshaw (@BenPBradshaw) 
Dear @Lord_Sugar <https://twitter.com/Lord_Sugar> This is just the time *not* 
to leave but to stay & help us back to sanity ensuring we win in 2020.
 <https://twitter.com/BenPBradshaw/status/597735092539252736> May 11, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/BenPBradshaw/status/597735092539252736>  