
Comics legend Alan Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-moore> has 
finished the first draft of his second novel, Jerusalem – and it runs to more 
than 1m words.

His daughter, Leah Moore, made the announcement on Facebook on Tuesday 
<https://www.facebook.com/OfficialAlanMoore?fref=nf>, adding with a wink that 
“now there’s just the small matter of copy editing” a book of that length, “and 
it’s all done”. To put that “more-than-a-million-word document” into context: 
Samuel Richardson’s doorstopper, Clarissa, runs to around 970,000 words, 
200,000 more than the Bible . War and Peace is around 560,000 words long.

Moore, revered for creating comics including Watchmen and V for Vendetta, has 
been working on Jerusalem since 2008. It focuses on a small area – half a 
square mile across – of the town where he grew up, Northampton, and explores 
its history through stories from his family’s past, Moore’s take on historical 
events, and of course fantasy. “Any editor worth their salt would tell me to 
cut two-thirds of this book but that’s not going to happen. I doubt that Herman 
Melville had an editor – if he had, that editor would have told him to get rid 
of all that boring stuff about whaling: ‘Cut to the chase, Herman’,” hetold the 
New Statesman in 2011 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/helen-lewis-hasteley/2011/06/alan-moore-novel-jerusalem>
.

Moore added at the time: “I have doubted that people will even be able to pick 
it up. I’m not averse to some kind of ebook, eventually – as long as I get my 
huge, cripplingly heavy book to put on my shelf and gloat over, I’ll be happy.”

The author has revealed intriguing details about the book in the past, telling 
the BBC <http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/7307303.stm> in 2008 that a 
section will feature his brother’s adventures in the fourth dimension, while 
the “middle bit” is “a savage, hallucinating Enid Blyton”.

According to other interviews 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/blogs/helen-lewis-hasteley/2011/06/alan-moore-novel-jerusalem>
, there is also a “Lucia Joyce chapter, which is completely incomprehensible … 
all written in a completely invented sub-Joycean text”, a chapter in the form 
of a Samuel Beckett play, because the author once visited the town to play 
cricket, “a noir crime narrative based upon the Northampton pastor James 
Hervey, whom I believe was the father of the entire Gothic movement”, and “a 
combination of the ghost story and the drug narrative”.

“I am currently on the last official chapter,” he told the Guardian late last 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/nov/22/alan-moore-comic-books-interview>
, “which I am doing somewhat in the style of Dos Passos. It should be finished 
by the end of the year or close to it. I don’t know if anyone else will like it 
at all.”

There is no word yet on an official release date for the book, and Comics Beat 
reports that it has not yet got a publisher. “Now, how many years do you think 
it will take to give the first draft a run through?”wrote Heidi MacDonald 
<http://comicsbeat.com/alan-moore-has-finished-first-draft-of-1-million-word-novel-jerusalem/>
. But “no matter how long it takes. Jerusalem will be an event when it finally 
appears.”
 