
Alan Greenspan will go down in history as the person most responsible for the 
enormous economic damage caused by the housing bubble and the subsequent 
collapse of the market. The United States is still down almost 9m jobs from its 
trend path. We are losing close to $1tn a year in potential output, with 
cumulative losses to dateapproaching $5tn <http://www.lostoutputclock.com/>.

These numbers correspond to millions of dreams ruined. Families who struggled 
to save enough to buy a home lost it when house prices plunged or they lost 
their jobs. Many older workers lose their job with little hope of ever finding 
another one, even though they are ill-prepared for retirement; young people 
getting out of school are facing the worst job marketsince the Great Depression 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/peterferrara/2013/02/07/the-worst-five-years-since-the-great-depression/>
, while buried in student loan debt.

The horror story could have easily been prevented 
<http://www.cepr.net/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=405> had 
there been intelligent life at the Federal Reserve Board in the years when the 
housing bubble was growing to ever more dangerous proportions (2002-2006). But 
the Fed did nothing to curb the bubble. Arguably, it even acted to foster its 
growth with Greenspan cheering the development of exotic mortgages and 
completely ignoring its regulatory responsibilities.

Most people who had this incredible infamy attached to their name would have 
the decency to find a large rock to hide behind; but not Alan Greenspan. He 
apparently believes that he has not punished us enough. Greenspan has anew book 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/21/books/the-map-and-the-territory-by-alan-greenspan.html>
 which he is now hawking on radio and television shows everywhere.

The book, which I have not read, is ostensibly Greenspan's wisdom about the 
economy and economics. But he also tells us that his problem as Fed chair was 
that he just didn't know about the flood of junk mortgages that was fueling the 
unprecedented rise in house prices during the bubble years. He has used this 
ignorance to explain his lack of action – or even concern – about the risks 
posed by the bubble.

Greenspan's "I didn't know" excuse is so absurd as to be painful. The 
explosion of exotic mortgages in the bubble years was hardly a secret. It was 
frequently talked about in the media and showed up in a wide variety of data 
sources, including those produced by the Fed. In fact, there were widespread 
jokes at the time about "liar loans" or "Ninja loans". The latter being an 
acronym for the phrase, "no income, no job, no assets".

The fact that banks were issuing fraudulent mortgages by the millions, and 
that the Wall Street crew was securitizing them as fast as they could get them, 
was not top secret information available only to those with special security 
clearance. Thiswas the economy in the years 2002-2006. 

It was impossible to look at the economy in these years and not see the role 
of the housing bubble and the tsunami of bad mortgages that fueled it. The 
run-up in house prices led to a near record pace of construction. Typically 
housing construction is around 4.5% of GDP. It peaked at 6.5% in 2005. 
Greenspan didn't notice? Who did he think was going to live in all these units, 
the building of which had created record vacancy ratesas early as 2003 
<http://money.cnn.com/2004/02/10/pf/yourhome/rentalprices/>?

And he didn't notice that the spike in house prices had led to a surge in 
consumption pushingsaving rates to nearly zero 
<http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CC4QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cepr.net%2Findex.php%2Fpublications%2Freports%2Fwhen-numbers-dont-add-up&ei=nSNnUuCcL_e34AP4s4HwDw&usg=AFQjCNG8t2iGvw42D2n2P1iiJWRztywExg&sig2=6VPTqVhkfyaIV2dSTSfYiA&bvm=bv.55123115,d.dmg>
? He actually co-authoredseveral 
<http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&ved=0CDYQFjAB&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.federalreserve.gov%2Fpubs%2Ffeds%2F2005%2F200541%2F200541pap.pdf&ei=yCNnUricH9fe4APoz4GQCw&usg=AFQjCNEJOAIK4UTK-Yl4E_sm2NKub3uEpA&sig2=22JQldf-p3lT5ErPclAbzw&bvm=bv.55123115,d.dmg>
pieces 
<http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=3&cad=rja&ved=0CD8QFjAC&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.federalreserve.gov%2Fpubs%2Ffeds%2F2007%2F200720%2F&ei=yCNnUricH9fe4APoz4GQCw&usg=AFQjCNH-w2KP3b-M5FrHqtJOV0dKBkKfnQ&sig2=Fvo_SIVBN2B12OCAAreavQ&bvm=bv.55123115,d.dmg>
 on exactly this topic with another Fed economist. Between the 100% predictable 
collapse of residential construction and the plunge in consumption that would 
follow the loss of the housing wealth that was driving it, we were looking at a 
loss of more than $1tn in annual demand. What did Greenspan think would fill 
this gap, purchases of Ayn Rand's books?

Greenspan had all the information that he could have possibly needed to spot 
the housing bubble and to know its collapse would be really bad news for the 
economy. More than anyone else in the country he was in a position to stop the 
growth of the bubble.

Suppose that, instead of extolling the wonders 
<http://www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2004/20040223/> of adjustable 
rate mortgages, Greenspan used his public addresses to warn people that they 
were buying into an overpriced housing market; and he warned investors that the 
subprime mortgage backed securities they were buying were filled withfraudulent 
mortgages <http://www.nytimes.com/2008/10/24/business/economy/24panel.html>. 
Suppose further that he used the Fed's research staff to document these facts.

Greenspan could have used the regulatory powers of the Fed to crack down on 
the bad mortgages being issued by the banks under the Fed's jurisdiction, as 
his fellowgovernor Edward Gramlich urged 
<http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB118134111823129555>. And, he could have 
arranged to have a meeting with other federal and state regulators to see what 
they were doing to prevent mortgage fraud in the financial institutions under 
their jurisdictions as well.

Those are the actions that we had a right to expect from a Fed chair faced 
with the growth of a dangerous asset bubble. That is whatAlan Greenspan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-greenspan> would have done if he had 
been earning his salary. Instead, he did nothing. He cheered on the bubble 
until it burst and then he said it wasn't his fault.

This man has nothing to tell the country about the economy and the media is 
not doing its job 
<http://www.newrepublic.com/article/115285/media-cant-stop-sucking-alan-greenspan>
 to imply otherwise. If Greenspan doesn't have the decency to keep himself out 
of public view after all the damage he has done to the country, then the media 
should do it for him. The only thing he has to say that would be newsworthy is 
that he's sorry.
 