 After 14 films and 28 years in the highest branches of the Hollywood tree, 
Alan Parker is turning to the novel.
The director, who made his name with Bugsy Malone, and who also drew 
award-winning performances from young people in The Commitments, Fame and Shoot 
the Moon, has written a book about a street urchin which begins as San 
Francisco burns during the earthquake of 1906.

The Sucker's Kiss, which follows the child pickpocket on a journey through 
America during the Depression, is his first "proper novel", although he wrote 
the novelisation of Bugsy Malone and the graphic novel that the film spawned.

Despite the critical pasting his new film, The Life of David Gale - a 
death-penalty thriller starring Kevin Spacey and Kate Winslet - received in 
Britain, Parker, who is the chairman of the Film Council, said he was not 
changing direction.

"Some people said I should never make another film after that," he joked. "But 
I am not like those French film-makers who make the same film over and over 
again. The critics may not like it, but I do and I have always to do something 
new."

He said that writing had its attractions. "The one thing about a novel is you 
don't have to beg anyone in Los Angeles for millions of dollars. Which is just 
as well, since the book starts with the San Francisco earthquake, which would 
be the first thing to be dropped in a film."

Parker told a masterclass at the Guardian Hay Festival that he didn't get "the 
same fun out of making films as I once did, if I ever did. It is a very 
gruelling business, very physically demanding. There is the difficulty now of 
the tap-dance you have to do to persuade people to give you the money, which is 
the hardest part of it. I have got to the age when I have run out of reasons to 
kiss the arse of people I don't like. So writing a novel was a civilised thing 
to do. I am not in a rush to make another film."

At 59, he is not about to retire, and he admitted to being addicted to the 
"madness of shooting".

Parker, who finished the book during an "enforced hiatus" caused by threatened 
actors' and writers' strikes in America, revealed he had been approached to 
direct the first Harry Potter film but had been "auditioned in a late night 
phone call from LA after I had one or two glasses of white wine.

"I think I would have made a better film," he quipped. 

Parker also disclosed how he turned down a chance to cash in on Fame with a 
follow-up TV series which was to be called Alan Parker's Fame. "I saw what they 
were doing and sent them back a cartoon of me with my head stuck down a toilet.

"The series eventually made something like $350m. Aaagh!" 

Â· The Sucker's Kiss will be published by Hodder in November. 
 