
The residents of an Alaskan coastal village have begun voting on whether to 
relocate because of rising sea levels.

'There was just no snow': climate change puts Iditarod future in doubt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/24/iditarod-climate-change-sled-dogs-winter-alaska>
If they vote to move, the village of Shishmaref, just north of the Bering 
Strait, and its population of 650 people, could be the first in the US to do so 
because of climate change.

The village would be relocated at an estimated cost of $180m to a new location 
less threatened by rising waters and melting sea ice. Where it would move would 
be decided later in a town meeting, according to the city clerk’s office.


The results of the vote will be announced on Wednesday, the city clerk said.

Alaska map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/08/shishmaref/giv-31075cm3e7f01cyG2/>
The sea ice used to protect Shishmaref, which is built on a barrier island and 
largely inhabited by members of the Inupiat Inuit tribe. But now that the ice 
is melting, the village is in peril from encroaching waves, especially as the 
permafrost on which it is built is thawing, and crumbling beneath the mostly 
prefabricated houses. Barricades and sea walls have had little effect.

“Over the past 35 years, we’ve lost 2,500 to 3,000 feet of land to coastal 
erosion,” wrote Esau Sinnok, a Shishmaref native and Arctic Youth Ambassador, 
in anessay <https://www.doi.gov/blog/my-world-interrupted> for the Department 
of the Interior in 2015.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Falaska-town-shishmaref-vote-climate-change-relocation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74eff01f0d9b95012fd1a0c7ea6e809aae5d1c7b%2F0_191_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alaskan%20village%20votes%20on%20whether%20to%20relocate%20because%20of%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Falaska-town-shishmaref-vote-climate-change-relocation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alaskan%20village%20votes%20on%20whether%20to%20relocate%20because%20of%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Falaska-town-shishmaref-vote-climate-change-relocation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74eff01f0d9b95012fd1a0c7ea6e809aae5d1c7b%2F0_191_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A man drives down the street in Shishmaref, Alaska. Photograph: Andrew 
Burton/Getty Images 
“To put this in perspective: I was born in 1997, and since then, Shishmaref 
has lost about 100 feet,” he continued. “In the past 15 years, we had to move 
13 houses – including my dear grandma Edna’s house – from one end of the island 
to the other because of this loss of land.”

“Within the next two decades, the whole island will erode away completely.”

Shishmaref is not the only town facing a global warming-linked crisis. 
According to astudy <http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09551.pdf> by the US 
Government Accountability Office (GAO), 31 villages face “imminent threats” 
from flooding and coastal erosion.

At least 12 of those have begun exploring relocation, including Shishmaref, 
but the report also said that federal funds were limited and unavailable to 
some of those communities. In February 2015, Sally Jewell, the secretary of the 
interior,announced 
<http://www.bia.gov/cs/groups/public/documents/text/idc1-029389.pdf> $8m in 
funding for “projects that promote tribal climate change adaption” in Alaska.
 