
Species can be listed as “threatened” and receive protection based on climate 
change projections that stretch until the end of the century, a federal appeals 
court has ruled, in a decision that could have major implications for the fate 
of animals as their environment rapidly changes.

A three-judge panel at the US ninth circuit court unanimously rejected an 
appeal by a coalition of oil companies, the state ofAlaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alaska> and indigenous Alaskans to prevent 
a subspecies of the Pacific bearded seal from getting federal protection.

Terns follow record warm temperatures in 'shock' migration to north of Alaska
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/23/terns-migration-alaska> 
The federal government’s National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) decided that 
the Alaska-based populations of bearded seals would “almost certainly” be at 
risk of being wiped out due to disappearing Arctic sea ice by 2095.

Alaska, along with the oil companies, argued that listing the species as 
threatened wasn’t warranted because the climate predictions were speculative. 
The appeals court disagreed, potentially opening the way for other species to 
be protected due to long-range climate forecasts.

“The service need not wait until a species’ habitat is destroyed to determine 
that habitat loss may facilitate extinction,”the judges’ ruling states 
<http://cdn.ca9.uscourts.gov/datastore/opinions/2016/10/24/14-35806.pdf>. 

“The fact that climate projections for 2050 through 2100 may be volatile does 
not deprive those projections of value in the rule making process. All parties 
agree that there will be sea ice melt; the only uncertainty is the magnitude of 
warming, the speed with which warming will take place, and the severity of its 
effect.”

The court noted the position taken by the “overwhelming majority” of the 
world’s climate scientists who warn that diminishing sea ice, caused by warming 
temperatures, will pose an existential threat to species such as seals that 
depend upon the icy environment for mating, birthing and feeding.

Observational data from 2010 showed that the bearded seals’ habitat in Alaska 
had 40% less summer sea ice than the long-term average. Winter sea ice in the 
Bering and Okhotsk seas off Alaska and Russia is expected to decline by at 
least 40% by 2050, with summer ice forecasted to largely disappear.

The ruling is the first to affirm the federal government’s right to protect 
species because of climate models stretching until the end of the century. In 
2008, the polar bear was listed as threatened based on loss of sea ice, 
although the forecast in that case will end in 2050.

“This is a huge victory for bearded seals and shows the vital importance of 
the Endangered Species Act in protecting species threatened by climate change,” 
said Kristen Monsell, an attorney at the Center for Biological Diversity who 
argued the case.

Climate change will mean the end of national parks as we know them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/22/climate-change-national-parks-threat>
“This decision will give bearded seals a fighting chance while we work to 
reduce the greenhouse gas emissions melting their sea-ice habitat and keep 
dirty fossil fuels in the ground.”

The decision may be challenged by Alaska, which said such listings could 
hinder economic development in the state for little environmental benefit.

“If this opinion stands, the National Marine Fisheries Service would list a 
species that is abundant and in good health based on the claim that climate 
change will impact habitat over the next 100 years and may cause harm,”said 
<http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-species-climate-projections-20161024-snap-story.html>
 Brad Meyen, senior assistant attorney general for Alaska.
 