
In Albania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania>, corruption has long 
been part of everyday life. People talk of taking a loved one to hospital and 
having to pay the doctor to get the best treatment, or of going to a property 
registration office and being asked to pay an extra “fee” to speed things up.

This culture of bribery has not only kept society’s most vulnerable from 
accessing vital services but has also damaged Albania’s international image. In 
a 2011study 
<http://www.unodc.org/documents/data-and-analysis/statistics/corruption/Albania_corruption_report_2011_web_small.pdf>
, theUN Office on Drugs and Crime <https://www.unodc.org/> (UNODC) said 
Albanian citizens ranked corruption as the second most important problem after 
unemployment.

Since emerging from the decades-long dictatorship of Enver Hoxha, who turned 
Albania into one of the world’s most isolated states, the Balkan country of 2.8 
million people has struggled to deal with corruption and organised crime.

When he took office in 2013, Prime Minister Edi Rama, the one-time flamboyant 
mayor whooversaw the repainting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/oct/22/worlddispatch.sophiearie> of 
Tirana’s communist-era grey buildings,made it a priority to tackle corruption 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2013/09/15/uk-albania-government-idUKBRE98E0CH20130915>
 and improve Albania’s international standing.

The centre-left coalition government’s reforms have focused on improving 
administrative systems, enforcing the rule of law, and making it easier for 
people to report corruption.

 Last February, the government launched an online anti-corruption portal 
<http://www.stopkorrupsionit.al/> to allow citizens to anonymously record 
instances <http://www.anticorruption-albania.org/reports> of unscrupulous 
practices. The website covers 12 key areas, including police, health and 
customs.

Since then, 6,840 reports have been logged 
<http://www.ceshtjetvendore.gov.al/al/programi-transparences/portali-antikorrupsion>
. Many of these involve complaints about poor service, but 777 cases directly 
relate to accusations of corruption, with 35 reports referred to prosecutors.

Rama insists Albania’s poor international reputation is based on exaggerated 
stereotypes rather than reality, but admits that combating corruption is key to 
changing perceptions. “To improve the image of a country, first you have to 
change the country itself,” he said. “I believe corruption becomes the 
alternative when a government is not able to serve its citizens in a 
transparent and efficient way. So we have to modernise, and modernisation is 
about reforms.”

Another anti-corruption programme involves text messages being sent to 
citizens to ask whether they had to pay a bribe when receiving treatment at 
state-run hospitals.

The scheme, run by the ministry of state for local issues and anti-corruption, 
and supported by theWorld Bank <http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/albania>, 
was launched in March and has reached more than 33,000 people, about 20% of 
whom have provided feedback.

“The doctors are always late and the corruption continues as always. Without 
giving away money, no one takes care of you,” said one person. Another person, 
who had gone to a hospital in the city of Durres, was more positive: “I have 
been in hospital before, but this time you could feel the change. No one asked 
for a bribe.”

The World Bank has previously supported a similar programme in Pakistan.

“Low trust in government leads not only to informal means of obtaining 
services and less willingness to pay taxes, it also leads to lower resources 
for the government to provide public services, thus completing a vicious cycle 
of mistrust and corruption,” Jana Kunicova and Zubair Bhatti, public sector 
experts at the World Bank, wrote in ablog 
<http://blogs.worldbank.org/governance/building-trust-in-government-though-mobile-messaging>
. “By proactively collecting citizen feedback and using it for management 
actions, this vicious cycle can be broken.”

In its 2011 survey 
<http://www.unodc.org/documents/data-and-analysis/statistics/corruption/Albania_corruption_report_2011_web_small.pdf>
, the UNODC said on average 28.3% of Albanians aged between 18 and 64 had been 
exposed, either directly or indirectly, to a bribery experience with a public 
official in the previous year. But it noted that about 30% of bribes paid were 
actually offered by citizens themselves.

Albania, which ranks 110th out of 175 countries in Transparency International’s
 <http://www.transparency.org/country#ALB>2014 corruption perceptions index, 
joins a list of other countries using the internet tocrack down on corruption 
<http://ipaidabribe.com/>, either through “naming and shaming” or by bringing 
bribery and other corrupt practices into the open.

The UN Development Programme <http://www.al.undp.org/> (UNDP) is supporting 
Albania’s anti-corruption drive. The country, which was given aninth millennium 
development goal <http://www.un.org.al/subindex.php?faqe=details&id=13&mnu=14> 
on good governance, is now piloting the governance indicator of the new
sustainable development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/ng-interactive/2015/jan/19/sustainable-development-goals-changing-world-17-steps-interactive>
, which will frame development priorities until 2030.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Falbania-battle-against-corruption-organised-crime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435249903329%2F38aed61d-c868-4c09-b630-2e092cb631c9-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Albania%20makes%20headway%20in%20the%20battle%20against%20corruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Falbania-battle-against-corruption-organised-crime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Albania%20makes%20headway%20in%20the%20battle%20against%20corruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Falbania-battle-against-corruption-organised-crime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F25%2F1435249903329%2F38aed61d-c868-4c09-b630-2e092cb631c9-2060x1236.jpeg>
 People in the Albanian capital Tirana enjoy their morning in Green City Park. 
Photograph: Vedat Xhymshiti/Alamy 
Between June and December 2014, the project focused on identifying indicators 
relevant to Albania. The second phase, which ends in September, will implement 
systems to measure the indicators.

The UNDP says Albania recognises that reforms in good governance are essential 
if the country wants to achieve European Union membership. Many Albanians are 
optimistic thatacceptance last year as an official membership candidate 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/06/24/us-eu-albania-idUSKBN0EZ0WU20140624> 
signals a new start for the former communist country.

“The governance indicators are very important for Albania’s EU integration and 
for strengthening the rule of law,” said the UN’s resident coordinator, Zineb 
Touimi-Benjelloun. “Controlling corruption and improving good governance remain 
a challenge here, but being a pilot country has proved to serve as a catalyst 
for the government to set up appropriate systems and improve service delivery.”

After the first phase of the pilot, about 20 indicators were proposed and 
grouped into three target areas: improvement in governance to meet EU standards 
by 2030; better service delivery, with a focus on water, electricity and land; 
and improved economic performance, using foreign direct investment as a measure.

Rama believes his government is moving in the right direction. “Albania 
suffered for many years from lack of reforms and badly made policies,” he said. 
“We have shown we can make positive changes but, of course, we have not solved 
all the country’s problems yet. Every month, we have something important 
scheduled to happen and, less than two years in, we are definitely where I 
hoped we would be.”
 