
Gianni De Biasi must be the only Italian who has been offered Albanian 
citizenship by the country’s president. Such a gesture speaks volumes for his 
achievement, with Albania gripped by Euro 2016 fever caused by reachingtheir 
first major championship​ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/11/armenia-albania-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
.

De Biasi’s and Albania’s story is a remarkable one. The 59-year-old took 
charge four and a half years ago and the Eagles’ progress has been drastic. 
They finished second bottom of their qualification group for Euro 2012 having 
lost to Luxembourg but defied Denmark and Serbia to end the recent campaign as 
automatic qualifiers for the 2016 tournament behind Portugal.

Euro 2016: the complete guide to every squad and every player in France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
In France, who Albania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> beat 1-0 
in a friendly last June, they will play the hosts as well as Switzerland – on 
Saturday afternoon – and Romania. Yet while the Balkan nation is feverishly 
anticipating a milestone moment in their sporting history, De Biasi remains 
calm.

“There is great euphoria within our fans, because for the first time the 
national team plays in a very important international tournament,” he says. 
“But you always have to lead footballers in periods of euphoria. I believe the 
important thing is to live our experience this summer serenely, not with the 
weight of predictions, therefore we will have less stress and this will help us 
play our best.”

De Biasi is an experienced coach, having worked with numerous clubs in Italy 
and Levante in Spain. Two spells with Torino preceded a short period at Udinese 
– run by thePozzo family who ​have since​ bought Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/04/pozzo-family-fuelled-watford-premier-league-dreams>
 – before a first international job.

His appointment was unexpected, and neither man nor association knew that much 
about the other before a deal was struck in December 2011. Since then Albania 
have progressed beyond all expectations, negotiating a qualifying campaign that 
includeda violent and abandoned fixture in Serbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/14/serbia-albania-euro-2016-flag-halted>
.

De Biasi set about transforming the Albanian footballing culture. The country 
has historically been hampered by numerous players being eligible for Albania 
but opting to play international football elsewhere.

The Swiss players Xherdan Shaqiri and Valon Behrami – who will play against 
Albania in Lens – were born in Kosovo, whichbecame a member of Uefa in May​ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/03/kosovo-accepted-uefa-member-vote-congress>
. There ​are many links between the two sides, with the Albania midfielder 
Taulant Xhaka potentially facing his younger brother, the Switzerland midfielder
Granit who has just joined Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/may/26/granit-xhaka-arsenal-leader-borussia-monchengladbach>
, becoming the first brothers to meet in a European Championship match.

De Biasi reached out to players who had rejected the chance to play for 
Albania and attempted to build a cohesive, united squad. He admits initially 
his Italian mentality contrasted with the Albanian one, but has tried to instil 
a more focused approach. “I had a huge disappointment with my previous job at 
Udinese,” De Biasi says. “After being appointed in December and having tried to 
give the squad a different mentality, we eliminated Milan in the Coppa Italia 
but then lost to Genoa and the club let me go after only two months in the job. 
For me it was an incredible situation and very strange.

“Some months after I was contacted for an interview with executives from the 
Albanian federation. For me the first two years was primarily to find new 
players, always trying to find younger ones with more quality.

“I started to understand the Albanian mentality, which at the beginning was 
ill-married with my mentality. It is different compared to the north Italian 
one, where we do everything with punctuality and precision. I wanted us to 
focus more on our objective.”

Their mental strength was certainly tested in October 2014. On a Tuesday night 
in Belgrade, historic rivals Serbia hosted Albania and, it is fair to say, all 
hell broke loose.A drone was flown across the pitch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2014/oct/15/serbia-albania-flag-fury-match-abandoned-in-pictures>
 that held a banner bearing the Albanian black eagle, insignia saying “Greater 
Albania” and notable political figures. It caused a brawl with Serbia fans 
breaking police cordons.Albania were awarded the three points in July 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/10/albania-serbia-match-abandoned-drone>
 after a ruling by the court of arbitration for sport, which rejected Uefa’s 
decision of a default Serbia win. “An evening where sport lost and violence 
triumphed,” De Biasi says. “I had said, immediately after the draw, it was 
wrong to put Albania and Serbia in the same group, and we have seen how things 
went. It was a truly difficult evening.”

That night is behind them and excitement is building. The game against France 
in Marseille next Wednesday will be “beautiful”, according to De Biasi, but he 
believes each team in Group A will bring something to the table.

He says: “France will be a beautiful game but a very difficult one. We have 
big motivation for this match. However, we are obviously aware of France’s 
extraordinary quality. A very strong squad, playing at home and for the public.

“Both Switzerland and Romania will also be difficult games. They are two 
dangerous teams, Romania is, in my opinion, a team that has grown significantly 
in the last two years. You can see their Fifa ranking has improved a lot. 
Switzerland, they won many games in qualifying and have experience at World 
Cups.”

Whether they qualify for the knockout rounds or lose all three matches, this 
tournament represents a seminal moment for Albania. De Biasi is the toast of 
the nation, and hopes for a summer to remember.

“We have undergone an evolution in the last four years, we are better both 
defensively and offensively,” he says. “The people were passionate before I got 
here but even more so now. Everyone is very content because no one thought it 
was possible to achieve this dream.

“We will prepare to our maximum and ignore no details. However, I don’t want 
us to be tourists in France. Fairytales can happen.”
 