
This article is part of the Guardian’s Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> Experts’ Network, a 
cooperation between some of the best media organisations from the countries who 
have qualified for France. theguardian.com is running previews from three 
countries each day in the run-up to the tournament kicking off on 10 June.

When Gianni De Biasi was appointed as manager of the Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> national team in 2011 his 
priority was not only rebuilding a team after the departure of several key 
players, but also to fix a leaking defence. The 2014 World Cup qualifiers 
worked as a test for the Italian, who found out a lot during that campaign. The 
end result was the he ruthlessly dropped skilful players who did not work hard 
enough for the team.

Euro 2016: the complete guide to every squad and every player in France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
Albania changed from a straight 4-4-2 system into a 4-3-3 setup during the 
Euro 2016 qualifying campaign (well, that is how they line up when the game 
kicks off at least). The system quickly shifts into a 4-5-1 when Albania do not 
have possession with the main focus being on disrupting opponents’ play and 
launching quick counter-attacks.

Apart from the trio of defensive midfielders – Burim Kukeli, Amir Abrashi and 
Taulant Xhaka – who all played regularly during the campaign, De Biasi has not 
been afraid to use defenders as wingers. Ermir Lenjani, deployed regularly on 
the left, is primarily a defender.

Although he has shown to be very capable in attack with his runs from one end 
of the pitch all the way to the other and is one of the players to watch in 
this team, his main task during the matches has been providing cover for the 
Albanian defence. The same can be said of Andi Lila, who started his career as 
a right-back, before moving in to midfield.

De Biasi demands that all players sacrifice themselves and help out in 
defence, so it is not uncommon to see even offensive-minded wingers such as 
Odise Roshi and Shkëlzen Gashi falling deep back to cover space, or recover the 
ball. And the players have listened, their commitment to harrying opponents 
relentlessly making this Albania team very difficult to beat.

The team now have a very good back four, comprising Elseid Hysaj, Lorik Cana, 
Mërgim Mavraj and Ansi Agolli, while players such as Arlind Ajeti and Berat 
Djimsiti providing excellent back-up. Sticking to the plan and waiting for the 
right moment to attack worked perfectly during the Euro 2016 qualifying 
campaign. They were unbeaten in four key group games away to Portugal, Serbia, 
Denmark and Armenia. Out of the five goals that were conceded at home, three 
came in added time when the players had switched off and were not following the 
manager’s instructions.

The strong defence contributed heavily towards getting Albania to the Euros 
but it would be unfair to say that they are unable to provide attacking 
football.

The Kuq e Zinjtë apply high pressure in order to win the ball back in 
midfield, and then use a quick passing game centrally or on the wings and have 
technical players who have now adapted to De Biasi’s style of play.

Ledian Memushaj, Migjen Basha and Ergys Kaçe have attacking quality in 
abundance while the lone striker Sokol Çikalleshi has proved that he can 
trouble any defence. De Biasi also likes to vary the team’s set-pieces in order 
to surprise the opponents, another weapon they will use in France.

Probable starting XI
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Falbania-euro-2016-team-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc49fbdf05ab1ee1a8ca805307fffbba2597df283%2F0_0_1695_969%2F1695.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Albania%20Euro%202016%20team%20guide%3A%20tactics%2C%20key%20players%20and%20expert%20predictions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Falbania-euro-2016-team-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Albania%20Euro%202016%20team%20guide%3A%20tactics%2C%20key%20players%20and%20expert%20predictions&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Falbania-euro-2016-team-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc49fbdf05ab1ee1a8ca805307fffbba2597df283%2F0_0_1695_969%2F1695.jpg>
Which Albania player is going to surprise everyone at Euro 2016?

This is the moment for Taulant Xhaka to show how good he really is. The 
do-it-all player has been in his little brother’s shadow all these years, but 
he is such a good player in his own right (Granit even says he is the better 
one). Taulant has been outstanding at Basel in the past couple of seasons and 
would love to come out on top when the two play each other in France

Which player could be a disappointment?
Lorik Cana 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Lorik%20Cana&team=Albania&isSimple=true>
Everyone expects so much of Cana before a tournament played in what he calls 
his second country – and this could prove to be too big a burden for the 
captain. He puts so much pressure on himself and takes on so much 
responsibility, despite not being at the peak of his career. His experience 
means that he is still one of De Biasi’s key men in the squad and the odd 
mistake has been overlooked because of that. But the Euros are uncharted 
territory and an historic event for Albania, so any high-profile mistakes would 
contribute negatively to how he is remembered when he retires.

What is the realistic aim for Albania at Euro 2016 and why?

The team goes to France under no pressure whatsoever and this could work in 
their favour as they try to reach their objective: to get out of the group. If 
the team are able to repeat the performances of the qualifying campaign then 
four points and third place is achievable. The wins against Portugal and France 
(although this was in a friendly) have meant that Albania fear no one and they 
will feel that they can nick a point or three against France and Switzerland. 
The chances of reaching the knockout stage is likely to be decided, however, 
against what can be described as Albania’s direct rival, Romania, in the final 
group game.

• Ermal Kuka writes for Panorama Sport <http://www.panorama.com.al/sport/> in 
Albania.

 Click here for a profile of Albania’s Elseid Hysaj. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/elseid-hysaj-albania-euro-2016-father-promise>
 