
Albania’s opposition Democratic party made a criminal complaint against the 
prime minister, Edi Rama, on Monday, accusing him of illegally funneling 
$80,000 to Barack Obama’s re-election campaign in 2012, in return for a 
photograph of the two men together.

Trump campaign may have broken law by seeking foreign political donations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/29/trump-campaign-donations-foreign-politicians>
The Democrats brought the case to the prosecutor general’s office, saying Rama 
– who was then the opposition leader – paid the money in violation ofUS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/29/trump-campaign-donations-foreign-politicians>
 and Albanian laws to gain access to a campaign event in San Francisco in 
October 2012.

Last week, Bilal Shehu, 48, a US citizen of Albanian origin, pleaded guilty in 
federal court in New Jersey to willfully makingforeign contributions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/29/trump-campaign-donations-foreign-politicians>
 and donations to the Obama campaign.

Rama has denied taking part in “any of President Obama’s electoral meetings” 
or that he paid for tickets to the San Francisco event, although he 
acknowledged meeting Shehu as “a member of the Albanian community in New York”.

“Edi Rama has committed at least three criminal acts … and personally profited 
from that,” said the Democratic lawmaker Eduard Halimi after handing over the 
request.

At the time, Rama proudly used the picture with Obama, months before 
parliamentary elections brought his Socialist party to power.

“Premier Rama has no connection with any kind of illegal funding,” a statement 
from Rama’s office said, “and the only ‘crime’ he committed in 2012 is that he 
had a picture with the US president at a time when the Albanian government and 
its chief had the doors closed and Albania’s international relations suffered.”

It was not clear if prosecutors would decide to investigate.

Donald Trump blames 'dishonest media' in furor over 'antisemitic' Clinton tweet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/04/donald-trump-antisemitic-hillary-clinton-tweet>
According to documents filed in Shehu’s case in the US, investigated by the 
FBI, he received the money from a foreign source and provided it to a joint 
fundraising committee to disguise its true origin, so a foreign national could 
attend a campaign event.

Rama’s name was not mentioned in the case. The documents said the “foreign 
national” was denied access to the event in San Francisco but was allowed to be 
photographed with the president.

The New Jersey US attorney’s office said in a statement that no one from the 
fundraising committee is accused of wrongdoing, and the committee has fully 
cooperated with the investigation.

Shehu’s sentencing is scheduled for 5 October. The offense carries a maximum 
sentence of five years and a $250,000 fine.
 