
Labor left powerbroker Anthony Albanese has publicly slapped down an 
insurgency in the Victorian left, and has delicately criticisedBill Shorten’s 
decision to parachute in a longtime ally, Kimberley Kitching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/bill-shorten-ally-kimberley-kitching-to-replace-stephen-conroy-in-senate>
, to replace Stephen Conroy in the Senate.


Albanese rubbished recent comments from Labor senator Gavin Marshall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/17/labor-left-try-to-stem-infighting-after-shorten-backs-kimberley-kitching-for-senate>
 – a senator closely aligned with Victorian left powerbroker Kim Carr – that he 
intended to back a preselection challenge to fellow leftwinger, the member for 
Scullin, Andrew Giles.

Marshall, in his attack on colleagues on Monday, also nominated two Labor 
frontbenchers, the shadow health minister, Catherine King, and the shadow 
families minister, Jenny Macklin, as people who might have their preselections 
challenged.

Labor left try to stem infighting after Shorten backs Kimberley Kitching for 
Senate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/17/labor-left-try-to-stem-infighting-after-shorten-backs-kimberley-kitching-for-senate>
“I have seen the comments about not just Andrew Giles, but Catherine King and 
Jenny Macklin – they are all valued colleagues, they are all frontbench 
colleagues, they’re all playing a significant role in the parliament,” Albanese 
told reporters in Canberra on Tuesday.

“And they have, I think, the support of everyone not just here but importantly 
the people in their respective electorates which is why they were all returned 
on 2 July at the federal election.”

Albanese said Marshall’s comments “speak for themselves” and “say more about 
senator Marshall than they do about the colleagues he’s disparaged”.

Asked about the preselection of Kimberley Kitching for Stephen Conroy’s Senate 
vacancy, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/17/labor-left-try-to-stem-infighting-after-shorten-backs-kimberley-kitching-for-senate>
 Albanese said it was a matter for the Victorian branch, and he did not have a 
vote, but he noted that Kitching had the support of “some significant figures” 
in the Victorian branch.

Kitching won the Senate place as a direct consequence of Shorten’s support. 
Shorten ignored advice from all the key parliamentary players on the right, and 
many in the left faction, not to bring Kitching to Canberra – a development 
that has caused consternation in the Victorian ALP.

Albanese said the recent preselection had been conducted in accordance with 
the rules, but in a public dig at Shorten, he noted that he has previously 
called for ALP members to have votes in all Senate preselections.

Factional fanfare rears its head again within Labor and Liberal parties | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/factional-fanfare-on-the-boil-again-within-labor-and-liberal-parties>
The Labor left caucus met in Canberra on Monday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/17/labor-left-try-to-stem-infighting-after-shorten-backs-kimberley-kitching-for-senate>
 in an effort to stop the damaging infighting in the left, which has rolled on 
for months, and has escalated in the wake of the Kitching preselection.

Labor sources have told Guardian Australia that Monday night’s meeting 
resolved that a delegation would speak to Shorten about intervening to head off 
the escalating tensions in the Victorian left.

The tensions in Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> 
are between a group aligned with the veteran factional powerbroker Kim Carr, 
and other leftwingers in the Victorian branch, who are viewed by the Carr 
subfaction as being aligned with Albanese, and as a consequence, are viewed as 
displaying disloyalty both to the faction and to the Labor leader.
 