
One of Alberto Salazar’s main accusers has claimed 17 more witnesses have come 
forward since the Panorama documentary on Mo Farah’s coach.

Kara Goucher, who claimed in the BBC documentary that Salazar gave her thyroid 
medication after the birth of her son to speed up her weight loss and that she 
saw the coach instructing Galen Rupp on how to get special dispensation to use 
an intravenous drip before the race, has hit backafter Salazar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/alberto-salazar-issues-denial-doping-statement>
 andRupp both denied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/26/galen-rupp-alberto-salazar-eugene>
 her allegations.

Ten allegations against Alberto Salazar, his response and where this leaves us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/25/allegations-alberto-salazar-response>
“Regardless of Alberto’s expected attack on me and my family, I will continue 
to tell the truth and cooperate with Usada,” she said in a statement. “Over the 
past several weeks, 17 Oregon Project athletes and staff members have come 
forward to report what they saw during their time at the Oregon Project to the 
media, and since the USA Championships last month I know that the number of 
people who have come forward to Usada has grown.

“I went public with the truth about what I experienced at the Oregon Project 
and under the coaching ofAlberto Salazar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar> last month because I 
believe in upholding the integrity of our sport, and I wanted to confirm what I 
had already told Usada in 2013.

“I firmly stand by all my statements, and it was because of the illegal 
actions that occurred at the Oregon Project under Alberto Salazar that I chose 
to leave the group. The decision was mine, and I never looked back.

“This has certainly been a challenging time for my family and me, and it has 
taken some time to get the courage to stand up to some of the most powerful 
people in USA running. As my fellow competitors know, these issues run much 
deeper than just Alberto Salazar and include people that can make or break your 
career.

“But if multitudes can come forward as they have here, that shows that runners 
hold themselves and the sport to a higher standard and I want to do everything 
I can to make sure it stays there.

“I am confident that this fight is exactly what our sport needs and is long 
overdue. I will never regret speaking the truth and furthering the fight for 
clean sport.”

There have been no allegations against Farah, but the double Olympic gold 
medalist, his coach Salazar and his training partner Rupp have all denied any 
wrongdoing.
 