
Mo Farah’s coach has rubbished speculation of a relationship breakdown between 
himself and the double Olympic champion.Alberto Salazar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar>, along with Farah’s 
training partner Galen Rupp, is under the microscope over doping allegations 
made by the BBC’s Panorama programme. Both men have denied the allegations, 
while Farah has not been accused of doing anything wrong.

Farah, who himself has been placed under scrutiny after it was revealed by the 
Daily Mailhe missed two drugs tests  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/18/mo-farah-reportedly-missed-drugs-tests-2012-olympics#>
in the buildup to London 2012, travelled to his Portland training base to seek 
answers from Salazar last week.

Mo Farah enlists PR experts to tackle missed drug tests controversy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/18/mo-farah-fresh-questions-missed-drug-tests>
On Wednesday he had flown back from the US and was training in France, which 
led to rumours that Farah was trying to distance himself from his coach.

However, speaking to the Oregonian newspaper 
<http://www.oregonlive.com/trackandfield/index.ssf/2015/06/alberto_salazar_says_mo_farah_2.html>
, Salazar insisted Farah was still under his tutelage as he prepares to return 
to the track at the Monaco Diamond League meeting next month.

“Mo is on a different training cycle, as he always is at this time of year,” 
he said. “So I send him to Europe to get accustomed to the time zone. This is 
how we’ve always done it.

“This winter Barry [Fudge, a UK Athletics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/athletics> official who reports Farah’s 
progress to Salazar] administered my workouts to Mo in Ethiopia for six weeks, 
and Mo broke the world two-mile record.”

Farah, meanwhile, has been backed by his British team-mate and fellow distance 
runner Hannah England, who has called the stories surrounding the 32-year-old a 
witch hunt.

England, who won silver at the 2011 world championships in Daegu, said in the 
Independent: “I feel it’s turning into a witch-hunt against Mo. There’s been a 
lot of very serious allegations made in recent days and that’s very newsworthy 
but it’s like people are finding some way to bring down Mo with it.

“I think it’s irresponsible that this has become such a big story without a 
proper explanation. It’s not what people are making it seem like. There’s just 
a lot of speculation going around. People are ruining Mo’s reputation and 
ruining the sport.”

Farah was revealed to have missed tests in 2010 and 2011, the second of which 
came after he failed to hear his doorbell. Under the ’three strikes’ system, a 
third missed appointment would have counted as a doping offence carrying a 
maximum four-year ban.

UK Anti-Doping’s (Ukad) chief executive, Nicole Sapstead, has admitted it is 
“not common” for an athlete to have two missed tests.

Last year there were 266 British athletes on the testing register, each of 
whom would have a minimum of three tests a year, and there were a total of 37 
missed tests.

Between 2010 and 2014 there were 224 missed tests with the highest number in 
2011 – the year before the London Olympics – with 66 missed tests but 99 more 
athletes in the testing pool compared to last year.

Video evidence submitted to Ukad by Farah’s agent, Ricky Simms, aiming to show 
the runner had not heard the doorbell may also have helped avert any possible 
charge for deliberately trying to evade testers.

Missed drug tests happen but three strikes and out feels about right | Owen 
Gibson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/18/missed-drug-tests-mo-farah-wada>
Under the whereabouts system, athletes have to register where they will be for 
a specific hour every day so that testers can be sure of their location. If 
they are not where they say they will be three times in the space of a year 
then it is judged as a doping offence.

Sapstead would not discuss individual cases or reveal how many athletes were 
on two strikes but said: “It is not common for athletes to have two missed 
tests.”

Ukad’s legal director, Graham Arthur, said any evidence of a deliberate 
attempt to avoid testers would lead to an immediate doping charge. Arthur said: 
“If someone has deliberately not opened their door and deliberately hidden from 
the testers then we would take action against them for evasion, which carries 
up to a four-year ban.

“If they have put themselves in a place where they are not able to hear the 
doping control people arrive or ring the doorbell and we are satisfied they are 
just being negligent and not wilful, then it counts as a missed test.”

Mo Farah being left on back straight in race to protect reputation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/18/mo-farah-protect-reputation-alberto-salazar> 