
The German discounter Aldi, once derided as naff, low-quality and irrelevant, 
has more than doubled its market share in the past four years, overtaking
Waitrose <https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose> to become the UK’s 
sixth-largest supermarket chain.

Along with Lidl, it has shaken up the market and forced chains like Tesco and 
Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> to slash prices, 
shed staff and offload stores as they try to rescue profits. Only 5% of its 
products are big brands such as Colgate or Coca-Cola, yet sales are rising by 
more than 15% a year.

Now Aldi’s latest moves to maintain sales growth include own-label organic 
baby food and milk formula, selling wine online, and a new, smaller store in 
Tooting, south London, which, if successful could herald a wave of inner-city 
outlets.

The privately owned chain is still a relative minnow, controlling just 5.8% of 
all grocery sales in the UK, but only Pampers nappies are bigger sellers than 
its Mamia brand, and 8% of our fresh fruit and veg, and over a fifth of all 
premium steaks, are bought inAldi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> 
stores. Sales of Mamia nappies have risen 1,000% in the past four years as the 
company deliberately targeted new parents.

Strolling the aisles of the new Tooting shop, Matthew Barnes, Aldi’s UK and 
Ireland chief executive, says he brought in own-label nappies after research 
identified an overlooked sector: “Young families are a [key] battleground 
because they all buy big baskets of goods, and children grow up with your 
supermarket.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Faldi-cranks-up-pressure-big-four-supermarkets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3b76b3b4b34a7fdd076978f5ab2c53a4d437ee3%2F0_220_4368_2620%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aldi%20cranks%20up%20the%20pressure%20on%20the%20big%20four%20supermarkets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Faldi-cranks-up-pressure-big-four-supermarkets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aldi%20cranks%20up%20the%20pressure%20on%20the%20big%20four%20supermarkets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Faldi-cranks-up-pressure-big-four-supermarkets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3b76b3b4b34a7fdd076978f5ab2c53a4d437ee3%2F0_220_4368_2620%2F4368.jpg>
 Aldi’s second trial small outlet is in Tooting, south London. 
After success with nappies, wipes and baby bath, the retailer took on the 
popular Ella’s Kitchen organic baby food range with an own-label version, and 
doubled sales. Next up is milk formula – where the market leader is Aptamil.

While nappies won loyalty and higher sales from families, wine has been key to 
tempting in new shoppers. “We know many customers who now do full shops with us 
began with wine,” says Barnes. “They see we’ve won an award, come in and try 
it, are blown away by the quality and start to pick up other things.”

Barnes pours cold water on talk of traditional supermarkets starting to find a 
formula for fighting off Aldi and Lidl: “I think talk of a turnaround is other 
people’s agendas. From our point of view, growth is as impressive now as it was 
four years ago.”

The bulk of Aldi’s growth is also being driven by new stores: it plans to open 
83 this year, and between 60 and 80 a year after that, aiming for a total of 
1,000 UK shops by 2020.Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> and 
Morrisons are busy closing stores in the face of competition from the internet, 
small local stores and, of course, Aldi and Lidl.

Barnes, who took sole charge of Aldi in the UK and Ireland a year ago, says 
Aldi’s new sites will be broadly spread, from the north of Scotland to the 
south west, but London is a particular target. Four more outlets are planned 
within the M25 this year – Colindale, Ruislip, Crayford and Eastcote – taking 
the total in the capital to over 20.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Faldi-cranks-up-pressure-big-four-supermarkets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c8589d91af0a5bd4d7374d588bf1ced003a08fc%2F0_0_4368_2620%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aldi%20cranks%20up%20the%20pressure%20on%20the%20big%20four%20supermarkets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Faldi-cranks-up-pressure-big-four-supermarkets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aldi%20cranks%20up%20the%20pressure%20on%20the%20big%20four%20supermarkets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2016%2Fapr%2F02%2Faldi-cranks-up-pressure-big-four-supermarkets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c8589d91af0a5bd4d7374d588bf1ced003a08fc%2F0_0_4368_2620%2F4368.jpg>
 The Tooting store has twice as many staff as a standard Aldi. 
Traditionally Aldi has stuck to the outer limits of the city, where it can 
find the 1,200 sq metre sites that let it keep operations simple and efficient. 
Tooting is Aldi’s smallest store yet – a similar high street shop opened in 
Kilburn, north-west London, two years ago – and part of its latest weapon. At 
only 580 sq metres, it’s less than half the size of a standard store but 
employs nearly twice the staff – to keep shelves full throughout the day and 
checkout queues short.

Aldi’s wine and non-food retail website is already a success in the capital, 
with nearly a third of its wine sales in London.The service launched in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/19/aldi-launches-wine-service> 
and has exceeded expectations, Barnes says. While there are no plans to sell 
groceries online, it could be something customers demand in future.

We will not let any competitor get to a 5% differential. That's a concrete 
commitment
Matthew Barnes, Aldi 
Aldi’s online experiment is bad news for traditional supermarkets, which are 
relying on additional services, like home delivery, in the fight against 
discounters. But the real battle is over price. Aldi promises to be at least 
15% cheaper than equivalent products at traditional supermarkets, and its 
weekly deals on fruit and veg, as well as fresh meat, from premium dry-cured 
steaks to basic mince, have fuelled a nationwide price war.

All the major chains have cut prices, but Barnes says he merely cut Aldi’s 
further, by an average 6% in the past year, to maintain the differential. He 
adds thatAsda will never achieve its stated aim of narrowing its price gap with 
the discounters to just 5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/18/andy-clarke-asda-determined-not-shelve-five-year-plan>
. “Whether Asda gets to 5% is not just their decision; it’s ours as well. We 
will not let any competitor get to 5%. That’s a concrete commitment.”

Maintaining that price position has hit Aldi’s already slim profit margins, 
but Barnes says profits were strong last year, with the cost of price cuts 
offset by increased sales and tight control of central costs. He believes 
deflation in the market will slow by the end of this year as the major chains 
switch to competing on measures such as service or quality.

Aldi’s measure of its price difference is disputed by rivals, who question 
whether the chain’s own-label products are truly comparable to the top-rated 
brands. One analyst has suggested that Aldi simply dropped international brands 
where it struggled to reach a sufficiently low price point. Morrisons 
complained to the advertising watchdog about an Aldi ad that compared a basket 
of branded goods with one full of its own-label items. One analyst called the ad
“disingenuous and misleading” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/aldi-morrisons-ad-campaign-labelled-misleading-disingenuous>
.

Back in Tooting, serving hot cross buns spread with Aldi’s Norpak butter, 
Barnes says: “The response seems to be that brands deserve protection and we 
can’t compare our products against them. Why not? Customers do.”
 