
Aldi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> will continue to cut prices 
to ensure it is cheaper than the traditional supermarkets, even if that means 
crashing into the red, its UK boss has pledged.

The discount supermarket chain has revealed its second consecutive year of 
falling profits after being forced to cut prices in the face of aprice war 
partly driven by the success of Aldi and its German discount rival Lidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/06/supermarket-shares-fall-asda-price-cut-warning>
.

Operating profit dropped 1.8% to £255.6m in the 2015 calendar year as the 
German retailer said it had cut prices on about 30% of products last year. 
Sales rose 12% to £7.7bn Aldi as opened 65 more stores.

Matthew Barnes, Aldi’s chief executive for the UK and Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, said he had already cut prices on 
30% of products this year and was determined to keep them below the likes of 
Asda, Sainsbury’s, Tesco and Morrisons, even “if losses are an inevitable 
consequence”.

He said: “Regardless of what competitors may say or do, our price advantage 
will be maintained and our customers will always pay the lowest grocery prices 
in the UK.”

Aldi does not release like-for-like sales figures, which measure the pace of 
growth at established stores, but Barnes said that stores that had been open 
more than a year continued to record growth. He admitted growth had slowed, but 
said this was down to the group opening third, fourth or seventh stores in 
areas where its older outlets were very busy.

He said there had so far been no impact, in terms of rising costs or slowing 
sales, from the Brexit vote.

Dave McCarthy, an analyst at HSBC, said: “The discounters are not having it 
all their own way. On the figures released today, it seems that Aldi is feeling 
some pressure from increased price competition by the big four [supermarkets].”

Barnes said the price war was “a real challenge for us and everybody”, and 
profit margins might fall further but he couldn’t foresee a scenario in which 
Aldi would move into losses in Britain. He said Aldi’s simple and efficient 
operations meant it had lower costs and so could cope with lowering prices more 
effectively than its bigger rivals.

The group, which has 659 stores in the UK, plans to open a total of 70 stores 
this year. It will open a new distribution centre in Cardiff and 70 more stores 
next year, as well as refurbishing 100 stores.

Aldi plans to spend £300m over the next four years to make its no-frills 
stores easier and more pleasant to shop, expanding fridge space for fresh 
fruit, vegetables and meat and improving the look of its baby and alcoholic 
drinks sections – all areas which have seen double-digit growth.

Fruit and vegetable sales rose 18%, and fresh meat rose 20% last year as Aldi 
expanded its ranges.

UK supermarket sales rose 0.3% in the 12 weeks to 11 September as warm weather 
and Britain’s success at the Olympics and Paralympics increased spending on 
alcohol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/20/supermarket-sales-boosted-by-warm-weather-team-gb>
. Aldi, which sponsors Team GB, and Lidl continued to perform better than their 
UK rivals as sales rose 11.6% and 9.5%, respectively.

The retailers are outpacing the market, despite selling a limited amount of 
products online, one of the fastest-growing grocery markets. Barnes said Aldi’s 
experiment with selling wine and non-food items was going well and the company 
was looking at extending into new areas. But he said: “That doesn’t include 
groceries at the moment.”
 