
A series of Aldi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> ads claiming 
shoppers could make big savings compared to the “big four” supermarkets have 
been banned for misleading consumers.

Aldi ran two TV ads which claimed that a £70 shop at the budget supermarket 
would cost £98 at the UK’s four biggest chains - Tesco, Asda, Sainsbury’s and
Morrisons <https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> - and compared a 
£33.04 Alsi basket with the so-called equivalent at its competitors which it 
claimed would cost £53.35.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Faldi-ads-claiming-big-savings-banned-for-misleading-customers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F976be3e2cca7d9033ced47f6b91a8521818f4d9e%2F0_0_1231_1993%2F1231.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aldi%20ads%20claiming%20big%20savings%20banned%20for%20misleading%20customers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Faldi-ads-claiming-big-savings-banned-for-misleading-customers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aldi%20ads%20claiming%20big%20savings%20banned%20for%20misleading%20customers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Faldi-ads-claiming-big-savings-banned-for-misleading-customers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F976be3e2cca7d9033ced47f6b91a8521818f4d9e%2F0_0_1231_1993%2F1231.jpg>
 Aldi’s banned advert. Photograph: Aldi 
A press ad read: “When it comes to the crunch, Aldi win every time. Other 
supermarkets go up, down, all over the place. But Aldi have ‘everyday low 
prices’, so you know where you stand.”


Rival Morrisons and two members of the public lodged complaints with the 
Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising> Standards Authority 
that Aldi compared products in the ad that made the price comparison misleading 
and unfair.


Aldi ad campaign labelled 'misleading and disingenuous'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/12/aldi-morrisons-ad-campaign-labelled-misleading-disingenuous>
In its ads, Aldi included comparisons between its own-brand products against 
only branded products sold by rivals, who all also sell their own budget 
own-label lines of products.


The German discount supermarket said it has included a disclaimer on-screen 
pointing out that rivals may also sell own-brand products at different prices.


The ASA said that consumers would expect the products that Aldi selected to be 
a “fair and representative” selection.


“We acknowledged that Aldi stated they had not intended the comparisons to 
represent a ‘typical’ weekly shop but to be a comparison between the pictured 
products only,” said the ASA. “Nonetheless we considered that was how consumers 
would interpret the ads rather than as a representation of the savings which 
could be made by switching from a largely branded shop to shopping in Aldi, and 
therefore assessed them on that basis.”


The ASA banned the ad campaign as misleading.


Matthew Barnes, chief executive of Aldi UK and Ireland, said that the company 
was “extremely disappointed” with the ASA’s “ambiguous and inconsistent” 
decision.


“The use of comparative advertising is a well-established principle and is 
firmly in the interests of consumers and encourages competition between 
retailers,” he said. “We will work within this new guidance from the ASA and 
continue to promote the significant price gap between Aldi’s quality, award 
winning products and their higher priced brand equivalents.”
 