
Discount chains Aldi and Lidl <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> have 
begun putting up the price of basic groceries, including milk and bananas, as 
the squeeze from the Brexit-driven fall in the value of the pound hits.

The two supermarket companies have raised the price of a four-pint bottle of 
milk to 99p, from 95p – a 4% lift, which puts them on a par with Asda and just 
1p behind Sainsbury’s, Morrisons and Tesco.

A pack of bananas is up to 72p from 68p – an increase of about 6% – putting 
them on a par with the major supermarkets, which sell 1kg of loose bananas for 
about 68p.

The price move on two of the most frequently purchased items marks a step 
change in the battle between the fast-growing German chains and the UK’s 
traditional big four supermarkets. It comes as the Aldi and Lidl’s pace of 
growthhas hit a five-year low in the face of price cuts and service 
improvements at their bigger rivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/tesco-aldi-lidl-growth-five-year-low>
.

Tesco makes gains as Aldi and Lidl growth hits five-year low
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/tesco-aldi-lidl-growth-five-year-low>
Aldi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> said it was still selling 
loose bananas for 68p per kg but had changed the way it priced packs of bananas 
from 68p for a 1kg bag to five bananas for 72p. It said this still made it the 
cheapest in the market, or 8p less than a five-banana pack at Tesco, which had 
the lowest prices of the big four.

However, industry insiders said the move meant Aldi was masking an even bigger 
price rise, as five bananas were likely to weigh less than 700g. Lidl has 
simply moved its 1kg bag up in price.

“This shows they are hurting. They have had to move up on price on the single 
most popular product line in any supermarket,” one industry source said.

Most traditional supermarket chains price their loose bananas, which shoppers 
compare closely with their competitors, slightly more cheaply than bagged 
bananas.

Before changing its packs, Aldi would have been cheaper than other 
supermarkets’ loose bananas. Now they are on a par with the more expensive bags.

“Gone are the days when Aldi and Lidl can respond to every price cut by the 
supermarkets with an equally big price cut,” said Bruno Monteyne, an analyst at 
Bernstein Research, who suggested the supermarket price war was going into 
reverse.

“Discounters raising their prices upwards to the same or higher price levels 
than the supermarkets on the most important food products is surely a huge leap 
forward.”

He said that Tesco had moved to match discounters on about 200 products and it 
was now too expensive for them to respond as these key items, including fresh 
produce, made up more than 20% of the German chains’ sales.

Matthew Barnes, chief executive officer of Aldi UK and Ireland, said: “We 
absolutely guarantee that our customers will always pay the lowest grocery 
prices in the UK when they shop at Aldi.

“This has been verified time and time again by the industry’s most 
authoritative independent price survey, the Grocer 33, which in our most recent 
appearance showed Aldi to be 17.9% cheaper than our nearest competitor.”

A spokeswoman for Lidl said it had upped its prices to reflect similar moves 
by the rest of the market.

Bananas are priced in dollars and so the 17% fall in the value of the pound 
against the US currency since the 23 June Brexit vote means they have become 
much more expensive to source.

Milk and other dairy prices are also being forced up, partly due to a fall in 
supply after the previously low price forced dairy farmers to reduce their 
herds or move on to other things.

The fall in the value of the pound against the dollar has exacerbated the 
situation, as competition from imported dairy products has diminished while 
processors can get more for exporting British cheese, yoghurt and dried milk.

 