
Accepting his second award for best director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/29/alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-wins-best-director-oscar-for-the-revenant>
 for his work on The Revenant, Alejandro G Iñárritu briefly touched upon the 
need for diversity before being drowned out by music in order to keep the 
ceremony running on time.

As one of the handful of Mexican film-makers to find great success in 
Hollywood, Iñárritu said he was “very lucky to be here tonight”, while 
acknowledging that “unfortunately, many others haven’t had the same luck”. In 
closing, he urged society to “liberate ourselves from all prejudice” – and to 
make sure the “colour of our skin becomes as irrelevant as the length of our 
hair”.

In a year of #OscarsSoWhite, a Mexican film-maker quietly dominates the 
Academy Awards
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/26/latino-film-maker-alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-ethnic-diversity-hollywood>
Shortly following his win, Iñárritu – who also took the prize for directing 
Birdman last year – was asked to elaborate on his comments backstage.

“I think the debate is not only about black and white people,” he said, 
referring to the #OscarsSoWhite controversy that has galvanised the industry in 
recent weeks, after no black actors were nominated for a second year in a row.

“I think diversity really includes … we are yellow and Native Americans and 
Latin Americans.

“The complexity of the society of the world is much more than one or the 
other,” he said. He called the debate surrounding diversity in Hollywood “very 
polarised” and “very politicised”, criticising the #OscarsSoWhite movement for 
not “observing the complexity and beauty” of “a multi‑mixed country.”

Iñárritu attacked “tribal thinking”, saying: “I think one of the problems that 
we are suffering is there are no moderate platforms to talk about something 
deeply, very important, that in a way is deciding the destinies of people 
around the world – not only here – by the colour of their skin. So that we are 
still dragging those prejudices and tribal thinking at this time? It seems to 
me absolutely absurd.”

During the Berlin film festival earlier in February, actor Michael Peña, who 
is of Mexican descent, alsosuggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/12/michael-pena-media-overplays-police-brutality-usa-war-on-everyone>
 that key Latin talent had been forgotten in the #OscarsSoWhite furore, calling 
it a “champagne problem” for wealthy Hollywood stars.


“The Revenant – Alejandro González Iñárritu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/07/alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-the-revenant-wins-directors-guild-of-america-award-oscars-race-2016>
, his writers – they’re all Mexican. So where are they in the diversity 
conversation?” he asked during a press conference.


The Latino presence at Sunday’s ceremony was notable: on top of Iñárritu’s 
victory, Mexican cinematographerEmmanuel Lubezki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/15/the-revenant-american-society-of-cinematographers-awards-emmanuel-lubezki>
 won his third Oscar in row for his work on The Revenant, after wins for 
Gravity and Birdman.
 