
Alex McLeish <https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish> believes he 
has "the bottle" to weather the storm at Aston Villa and has reiterated his 
determination to see the job through. The Villa manager was subjected to chants 
of "you don't know what you're doing" from the club's supporters at Newcastle 
last weekend and some fans have talked about staging a protest ahead of 
Sunday's home game against Manchester City.

To compound matters, McLeish has had problems with two of his senior players. 
Stephen Ireland swore at him after he rebuked him for failing to cut out the 
cross that led to Newcastle taking the lead in their 2-1 victory over Villa 
while Charles N'Zogbia, who was replaced by Emile Heskey in the substitution 
that prompted anger from the travelling fans, tweeted after the game: "First 
time in my life I'm not happy playing football."

Although N'Zogbia later deleted his tweet and McLeish claims not to have heard 
Ireland's response to his criticism, they are the sort of incidents that the 
manager could do without at a time when unrest is festering and Villa have 
failed to win at home for three months.

"I didn't think it would be a cakewalk," McLeish said. "When you look at the 
points, we are two or three off Stoke and Everton, so we're all much of a 
muchness. If everybody thinks we're a rotten team, then I'm sure they must be 
saying the same things about Everton and Stoke.

"I expected a rollercoaster and I knew I'd have to have thicker skin than 
usual but I believe I've got the bottle to handle the downsides because I've 
experienced it in my managerial career. It would be great for everybody to walk 
in and get countless millions to spend but I knew the parameters and I'm with 
Randy [Lerner, the club's owner] all the way on his vision for Villa."

It remains to be seen whether the protest will take place. "It's out of my 
control. It's a modern day fashion," McLeish said. "There was talk of a protest 
against Ars√®ne Wenger a couple of weeks ago, so I'm in pretty good company. 
It's not something that I'm going to say I enjoy because we all like to be 
popular. But the one thing I can control is the team and what effort they put 
in to get the best out of them. And I know that I'm pretty good at that."

Ireland, who has been something of an enigma at the club, is a case in point. 
"I told him: 'You've got to endear yourself to the Villa fans by showing that 
you can go and make tackles. I'm not telling you to go and be a destroyer, I'm 
not asking you to be a Roy Keane and be the complete midfielder. But go and 
press and close down and do it with a bit of urgency.' And I didn't feel Stevie 
did that at Newcastle and I told him that. If players fall below the standards 
we expect, I'll tell them."
 