
Alexa Chung <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung> can make 
anything fashionable: smock dresses, dungarees, tasselled loafers, even 
satchels but, the big question is, has the TV presenter turned style maven got 
enough stardust to make even Marks & Spencer sparkle? Last week, Chung seduced 
the fashion press with herfirst collection for the high street giant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/13/the-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa>
. The range features a handful of classic looks, including a 1950s-style 
trench-coat and a Princess Di-esque ruffle blouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/08/what-wore-this-week-pie-crust-blouse-jess-cartner-morley-fashion>
, rebooted from the M&S archive with her input.

A contributing editor to British Vogue and ambassador for the British Fashion 
Council, Chung’s fashion credentials are impeccable. If she thinks a 
double-breasted navy blazer with gold buttons is trendy – an unflattering look 
last seen on Sarah Ferguson in the mid-1980s – who are we to doubt her? Where 
her tomboyish style leads, a fashion tribe of 2.2m Instagrammers follows.

The 32-year-old’s star has risen sharply over the past decade after being 
offered her first TV job, onChannel 4’s teen music show Popworld 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Popworld>, in her early 20s. The paparazzi trail 
her when she steps out of homes in London and New York, enabling that day’s 
outfit to be dissected by fans eager for her latest style cues.

Chung has become a style icon for cool teenagers and twentysomethings who 
would like her clothes and social life. Last year, her first assignment as a 
photographer, for hipster magazinePaper, documented a glamorous circle that 
includesPixie Geldof, Cara Delevingne, Daisy Lowe and Dakota Johnson 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-2756460/Pixie-Geldof-supported-Daisy-Lowe-Alexa-Chung-returns-spotlight-London-Fashion-Week.html>
. Ex-boyfriends include Arctic Monkeys frontman Alex Turner but more recently 
she has been datingTrue Blood actor Alexander Skarsgård.

Her contributions to Vogue include a series of short films aimed at young 
people who want to work in fashion. In one, she explains how she got “bored” 
with modelling.

“I was always weird about being photographed in my pants,” she jokes, before 
adding: “I think I found modelling hard because I always found it difficult to 
keep my mouth shut.”

Her gobbiness, albeit delivered in plummy tones, helped her find her true 
calling, with her irreverent sense of humour translating on to youth TV.

“In the first meeting for Popworld, they asked me my opinion on music and I 
could have cried with happiness because it was the first time since school I’d 
been asked what I thought of something,” she says.

In one deadpan interview with rock band Panic! at the Disco, 
<http://www.panicatthedisco.com/> she famously corrected their grammar. That 
sense of humour didn’t play too well on the other side of the Atlantic and her 
MTV show,It’s On With Alexa Chung, lasted for just two series.

Raised in the Hampshire village of Privett, to a Chinese father and English 
mother, she had a middle-class upbringing, complete with ballet lessons and a 
pony named Pippi. One of four children, her career choices were not born out of 
necessity. A good student, she left school with three A-levels (two As and a B) 
and places to study either art foundation or English at university, but 
modelling beckoned and she enjoyed a successful run as a teen model. Like Jane 
Birkin and Grace Kelly, she is one of the few women who can boast of having a 
designer handbag named after her.In 2009, Mulberry named the Alexa satchel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/nov/21/alexa-handbag-fashion-mulberry>
 in her honour; by the following year, it was a sales sensation and remains a 
core member of the handbag maker’s collection.

Along the way, Chung has appeared in campaigns for Maje, DKNY, Pepe Jeans, 
Tommy Hilfiger and Longchamp and in 2013 released her debut book,It, which 
offered style tips and advice to her teenage fans.

More recently, she launched Villoid, a phone app billed as an “Instagram for 
fashion”, which lets users create mood boards and buy clothes.

Chung steers clear of grandstanding on the issues du jour and has ducked 
criticism of the slender frame that enables her to wear styles unforgiving to a 
large section of the female population.

After a decade of false starts, seasoned M&S watchers struggled to shake off a 
sense of déjà vu

Whether Chung is what M&S needs is another matter. M&S’s clothing business is 
struggling to find its place in a marketplace where its core middle-aged female 
shopper has moved on, thanks to the expansion of fashion-forward chains such as 
Zara and H&M.

The high street grande dame has managed to grow its clothing business in only 
one three-month period during the past five years and appears to have lost its 
sense of identity.

That loss of direction was clear in the expensively shot Leading Ladies 
campaign, which, despite bringing together a formidable cast of inspiring women 
that includedEmma Thompson, Annie Lennox, Lady Doreen Lawrence and Alek Wek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/mar/24/marks-spencers-2014-leading-ladies-campaign-whos-who>
, fell down on clothes that even celebrated photographer Annie Leibovitz could 
not make look good.

But there is a new man in charge at M&S. Steve Rowe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/07/steve-rowe-new-m-and-s-marks-and-spencer-boss-profile>
, an M&S lifer, replaced Marc Bolland at the start of this month and in his 
first outing in the City banged the table and branded the performance of its 
clothing business as “unsatisfactory”.

“Our priority is fixing clothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/02/challenges-facing-marks-spencers-new-chief-steve-rowe>
,” he said. “We’ve not been as stylish as we need to be, not had the 
availability and need to make sure we have the right product at the right 
price.”

After a decade of false starts, seasoned M&S watchers struggled to shake off a 
sense of deja vu. “Alexa Chung is an interesting choice and definitely a ‘face’ 
that moves M&S in the right direction,” says Neil Saunders, a retail analyst at
Conlumino <http://conlumino.com/>.

“However, it is something of a partial solution that won’t have much long-term 
impact unless M&S makes wider and deeper changes. M&S needs to entice shoppers 
on the strength of its own brand, not simply off the back of celebrity 
associations.”

Retailers are big fans of celebrity tie-ups. Topshop’s collaboration with Kate 
Moss was a massive hit until it wasn’t, while H&M’s regular collaborations with 
designers, a list that includes Stella McCartney and Karl Lagerfeld, have often 
initiated a shopper stampede.

Chung is not the first famous name to take the M&S shilling. Over the years, 
it has worked with an array of celebrities from David Beckham and Twiggy toSex 
and the City stylist Patricia Field and fashion designers Zandra Rhodes and 
Betty Jackson.

The collaboration with Chung came about after she helped turn its 1970s-style 
suede skirt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/apr/01/this-seasons-cult-item-the-autograph-suede-skirt>
 into a fashion sensation last spring, after she was photographed wearing it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Falexa-chung-marks-spencer-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1bc59c587c20f02f986e5830a2211c2349d9b43%2F0_0_3671_2447%2F3671.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexa%20Chung%3A%20can%20she%20make%20M%26S%20sparkle%20once%20again%3F%20%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Falexa-chung-marks-spencer-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexa%20Chung%3A%20can%20she%20make%20M%26S%20sparkle%20once%20again%3F%20%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F17%2Falexa-chung-marks-spencer-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1bc59c587c20f02f986e5830a2211c2349d9b43%2F0_0_3671_2447%2F3671.jpg>
 Alexa Chung at Marks & Spencer’s archive in Leeds. Photograph: Marks and 
Spencers 
M&S said 34,000 shoppers had pre-registered their interest in Chung’s 
collection before it went on sale and a number of the 31 lines are already 
selling out intermittently online.

Enlisting Chung will help M&S appeal to millennials who have grown up online; 
without her endorsement of the brand, few daughters would be willing to be seen 
shopping there with their mothers.

Presumably for the benefit of this youth audience, the official launch of the 
Alexa collection was captured in shaky cam style. As she talks through the 
collection, she zooms in on the trenchcoat, advising viewers that it is made of 
gaberdine, adding: “If you don’t know what that is, you should Google it.”

On M&S’s Facebook page, the older guard was even more confused. “Read an 
interview with thisAlexa Chung <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/alexa-chung>
 person (whoever she is) reminiscing happily about the pleated school skirts 
she used to wear,” writes Susan. “Gawd help us if M&S introduce those into what 
is a dreadful range of clothes.”

Pauline, another commenter, adds: “Am I missing something; if these clothes 
look awful on the stick-thin models, what hope is there for the rest of us? I 
am a 14 and over-60.”

Saunders says M&S is still a brand for which most Britons feel affection. 
“Those things don’t mean much if people don’t see it as being relevant to them, 
which in clothing many don’t,” he says. “That said, M&S still pulls in 
shoppers, helped no doubt by food. This gives M&S a fighting chance.”

Chung has already started assembling her winter collection, a process that 
will involve lots more rummaging around M&S’s archive in Leeds, a fashion hoard 
she likened to a “big fridge”. “I just found the future of M&S in the past,” 
she says of her collection.

Let’s hope so, for M&S’s sake.

THE CHUNG FILE

Born 5 November 1983.

Best of times Chung makes the leap from modelling to TV, landing her dream job 
as co‑presenter on Channel 4’s cult teen music show,Popworld.

Worst of times Heartbreak after her four-year relationship with Alex Turner, 
lead singer of Arctic Monkeys, ends in 2011.

What she says “Yes, I am lucky. I know I am. Every time I call my mum, she’s 
always like, ‘Remember how lucky you are, Alexa!’ But the thing is, I live in 
the East Village and my apartment is nothing crazy. The night-time invitations 
are fancy-pants, but I’m like Cinderella and at the end of the night I have 
lost a shoe and I am going home in a pumpkin.”

What others say “She is super-bright, famously self-deprecating and always has 
an intelligent take on the world. When I was atGrazia, she was the most 
searched personality on our website. I think it is because she has such a 
unique, quirky, very British sense of style; it helps that she also looks 
utterly amazing in anything she puts on.” Jane Bruton, former editor in chief of
Grazia.
 