
If anyone knows how to win in the fashion industry, it’s Ms Alexa Chung. Her 
new short film on how to break into the industry 
<http://www.vogue.co.uk/news/2015/09/15/alexa-chung-future-fashion-episode-one-sarah-mower-christopher-kane>
 onvogue.co.uk <http://vogue.co.uk> is required viewing for anyone aiming to be 
on that front row in future seasons. Here the queen of London fashion week 
spills about the Topshop trousers she loves right now, partying with the 
Delevingnes and, um, ducks v dogs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK36uZgYEBOU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK36uZgYEBOU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DK36uZgYEBOU&media=>

JCM: In your Vogue video series, you talk to everyone in the industry from 
designers to psychologists. If you could do anyone’s job in the fashion 
industry for one day, which one would you pick and why?

AC: I’ve always wanted to be a photographer. Or I’d like to be [Balmain 
designer] Olivier Rousteing – he looks as though he’s just been handed the keys 
to the city.

JCM: And if you could be a fly on the wall in one designer’s studio, which 
would you pick?

AC: Nicholas Ghesquiere – I’m such a huge fan. And I have become recently 
obsessed with Vetements. I have no idea who designs that or where they’re 
based, so that would be fun to discover.


JCM: Fashion is seen as a tricky industry for outsiders to get into. Is this 
true, and what strategies are helpful for breaking through?

AC: That’s something we talk a lot about in this series. It’s true that it 
takes a lot of determination and hard work to break into the industry, but I 
think if you’re passionate about what you do and are talented and willing to 
carry out the more mundane tasks while learning your trade it is achievable.


JCM: Is it better to be on-trend or to have a signature style?

Breakfast of champions: Alexa Chung’s scrambled eggs with avocado
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/aug/22/alexa-chung-scrambled-eggs-avocado-breakfast-recipe>
AC: Yikes, I don’t know that there’s a right way to dress. People get bored 
and crave the opposite – that’s what fashion is about, I suppose; the desire to 
create something new and move forward so if you just stick to how you feel the 
chances are you’ll probably collide with a few trends along the way.

JCM: In the Vogue video, I noticed an awesome multi-coloured pastel manicure. 
Are rainbow nails a thing now?

AC: Really? I can’t remember it ... oh! I know – no, that was because I went 
to get a pedicure but I have a horribly low attention span so as I was waiting 
for that, I painted my hands every colour they had. I got tired of looking at 
it really quickly but was too lazy to locate nail varnish remover for a while.

JCM: Have you got any top tips for interviewing Olivier Rousteing without 
licking his face?

AC: Hahahaha. It’s funny with him because his Instagram persona 
<https://instagram.com/olivier_rousteing/?hl=en> is so different to how I find 
him to be. He’s chronically intelligent and kind and really funny. Doesn’t take 
himself too seriously at all.

JCM: What’s the best career advice anyone’s ever given you?

AC: Phillip Lim <https://www.31philliplim.com/> just said this to me this 
morning in relation to people, but I suppose it works for business too: “A duck 
quacks, a dog barks. Never expect a duck to bark.” No idea what he’s going on 
about, but it sounds good!

JCM: And the best non-career advice?

AC: Someone once said: never get into something if you’re already thinking 
about how to get out. My advice to people is to trust their intuition. And be 
kind, just be kind.

JCM: Who are your top three favourite Instagram accounts to follow and why?

AC: I really like @manrepeller, <https://instagram.com/manrepeller/?hl=en> 
she’s cool and funny.@zanzanman <https://instagram.com/zanzanman/?hl=en> is 
great to oggle and@laurabaileylondon 
<https://instagram.com/laurabaileylondon/?hl=en> is nice for some dream-life 
escapism.

JCM: If you had to have a job outside the fashion industry, what would it be?

AC: Television presenter.


JCM: Describe your front row look for this season as if she was a character in 
a story.

AC: A woman leading a double life. 


JCM: What’s the one piece I can buy on the high street right now for instant 
AW15 chic?

AC: Red high-waisted cord trousers from Topshop [alas, they’re currently sold 
out].
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Falexa-chung-break-into-fashion-industry-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c06f7b8bc13ca4361b7a787850aec378eaceda5%2F155_144_2801_4004%2F2801.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alexa%20Chung%20on%20how%20to%20break%20into%20the%20fashion%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Falexa-chung-break-into-fashion-industry-london-fashion-week%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alexa%20Chung%20on%20how%20to%20break%20into%20the%20fashion%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Falexa-chung-break-into-fashion-industry-london-fashion-week%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c06f7b8bc13ca4361b7a787850aec378eaceda5%2F155_144_2801_4004%2F2801.jpg>
 Alexa’s Topshop trouser choice. Photograph: Topshop 
JCM: Give me two front-row small-talk ice-breaker lines.

AC: Weather is too easy. Sometimes I like to turn to the person next to me and 
just say: “Are you in love?” People like talking about love or heartbreak. 
Another good one is: “Do you have lots more to do today?” As if sitting front 
row is understood to be the most exhausting, challenging job in the world.


JCM: Can you or any of your friends do good impersonations of any top model’s 
signature walks? Details, please.

AC: Dude, yes. We play catwalks all the time. Never thought I’d make it to my 
thirties and still be playing catwalk. I like to be Naomi.


JCM: Chair-dancing on the front row: yes or no?

AC: I understand that to observe it must be irksome to observe, but the House 
of Holland show makes me so happy and the music is always too good to resist.


JCM: What’s your favourite song lyric of all time?

AC: Impossible to answer, but today I’ll settle for this by Elvis Costello:
 <>

Still you’re hoping that she’s well-spoken 


’cause she’s this year’s girl,

You want her broken with her mouth wide open ,


’cause she’s this year’s girl,

Never knowing it’s a real attraction,

All these promises of satisfaction,

While she’s being bored to distraction being this year’s girl


JCM: Who is your favourite party wingman for a night out at fashion week, and 
why?

AC: Poppy Delevingne. Never a dull moment when she’s around. 

 