
And so, once more, to former Blur bassist Alex James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alex-james>, who seems to be the new Paul 
Ross of the entertainment world. Which is to say, his answerphone message says: 
"I'll do it."

The gig Alex would not be willing to accept appears yet to have been found, 
with his latest incarnation being the job ofSun food columnist 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/features/4068586/Why-fast-food-is-on-a-roll-in-the-UK.html>
. This Wednesday found the self-styled foodie's byline above a lengthy article 
entitled "Why fast food is on a roll", presumably designed to appeal to the 
Sun's advertisers.

Charged with touring factories for Greggs and McDonald's and so on, Alex's 
prose style is that of a seven-year-old asked to relate the events of their 
weekend, crossed withBrilliant Kid from The Fast Show 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xgMgkl-gRxk>. Thus we learned that "Getting the 
chance to get the bonnet up and see how the Greggs machine ticks was 
brilliant". "If you want to compete on the British high street in 2012 you have 
to be brilliant," Alex noted, before going on to reveal that: "My day with 
McDonald's was absolutely brilliant."

But what of his visit to the kitchens of some of the chains' branches? 
Poignantly, Alex seems unwilling to let go of his pretensions to cool, 
describing himself as "backstage at a KFC in Reading" (I do hope he was wearing 
an "Access All Fryers" laminate). As for a similar jaunt to a McDonald's ... 
well, he'd like you to know that "backstage was brilliant".

Incidentally, the last time we touched on Alex 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2011/nov/03/alex-james-cheese-festival>
, in connection with the festival he held on his Cotswolds estate last summer, 
the item drew an irate response from someone who admitted to being his agent. 
She was apparently unable to comprehend that if you allow a festival to be 
called "Alex James Presents" – presumably in the hope of critical praise and a 
healthy payday – you must take the rough with the smooth, and accept some 
criticism when it all goes tits up and contributors are left out of pocket. You 
can only say, "Oh, it's not me, it's all down to the promoter," if that's what 
you'd have said had it been a roaring success.

Still, it is encouraging to see that her client has got back on the horse, and 
suggestions are encouraged as to whose shilling he'll take next.
 