
Scotland’s former first minister Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond> will join the esteemed 
company of the London mayor, Boris Johnson, and the Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, 
to host a weekly phone-in show on LBC.

Listeners will be able to phone, text, tweet or email the MP for Gordon and 
former Scottish National party leader, with the station pledging that no topic 
will be off limits.

Greeting the announcement, Salmond said that his phone-in, which will take 
place on Wednesday afternoons, from 4pm to 4.30pm during Iain Dale’s Drivetime 
show, would be “honest, straight-talking with a bit of fun thrown in”.

In a confession that will surprise some who observed his tenure as head of the 
Scottish government, Salmond went on: “When I was first minister ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, there were times when I had to bite 
my tongue. However, now unburdened from office, I can shoot straight from the 
hip.”

He added: “I am looking forward to discussing all of the issues and taking 
calls from every corner of these islands.”LBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/lbc> went national in 2014, and now has 1.5 
million listeners across the UK.

LBC first offered its listeners direct access to serving politicians in 2013, 
when it introduced Call Clegg, with the then deputy prime minister. It 
currently airs a monthly Ask Boris slot with the mayor of London, and the 
fortnightly Phone Farage with the Ukip leader. The station said the regular 
Salmond phone-in seemed a natural progression after a succession of one-off 
phone-ins with him generated hugely positive audience feedback.

James Rea, LBC’s managing editor, said: “Alex Salmond is one of the most 
outspoken and straight-talking politicians with in-depth knowledge of 
Westminster andScottish politics <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scotland>
 and we look forward to him joining our powerful line-up this year.”

LBC does not discuss salaries paid to hosts.
 