
Nottingham Forest's season has descended into farce after Alex McLeish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish> left his post as manager at 
the City Ground only 40 days after replacing Sean O'Driscoll. McLeish's 
departure, which comes as no surprise after he was left deeply frustrated with 
the lack of activity in last month's transfer window, means that the al-Hasawi 
family, Forest's Kuwaiti owners, are now looking for their fourth manager since 
they took control of the club in July.

Rumours surfaced last Thursday night that McLeish had walked out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/01/nottingham-forest-alex-mcleish>
 after being bitterly upset with the club's refusal to sanction a deal for 
George Boyd, whose move from Peterborough collapsed because of an alleged eye 
defect. It was one of a number of signings that McLeish had hoped to make on a 
deadline day, only for none of the deals to come off.Forest's chairman, Fawaz 
al-Hasawi, insisted there was no truth in the rumours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/feb/01/nottingham-forest-alex-mcleish-resignation>
, and that he and McLeish "have a very good working relationship and it 
troubles me greatly that people think otherwise".

Although McLeish stayed on to take charge of Saturday's away game at 
Birmingham City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2013/feb/03/nottingham-forest-alex-mcleish-birmingham-city>
, where he was returning for the first time since his highly controversial 
switch to Aston Villa in the summer of 2011, he did nothing to dampen the 
speculation about his position when he refused to answer questions about his 
future after the 2-1 defeat at St Andrew's. There was a sense of inevitability 
that he would soon be moving on.

That news arrived on Tuesday morning, when McLeish issued a statement, via the 
League Managers' Association, confirming that he had left Forest by mutual 
consent after seven games in charge that delivered one win, two draws and four 
defeats. "I am extremely saddened to be leaving after such a short period but 
even so it has been a privilege to be manager of such a fantastic football club 
and I want to thank the players, staff and fans for their support and wish
Nottingham Forest <https://www.theguardian.com/football/nottinghamforest> the 
best of fortunes ahead.

"Both parties entered into the relationship in good faith. However, there was 
a difference in the understanding of the development strategy of the football 
club and it was felt by both parties that we should part company."

Nigel Adkins has been installed as the early favourite for the position, 
although it would be a brave man that takes the Forest job under the current 
owners and with so much turmoil behind the scenes. While it may not have come 
as a huge surprise whenthe al-Hasawi family sacked Steve Cotterill within 48 
hours of completing their takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jul/12/nottingham-forest-manager-steve-cotterill>
, thedecision to dismiss O'Driscoll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/dec/26/nottingham-forest-sean-odriscoll-sack>
, only hours after Forest had defeated Leeds United 4-2 to leave them only one 
point adrift of the play-off places, went down badly with many supporters.

Fawaz al-Hasawi, Forest's chairman, said on the clubs website 
<http://www.nottinghamforest.co.uk/news/article/nffc-alex-mcleish-part-company-639565.aspx>
: "I'm bitterly disappointed – as is Alex – that it has not worked out as we 
had hoped. I would like to put on record my thanks for his services and wish 
him every success in the future."
 