
David Cameron’s hopes of persuading Scottish Nationalists not to reject 
extending RAF strikes in Syria were dealt a blow yesterday whenAlex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond> insisted his party would 
only support military action if there was explicit backing from the UN.

There had been signs that the SNP leader, Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, was softening her 
party’s approach to bombing in Syria after she confirmed she was prepared to 
listen to the case for extending British airstrikes against Isis, from Iraq to 
Syria.

Nicola Sturgeon prepared to listen to case for extending anti-Isis airstrikes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/19/nicola-sturgeon-prepared-to-listen-airstrikes-syria>
The SNP voted unanimously to oppose UK military action in Syria at its 
conference in Aberdeen last month, where Sturgeonsaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/17/snp-conference-nicola-sturgeon-commit-party-vote-against-syria-intervention>
 it would only add to the “already unimaginable human suffering” in the region 
rather than help bring it to an end.

She said on Thursday: “I’m not yet convinced the case for airstrikes has been 
made. That is not to say I will not listen to the case thatDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> will make.”

On Tuesday, Cameron promised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/17/david-cameron-britain-must-extend-airstrikes-to-syria-to-fight-isis>
 to publish a comprehensive strategy on Syria, responding to a report by the 
foreign affairs select committee which concluded that the government had failed 
to make the case for extending airstrikes.


The prime minister could publish the reply when he returns from the climate 
change talks in Paris next week, depending on the progress made in talks with 
other countries, includingRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, on 
combating Isis.

It is thought that 15 Labour MPs are determined to vote for airstrikes, though 
more may be willing to defy a Labour whip. About 15 Tory MPs might vote against 
action. The position of the SNP’s 56 MPs on the issue could therefore be 
crucial to the outcome of a vote in the Commons.

Salmond, speaking on the BBC’s Daily Politics, said there was no change in the 
SNP position. He added: “A UN resolution is a pre-condition of SNP support for 
military action. Not, incidentally, just because of the legality, although 
legalities are quite important in these matters, but also because unless you 
have that UN consensus you cannot bring peace toSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>.


“In other words, you have a situation where the Russians would be opposed to 
Daesh (Isis) but bombing the Free Syrian Army, you would have a situation where 
the Turks are bombing Daesh but also bombing theKurds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kurds>, and you couldn’t bring peace to 
Syria. That is why a UN resolution is certainly a pre-condition to SNP support, 
but more importantly a pre-condition to bring about peace to the people of 
Syria.”

Work is going ahead at the UN to secure a resolution with Russia, and table a 
new draft resolution aimed at securing international co-operation against Isis.

The French are expected to present a text arguing that the Russian solution is 
in error for accepting the sovereignty of the Syrian government – seen to be 
code for sayingBashar al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bashar-al-assad> could remain as Syrian 
president at the end of a peace process leading to UN-monitored elections in 18 
months. Diplomatic work is underway to merge the two texts.

Cameron’s chances of winning MPs’ support for an extension of airstrikes will 
be increased if there is an agreed UN resolution, although Downing Street has 
said again that UK airstrikes in Syria would be legal anyway as they would be 
undertaken to “protect Britain”.



The clarity of the case Cameron can put to MPs in the next few days will 
depend on the extent to which Russia starts to target Isis exclusively, any 
international agreement on Assad’s future, and whether Russia and the US can 
agree on the terror groups which will not be part of the peace process in Syria.

The international community is under intense pressure to reach a deal. Spain’s 
foreign minister, José Manuel Garcia-Margallo, on Wednesday called for an 
agreement with Assad “to kickstart a political transition and above all attack 
our common enemy”.

He added: “If we want peace, we have to find a way of getting along with 
Assad, at least in a transition period ... Roosevelt didn’t like Stalin, but he 
had to get a deal with him in order to defeat the Nazis, who were the greater 
evil.”

Russia’s foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, said he first detected a change in 
the western position after his country’s president, Vladimir Putin, called for 
a broad coalition to fight Isis jihadi in Syria and praised the position of the 
French president,François Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande>. “Right now, sensible 
politicians are putting secondary things aside and understand that it’s 
necessary to focus attention on the priority: to prevent efforts by Isil to 
conquer positions on the huge territory on Earth.”

Lavrov reiterated Russia’s stance that Assad protected the interests of “a 
significant part of Syrian society” so it would not be possible to reach a 
settlement “without his participation”.
 