
When Alex Salmond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond> flew to 
Iran to meet Iranian ministers and MPs just before Christmas, he was expecting 
to be briefed by the resident UK diplomatic team over dinner at the embassy. It 
did not turn out that way.


Instead, the foreign secretary Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/24/philip-hammond-iran-syria-war-discussion>
’s office sent a message that the Scottish delegation was not entitled to 
hospitality. To avoid embarrassment, Scotland’s former first minister hosted 
the dinner at his hotel in Tehran, paying for not only himself and his 
delegation but British embassy staff, too.

Salmond, who is the Scottish National party’s foreign affairs spokesman, is 
torn between whether the incident is comic or a piece of political 
vindictiveness on the part of Hammond’s office.

Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/24/week-in-radio-alex-salmond-lbc-word-of-mouth-slang-rethinking-anorexia-nervosa>
’s treatment contrasts with that of the former prime minister Tony Blair, who 
washosted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/03/tony-blair-and-ex-ministers-barred-using-uk-embassies-for-own-interests>
 at British embassies in Washington and Paris. The Scottish visit was at the 
invitation of the Iranian parliament.

The week in radio: The Alex Salmond Phone-In; Word of Mouth; Rethinking 
Anorexia Nervosa
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/24/week-in-radio-alex-salmond-lbc-word-of-mouth-slang-rethinking-anorexia-nervosa>
There is a potential constitutional issue over whether the Foreign Office sees 
itself playing host exclusively to Westminster delegations, rather than 
Scottish ones as well.


Salmond, who is a member of the Scottish and Westminster parliaments, said: 
“It’s a quite serious matter because it indicates the deep politicisation of 
the Foreign Office underHammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jan/19/trident-devolution-defence-snp-nuclear-weapons>
 and his Tory special advisers. The Foreign Office permanent under-secretary 
should be putting his foot down to make it clear it is the British Foreign 
Office, not the Tory Foreign Office.

“It is worth noting that, while Foreign Office staff are being prohibited from 
offering elementary courtesy to a parliamentary delegation from the Westminster 
and parliaments, including privy councillors and members of the Council of 
Europe, they have been for years offering bed and board for Tony Blair.”


SNP's defence policies are 'laughable', says Philip Hammond
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jan/19/trident-devolution-defence-snp-nuclear-weapons>
The Foreign Office said this month that Blair, after revelations in the media 
about his embassy stays, and other former ministers would not be provided with 
any assistance for visits unless they were in pursuit of government objectives.


Asked specifically about Salmond, a Foreign Office spokeswoman said: “Overseas 
posts follow clear guidance on arrangements for visiting parties. Visiting 
politicians from a single party are offered a general political briefing, but 
it is not the role of overseas posts to provide hospitality or to arrange 
meetings unless it is for an official visit on her majesty’s government 
business. All embassy expenditure is kept under close scrutiny to ensure the 
best value for money for the taxpayer.”

During the visit, the six-strong Salmond delegation, which included two SNP 
members of the Scottish parliament, Azzam Mohammed, vice-chairman of the Muslim 
Council for Scotland, and two staff, met theIranian foreign minister, Mohammad 
Javad Zarif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/18/iran-mohammad-zarif-concerted-international-effort-beat-isis-end-syrian-war>
, and the speaker of the Iranian parliament, Ali Larijani. A British embassy 
team was included in thetalks 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-35168780>, which 
featured discussion of the nuclear pact, trade and human rights.

Salmond said the British chargée d’affaires, Ben Fender 
<https://twitter.com/benfenderfco>, and his staff were helpful and 
co-operative: his beef was with Hammond’s office. It was only as Salmond and 
his team were about to fly the last leg from Dubai to Tehran that he was 
informed that there would be no dinner at the embassy that night.

Rather than allow the Iranian government, which was covering the costs, to 
pick up the tab for the British diplomats, Salmond offered to pay for the hotel 
dinner. He hesitated momentarily when the bill for 3.5 million rials landed, 
anxiety only lifting when it was converted to £82.
 