
My dad, Esteban, was Spanish and my mother, Giovanna, Italian. I went to a 
Roman Catholic secondary modern in Notting Hill, west London, before Julia 
Roberts moved in. It was a working-class immigrant neighbourhood and a lot of 
kids in my school were the sons of immigrants, so my parents weren’t the only 
ones with a foreign accent. I didn’t stick out.

My parents divorced when I was 12. My brother, Roberto, who’s seven years 
younger, was sent to live with my dad and I was ordered to live with my mother. 
She was a big personality and very complex. She was all the things you want a 
mother to be – loving, attentive, caring and a lot of fun – but looking back I 
realise that she was probably depressive.

She was incredibly generous, too. She had a friend at work who was a 
transvestite, a gay man who would go to parties and drag up. He was the same 
size as my mum and she used to lend him clothes. He’d come on a Friday night, 
leave with a holdall and come back on a Sunday.

My mum could be embarrassing, too. She came to the end-of-the-season party at 
the RSC in the 70s when I was a spear carrier and said: “Where is your boss?” I 
gingerly took her over toTrevor Nunn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/18/trevor-nunn-life-in-theatre>, 
who was the artistic director and was talking withJudi Dench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/sep/13/judi-dench-actors-held-back-by-wealth-divide-drama-school>
, and he was very sweet to my mum. Then she asked, “Trevor, is my Alfred a good 
actor?” Trevor went, “He’s a very good actor,” and she said, “If he’s so good, 
why you don’t give him a job?” I wished the ground would swallow me up

My mum was only 56 when she died of a massive blood clot on the brain. She had 
gone back to Italy and found real, genuine happiness with a childhood 
sweetheart, which was pleasing to us. My relationship with her was very 
tempestuous. I loved her to death and I know she loved me, but we were both 
strong personalities and I inherited a lot of her fire and energy. We had a few 
moments that resembled the third act of Aida.

My relationship with my dad was cordial but not very close, and I never quite 
reconciled with him before he died in 1999, which I regret. I have nothing but 
respect for him, because he worked like a Trojan all his life. He’d fought in 
theSpanish civil war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/29/national-museum-spanish-civil-war-barcelona>
 and the second world war and then worked hard as a waiter.

I was a bit of a show-off as a kid, apparently. I was very lucky my first day 
at secondary school was also the first day of a new English master, Martyn 
Corbett, who started a drama club and directed all the school plays. He was 
like a dad and a mentor, and was the first person in my life who took me 
seriously when I said I wanted to be an actor. I lived for his Wednesday night 
drama club. When I got turned down for a drama school grant because I forgot my 
lines, he wrote an impassioned letter asking them to give me another chance, 
and they did.

Alfred Molina: ‘I’ll do anything. I’m a bit of a slut that way’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/29/alfred-molina-interview-love-is-strange>
My ex, Sue, and I broke up quite quickly after our daughter, Rachel, was born 
in 1980, and, although I wasn’t absent, I was pretty much a weekend dad. I 
tried to be the best dad I could, although I made all kinds of mistakes. I’ve 
got a very good relationship with my daughter, but I think that is more to do 
with her generosity than anyparental skills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/17/i-thought-all-you-needed-to-be-a-good-parent-was-to-love-your-kids-i-was-wrong>
 I might have.

My marriage is in a strange place now because my wife [the actor Jill 
Gascoine] is in avery advanced stage of Alzheimer’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/29/alfred-molina-interview-love-is-strange>
. I looked after her for a few years at home, but she began to need specialised 
care that I wasn’t able to provide, so we found a very nice home for her over 
two years ago. It has been tough, but no tougher than what a lot of others go 
through. I went to a support group and to therapy for people in my situation; 
the stories I heard of sacrifice and hardship made me realise I had nothing to 
complain about.

• Close to the Enemy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/31/stephen-poliakoff-bbc-drama-close-to-the-enemy>
 begins on 10 November, 9pm, BBC2
 