
In terms of the quality of football, this has been a mediocre Africa Cup of 
Nations, but in terms of intrigue it improves by the day. After the exits of
Ivory Coast 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2010/jan/25/algeria-england-africa-cup-of-nations>
 andCameroon 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2010/jan/25/egypt-cameroon-africa-cup-of-nations>
 in the quarter-final, both dramatic in their own way, there comes the great 
reunion of Algeria and Egypt, the hate match redux.

It has been a strange couple of days in Benguela, as both sides have drawn 
down the shutters, refusing to speak to the media (the regulation applied by 
every other confederation that in a tournament teams conduct a mandatory press 
conference the day before a game, like so many other sensible ideas, is 
eschewed by CAF). Closed training sessions have been rigorously enforced by 
local authorities, who last night called in 12 trucks of riot police to deal 
with a couple of dozen journalists who, in the absence of anything else to do, 
have spent most of the last 48 hours interviewing each other.

With both Algeria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> and Egypt 
insisting that they will airlift in around 1,000 fans – although how they will 
meet visa requirements and how the airports in Benguela and Catumbela will cope 
has not been explained – a rare sense of tension has fallen over what has been 
until now in this tournament a pleasantly sleepy town.

It is only 70 days since the sides met in a World Cup qualifying play-off 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2009/nov/18/algeria-egypt-live-world-cup-playoff>
 in the Sudanese city of Omdurman, when Algeria took the lead through Antar 
Yahia's volley from a narrow angle and then successfully stifled Egypt in the 
second half. For the Egyptians,the wound 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2009/nov/20/egypt-fifa-algeria-iraq> is 
evidently still fresh. "For both sides this will be a war," said the forward 
Mohamed Zidan.

"This is a matter of life and death. For us it's a chance to show the world 
that we deserve to be at the World Cup. If we win this we can watch the World 
Cup in peace. We're the champions and we're a better team than them. Everybody 
will see who is the better team."

Everything, it seems, has been filtered through the lens of 1989 and the 
so-called "hate match", whenEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> 
reached the World Cup at Algeria's expense with a controversial 1-0 win in 
Cairo. Players and officials brawled on the pitch after the match, heavy pot 
plants were hurled about, while the Algeria forward Lakhdar Belloumi allegedly 
bottled an Egyptian doctor, blinding him in one eye. An international arrest 
warrant was dropped in April as part of diplomatic efforts to ease tensions 
ahead of their meeting in the World Cup qualifiers.

By November, those efforts had palpably failed. Algeria's team bus was stoned 
as it travelled to Cairo for their final qualifier, while the subsequent 
play-off brought allegations on both sides, with Egyptians reportedly attacked 
in Algeria and vice versa.

From a football point of view, the fact that Egypt are on a record run of 17 
games without defeat in the Cup of Nations – the last team to beat them, six 
years ago tomorrow, was Algeria – only made the defeat in Sudan and the 
continued failure to qualify for the World Cup more frustrating. "It was a game 
about blood, about dying; Algeria died for this game," Zidan said. "They scored 
a goal from nothing – if the guy had that chance 100 times he would not hit it 
in that way and the ball would not go in the net that way. Then the team 
defended the whole game, stayed in their own half. We had many chances, but we 
couldn't make one count. You can't say that Algeria don't deserve to be at the 
World Cup, but they had luck."

They have had some luck – or "character" as the preferred euphemism seems to 
be – in this tournament as well, recovering from a 3-0 defeat to Malawi in 
their opening game to go through, after two early goals for Mali in their final 
group game against Malawi allowed them toplay out a mutually beneficial 0-0 draw
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2010/jan/18/algeria-angola-deny-fixed-draw>
 with Angola.

Even in the quarter-final against Ivory Coast, what was ultimately a deserved 
win came only after Algeria had fallen behind in the final minute. They have a 
resilience and a doggedness, but they have played with nothing approaching the 
coherence of Egypt, who have been by some distance the best team in the 
tournament so far.

"It's great to play Egypt again," said the Blackpool forward Hameur Bouazza. 
"It gives us a chance to prove that we beat them fairly and not through luck. 
We won because of hard work and because we have talented players. We have great 
character and spirit and that is our greatest quality. In this tournament we 
are getting better and better."

The tournament, though, has largely been forgotten. It will probably come to 
mind again on Sunday, as the winners play the final against the winners of 
Ghana's match against Nigeria – itself a rivalry of some intensity – but for 
now it's all about north African pride and score-settling.
 