
Award-winning Scottish author Ali Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alismith> has described the systematic 
removal of the arts from state schools, revealed ina report by the Warwick 
Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/17/arts-and-culture-systematically-removed-from-uk-education-system>
 as both horrific and deeply distressing.

Smith, who was speaking as the guest director of this year’s Brighton festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/brighton-festival>, said the report – 
containing figures that showed children’s overall contact with the arts in 
school has notably decreased over the past five years – were the sign of an 
education system “going backwards”.

“The Warwick commission has raised things which are horrific,” said Smith. 
“Introduction and engagement with the arts begins with education. That’s the 
place where young people either feel included or excluded and if we are cutting 
back arts coverage and education in our schools, especially at such an early 
level when young people are so full of possibility and pliability, then where 
and how are they going to pursue it later if they feel it was never for them in 
the first place?”

Among the commission’s findings were statistics showing that those from 
working-class backgrounds were being worst hit by the cuts in cultural 
education, with the wealthiest 8% of society now found to make up nearly half 
of live music audiences and a third of theatregoers and gallery visitors. 
Smith, whose novelsThe Accidental 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jun/11/bookerprize2005.bookerprize> and 
How to be Both 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/sep/13/how-to-be-both-ali-smith-review-novel>
, were both nominated for theBooker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booker-prize>, said that having come from a 
working-class background herself, school had played a fundamental role in 
encouraging her to “embrace the arts vibrantly and freely”.

“Why would we take that away, why would we go backwards?” she asked. “And it 
astonishes me to think that it is my generation doing that. I find it deeply 
distressing that around a third of kids compared to five years ago now have no 
contact with the arts. It is causing damage at every level and it needs to be 
addressed.”

Smith said her desire to reach out to all audiences and blur the boundaries 
between the art forms had been a motivating factor in her taking on the role of 
guest director of this year’s Brighton arts festival, one of the biggest 
cultural events in the UK, now in its 49th year. 

As a guest director, Smith follows the likes of sculptor Anish Kapoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/may/15/anish-kapoor-in-berlin-britain-fucked>
, musician Brian Eno and Burmese democracy leader and campaigner Aung San Suu 
Kyi. This year, she has helped curate a line-up that features everything from 
midnight ‘nightingale’ walks though the South Downs with Mercury-nominated folk 
singerSam Lee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/28/sam-lee-gypsy-folk-music>, a 
Margaret Atwood discussion on birds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/09/margaret-atwood-birds-review> 
and a sound-and-fire installation on Brighton beach.


The festival will also host a rare UK appearance for 86-year-old film director 
and pioneer of French new-wave cinema Agnès Varda. Varda, whose six-decade 
career was this year marked by a lifetime achievement awardat the European film 
awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/14/agnes-varda-european-film-awards>
, will be curating a special gallery exhibition as well as doing a talk at the 
festival while wearing an electronic screen showing her own work around her 
neck. (She may also, Smith added, come dressed as a potato, “as she has been 
known to do in the past”.)

Smith said she was overwhelmed to have Varda as part of the festival, 
crediting the French ‘mother of new wave’ as an integral part of her own 
introduction both to the arts and the world, while living in Inverness as a 
teen.

“I grew up in the Highlands of Scotland and we lived in a town where for most 
of my childhood there was basically no theatre – there was a tiny theatre at 
the back of the bus station which occasionally put on a play,” Smith recalled. 
“And then when I was about 14, somebody opened a theatre in the middle of the 
town ... I would go every week, and one Sunday, just by chance, I saw an Agnès 
Varda film, L’une Chante, L’autre Pas. It was then I realised that Paris was 
possible in Inverness, that France was possible in Inverness, and that the rest 
of the world was possible ... She was an influence from that point. So to have 
her here, all these years later, is simply incredible.”

Taking her cue from Varda’s recent speech at the European film awards, where 
she criticised the lack of female directors being celebrated, Smith also made a 
conscious effort to give British women directors such as Joanna Hogg, Clio 
Barnard and Carol Morley a platform, with all three speaking and screening 
their films as part of the festival programme.

It will be a similarly female-led literary line-up, with Jeanette Winterson, 
author of Oranges Are Not The Only Fruit, delivering the annual new writing 
lecture, entitled Boldness in the Face of a Blank Page, and Jackie Kay and 
Carol Ann Duffy also making appearances.

The festival, which closes on 24 May, will end with a new and one-off 
performance by experimental American artistLaurie Anderson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/feb/13/laurie-anderson-landfall>, a 
show that Smith said was a particularly fitting finale.

“It starts with Varda and ends with Anderson,” she said. “Both versatile 
figures who are never not going to be relevant, never not going to be vibrant 
and never not going to be plugged into culture across the world in way that 
resonates.”

Brighton festival runs from 2-24 May. For the full programme and to purchase 
tickets visitthe festival website  
<http://http://brightonfestival.org/whats_on/>
 