
Alibaba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba>, China’s biggest 
e-retailer, has been strongly criticised by a government regulator for failing 
to do enough to stop fake goods being sold on its site.

The State Administration for Industry and Commerce (SAIC) said in a report 
published on Wednesday that many products sold through Alibaba’s Taobao and 
Tmall platforms infringed trademarks or were substandard, fake, illegal or 
dangerous.

The “Alibaba Group has long paid insufficient attention to the illegal 
business activities on Alibaba platforms,” the report said, adding that the 
company “let that abscess fester until it became a danger”.

“This not only is the biggest crisis of integrity faced by the company since 
its founding, but also has hurt other internet companies that try to operate 
legally.”

The unusually stern report also said Alibaba had allowed “illegal advertising” 
that misled consumers with false pricing claims, failed to deal effectively 
with fraud and that some employees took bribes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Falibaba-in-row-with-chinese-regulator-over-fake-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422460143206%2F6edb4a98-dc2b-4187-af1a-ab74ebbfe0cf-690x720.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alibaba%20in%20row%20with%20Chinese%20regulator%20over%20fake%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Falibaba-in-row-with-chinese-regulator-over-fake-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alibaba%20in%20row%20with%20Chinese%20regulator%20over%20fake%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Falibaba-in-row-with-chinese-regulator-over-fake-goods%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422460143206%2F6edb4a98-dc2b-4187-af1a-ab74ebbfe0cf-690x720.jpeg>
The SAIC said the document was based on a meeting held between its officials 
and Alibaba representatives in July 2014, which it had delayed releasing to 
avoid affecting the company’s New York float in September.


‘Condemning tone’

According to the SAIC report, Alibaba officials said in the July meeting that 
they would rectify the problems.

Joe Simone, director of Hong-Kong based intellectual property consultancy 
SIPS, said: “The frankness of the report and its condemning tone are 
unprecedented and speak volumes about what the SAIC found in its inspection.”

Alibaba retaliated by accusing the SAIC official in charge of internet 
monitoring, Liu Hongliang, of unspecified “procedural misconduct” and said it 
would file a formal complaint.

“We welcome fair and just supervision, and oppose selective omissions and 
malicious actions,” Alibaba’s statement said. “Obtaining a biased conclusion 
using the wrong methodology has inflicted irreparable and serious damage to 
Taobao and Chinese online businesses.”


Such public defiance is almost unprecedented in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, where companies usually respond to 
official criticism by promising to change their practices.

Huge demand for Alibaba shares led it to raise $25bn, making the IPO the 
world’s biggest. The stock rose 38% to $93.89 on the first day of trading and 
stood at just over $100 on Wednesday, valuing the company at about $250bn 
(£164bn).

The company is due to release its quarterly results on Thursday. 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Falibaba-in-row-with-chinese-regulator-over-fake-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422459109445%2F1bf0c481-dcdb-4dd3-a38e-326cf12ef236-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alibaba%20in%20row%20with%20Chinese%20regulator%20over%20fake%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Falibaba-in-row-with-chinese-regulator-over-fake-goods%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alibaba%20in%20row%20with%20Chinese%20regulator%20over%20fake%20goods&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2015%2Fjan%2F28%2Falibaba-in-row-with-chinese-regulator-over-fake-goods%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F28%2F1422459109445%2F1bf0c481-dcdb-4dd3-a38e-326cf12ef236-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alibaba chief executive Jack Ma with then California governor Arnold 
Schwarzenegger at the company’s annual summit for e-commerce entrepreneurs in 
Hangzhou in 2010. Photograph: Steven Shi/Reuters 
Alibaba had sought to tackle the problem of counterfeit goods ahead of the 
IPO, but online fakes remain a major problem in China.

Earlier this month, it agreed with American authorities to stop selling as 
many as 15 illegal or dangerous toys in the US.

Yahoo plan

Last month Alibaba said it had removed 90m listings for goods that might have 
infringed trademarks and had spent $161m in the past two years on blocking 
counterfeit goods and improving consumer protection.

Alibaba was founded by Jack Ma, a former English teacher who counts Forrest 
Gump as his inspiration. He made some $25bn in the IPO, making in China’s 
richest person.


Yahoo, which owns a $40bn stake in Alibaba, said on Tuesday it would spin off 
the holding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/27/yahoo-spins-off-stake-alibaba-spinco-avoid-tax-bill>
 to avoid a multibillion-dollar US tax bill.

The plan will place Yahoo’s 15% stake in the company into a secondary new firm 
called SpinCo.

Yahoo’s chief financial officer, Ken Goldman, said the company has spent years 
trying to work out how to return capital from the Alibaba stake to shareholders 
without incurring a major tax bill.

• Alibaba’s Singles Day sale in China breaks online records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/11/alibaba-singles-day-sales-china-break-records>
 