
The Chinese e-commerce giant Alibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> has reported a stronger than 
expected 32% rise in second-quarter revenue, though the value of transactions 
on its platforms grew at a slower pace.

Revenue from mobile platforms, an increasingly important area for the company, 
nearly tripled to $1.66bn (£1.1bn).

“Mobile is the trend and Alibaba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba>
 is capturing that trend,” said Tian Hou, an analyst at TH Capital Research.

Alibaba’s New York-listed shares were up 10% in pre-market trading. Shares in 
Yahoo, which owns 15% of Alibaba, were up 7%. The total value of transactions 
on Alibaba’s retail marketplaces inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, which Chinese exporters with 
overseas companies, rose 28% to $112bn. This was the slowest growth in more 
than three years.

The lower growth was expected. In early September, Jane Penner, the company’s 
head of investor relations, said the total value of transactions during the 
quarter would be smaller than originally expected because of lower order 
values. Revenue rose to $3.49bn in the three months to the end of September.

The jump in revenue added weight to recent comments from Jack Ma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/19/jack-ma-profile-alibaba-powerful-humble-billionaire>
, Alibaba’s founder and chairman, that concerns about slowing consumption in 
China were overdone.

The earnings report comes about two weeks before the company’s singles day 
shopping festival on 11 November, which last year netted sales of more than 
$9bn.


The company reported net income attributable to shareholders of $3.58bn, or 
$1.40 per share. It earned 57 cents per share, beating the average estimate of 
54 cents.

Facing increasing competition from its rival JD.com, Alibaba has been 
branching out from its core online shopping platforms in an attempt to stem a 
slowdown in revenue growth. During the quarter, the company invested $4.6bn in 
Suning Commerce Group in a move to bolster its ability to compete in logistics 
and electronics – two areas of strength for JD.com.

The company has also poured more money into ventures outside China, investing 
in One97 Communications, the parent of the Indian online retailer Paytm, and 
taking part in a funding round for the Indian e-commerce company Snapdeal.com.

Alibaba shares closed at $76.35 on Monday, down about 36% from their record 
high of $120 in November 2014. Yahoo closed at $33.40.
 