
The dust has settled on Singles’ Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/11/alibaba-singles-day-sales-china-break-records>
, the biggest retail day in the world. Records have been smashed wherever you 
look. China’s day of e-commerce, 11 November, may be a relatively new arrival 
on the retail scene, but it is already streets ahead of similar red letter days 
such asBlack Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/nov/28/what-is-black-friday> and Cyber 
Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/03/amazon-uk-cyber-monday-busiest-shopping-day>
. The combined total sales for these two days was $2bn (£1.3bn) last year.

This year, Alibaba, the Chinese e-commerce giant that can lay claim to 
popularising Singles’ Day, sawrecord sales of $9.3bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/11/alibaba-singles-day-sales-china-break-records>
, a 60% increase on 2013’s $5.8bn, which was also a record. Participants spent 
$2bn in gross merchandise value within the first hour, a total that took almost 
nine hours to achieve last year. Not only are people spending more, but they 
are spending more quickly.

As well as Alibaba’s shopping portal Tmall <http://about.tmall.com/>, other 
Chinese shopping portals have got in on the action, with JD.com announcing it 
too experienced record sales with more than 14m orders placed, an increase of 
roughly130% <https://twitter.com/JD_Spokesman/status/532101142600093696> on 
last year.

This year has also been about the arrival of mobile commerce (m-commerce). 
More than 40% of JD.com’s orders wereplaced on mobile 
<https://twitter.com/JD_Spokesman/status/532374529671053313>, a figure that was 
up eight times on last year. Alibaba said that 43% of its orders also came via 
mobile.

It’s a long way from the humble origins of the day that was dreamed up in the 
early 90s by students at Nanjing University as an antidote to feeling left out 
by traditional couple-focused events such as Valentine’s Day. On Singles’ Day, 
they could commiserate or celebrate their single status with a get together, 
meal or some retail therapy. The day really started to take off as a retail 
event five years ago when Alibaba started to time special 24-hour sales to take 
advantage of and to encourage this urge to splurge. Starting with just 27 
merchants, the sale has grown to include 27,000 brands such asMuji 
<http://www.muji.eu/>, Spanish clothing retailer Desigual 
<http://www.desigual.com/en_GB> and outdoor clothing label The North Face 
<http://www.thenorthface.co.uk/>.

The sales give shoppers a compelling reason to buy, in the shape of huge, 
time-limited discounts. The day has also coincided with the Chinese’s growing 
love affair with online shopping and has become the natural route for consumers 
dipping their toes on-line. This year Alibaba turned Singles’ Day into a 
worldwide event, offering more than 1m items to consumers outside China. It 
also used it as a gateway event for companies trying to get into the Chinese 
market, such asCostco <http://www.costco.co.uk/>, Juicy Couture 
<http://www.juicycouture.com/> and Japanese fashion brand Nissen 
<http://www.nissen.com/home/shop/00/00/10/>.

Retailers have always followed a key dates strategy to promote their 
businesses and to create demand around events such as Halloween, Christmas, 
Mother’s Day and so on. Success has led to the attempt to create new days that 
resonate with shoppers. Apple product release days, where fans camp days in 
advance for the latest product, are an example of how these day-long occasions 
become an event in themselves. Discount store Aldi has used one-off, WIGIG 
(when it’s gone, it’s gone) offers to entice shoppers on specific days. 
Guinness even created its own day – Arthur’s Day, celebrating the company’s 
founder’s birthday – to provide a sales spike.

There are lessons for brands looking to learn from Singles’ Day. First, take 
note of it. It may be relatively low key at the moment, but most phenomena are 
to start with. It has the potential to be big here too.Alibaba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> has created and nurtured 
Singles’ Day and it has extensively trademarked it to ward off competition, 
with the result that it gets bigger each year. That doesn’t happen by accident. 
As well as taking it international, it signed global logistics deals to allow 
easier movement of the 200m orders generated on the day.

Brands that look to get involved will be advised to make a splash and stand 
out. If the Chinese example is anything to go by, consumers will gravitate to 
brands that do something out of the ordinary. Although buyers are conditioned 
to expect discounts, there is nothing to stop clever retailers from adding 
value through bundled deals, special product lines, or forging a closer and 
longer lasting relationship with consumers by hooking them into ongoing 
services for example.

If things pan out, Singles’ Day could well be a red letter day for UK 
retailers sooner than you think. Retailers, put it on your wall planner now.

Simon Hathaway is president and global head of retail experience at Cheil 
<http:>, which is a member of the Marketing Agencies Association

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled “Brought to you by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 