
Alice Walker meditates, and it was from her meditation cushion in Mexico that 
Walker, then 60, suddenly rose with a particular conviction to help those 
bearing greater burden than herself. The renowned poet and author, who became 
the first African American woman to win a Pulitzer Prize with her novelThe 
Color Purple <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/16/the-color-purple> 
in 1982, is now 70, and her most recent bookThe Cushion in the Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/mar/09/alice-walker-beauty-in-truth-interview>
 is a collection of meditations on Walker's expansive history of activism and 
her place in the world.

"I realised when I heard about the bombing of Gaza and it coincided with my 
sister's death ... I knew I had to get off my cushion," she tells a packed 
house at the Sydney writers' festival. Walker had a compulsion to travel toGaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza>, if only to connect with anyone who 
had survived the destruction and tell them that there was at least one person 
who did not agree with where her American taxes were going "and what what they 
were doing to them".

Walker's activism pre-dates her Gaza trip. The eighth and youngest child of 
impoverished Georgia share-croppers, Walker's childhood was spent under theJim 
Crow law <http://www.ferris.edu/jimcrow/what.htm> in an atmosphere of 
institutional racism. In order for their black children to receive an 
education, her community had to build its own school and protect it. "The white 
children had a school bus, they had adequate schooling, adequate medical care 
and we did not and we had to make do," explains Walker, who learned young that 
"in a terrible situation, people are very generous and very kind."


For this reason, her love of literature flowered even amidst this deprivation; 
her parents were both great storytellers, encouraged their children's education 
and filled their household with whatever books they could find. Walker had had 
one of her eyes destroyed as a child when her brother deliberately shot at her 
with a BB gun, and the self-conscious girl retreated into a literary world of 
English literary classics.


It's reading that she credits with the ability to develop political empathy. 
"If our children could just read everything and feel themselves into everything 
they're reading, things would be very different when they grew up," she says, 
recalling a particular fondness forCharlotte Bronte's Jane Eyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/09/100-best-novels-jane-eyre>. "I 
recognised myself in Jane Eyre. It amazes me how many white people can't read 
themselves in black characters. I didn't feel any separation between me and 
Jane. We were tight."

Walker's parents struggled but put her through college, and she became 
committed to the American civil rights campaign of the 1960s. She and the man 
she married in 1965 were the first legal interracial marriage in the state of 
Mississippi. She knew Martin Luther King; on the day of his murder, she 
miscarried her first child.

The activist need to "show up for others" discussed in the book has carried 
her across to the world, not merely to arriving in Gazaon the flotilla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza-flotilla> (her participation was 
perhaps the reason that a subsequent visit to Ramallah for an arts festival saw 
her interrogated by Israeli border security for nine hours without food or 
water). Amongst decades of political activity, she has met with Fidel Castro 
and Nelson Mandela and started an orphanage in Kenya.

Walker feels great disillusion with the political limitations of the Obama 
presidency, and supported of the the Occupy movement in the United States. It's 
this last political project she cites as her greatest current inspiration. "My 
vision of change is a rumbling underneath, that is us, a rumble of us," says 
Walker. "A change that is coming, that is inevitable. If we don't come up with 
a system that is egalitarian, empathetic, loving, giving ... There really isn't 
much of a reason for us to continue to survive."
 