
In June 1948 the Republican party held its national convention to select its 
nominee for president of the United States. A Guardian editorial on 22 June 
described the Republican process (compared to that of the Democrats) as‘a field 
for power politics rather than for ideologies; they have preferred to settle 
their differences by discreet compromises.’ 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/05/11/Republican_Convention_Guardian_editorial_22_June_1948.jpeg>

Thomas E Dewey was eventually selected as the Republican nominee, losing 
unexpectedly to the incumbent Harry S Truman in November 1948.Strom Thurmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/jun/28/guardianobituaries.haroldjackson>
, long-serving senator and record filibuster, stood on the Dixiecrat ticket 
that opposed desegregation.

Alistair Cooke <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alistaircooke>, who had 
become the Manchester Guardian’s chief US correspondent the previous year, 
wrote an ‘ABC of American ritual’ on the Republican Convention:

An Englishman dropped into the middle of a nominating Convention begins by 
saying that he feels like the man from Mars. The more he is plied with 
enlightenment, the more he loses hope of ever understanding the political mores 
of America, ancient or modern. He usually ends up by branding them with his 
favourite adjective for whatever is alien or unpleasant to have to face: they 
are “fantastic.” He tends to let it go at that.

What commonly confuses the stranger is the tendency of his instructors to mix 
the mechanics of the Conventions with the motives of the delegations involved 
in them. He is unable to pick out the tune from the floods of harmony and 
dissonance that swirl around it. But there is a tune, an eighteenth-century 
one, that derives from the Constitutional Convention of the Founding States and 
that is no more intricate and no less formal than a Haydn symphony.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Frepublican-convention-explainer-thomas-e-dewey-alistair-cooke-1948-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e2b19be6cef3b5088d961f26b3ad380b69ee702%2F0_0_1380_3960%2F1380.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alistair%20Cooke%20explains%20the%20strange%20ritual%20of%20the%20Republican%20Convention%2C%201948&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Frepublican-convention-explainer-thomas-e-dewey-alistair-cooke-1948-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alistair%20Cooke%20explains%20the%20strange%20ritual%20of%20the%20Republican%20Convention%2C%201948&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Ffrom-the-archive-blog%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Frepublican-convention-explainer-thomas-e-dewey-alistair-cooke-1948-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e2b19be6cef3b5088d961f26b3ad380b69ee702%2F0_0_1380_3960%2F1380.jpg>
 Manchester Guardian, 22 June 1948.Read a larger version. 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/05/11/Republican_Convention_Alistair_Cooke_22_June_1948.jpeg> 