
Police in Albania have arrested a man who claimed to have flown a drone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2014/oct/15/serbia-albania-drone-brawl-video>
 carrying a nationalist banner over a stadium in Serbia last year during a 
European qualifier, in an incident that prompted fan violence and a diplomatic 
spat between the two countries.

Ismail Morinaj, 33, was arrested with three other men as part of a security 
operation on the eve of the return match in Elbasan,Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania>.

Morinaj, who is from the north-eastern Kukes area but lives in Italy, is a 
regular at Albania’s away matches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Falbania-serbia-alleged-drone-pilot-arrested%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa13e0cf3a5a088915364cc6f2b98bb3cc200292a%2F0_40_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alleged%20drone%20pilot%20arrested%20on%20eve%20of%20Albania%20v%20Serbia%20Euro%202016%20qualifier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Falbania-serbia-alleged-drone-pilot-arrested%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alleged%20drone%20pilot%20arrested%20on%20eve%20of%20Albania%20v%20Serbia%20Euro%202016%20qualifier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Falbania-serbia-alleged-drone-pilot-arrested%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa13e0cf3a5a088915364cc6f2b98bb3cc200292a%2F0_40_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Serbia’s Stefan Mitrovic grabs a flag with Albanian national symbols flown by 
a remotely operated drone. Photograph: Andrej Isakovic/AFP/Getty Images 
Two handguns, ammunition, and 36 match tickets were seized, police said. 
Morinaj was found with a Serbian-made Zastava pistol and a Chinese handgun.

Police have taken extensive security measures for Thursday’s game, deploying 
more than 2,000 officers and enforcing road closures and a traffic cordon 
around the stadium. Fans will have to show identification and be searched 
before entering Elbasan Arena.

Saimir Tahiri, the interior minister, said undercover officers would also be 
used. He said an elite police unit had been assigned to protect members of the
Serbia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/serbia> team. “This is an 
opportunity to show our values in supporting the national team and hosting the 
guest team,” he said.

Despite the security, travel officials with the Serbia team said no plans had 
been made for Serbian fans to travel toAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania>.

Albania are third in Group I with 11 points from six matches. Portugal lead 
with 15 points, followed by Denmark with 12 but having played an additional 
game. The top two qualify automatically with the third-place team entering a 
play-off.
 