
Allied Bakeries launched the Kingsmill carbon footprinting project in 2008 for 
the three biggest selling varieties of Kingsmill bread to find a way of 
measuring carbon over the life-cycle of all its products.

Helped by carbon reduction company, Sustain, the assessment was developed in 
accordance with PAS 2050 and certified by the Carbon Trust, making Kingsmill 
the first loaf to carry the trust's carbon reduction label.

First the group identified carbon hotspots in a loaf's life-cycle: fertilisers 
on wheat, toasting and baking, delivery to supermarkets and bakery chillers. 
Then it focused on carbon cutting measures within the company and on key 
suppliers such as farmers and flour and sugar producers.

Overseen by the environmental steering group, practical measures included: 
insulating exposed pipework at bakeries, replacing chillers, introducing Euro V 
EEV Technology Diesel engines and more aerodynamic vehicles. The team also 
looked at changing driver behaviour, introducing route tracking, automatic 
engine cut-off when idling, for example.

Allied Mills carried out a separate assessment of wheat and flour production, 
and agronomists are working with farmers to advise them on cutting green house 
gas emissions related to fertilisers â€“ the largest hotspot.

Allied Bakeries also intends to drive down emissions across the business and 
supply chain, reduce waste at production sites and consumers' homes and move to 
sustainable palm oil. PAS 2050 and the Carbon Trust's carbon reduction label 
allow structured measurement, management and reduction. Other businesses within 
the group have used the same process to drive down carbon.

By May 2011 Allied Bakeries will re-assess the changes made across their three 
loafs.

Kingsmill is a top 10 grocery brand. Carbon labelling on its packaging will 
publicise the scheme and the broader idea of how products affect climate 
change. In this project, Allied Bakeries has been a pioneer among bread 
producers, working above and beyond standard sustainability practice.

Jackie Wills is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 