
Rangers' creditors meeting began on Thursday morning amid increasing 
uncertainty over the future of Charles Green's new regime and speculation that 
the managerAlly McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist> was 
poised to leave the club.

Reports claim McCoist is poised to resign due to uncertainty over his future 
once Green completes his Â£5.5m newco purchase of the club's assets.

McCoist arrived at Ibrox on Thursday without making comment while Green 
briefly told reporters he wanted the manager to stay as he arrived for the 
creditors meeting.

Green has held talks with Scottish Premier League officials after it emerged 
hiscompany voluntary arrangement was doomed to failure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/jun/12/rangers-deeply-disappointed-hmrc-move>
 but his plans to stay in the top league suffered a blow this morning.

Aberdeen updated their position on a potential newco vote by stating that 
"integrity" was their central criteria.

The Dons chief executive Duncan Fraser told the club's official website: 
"Yesterday's announcement thatRangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/rangers> FC will reform as a newco brings 
a degree of clarity to the situation.

"However, there are a number of other investigations ongoing. Like everyone we 
wish to see them resolved as soon as possible.

"A large number of our supporters have made their views and feelings very 
clear and as a club I can assure everyone that these are being taken into 
account.

"The integrity of sport in general and football in particular must be central 
to any decision.

"This issue has our full attention and we will communicate any decisions we 
take in relation to this situation with our supporters in a transparent way at 
an appropriate time."

However, fresh reports claimed that the SPL's broadcasting deal, which is due 
to be renewed this summer, would be in serious doubt if Green's Rangers are 
forced to start in the Irn-Bru Third Division.

Green would need seven other clubs to accept his application to acquire 
Rangers' share in the competition if he pushes through with his newco deal.
 