
Ally McCoist, the beleaguered manager of Rangers football club and a former 
Scotland international, has been told by police he is a suspected victim of 
phone hacking by theNews of the World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/newsoftheworld>.

McCoist, who has so far not disclosed details of the alleged hacking, is the 
latest of more than a dozen prominent Scottish public figures and other 
individuals known to have been targeted by the closed Sunday tabloid.

The disclosure came as Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>, Scotland's first minister, 
prepared to face questions at the Leveson inquiry into hacking and media ethics 
about his close political relationship with Rupert and James Murdoch, the News 
Corporation owners.

Salmond, who is due to give evidence at Leveson on Wednesday, has repeatedly 
refused to answer questions from opposition leaders in Holyrood about whether 
he too was hacked.

He has come under intense pressure to explain his offer to help the Murdochs 
lobby UK ministers to win complete control of the satellite broadcaster BSKyB 
at the same time as he was brokering a deal to get the Sun's political 
endorsement inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>.

More than a dozen people in Scotland, including the former first minister Jack 
McConnell and his two adult children; the socialist politician Tommy Sheridan; 
and the Scottish National party MSP Joan McAlpine, who is also an aide to 
Salmond; have so far been named as alleged hacking victims in Scotland.

Last month, the Guardian revealed that Sir Sean Connery, the Edinburgh-born 
actor who played James Bond, and now lives in the Bahamas,had been told he was 
hacked about 10 times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/may/30/sean-connery-phone-hacking-police>
.

It is understood his case is being investigated by Met officers involved in 
Operation Wheeting, and not by the team of Strathclyde police detectives who 
charged the former NoW editor and Downing Street communications chief, Andy 
Coulson, with perjury in late May.

Legal sources said the growing number of people in Scotland believed to have 
been targeted suggested that the NoW's hacking operations spread across all 
editions of the Sunday tabloid, including its Scottish edition, and not just 
the main UK paper printed in London.

Former NoW executives in Scotland are understood to be under investigation by 
Operation Rubicon, the investigation set up by Strathclyde police after the NoW 
was closed down last July.

A source close to McCoist confirmed he had been informed by police. The Record 
reported another source as saying: "He has received calls from the police 
telling him they believe he was hacked.

"He expected he might have heard more, perhaps a letter. But he's not heard 
anything, so he's waiting to see how things develop."

A number of key figures involved in the NoW's investigations into Sheridan's 
private life have emerged as hacking victims. Those include McAlpine, a former 
friend of Sheridan's who co-wrote his book on the anti-poll tax campaign; his 
mother Alice Sheridan; Fiona McGuire, the ex-prostitute named as one of 
Sheridan's lovers â€“ an allegation he has denied; and another witness at his 
libel trial, Anne Colvin. McGuire and Colvin are now suing News International.

It emerged on Sunday that Sarah Heaney, a former Scotland Today presenter for 
STV, had also been a victim.
 