
With crucial World Cup qualifiers approaching for the USMNT 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/may/16/landon-donovan-jurgen-klinsmann-usmnt-usa>
, Jürgen Klinsmann has turned to Europe for the bulk of his squad. As Europe's 
domestic season closes, it has been a landmark campaign for the Americans who 
ply their trade across the Atlantic. Breakout seasons, smashing goal records, 
rising reputations and plenty of silverware add up to a banner year for the 
"Yanks abroad".

Jozy Altidore

In 2011-12, Clint Dempsey scored a record number of goals in a season for an 
American playing in Europe. This season, Altidore smashed that mark. The 
23-year-old scored 31 goals for the Dutch side AZ Alkmaar, including his first 
career hat-tricks. The highlight of his season came on 9 May, when he scored 
the game-wining goal in the Dutch cup final, against PSV Eindhoven.The New 
Jersey native was named in the Dutch League team of the season 
<http://www.telegraaf.nl/telesport/voetbal/nationaal/21559236/__Eredivisie__Elftal_van_het_Jaar__.html>
 for his pace, power and clinical finishing. Will he still be in Holland next 
season? Rumors persist as huge sides circle for his signature. Altidore's 
breakout campaign – which had one notably tough moment,when Den Bosch fans 
subjected him to racial abuse 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/video/2013/jan/30/jozy-altidore-racist-monkey-video>
 – could have set him up for the rest of his career.

Brad Guzan

Released by Aston Villa at the end of the 2011-12, Guzan ended up being named 
the Villa fans' and players' player of the season for 2012-13 
<http://www.avfc.co.uk/page/NewsDetail/0,,10265~3170507,00.html>. Guzan was 
watching his career melt away after serving as understudy for years at Villa 
Park, but when new manager Paul Lambert arrived, he made him his No 1.The 
former Chivas USA goalkeeper hasn't looked back 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/apr/20/brad-guzan-aston-villa>. He 
kept Villa in the EPL with his consistent displays, facing the fourth-most 
shots in the league (438) and making 114 saves (fifth highest) and winning 
numerous points for the team with a young and inexperienced defensive line in 
front of him. Can he dethrone Tim Howard as the USA's first choice goalkeeper?

Michael Bradley
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FwEGAThokaE4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FwEGAThokaE4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FwEGAThokaE4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

His nickname in Italy is "the General". Bradley's selfless work in the engine 
room can, at times, be taken for granted but without him Roma would have been 
struggling this season. Instead, Roma battled for a European spot. Bradley's 
move to Serie A has been the making of him. The USMNT midfielder has absorbed 
the Italian culture and his family have settled well in the Eternal City – just 
check outthe video above <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wEGAThokaE4>, in which 
Bradley shows off his Italian, talks yoga and Springsteen and gives off 
flamboyant hand gestures … Bradley joined Roma after helping Chievo to a 
respectable 10th place the previous season. In February, Aurelio Andreazzoli 
arrived as Roma's new manager and Bradley excelled, playing 31 times, scoring 
once, but his season finished on a low point, as Roma lost 1-0 to Lazio in a 
tense Rome Derby/Coppa Italia final. A piece of silverware would have been the 
perfect way to cap off this season.

Clint Dempsey

Frustrating? Disappointing? Or just plain unlucky? Deuce has had a mixed 
season after his move across London to Tottenham Hotspur 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/apr/12/tottenham-basel-champions-league-clint-dempsey>
. After his stellar season for Fulham in 2011-12 - including 17 Premier League 
goals - Dempsey has been hampered with injuries and has often played off the 
bench for Spurs under André Villas-Boas. Missing out on Champions League 
qualification will be a bitter pill, as that was a major motivation behind 
joining the North Londoners. He still scored 12 times, including both goals as 
Tottenham agonizingly lost in the Europa League quarterfinals to Basel. His 
crucial goals against Manchester City and Stoke City towards the end of the 
season helped Spurs keep their Champions League aspirations alive. He's still 
the go-to man for the USMNT, after being handed the armband and scoring the 
winner inthe snowy World Cup qualifying win over Costa Rica in Colorado 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/mar/23/usa-costa-rica-live>. Expect a 
fired-up and fit Deuce looking to spur the USMNT this summer.

Geoff Cameron

The unsung hero for Stoke in his first EPL season, Cameron can look back on 
his debut in England's top flight with fond memories. The former Houston Dynamo 
defender made 38 appearances in a year that saw him play all across the defense 
and midfield. His versatility fitted in with Tony Pulis' philosophy at the 
Britannia Stadium –although how the manager's departure will affect him remains 
to be seen <http://www.guardian.co.uk/football/2013/may/21/tony-pulis-stokecity>
. Klinsmann has also taken to Cameron, with the adaptable 27-year-old having 
been used at right-back and center-back in a new-look back line. His first 
season abroad has seen Cameron announce himself as one of the USMNT's most 
reliable and composed defenders.

Jermaine Jones

The combative midfielder has once again helped push Schalke into the Champions 
League - the side from Gelsenkirchen booking their spot in Europe's elite 
competition on the final day of the Bundesliga. Jones's highlight came when he 
scored an equalizer against Galatasaray in the last 16 of the Champions League. 
His appearances for the USMNT have been limited but the Frankfurt-born star has 
made 31 appearances forSchalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke>. 
With just one year left on his contract, he is keen on a switch to MLS – and he 
has a second home in Los Angeles. Has Bruce Arena been on the phone? The 
31-year old has plenty left in the tank. Jones also seems to have sorted out 
any lingering disciplinary problems and with his experience on the biggest 
stages in Europe, his leadership could be key for the national side.

Sacha Klejstan

Not a remarkable season, numbers wise, for the former Chivas USA attacker, but 
Klejstan was influential asAnderlecht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> won yet another Belgian 
title, his second straight. The Seton Hall University product played 48 times, 
the most he's ever played in a season, and despite scoring just three times he 
did get the opener in the league semi-final win. A good run in the Europa 
League saw Klejstan star further, though his lack of recognition by the USMNT 
must be nagging away at him.

Best of the rest

Goodson is at Brondby and Parkhurst is now at Augsburg.
 Tim Howard in action for Everton. Photograph: Stu Forster/Getty Images 

Terrence Boyd scored 16 goals and added 10 assists for Rapid Vienna, while 
Josh Gatt and Mix Diskerud have started the Norwegian season promisingly. 
ElsewhereClarence Goodson is plugging away in Denmark with Brondby and Michael 
Parkhurst's Augsburg stayed up on the final day of the Bundesliga season. Brek 
Shea has struggled to find his feet at Stoke, with injuries curtailing his 
development in the EPL, and the German-bornDanny Williams and Fabian Johnson 
face a relegation playoff with Hoffenheim. Another German-American,Timmy 
Chandler, had a decent season at Nuremberg cut short by injury. Veterans Steve 
Cherundolo and Tim Howard had solid campaigns with Hannover and Everton, with 
'Dolo getting a new contract. But Howard is under pressure from Guzan for his 
USMNT starting spot and Cherundolo's glittering international career could be 
over.Alejandro Bedoya has rejoined the Swedish side Helsingborgs and is 
impressing while the Hertha Berlin youngsterJohn Anthony Brooks will be one to 
look out for at the Under-20 World Cup this summer.
 