
The son of a Louisiana <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/louisiana> man 
whose father was shot and killed at point-blank range by Baton Rouge police 
asked protesters for “peace” and “no violence, none whatsoever”.

Cameron Sterling, the 15-year-old son of Alton Sterling, whose death at the 
hands of police was caught on video, spoke about his father and protests.

Alton Sterling was killed by Baton Rouge police on 5 July at a convenience 
store, where he was said to be selling CDs. Baton Rouge police said in a 
statement that police were called to the convenience store because Sterling had 
allegedly threatened another patron with a gun.

The press conference on Wednesday is Cameron’s first since he broke into sobs 
at a nationally broadcastpress conference with his mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/06/alton-sterling-son-press-conference-police-shooting-baton-rouge>
, following his father’s death.

“I came to talk to everyone about one: the death of my father. And, two: about 
how I feel about people in general,” said Cameron, whose distinctly young voice 
was calm and composed in front of the scrum of reporters at the Triple S 
convenience store.

Alton Sterling death: 'I’ve been sick ever since they murdered him'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/alton-sterling-death-ive-been-sick-ever-since-they-murdered-him>
“People, in general, no matter what the race, should come together as one 
united family.

“No more arguments, violence, crimes,” said Cameron. “Yes, you can protest, 
but I want everyone to protest the right way.Protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/protest> in peace – no guns, no drugs, no 
alcohol, no violence. Everyone needs to protest in the right way, with peace. 
No violence, none whatsoever.”

Earlier on Wednesday, in an interview with CBS News 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/alton-sterling-son-cameron-father-police-shooting-death-dallas-ambush/>
, Cameron said he didn’t believe all police were “bad”, and that all police 
“shouldn’t be punished for other police’s crimes”.

“The police in Dallas, Texas, they didn’t deserve that,” said Cameron.

Alton Sterling’s death spurred a Department of Justice investigation, protests 
across the country, and was one of the subjects of a march in Dallas on 
Thursday when a gunmanattacked and killed five police officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dallas-police-shooting> there. 

His was the first of two police shootings that week, including a shocking 
video of the shooting of Minnesota manPhilandro Castile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/remembering-philando-castile-everything-mr-phil-did-was-for-the-kids>
, the aftermath of which was broadcast live on Facebook by his girlfriend.
 