
Amanda Seyfried is in talks to star as Linda Lovelace in one of two competing 
projects about the infamous star of 1970s porn film Deep Throat,according to 
the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/amanda-seyfried-negotiations-play-linda-256060>
. If all goes to plan, she will appear opposite Peter Sarsgaard, who is in 
negotiations to play Lovelace's husband, Chuck Traynor.

The Seyfried project, with which James Franco and Kate Hudson were previously 
linked, is titled Lovelace and is based on The Complete Linda Lovelace, a 
biography by Eric Danville, published in 2001. It is not to be confused with 
Inferno: a Linda Lovelace Story, which was once due to star Lindsay Lohan in 
the title role and now has Malin Akerman and Matt Dillon on board.

One of the first pornographic films to feature a plot, character development 
and reasonably high production standards, Deep Throat made a huge impact on its 
release, though it was banned in the UK and was the subject of a number of 
obscenity trials in the US. It has been suggested the movie made more than 
$600m (£395m) from box office receipts and home video sales, which would put it 
among the highest-grossing films of all time.

Lovelace, real name Linda Susan Boreman 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linda_Lovelace>, later denounced the film and its 
makers, becoming an anti-pornography activist. She said she had been forced 
into the career – often at gunpoint – by Traynor. She died following a car 
accident in 2002.

Chances are that only one of the Lovelace projects will see the light of day, 
as studios often get cold feet when faced with a competing film.Guy Ritchie's 
Sherlock Holmes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/130110/sherlock-holmes> 
saw off a comedic take on the great English sleuth starring Sacha Baron Cohen 
and Will Ferrell, while John Maybury'sThe Edge of Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/124428/edge.of.love> put paid to a 
separate Dylan Thomas biopic which was due to star Michael Sheen and Miranda 
Richardson.

When two films about the same figure do emerge, there's usually only one 
winner. In 1994, Lawrence Kasdan's Wyatt Earp was beaten to the draw by George 
P Cosmatos' Tombstone, while in 2005 Douglas McGrath's Infamous trailed in the 
wake of Bennett Miller's Oscar-winning (for Philip Seymour Hoffman) Capote, 
despite strong reviews.
 