
RIP, America Idol. After 15 seasons of singing, squawking, bitching, Simon 
Cowell’s V-necks and Ryan Seacrest’s ceaseless smarm, Fox has finally had 
enough. Following a ratings plummet the network has declared this will be the 
final season of the singing show that was once nicknamed theDeath Star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/11/fox-cancels-american-idol>
 for its ability to wipe out competition. As we prepare for Idol’s swan song, 
here are our top five moments.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQKrBTWn6pAc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQKrBTWn6pAc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQKrBTWn6pAc&media=>
 ‘The British man didn’t make me cry’ 
Kelly Clarkson’s first audition 

“I was so happy because the British man didn’t make me cry.” So said American 
Idol’s inaugural winner Kelly Clarkson of her first audition, a sentence that 
sums up the show’s main appeal when it first aired on Fox in 2002. To an 
unsuspecting America – he’d already shown his true colours on UK TV on Pop Idol 
– Simon Cowell was the waspish, perma roll-necked quote generator whose aim was 
to destroy people’s dreamsone quip at a time 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uFpeCKyUvuc>. Everyone feared him. But there 
was something special about Kelly Clarkson, who has since gone on to become the 
show’s biggest-selling winner with 23m albums sold. This clip not only shows 
off her amazing vocals, but also the lack of budget for the first season , 
which has the feel and production values of a high school talent show. You get 
the feeling that at that point not even Fox were convinced they were on to a 
winner.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGOCEnoJJQqI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGOCEnoJJQqI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGOCEnoJJQqI&media=>
Jennifer Hudson’s shock eviction

After season two became more famous for its off-screen antics (three 
contestants were booted off the show, with one, Corey Clark, claiming it was 
because he was having an affair with judge Paula Abdul), season three’s most 
controversial moment involved big-voiced diva Jennifer Hudson. A favourite with 
the judges from the start, Hudson was shockingly voted out in week six, a move 
which Elton John, a mentor on the show that year, referred to as “incredibly 
racist”. In the end, however, Hudson had the last laugh, going on to win 
numerous Grammys and an Oscar for her role in Dreamgirls where she more than 
held her own against Beyoncé. She’s since been back on the show for her cruelly 
curtailed lap of honour.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJYn0QbpYYXk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJYn0QbpYYXk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DJYn0QbpYYXk&media=>

Paula Abdul in general



As previously mentioned, it was Cowell’s job to be Mr Nasty for the majority 
of his American Idol tenure (he left in 2010), while the other original judge 
Randy Jackson was often the voice of reason (he also loved telling everyone 
they were “a bit pitchy”). In between Cowell’s pantomime villain and Jackson’s 
Captain Sensible was Paula Abdul, a woman prone to saying things that made you 
worry there was more than just Coca-Cola in her cup (she once critiqued a 
contestant’s performance before they’d even performed). But the chemistry 
between Abdul and Cowell was what made those early seasons so amusing, Simon 
trying manfully to try and keep the show’s semblance of seriousness going 
while, for example,Abdul growled at him 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fsp_3rSGQqs> or stepping in before Abdul makes 
things a little too X-rated for a family show.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzGnak9GsiOY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzGnak9GsiOY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzGnak9GsiOY&media=>
Fantasia performing Summertime 

As well as Kelly Clarkson, American Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol> also found success 
with season four winner Carrie Underwood, season six winner Jordin Sparks and 
season eight runner-up Adam Lambert. But probably the most memorable 
performance comes from soul firebrand Fantasia, the winner of the third season. 
Sitting on the floor, she starts soft and small on her cover of Summertime, 
showing an understanding of dynamics that seems to pass by most other 
big-voiced TV talent show contestants. As the song builds her voice starts to 
fray with emotion – again, not another trait associated with TV talent shows – 
and the moment moves from straight cover to genuine performance, those final 
vocal runs basically winning her the entire show.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbu2iH43gVzo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbu2iH43gVzo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dbu2iH43gVzo&media=>
Nicki v Mariah 

As the seasons dragged on, the show’s winners became less and less successful, 
with season 13 winner Caleb Johnson’s debut album only shifting 11,000 copies 
in its opening week to make it the lowest-selling winner’s album ever. To 
counteract the diminishing interest in the new talent, the producers tried to 
revamp the judging panel and in 2013 decided to employ both Mariah Carey and 
Nicki Minaj. Rumour has it that Carey didn’t know Minaj had been offered a role 
on the show when she signed up and from the start the two didn’t get on.

In October 2012 TMZ leaked a video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R25ypkQx7ac> of Minaj telling anyone that 
would listen that she wasn’t “going to put up with her fucking highness 
anymore”, while the early judging rounds werepeppered with thinly veiled shade 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DF8lo3NYNrM>. To the surprise of no one, both 
Carey and ameriMinaj quit the show after one season, which was a shame as it 
was probably the last time anything interesting happened.
 