
For over a decade, American Apparel was a byword for cool. Simple T-shirts in 
technicolour prints, crop tops and high-waisted jeans – the uniform for those 
in the know. But as this look grew popular, the company became what it didn’t 
want to be: mainstream. Now, after years of scandals and falling sales,the 
company has filed for bankruptcy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/american-apparel-files-for-bankruptcy>
.

American Apparel files for bankruptcy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/american-apparel-files-for-bankruptcy>
American Apparel’s aesthetic is built on the high school uniform of US jocks 
and cheerleaders of the 1970s and early 1980s. Knee-high striped sports socks, 
1970s running shorts in binary colours and gold lamé bikinis created a certain 
modish student style.

Much of the company’s advertising was cannily placed in Vice magazine and it 
became de rigueur for a certain type of wearer – creative, young, hip and thin. 
That much of its stock is, bafflingly, one size fits all, helped crystallise 
its hipster status: if you could pull it off, then you had to wear it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Famerican-apparel-goes-out-of-fashion-and-into-bankruptcy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e64bae542195d035645fd9d096683b6689b0729%2F0_11_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20Apparel%20goes%20out%20of%20fashion%20and%20into%20bankruptcy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Famerican-apparel-goes-out-of-fashion-and-into-bankruptcy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20Apparel%20goes%20out%20of%20fashion%20and%20into%20bankruptcy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Famerican-apparel-goes-out-of-fashion-and-into-bankruptcy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e64bae542195d035645fd9d096683b6689b0729%2F0_11_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The interior of a store in New York. Photograph: Spencer Platt/Getty Images 
American Apparel arguably brought this look to the UK high street, inspiring 
heritage brands such as Adidas Originals and Gap to revamp their basics. But 
the chain also created a monster, as super-cheap shops including Primark and 
Forever 21 churned out the same style for half the price; theAmerican Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> aesthetic was tarnished 
by its own simplicity.

However, part of the problem is that the clothing has not evolved. While stock 
is still updated to meet current trends (recent additions include pinstripe 
cotton, pleather scrunchies and rose gold jewellery), the core look has 
remained unchanged for years.

Naomi Klein on how corporate branding has taken over America
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/16/naomi-klein-branding-obama-america>
One of the company’s saving graces has been its political stance, often 
printing T-shirts with pro-immigration orgay rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/feb/07/american-apparel-gay-rights-merchandise-sochi-games-p6>
 slogans – it currently sells a T-shirt emblazoned with ‘Free Iran’. This 
tapped into a student mindset, which sat somewhere between having a social 
conscience and looking good. Equally, there is no discernible branding, which 
proved ideal for those readers ofAdBusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2000/oct/09/mondaymediasection.advertising1> 
and Naomi Klein’sNo Logo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/nov/27/firstchapters.extract> (American 
Apparel’s popularity soared just before the book came out).

But as much as young people like to think they care about wearing their 
political leaning on their sleeve or who made their T-shirt – the company 
famously manufactures all its clothes in the US, in contrast to Forever 21, for 
example, which subcontracts factories all over the world – it is also skint.

Despite American Apparel’s revamped approach to working practices and 
advertising – it is currently holding open castings for models of all ages and 
sizes at therequest of newly appointed chief executive Paula Schneider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/feb/16/american-apparel-paula-schneider-social-issues-brand>
 – wearing its clothes still feels like you are buying into the brand’s
hyper-sexualised mentality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/apr/10/american-apparel-ad-banned>, 
particularly given the reputation of its founder and former chief executive, 
Dov Charney.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Famerican-apparel-goes-out-of-fashion-and-into-bankruptcy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac56c6c480a471bb65b1a6343a7aa420b49f3ab7%2F0_188_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20Apparel%20goes%20out%20of%20fashion%20and%20into%20bankruptcy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Famerican-apparel-goes-out-of-fashion-and-into-bankruptcy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20Apparel%20goes%20out%20of%20fashion%20and%20into%20bankruptcy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Famerican-apparel-goes-out-of-fashion-and-into-bankruptcy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac56c6c480a471bb65b1a6343a7aa420b49f3ab7%2F0_188_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 The chain’s former chief executive, Dov Charney, who was fired in December 
2014. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Dov Charney was never an edgy CEO. Selling sex is as old as retail itself | 
Jenna Sauers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/20/dov-charney-ceo-ousted-american-apparel>
Charney founded American Apparel in 1998 as a T-shirt wholesaler, before 
expanding it into a global business. He was fired by the company in December 
2014 following a barrage of scandals, including allegations of sexual 
misconduct. Charney allegedly exposed himself to a female journalist and 
sexually harassed staff. It is thought the allegations were so frequent, the 
company could no longer afford to pay costs for the ongoing and potential 
lawsuits filed against him.

His position was terminated in December 2014. He has denied the sexual 
misconduct allegations andlaunched a number of lawsuits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/27/american-apparel-dov-charney-40m-damages>
 against American Apparel, including breach of contract and defamation.

The sexualised advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/03/american-apparel-ads-banned-school-age-girls>
, the use of seemingly young models and Charney’s reputation as a mainstream 
bogeyman have all contributed to American Apparel’s downfall. That it is no 
longer at the vanguard of style proved the final nail in its spandex coffin.
 