
The latest American Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> ad to be banned shows a 
young woman leaning through the window of a car, showing her underwear to 
camera.

I say latest because it’s the most recent in a long line of American Apparel 
ads to have met with the same fate. This time theAdvertising Standards Agency 
<http://www.asa.org.uk/Rulings/Adjudications/2014/9/American-Apparel-UK-Ltd/SHP_ADJ_275883.aspx#.VBB3WGRdVOg>
 (ASA) said: “We considered the ads had the effect of inappropriately 
sexualising school-age girls and were therefore offensive and irresponsible for 
that reason too.”

If they hadn’t been banned for bad taste they should have been banned for bad 
marketing <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/brand-marketing>.

American Apparel was built on a platform of fairness 
<http://www.americanapparel.net/aboutus/>. Their T-shirts and hoodies were made 
by workers earning a living wage in Los Angeles, California and not by 
slave-labour in the Far East. “Sexy sweats without the sweatshop” asABC News 
<http://abcnews.go.com/2020/Business/story?id=1362781> put it.

But despite the ethical approach, they also used shock value for cheap PR. A 
quick search on Google reveals a long list of theirother controversial 
advertising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/dec/12/american-apparel-ad-banned-asa?INTCMP=SRCH&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 images showing too young women in too grown-up poses, usually in their own 
bedrooms. The home video style of photography gives the shots exactly the right 
voyeuristic feeling to attract the censor’s eye.

To start with it worked – or something did. In 2005 their three-year growth 
was 525% <http://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/American_Apparel>.

But then they hit the buffers. As it stands today, they haven’t made a profit 
in 16 out of the last 17 quarters 
<http://www.fastcodesign.com/3032215/the-design-legacy-of-ousted-american-apparel-ceo-dov-charney>
 and the shares havefallen 84% over five years 
<http://www.boston.com/business/news/2014/06/19/american-apparel-ceo-faced-allegations-harrassment-sex-slavery/wFRM0xcXxr4eUgqNj07XWK/story.html>
.

Maybe everyone just got bored? The most powerful word in marketing is new and 
yetAmerican Apparel <https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> 
used the same old tactic over and over again. As Time put it: “Being offensive 
only works the first 100 times.”

Another problem could be that the ads are sexist and yet the range is aimed 
predominantly at women.

And then there’s Dov.

Dov Charney founded the company and was responsible for all of the marketing. 
He has received multiple accusations of unwanted sexual conduct and wasfired 
this June 
<http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2014-06-19/american-apparel-founder-dov-charney-finally-gets-fired>
. Reading through his crimes and misdemeanours is like reading a real life 
version of Boogie Nights – funny to begin with (walking the shop floor in his 
Y-fronts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/aug/25/rise-fall-american-apparel>) 
sad and nasty by the end (having oral sex while being interviewed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/jun/19/dov-charney-american-apparel>
). With this backstory the brand very quickly stopped being sexy and started 
being sleazy.

Do shock tactics still work? Yes, but it’s become much harder. Charities with 
small budgets can still jolt us into action – just watchEd Morris’s film for 
Cybersmile <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=02aq183kAB0>. What’s changed is we 
now live in a real world. Isis videos arrive on our screens next to 
commercials, American Apparel lives in the same universe – and on the same 
tablets – as Operation Yewtree. Real is why these days we’re more interested in
Dove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/20/dove-real-beauty-sketches-ad-women-perfection>
 than Dov.

This may explain the success of Benetton’s Colours campaign 
<http://www.colorsmagazine.com>. Instead of trying to get banned, the 
advertising and highly influential magazine simply holds a mirror up to the 
world – and if the images get a few Daily Mail readers clutching at their 
pearls, so be it. Some ads have been banned but that seems to be a by-product 
rather than the primary aim. The work has always seemed a bit disconnected from 
the bright, fluffy jumpers they sell in store. But it’s been running for over 
20 years and the jumpers are still very much with us.

Some things don’t change. Brands that want headlines will always court 
controversy. And sex sells, so there will always be marketing directors who 
want to show knickers. But right now, I think we’ve all moved on.

David Prideaux is the executive creative director at Publicis Chemistry 
<http://www.publicischemistry.com/>

More like this:

• Note to brands using digital platforms – apply ‘humour’ with caution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/brand-marketing-archive/roundup?page=3>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 