
American Apparel <https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> has 
filed for bankruptcy protection after persistent plunging sales at the the 
scandal-ridden teenage fashion company.

The Los Angeles-based company, which makes all its clothes in the US, said it 
had reached a restructuring deal with 95% of its secured lenders to reduce its 
debts.

Lenders will write off about $200m (£131m) of bonds in exchange for equity in 
the company, reducing its debt to no more than $135m and cutting annual 
interest payments by $20m.

American Apparel: at first arty and subversive, then it got creepy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/21/american-apparel-arty-subversive-creepy>
As part of the deal, American Apparel will file for chapter 11 bankruptcy 
protection, the companysaid in a statement 
<http://investors.americanapparel.net/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=935021>. 

American Apparel started out as an idea that its founder, Dov Charney, had in 
his Tufts University dorm room in 1989. It expanded to sell US-manufactured 
clothing from 260 shops in 19 countries, attracting notoriety for explicit 
advertising. Then followed a string of increasingly lurid allegations against 
Charney, undermining any lingering glamour from the company’s image. He was 
alleged to have made an 18-year-old sales clerk his“sex slave” 
<http://nypost.com/2014/06/20/american-apparel-ceo-ouster-linked-to-sex-slave-case/>
, masturbated repeatedly in the presence of a female journalist 
<http://www.claudineko.com/storiesamericanapparel.html> sent to profile him and 
sent explicit texts to employees.

The 46-year-old Canadian, who once held a meeting wearing only a sock – not on 
his foot – has been cited in severalsexual harassment lawsuits 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/debtwire/2015/10/02/american-apparels-road-to-bankruptcy-littered-with-lawsuits/>
 brought by former employees.

However, it was mainly financial rather than sexual matters that led to the 
company’s downfall as American Apparel failed to keep up with its young 
consumers’ tastes. Charney’s behaviour arguably sapped the company’s morale and 
took its sexualised image too far for young shoppers.

Charney had built American Apparel into one of the world’s most admired 
fashion brands, trading on an image that combined hipster chic and the sexual 
mores of the 1970s.


He won plaudits for his “Made in America” policy, which shunned the sweatshops 
of Asia to support US manufacturing. He paid double the minimum wage to his 
mainly immigrant workforce and provided health insurance and free international 
telephone calls.

But changing fashion trends and the financial crisis made young shoppers less 
keen to pay £30 for one of Charney’s plain T-shirts. Sales slumped and debts 
mounted.


American Apparel’s board fired Charney as chairman in June 2014 and sacked him 
as chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/02/american-apparel-granted-restraining-order-dov-charney>
 in December for sexual misconduct. The board highlighted the rising cost of 
defending the company against lawsuits against Charney and said potential 
backers would not deal with a firm with the self-confessed “dirty guy” at the 
helm.


American Apparel’s bankruptcy had looked likely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/21/once-sexy-american-apparel-looks-impotent-impending-doom>
 for some time after it suffered mounting losses. The companyreported a $19.4m 
loss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/21/once-sexy-american-apparel-looks-impotent-impending-doom>
 in the second quarter of this year – its 10th consecutive quarterly loss – as 
sales dropped 17%.


American Apparel CEO Dov Charney fired: the fall of a merchant of sleaze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/17/american-apparel-ceo-dov-charney-fired-fall-icon-sleaze>
 “This restructuring will enable American Apparel to become a stronger, more 
vibrant company,” chief executive Paula Schneider said in a statement early on 
Monday.

The company listed assets and liabilities of between $100m and $500m in its 
bankruptcy filing.
 