
Dov Charney, the founder of American Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel>, was sacked from his 
role as CEO nearly a year ago, but he is still a looming presence at the 
fashion brand.

Only last week he spent a few hours walking back and forth outside the 
company’s Los Angeles offices alongside factory workers protesting over pay.

The controversial fashion executive, who was ousted after a string of lawsuits 
alleging sexual misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/17/american-apparel-paula-schneider-dov-charney>
, has been replaced by Paula Schneider, a former executive at the US label BCBG 
and the lingerie group Warnaco. She is trying to resuscitate the brand after 
nearly six years of falling profits.

American Apparel appoints female CEO after dismissing Dov Charney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/17/american-apparel-paula-schneider-dov-charney>
Many hoped her arrival in January would mark a turning point for the troubled 
company known for its hot pants, $30 (£20) T-shirts and high-waist jeans. Ten 
months in, however, she has been forced toput American Apparel into  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/american-apparel-files-for-bankruptcy>
Chapter 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/american-apparel-files-for-bankruptcy>
 bankruptcy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/american-apparel-files-for-bankruptcy>
 and seen factory workers batter a pinata effigy of her in their protest over 
pay. There have been dozens of legal actions,some of which stemmed from 
Charney’s time at the helm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/27/american-apparel-dov-charney-40m-damages>
.

Over the past 18 months, the company has spent more than $40m on lawyers’ fees 
and a nother $6m on settlements with former staff and other litigators.

“It’s been a wild ride,” she admits, dressed head to toe in black as she works 
the micro-wardrobe that enables her to pack carry-on for a business trip to 
London and the Middle East. “I didn’t expect it to be so contentious. It’s just 
a clothing company,” she says.

She says that certain members of the former management continue to stir up 
difficulties to fuel their agenda of “finding a way back into the company at 
all costs – at any cost”.

“I don’t think [Charney] will ever give up, but it doesn’t matter as there are 
new owners of the company,” she says.

Charney, who founded the brand from his Tufts University dormitory room in 
1989, lost his $8.2m stake when the company announced it was delisting last 
month and filed for bankruptcy with debts of more than $200m.

American Apparel files for bankruptcy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/american-apparel-files-for-bankruptcy>
The process, which should be completed early next year, will see bonds 
exchanged for equity in the company, reducing its debt to no more than $135m 
and cutting annual interest payments by $20m.

The debt restructuring is a key part of Schneider’s turnaround plan, which 
relies on reducing central costs while trying to reboot a brand that has become 
synonymous more with sleaze than sex appeal.


It’s a tricky game. “We’re trying to build the plane while flying the plane,” 
she said.

Once one of the hottest brands on the planet, American Apparel appears to have 
lost its mojo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/american-apparel-goes-out-of-fashion-and-into-bankruptcy>
. Sales dived 17% in the three months to 30 June, the last reported period.

When it launched in the late 1980s, newspapers wrote approvingly about its 
ethical stance. All its goods were made in the US where workers were paid and 
treated well.

More recently, however, it has made headlines over Charney’s exploits, which 
have includedturning up to work in his underpants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/jun/04/fashion.women> and 
masturbating in front of a female journalist, and itsadverts, which have 
frequently featured scantily clad young women in suggestive poses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/18/second-american-apparel-advert-banned-for-sexualisation>
.

Schneider says the brand will now talk more about US manufacturing and its 
campaigning work on immigration and gay rights. Sex will not, however, 
disappear.

“As a woman and a feminist, I want to celebrate women and ensure whatever we 
are doing doesn’t denigrate women, but I still think women are sexy and we are 
still a sexy brand,” she says.


Only 10% of the brand’s ads, such as a “back to school” shot of a young girl 
bending over a car to show her underwear, stepped over the line, she claims, 
adding that such ads will not be appearing again.

She says the sales problems are down to organisational and financial issues 
that prevented the company’s newest and most exciting products from reaching 
stores. This season, it only had enough money to deliver 10% of its 
autumn/winter range and that was after using every scrap of fabric in its 
warehouse.


“Our customer wants new, and when we introduce new products into stores we 
win. It’s less of a brand problem than an execution problem,” she says.

“Looking forward, we have a beautiful spring range and the liquidity to put 
that into work. We’re hoping that things will start on a better track going 
from spring into fall next year.”

Whether in forecasting and managing stock, making sure that advertised 
products are featured in stores or regulating sizes properly so customers know 
what fits, Schneider says a lot can be done to fix the basics.

Perhaps her most contentious move has been her cost-cutting strategy, which 
has reduced overtime hours at the factory and in stores. About 135 jobs have 
been cut in manufacturing and at head office in the past year.

She says that the company had a $14m overtime bill in 2014 and was losing 
money for the fifth year in a row. It has now changed staff contracts in stores 
and used planning tools to cut back on overtime. She insists that factory 
workers’ average hours have dropped just one hour to 40 hours, despite all the 
problems at the company.

“We have to manage things for the good of the whole company, for everyone’s 
benefit. There’s an overall understanding of that throughout the business,” she 
says.

Despite all the brickbats, she is motivated by keeping American Apparel’s 
9,000 workers in their jobs. “This leadership team is not the group who brought 
Amercian Apparel into bankruptcy. It is the group that is taking it out … Few 
brands have this cachet. American Apparel isn’t going anywhere. It’s going 
everywhere,” she says.

American Apparel: highs and lows

1989 Dov Charney founds the brand from his Tufts University dorm room

2006 The company floats on the New York Stock Exchange

2008 An employee sues, alleging that Charney ordered her to pretend to 
masturbate in front of him. He gives $25m in shares to employees

2009 The company is forced to fire 1,500 immigrant workers after inspectors at 
its Los Angeles factory find they have invalid or suspect papers. Debts mount 
as the company expands rapidly

2010 Auditor Deloitte & Touche resigns after discovering “material weaknesses” 
in the company’s financial controls

June 2014 Charney is sacked as chairman and suspended as chief executive 

July 2014 Standard General pumps $25m of investment into the company under a 
five-year agreement under which Charney agrees not to to serve any leadership 
role if he is deemed unfit by investigation

December 2014 Charney is fired as chief executive and the company appoints 
Paula Schneider as his successor

January 2015 Schneider takes the reins

March 2015 Charney reveals lawsuit claiming $40m damages for breaches of his 
employment contract

October 2015 American Apparel files for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection and 
announces plans to delist
 