
La’Porsha Renae, the runner-up for the final season of American Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>, which ended last week 
by crowning Trent Harmon the winner, has come under fire for saying she doesn’t 
agree with the LGBT “lifestyle”.

The Mississippi-born Renae was asked to comment on her home state’s newly 
signed anti-LGBT law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/mississippi-law-lgbt-discrimination-religious-moral-grounds>
, which blocks anti-discrimination rules for the LGBT community based on the 
idea of “religious liberty”, shortly after the American Idol finale aired on 
Thursday.

Bryan Adams cancels Mississippi tour date in protest over anti-LGBT law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/11/bryan-adams-cancels-mississippi-tour-date-protest-of-anti-lgbt-law>
“This is how I feel about the LGBT community: they are people just like us,” 
she said on a conference call, according toJezebel 
<http://jezebel.com/american-idols-laporsha-renae-does-not-agree-with-the-l-1770148125>
. “They’re people with feelings. Although all of us may not agree with that 
particular lifestyle for religious reasons, whatever the reason is, you still 
treat each other with respect. Everybody is a human being. We should be able to 
coexist with one another.”

Renae went on to further say that she is “one of the people who don’t really 
agree with that lifestyle”.

“I wasn’t brought up that way,” she said. “It wasn’t how I was raised. But I 
do have a lot of friends and a lot of people that I love dearly who are gay and 
homosexual and they’re such sweet, nice people. We should just respect each 
other’s differences and opinions and move on.”

Renae elaborated on her remarks on Twitter.

Fans were quick to respond, voicing their disapproval. One dissent came from 
prominent LGBT activistShane Bitney Cone 
<https://www.facebook.com/ShaneBitneyCroneOfficial/info/?tab=page_info> (who 
produced the gay rights documentary Bridegroom: A Love Story, Unequaled), who
tweeted <https://twitter.com/ShaneBitney>: “Being gay isn’t a lifestyle; it’s 
part of who someone is. Using the word lifestyle implies it’s a choice – which 
it isn’t.”

As Jezebel pointed out, Renae’s comments are in stark contrast to a statement 
she made toYahoo Music 
<https://www.yahoo.com/music/laporsha-renae-on-using-american-idol-as-a-062256777.html>
 on Wednesday, saying she planned to use the American Idol spotlight “for 
good”. “It’s a show where a lot of times they shed light on certain things,” 
she said of the show.

American Idol has dealt with a similar LGBT-related controversies over its 
15-year run: in 2006, finalist Mandisastated 
<http://www.realityblurred.com/realitytv/2006/04/american-idol-5-mandisa_advocate/>
 she would never perform at an LGBT event because she’s “not an advocate for 
being gay”.
 