
The good news is that President Obama has already partially succeeded in 
making income inequality the focus of his second term, and definitely his state 
of the union address. The bad news is that it may not make much of a difference 
to the people who have it the worst.

His strategically leaked decision to substitute the term "income inequality" 
with the more euphemistic "ladders of opportunity" has an 
any-publicity-is-good-publicity quality to it, of course, as Fox News and other 
conservative outlets and commentators haveleapt upon the substitution 
<http://www.rawstory.com/rs/2014/01/26/george-will-sotu-is-a-plot-to-change-subject-but-obama-cant-hide-his-shrinkage/>
 as an example of Obama's desperation and weaknesses ("shrinkage 
<http://www.rawstory.com/rs/2014/01/26/george-will-sotu-is-a-plot-to-change-subject-but-obama-cant-hide-his-shrinkage/>
" in the provocative phrasing of conservative commentator George Will). They 
consider it a tacit symbol of the White House surrendering to a public that 
doesn't reallywant to talk about income inequality. 

But are a lot of poll results indicate that Obama is onto something. If 
there's a critique to be had about the "pivot", it's not that he's distracting 
the public from the administration's other problems, it's that his attention to 
income inequality has not matched the intensity with which Americans are now 
thinking about it. Gallupreports 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/166904/dissatisfied-income-wealth-distribution.aspx>
 that 67% of those polled are dissatisfied (39% "very" dissatisfied) with the 
distribution of wealth in America and 45% are dissatisfied with "opportunities 
to get ahead by working hard" – both numbers the highest they've been in a 
decade. Pewtells us 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/01/27/state-of-the-union-2014-where-americans-stand-on-key-issues/>
 that a stunning 69% believe the government should do something about the 
divide – and 43% say that it should "a lot" of something.

It is true that the massive and growing gap between the rich and poor is not 
ordinarily a topic of polite (or cable news) conversation. Fox News' recent 
batch of disingenuouspolling 
<http://www.foxnews.com/politics/interactive/2014/01/22/fox-news-poll-voters-say-us-still-in-recession-glad-know-snowden-secrets/>
 took advantage of our societal reticence on the subject. Their poll asked "How 
do you feel about the fact that some people make a lot more money than 
others?". Not surprisingly, they found 62% said, "I'm OK with it – that's how 
our economy works" and another 21% responded, "It stinks, but the government 
should not get involved."

"Some people make a lot more money than others" is hardly the problem, both in 
the sense that the question does not address the scope of "a lot more"nor it 
does not define what it means to "make" it. Most (53%) of theincome 
<http://www.cnbc.com/id/100958750> "earned" – one has to use the term somewhat 
loosely here – by the top 0.1% richest Americans is not salary for job, but the 
product of money being made out of money.

The Fox poll does get to one honest premise: up to a point, we take inequality 
for granted. Indeed, Americans are more sanguine about capitalism's separation 
of winners and losers than the rest of the world. When asked about it a source 
of national concern (as opposed to general dissatisfaction) just 47% of 
Americans say it's a problem. Ironically, weconsider 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/12/06/the-u-s-s-high-income-gap-is-met-with-relatively-low-public-concern/>
 it less of a problem than the people of other economically-developed countries 
do – even though we're the ones with the most alarming disparity. The income 
ratio of our rich to poor is 16.7%, more than double that of the next most 
divided country (Spain, at 6.8, where, justifiably, 75% say it's a problem), 
yet the only country less concerned with income inequality is Australia (33%), 
whose income ratio is a mere 2.7.

The degree to which Americans are "OK" with income inequality probably depends 
on their experience with it. Historically, Americans are indenial 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2013/08/why-americans-all-believe-they-are-middle-class/278240/>
 about both what class they belong to and thedifferences 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2013/03/06/this-viral-video-is-right-we-need-to-worry-about-wealth-inequality/>
 between the classes: income distribution is abouttwice 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2011/02/income-inequality-in-america-chart-graph>
 as unequal as poll respondents say they think it is.

But reality is sinking in. Americans are starting to discover that they 
themselves, or friends or a loved ones, have been pushed into the social safety 
net we used to think was there for someone else. Food stamps, once a symbol of 
desperate neediness allotted to those unable to fend for themselves, now assist 
arecord 
<http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2014/01/26/new-face-food-stamps-working-age-americans/>
 number of Americans (one in seven) – and a majority of them are working-age 
adults. Twenty-eight percent have at least some college education. Foreclosures 
and unemployment have turned people who had been solidly middle class into 
suddenhomelessness 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/01/12/homeless-america_n_808339.html>. 

In the last decade, wages have stagnated 
<http://www.epi.org/publication/a-decade-of-flat-wages-the-key-barrier-to-shared-prosperity-and-a-rising-middle-class/>
 for white-collar, college-educated workers at the same rate as blue-collar 
workers. In fact, fewer Americans than ever nowidentify 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/key-data-points/the-middle-class-pew-research-key-data-points/>
 (down to 44% from 53% in 2008) as middle class. Self-identification is 
catching up with reality.

People understand that the economy has not tanked so much as split in two, 
with the rich scuttled to the security of lifeboats, likely to be rescued, 
while the poor and middle class cling to the wreckage. If we're going to go 
with historical analogies for the current crisis, the Titanic is a lot more 
fitting than the offensive over-reach to Kristallnachtmade 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/livewire/tom-perkins-liberal-war-one-percent-kristallnacht>
 by venture capitalist Tom Perkins in the Wall Street Journal over the weekend:

 Writing from the epicenter of progressive thought, San Francisco, I would 
call attention to the parallels of fascist Nazi Germany to its war on its "one 
percent", namely its Jews, to the progressive war on the American one percent, 
namely the 'rich'.

At Talking Points Memo, Josh Marshall astutely observes that Perkins' grating 
folly stems from a combination of "socionomic acrophobia 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/edblog/the-brittle-grip-part-2>" (a "gulf of 
estrangement of and alienation") and paranoia. Indeed, the very rich cannot 
seem to take their attention off their bank acounts long enough to notice that 
the class struggle is not about them, it's aboutbeing poor. Or being just a few 
rungs of the ladder away from it.

The poor know all about what it's like to be rich, celebrity gossip magazine 
and reality television shows have seen to that, but the wealthy seem to know 
nothing, and can't be bothered to find out, about what it's like to poor.

The short version is that it sucks. The longer version is scarier and more 
precise about outcomes: low-incomes are linked to a lot of rather obvious 
material and physical outcomes, such asheart disease 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2009/03/27/us-lifelong-poverty-idUSTRE52Q3S520090327>
,diabetes <http://www.healthline.com/health/type-2-diabetes/rates> and asthma 
<http://inplainsight.nbcnews.com/_news/2014/01/03/22149240-mold-mice-and-zip-codes-inside-the-childhood-asthma-epidemic?lite>
.

In fact, in the past 30 years, the US has seen a "life expectancy gap" grow in 
line with the income gap: the poorest among us today canexpect 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/congress-blog/economy-a-budget/244141-poverty-takes-its-toll-on-life-expectancy>
 to die at the rates they did before the Civil Rights Era, the richest can 
expect to live five yearslonger 
<http://money.usnews.com/money/personal-finance/articles/2012/02/14/do-rich-people-live-longer>
.

Perhaps more surprising, even to those living in the midst of it, is the 
impact of poverty on relationships – both to self and others: the poor are 
three timesmore 
<http://minorityhealth.hhs.gov/templates/browse.aspx?lvl=3&lvlid=539> likely to 
suffer from mental illness. Being poor knocks off 13 IQpoints 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/poverty-effect-on-intelligence-2013-8> in terms 
of being able to address complex problems). Children in poverty are more likely 
to have their parents' marriage end indivorce 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/08/25/divorce-poverty-children-census_n_936896.html>
 and more likely to sufferabuse <http://www.nber.org/digest/jan00/w7343.html>). 

Some conservatives may grasp onto the subject effects of poverty as a way of 
justifying their preferred method of addressing income inequality: "return to 
sender", they deserve it. (Among Republicans, 51%say 
<http://www.msnbc.com/politicsnation/gop-blames-poverty-laziness> poverty is 
due to "lack of effort".) But further studies suggest that almost all of the 
negative effects of poverty are reversible across generations: if youinfuse 
<http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2014/01/18/what-happens-when-the-poor-receive-a-stipend/>
 money into a poor family, their children will succeed and behealthier 
<http://www.cnn.com/2011/10/20/health/high-poverty-areas-increase-obesity/>. 
They will be less likely to need the assistance that supported the generation 
before them. This not a hypothetical discussion about "welfare culture" versus 
"entrepreneurism". This is, to coin a phrase, just how our economycould work.

These concrete consequences and results are why Obama's project is not just 
urgent but eminently practical. Wecan do something about the income gap. 
Indeed, many argue that we already have: without what'salready 
<http://nlihc.org/article/new-poverty-measure-illustrates-benefits-government-intervention>
 been done, the situation today could be even worse. Government intervention 
practical for another reason as well: if nothing is done to slow down and 
ultimately reverse the growing gap between rich and poor, Perkins' siege 
mentality may become less ludicrous – for exactly the reasons he suspects! 
Doubling down on his Wall Street Journal comments, on Monday he emailed 
Bloomberg News furtherthoughts 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-01-26/kleiner-perkins-shocked-by-co-founder-comment-on-nazis.html>
 on the state of class struggle in America: "In the Nazi era it was racial 
demonization, now it is class demonization."

Class has indeed overtaken race as the signature fault in our wealth divide. 
Researcher Robert Putnamwarns 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2012/06/robert-putnam-class-now-trumps-race-as-the-great-divide-in-america/259256/>
:

The class gap over the last 20 years in unmarried births, controlling for 
race, has doubled, and the racial gap, controlling for class, has been cut in 
half. Twenty years ago the racial gap was the dominant gap in unmarried births 
– and now the class gap is by far.

You can see this fault line in still-pitifully pointless war on drugs as well, 
as working-class non-violent white drugoffenders 
<http://www.vice.com/en_uk/read/americas-war-on-drugs-is-the-holocaust-in-slow-motion>
 find themselves swept into the same grinding system of punishment, continued 
addiction, and recidivism – or, just as tragically, they enter the parallel 
economy of the drug trade.

Conservatives are, in this regard, completely correct about capitalism as a 
tool of economic advancement; a successful drug dealer is as much an 
entrepreneur as any other "maker" in America. We just are more aware of the 
social costs of their business – unlike our stubborn inattention to the costs 
of a more generalized form of chemical distribution, as in, say,West Virginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/13/west-virginia-chemical-spill-versus-bridgegate>
.

In other words, the class war could get more radicalized. Imagine the GOP 
without its southern strategy. Imagine a world where the leader of a new block 
of activist voters isn't representative of racial equality but of class 
solidarity. Imagine a free market allowed to run truly free (and the drug laws 
stay the same). If that time comes, Perkins and his cohort can only wish that 
it was the Obama government doing the intervention.

If America has in the past had trouble bringing its own attention to the 
problem of income inequality, it's because people assume that it is not as bad 
as it is.
 