
As Jennay Ghowrwal and her brother prepared to leave their mother’s house in 
Bethesda, Maryland, in March 2011, they prepared themselves for an ugly 
conversation.

For nearly two years, the Ghowrwals’ 65-year-old mother had been living alone 
with untreated schizophrenia. She refused medication. She wouldn’t see a 
doctor. The Ghowrwals’ Sunday visits were a critical part of the makeshift care 
system they’d created around their mother. And it was where they gave her a 
weekly allowance.


“That was the worst part,” says Jennay Ghowrwal, 28. “She always asked for 
more than she was going to get.”

But that spring afternoon, their mother’s demands were more extreme than 
usual. She demanded $2,000 because, she said, she needed a haircut. Frustrated, 
and weary of her mother’s emotional instability, Ghowrwal refused. “I said, 
‘No, mom. I’m sorry. We can’t give you that.’”


Her mother went quiet.


When she started to talk, her speech was quick and difficult to decipher. The 
CIA was after her. Her kids were out to get her.


“If I can’t have control over my life, then they can’t either,” she screamed 
through tears. Then she grabbed a box of matches from the kitchen table, and 
lit one. As the match burned in her mother’s fingers, Ghowrwal remembers being 
relieved, thinking: “Finally. The moment we’ve been waiting for.”

In the last several years, national tragedies like the shootings in Newtown 
have put pressure on the US government to improve access to mental health 
treatment. This weekend’s violence in Santa Barbara has reignited the issue. 
But behind these headline-grabbing mass killings is a much broader crisis.


The most publicised reform came in November 2013 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/09/opinion/equal-coverage-for-the-mentally-ill.html>
 when the Obama administration issued regulations directing all private 
American insurance plans to cover mental health care in the same way as other 
medical care. These regulations mean, among other things, that co-payments and 
caps for mental health-related treatment cannot be more expensive or 
restrictive than for any other type of medical care.

There’s just one problem: while Obama may have expanded access to mental 
health benefits, the reach of the services those benefits theoretically provide 
hasn’t kept up. The availability of mental health care in the US remains 
woefully inadequate to handle current demand, never mind a potential influx of 
new patients.

Paul Appelbaum, a Columbia University psychiatrist and an expert on legal and 
ethical issues in medicine and psychiatry, uses a simple phrase to sum up the 
biggest problem.

“Right to care does not mean access to treatment,” he says. “Tens of millions 
of people who did not have insurance coverage may now be prompted to seek 
mental health treatment. And the capacity just isn’t there to treat them.”


“There really is no mental health system in the US.”

‘A system requires a vision. What we have is a shapeless void’

Appelbaum’s blunt assessment was echoed by dozens of doctors, patients and 
caregivers with whom the Guardian spoke for an investigation into the US mental 
health care system. Inadequate access to treatment services and providers all 
over the country, has left families of the mentally ill picking up the burden, 
and the cost, of providing care.


The Ghowrwals are one such family.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fmay%2F27%2F-sp-americas-mental-health-care-system-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F23%2F1400872130463%2Fcb5984c1-2962-4d26-934e-c7a718891f80-1020x812.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=America's%20mental%20health%20care%20crisis%3A%20families%20left%20to%20fill%20the%20void%20of%20a%20broken%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fmay%2F27%2F-sp-americas-mental-health-care-system-crisis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=America%27s%20mental%20health%20care%20crisis%3A%20families%20left%20to%20fill%20the%20void%20of%20a%20broken%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2014%2Fmay%2F27%2F-sp-americas-mental-health-care-system-crisis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F5%2F23%2F1400872130463%2Fcb5984c1-2962-4d26-934e-c7a718891f80-1020x812.jpeg>
 Jennay Ghowrwal at home in Baltimore, Maryland. Photograph: Ruth Spencer for 
the Guardian 
Jennay Ghowrwal’s mother hadn’t always been sick.

In 1976, she came to the US from Afghanistan on a prestigious Fulbright 
scholarship. She first settled in Ohio, where she met her husband. In the early 
80s, Ghowrwal and her brother were born.

When Ghowrwal’s mother got a job in Washington working for the government, the 
family of four relocated to Virginia. There, they lived an uneventful life, 
until 1995, when their father died following a series of strokes.

Over the next few years, Ghowrwal’s mother poured herself into her work and 
rose through the ranks in the Defense Department, and eventually gained a high 
security clearance position at an intelligence agency. “Nothing seemed to throw 
her off,” Ghowrwal says.


Though she lived in the US for years, Afghan culture was always an important 
part of her mother’s life. In Virginia, she became a fixture in the Afghan 
community. “She was always taking on new challenges,” says her daughter. She 
started a non-profit Afghan women’s organization and even hosted her own public 
access television show about Afghan culture. In fact, in retrospect, one of the 
first signs something was wrong, Ghowrwal says, was that she stopped doing her 
show. But not everything was so obvious.


Passing comments about ever-present government surveillance were justifiable, 
Ghowrwal reasoned, because her mother worked at an intelligence agency. When 
her mother complained of workplace harassment, it again made sense; the 
Ghowrwals were Afghan immigrants living in post-9/11 America.


But her mother’s behavior at work soon became stranger, harder to ignore. She 
started having crying fits at her desk. She lashed out at colleagues. It didn’t 
take long before her co-workers reported her to their supervisor, and her 
employer began investigating her, eventually assigning a psychologist to review 
her mental state.


 “Personality disorder,” the psychologist wrote on the report, and recommended 
treatment if she wanted to keep her high-security clearance – and her job.

At first, Ghowrwal sided with her mother. “I read the report with the sense 
that her employer wasn’t being honest – and less with a suspicion that any of 
that was true. I don’t know why I was so skeptical other than I had never had a 
sense that my mother was detached from reality,” she says.
America's mental health care crisis: quick takes 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2014/04/2014-04-mh-factbox/Index.html> 
Still, although Ghowrwal didn’t yet believe that her mom was ill, she 
encouraged her to seek treatment for the sake of getting her job back. “But 
when we talked about it, she laughed and said ‘I’m not doing that,’” Ghowrwal 
remembers.

After she refused to follow the psychologist’s instructions, Ghowrwal’s mother 
was fired. She’d been making a six-figure salary, and had premium health 
insurance. Both were now gone.


Ghowrwal, who had just returned from a semester abroad in Chile, was now faced 
with an unemployed, unstable mother and burdened with the task of finding out 
what was wrong – and how to deal with it.


She moved out of her dorm on campus, and back into her childhood bedroom. 
Without an income, Ghowrwal’s mother was blowing through her savings. Ghowrwal 
took a job and helped with mortgage payments, bought groceries and paid utility 
bills. She cooked, she cleaned, she tried to keep her mother calm. Her life as 
a carefree college student was over.


“I don’t think I realized how messed up I was. I was emotionally unstable and 
angry all the time,” Ghowrwal says. “I would blow off assignments and my grades 
really suffered. I failed a few classes. And yet I was unaware that at the 
center of all this confusion was something truly life-changing.”


Living at home, Ghowrwal watched as the woman who raised her became someone 
else. She was obsessed with finding a job, but would make up excuses for why 
she couldn’t follow through on her applications. She demanded her children 
spend time at home, but her unpredictable behavior made their time together 
difficult.


“Everything was becoming about the delusions. She started to throw plates 
during arguments. She once threatened to kill my brother if he married a woman 
she didn’t approve of,” Ghowrwal says. As their mother became more unstable, 
Ghowrwal and her brother realized they needed to get her help.

“There wasn’t a single moment of horror,” Ghowrwal says, describing her 
mother’s deteriorating mental state. “It was kind of like a slow burn, building 
up to a flame of terribleness that eventually reached breaking point.”

First, they tried a tactical approach, asking their mother to seek treatment 
for their sake. “We told her seeing a therapist might help her be ‘less 
stressed’”, Ghowrwal says. “We didn’t even bring up medication.” But her mother 
refused. Time and time again. “We kept asking her, but eventually she started 
to get angry with us for bringing it up. There was no use,” Ghowrwal says.

Eventually, Ghowrwal and her brother looked into other options. “We started to 
realize that she needed to be forced into treatment.”

“Involuntary commitment was just sort of a thing we thought logically existed 
in society for people who needed it,” Ghowrwal says. She and her brother went 
to court to try and get an order for their mother’s hospitalization. But 
because of high commitment standards, their petitions were refused.

“The judge basically told us she would have to be wielding a knife in 
someone’s face at the moment that the petition was made. Or, alternatively, 
dying of hypothermia in her car.”

Paul Appelbaum says the “dangerousness” standard, which means a patient must 
be at risk of hurting themselves or others before they can be hospitalized 
against their will, makes it difficult for the families of seriously mentally 
ill people to get them into treatment. In order to get their loved ones the 
help they need, they often have to stand by and watch them spin out of control.

“The most agonizing calls I get are from family members who clearly are very 
worried about a loved one with a serious mental illness,” Appelbaum says. “I 
have to tell them that unless you can make a case that your loved one is likely 
to harm themselves, or likely to harm other people, or you’re willing to throw 
them out on the street, there’s no way to get them into the system. The 
involuntary system is very tightly constrained by these dangerousness criteria.”

Commitment standards – graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2014/04/2014-04-commitment-standards/index.html>
Dangerousness was not always the standard for involuntary treatment. Up until 
the 1970s, a mentally ill person only had to be “in need of care” in order to 
qualify for involuntary hospitalization. But as the deinstitutionalization 
movement gained momentum, attitudes toward mental health care evolved. One by 
one, states found “need of care” to be unconstitutionally broad, and 
unconstitutionally vague, and narrowed their standards to dangerousness. At the 
time, it made sense.

“These decisions were issued in an era when a majority of people were being 
hospitalized in large state institutions, which were typically underfunded 
understaffed and provided poor care,” Appelbaum says. “The courts were 
responding to that as well as the more theoretical constitutional 
argumentation.” One consequence of this change is that today, families have to 
wait for their loved ones to reach, as some call it, “rock bottom” before they 
can receive the care they need.

For help understanding the intricacies of the mental health system (and why it 
was so difficult to get her mother hospitalized) Jennay Ghowrwal turned to her 
local chapter ofNAMI’s Family2Family support group 
<http://www.nami.org/Template.cfm?Section=Family-to-Family&lstid=605>, for 
people with mentally ill loved ones.

“Hitting ‘rock bottom’ was a theme people would raise [in the group],” 
Ghowrwal says. “That’s what it takes.‘Let them fall hard enough and then 
they’ll get treatment’, they’d say.” For many of these families, this meant 
letting their loved ones become homeless, suicidal or homicidal.


When Ghowrwal watched as her mother stood in her kitchen, burning match in 
hand, she knew it was her chance. She picked up the phone and dialed 911.


After she lit that match, Ghowrwal’s mother was, as Ghowrwal had hoped, 
admitted to a hospital. But two weeks later, she was out again.

“All the doctors agreed with us that she needed to be there,” Ghowrwal says. 
“I couldn’t understand how she could be let out.”

With the match incident, Ghowrwal’s mother had finally met the dangerousness 
standard, which was enough to get her committed. But it wasn’t enough to get 
her treated.


In Maryland, at the time Ghowrwal was hospitalized, a patient had to be deemed 
dangerous in his or her community to be admitted involuntarily. But, to be 
medicated involuntarily, a patient had to be deemed dangerous a second time, 
while in the ward itself. And, of course, a patient who might be very dangerous 
on the street could potentially pose no issues while hospitalized.


The problem with this, Rebecca Birnbaum, a clinical researcher at the Lieber 
Institute for Brain Development <http://www.libd.org> in Baltimore, notes, is 
that anti-psychotic medication is critical to treating schizophrenia.

“Without medication and therapeutic sessions, patients and families endure a 
lot more suffering,” Birnbaum says.

Recognizing the barrier to treatment that the law presented, officials in 
Maryland finallychanged it <http://openstates.org/md/bills/2014/HB592/> this 
year.


Even with treatment, however, some experts say that patients need to be 
spending more time in the hospital than wards permit.


“In the 1980s, average length of stay was probably 20-30 days, whereas today 
it’s a week or less in most places,” Appelbaum says. “That’s not a lot of time 
to stabilize somebody in a psychotic condition or somebody with severe 
depression.”

For the 15 days Ghowrwal’s mother was held in the hospital, she did not 
exhibit acts of aggression considered dangerous enough to merit medication. 
Without the medication necessary to treat her delusions, she was released in 
essentially the same state that she was in when she was admitted.

America's mental health care crisis: join the conversation 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2014/04/2014-04-mh-join-conversation/Index.html>
Appelbaum says the fall in the length of stay on inpatient units is driven by 
two important factors: one, a drastic drop in in-patient beds over the years, 
and two, as demand for beds has increased, psych wards haven’t expanded.

“The public sector in this country has shrunk to just a mere ghost of its 
former self,” Appelbaum says. “In the mid-1950s there were over 555,000 people 
at any given time in psychiatric hospital beds. There are fewer than 55,000 
[beds] in service today.”


Moreover, psychiatric wards lose money. Their patients are, more often than 
not, on Medicaid, which has a very low reimbursement rate for care providers. 
“The returns are just not enough to cover the cost of care,” Appelbaum says. 
According to him, no matter how many patients cycle through the beds, or how 
long the waiting line is behind them, psychiatric wards are rarely, if ever, 
expanded. As a result, patients are let go too early, making it even more 
likely that they’ll cycle through the system again.

 When Ghowrwal went to pick up her mother at the hospital, she says the 
doctors understood her predicament. “They were like:‘We get it. It sucks. 
Here’s what we can offer.’” They sent her mother away with prescriptions for 
antipsychotics and referrals for community mental health centers.


“We asked our mom: ‘Are you planning to do any follow-up treatment?’ and she 
laughed it off,” Ghowrwal says. Left without any other option, Ghowrwal drove 
her mother home, which is where she remains today. “As far as I know she threw 
the prescriptions in the trash,” Ghowrwal says. It’s been three years since she 
was released, and she hasn’t seen a psychologist or a psychiatrist since.

Faced with few options, and unwilling to watch their mother bottom out again, 
the Ghowrwal children have taken matters into their own hands.

Jennay Ghowrwal and her brother have, at great personal expense, created a 
world in which their mother can live on her own and be safe. They check in on 
her regularly. They pay all her bills. They’ve learned to handle her delusions. 
It has not been easy.

Her persistent distrust of the government means she refuses to accept any 
assistance from it. Attempts to relieve some of the financial burden have 
included tricking their mother into signing up for food stamps. “We got her to 
sign a random piece of paper, just so we could get her signature,” says 
Ghowrwal.

Ghowrwal estimates that in the last six years, she and her brother have spent 
upwards of $140,000 on her care. “Each month, my brother and I spend about 
$2,000 on her.” she says, adding that her mother has been relying on those 
funds for about six years. “She’s our mother. I don’t want to imagine what 
would happen if she was living on the streets.” Throughout her years caring for 
her mother, Ghorwhal has become passionate about improving mental health care. 
Just this year, she took a job working for the Treatment Advocacy Center.

If the Ghowrwals lived in one of the 45 states that offer outpatient 
commitment (also calledAssisted Outpatient Treatment 
<http://www.treatmentadvocacycenter.org/solution/assisted-outpatient-treatment-laws>
), things might be different. Outpatient commitment is a policy in which 
certain patients are ordered by a court to continue treatment, like visiting a 
psychiatrist or taking medication, while living outside the hospital. 
Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Mexico, Tennessee and Maryland are the outliers.

Paul Appelbaum says studies of outpatient commitment programs shows that they 
do a lot of good for the people who need them. “The data suggests that with 
that sort of structure, with a court order in place and the services made 
available, people are much less likely to be re-hospitalized, they are much 
less likely to end up in jail and less likely to be homeless. All of the major 
outcome measures that you’d wanna look at for this group are moved 
significantly in the right direction by outpatient commitment.”

This year, the Maryland House defeated 
<http://openstates.org/md/bills/2014/HB767/> a bill proposing outpatient 
commitment. But according to Jeffrey Janofsky, director of the Psychiatry and 
Law program at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, making it law wouldn’t be 
enough to guarantee the program’s success anyway.

 “There’s no point in passing legislation if you’re not going to provide the 
funds to back it up,” he said. “New York has a particular kind ofoutpatient 
civil commitment law <http://www.omh.ny.gov/omhweb/Kendra_web/Ksummary.htm>, 
but that law comes with millions of dollars of funding for necessary services. 
The real question in Maryland is, are we as a society going to spend the money 
to treat patients with significant mental disorder? And we’ve decided, ‘No, we 
are not.’”
 