
American Apparel’s UK business is likely to be closed after the fashion 
retailer appointed administrators on Tuesday.

The Los Angeles-based company, which makes all its clothes in the US, has 
endured a difficult period since the departure of its controversial founder Dov 
Charney in 2014.The parent company filed for Chapter 11, the US version of 
administration, just over a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/american-apparel-files-for-bankruptcy>
 and is up for sale after its chief executive, Paula Schneider, stepped down in 
September.

The group’s 13 UK stores and some other European operations are not part of 
the US sale and are therefore likely to be wound down, according to joint 
administrators Jim Tucker and Richard Beard of KPMG.

American Apparel: a trip from the height of cool to lows of bankruptcy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/american-apparel-from-height-cool-lows-bankruptcy>
Tucker said American Apparel’s US parent had been “experiencing strong retail 
headwinds” that had led to it halting product shipments to the UK, where the 
brand was also experiencing trading difficulties.

Tucker said: “The 13 UK stores are well stocked and will continue to trade as 
usual in the lead-up to the peak Christmas trading period. While the UK 
business is not part of the US sale, a number of the UK stores are in prime 
high street locations, and we will also aim to sell individual stores following 
the Christmas trading peak.”

Charney launched American Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> while at university in 
1989, combining sexy, fashionable clothing with ethical production. The brand 
expanded to more than 200 stores in more than 20 countries but attracted 
notoriety for racy advertising often featuring young female staff members.

He later faced a string of increasingly lurid allegations, undermining the 
company’s image. He wasalleged to have masturbated in the presence of a female 
journalist <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/jun/04/fashion.women> 
and reportedly sent explicit texts to employees.

As changing fashion trends and the financial crisis made young shoppers less 
keen to pay £30 for one of Charney’s plain T-shirts, sales slumped and debts 
mounted.


American Apparel’s board fired Charney as chairman in June 2014 and sacked him 
as chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/02/american-apparel-granted-restraining-order-dov-charney>
 the following December. He has sinceattempted to buy back the brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/25/judge-rejects-dov-charney-bid-bankrupt-american-apparel>
.
 