
Watch Kanye West perform Gold Digger on American Idol
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/05/watch-kanye-west-perform-gold-digger-american-idol-audition-video>
As American Idol fumbles to the end of its 15-year run on television, critics 
and other media types have dug up that old chestnut about how TV executives who 
once trembled in fear at the thought of Idol’s presence on the schedule 
referred to the show as “the Death Star”. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/05/arts/television/american-idol-final-season.html?ref=topics&_r=0>
 Maybe not the most apt comparison to make, as the Death Star was a genocide 
machine the size of a moon and American Idol was, at worst, kind of crap.

I suppose Idol was revolutionary when it premiered on 11 June 2002. The first 
reality boom was at its peak, 9/11 and the subsequent wars had Americans in 
what I like to call “a bit of a mood”, and audiences had never seen such a 
bloated, self-important spectacle dedicated to a talent contest. Plus, we all 
got to vote on it! Finally, Americans could have their voice heard in an 
election that refreshingly wasn’t rigged. Every year, we got to elect some 
ropey crooner to act as the avatar for our collective aspirations. There were 
heroes (Kelly Clarkson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/04/kelly-clarkson-determination-celebrity-grammys-jane-austen-interview>
, Fantasia, Carrie Underwood) villains to thwart (Simon Cowell, Sanjaya 
apologist Howard Stern), and the insidious sideshow acts that livened up the 
audition round. I have the distinct honor of one day being able to tell my 
children that even though I never served in the military or fought for their 
freedom, I did live through the William Hung phenomenon and resisted the 
temptation to capsize my brain with a sack full of remote controls.

American Idol will die as it lived, though – self-important and unrelentingly 
pretentious

All that “triumph of the human spirit” stuff – the smiling, the positivity, 
the aw-shucks wholesomeness – eventually lost its appeal, and American Idol’s 
ratings collapsed. In the meantime, producers and networks perfected (or in 
some instances, mutated) the reality talent show. When NBC’sThe Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-voice> premiered, it was billed 
as being more forgiving to true talents because the judges couldn’t see if the 
contestants were ugly or not. Horrifyingly, some of them did end up being ugly. 
The nerve of them. This is broadcast television, for God’s sake, not the Food 
Network!

Fortunately for Americans unused to seeing normies on TV, the producers 
increasingly focus their program on the banter between the hosts and the flashy 
cameos by pop stars hoping to promote their new albums. The contest is almost a 
distraction from whether or notAdam Levine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2013/nov/20/adam-levine-sexiest-man-alive-people-magazine-backlash>
 and Blake Shelton are going to fight or run away to Ibiza with each other 
(though Levine would have to deal with Gwen Stefani if they did). On Idol, the 
judges were there to serve the holy mission of crowning a new megastar. On The 
Voice, the contestants could be juggling for all I care. I don’t remember what 
the prize is for winning The Voice, but I think it’s a first-class plane ticket 
back home.

Then there’s the truly apocalyptic stuff like MTV’s The Challenge, currently 
in its bajillionth season. It’s not a singing show, but it does take a certain 
amount of talent to participate – mostly a talent for anti-social behavior, 
binge drinking, and feats of strength. It’s part-Survivor, part-Real World, 
part-Intervention. When the players aren’t competing in games like “move this 
flag from one side of a lake to another” or “push this boulder up a hill”,they 
are threatening to punch each other 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UPHoXl3nJOg>. It’s pretty nihilistic stuff, 
all barely held together by laconic host TJ Lavin, whose major pet peeve is 
quitters, which he will mention whenever he can. Whereas American Idol meant to 
lift you up by the end of its runtime, The Challenge would prefer you go out 
and kick a dumpster.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Famerican-idol-final-season-the-voice-the-challenge-reality-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9aed5971d9cb3e62a08ee45705c759bf0431b5e%2F0_187_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=American%20Idol%3A%20a%20final%20farewell%20to%20the%20'Death%20Star'%20of%20reality%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Famerican-idol-final-season-the-voice-the-challenge-reality-tv%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=American%20Idol%3A%20a%20final%20farewell%20to%20the%20%27Death%20Star%27%20of%20reality%20TV&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Famerican-idol-final-season-the-voice-the-challenge-reality-tv%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9aed5971d9cb3e62a08ee45705c759bf0431b5e%2F0_187_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The Bachelor: ‘I love chicken too.’ Photograph: Rick Rowell/ABC 
Elsewhere, there’s ABC’s The Bachelor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/05/the-bachelor-episode-one-season-20-recap>
 – a steady ratings performer that premiered the same year as American Idol. 
The Bachelor occasionally feels just as old-fashioned as its reality sibling. 
On both shows, the prize isn’t a pile of cash or a sports car – on Idol, it’s 
stardom and on Bachelor, it’s a monogamous relationship. Sure, there’s a 
recording contract and a marriage license that are physical, but really, it’s 
intangible desires that both shows are satisfying. We all want love and most of 
us would like to be famous. But while Idol got even more sickly sweet after 
Simon Cowell pissed off to pilot the American version of The X-Factor into the 
ground, The Bachelor gets more self-referential, absurd and intentionally 
comedic every season. InMonday’s season premiere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/05/the-bachelor-episode-one-season-20-recap>
, we were introduced to contestants like Tiara, who listed her occupation as 
“chicken enthusiast”; Lace, whose name and sour temperament remind me of my 
favoriteAmerican Gladiator 
<https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/736x/05/eb/3d/05eb3d29c91fb5bc51f50681001e5db5.jpg>
; and Mandi, a dentist who, upon meeting this season’s Bachelor Ben Higgins, 
gave him an oral exam.

American Idol: where would country music be without it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/13/american-idol-country-music-carrie-underwood>
As Idol marched to the grave, it re-emphasized the talent part of the format. 
Svengalis like Cowell and Randy Jackson gave up their seats at the judges’ 
table to accomplished pop acts such as Jennifer Lopez and Keith Urban. The 
contest started to matter more, even though we all cared less. The producers of 
The Bachelor know that a sizable portion of its audience, cheekily known as 
“Bachelor Nation”, is wise enough to see through the artifice of it all and 
aren’t so naive that they believe the marriages dramatized on the show aren’t 
primarily for the benefit of the cameras. There’s an irreverence and a thinly 
veiled sarcasm that’s kept the show fresh as the same narrative gets repeated 
season after season across the multiple series in the franchise. It’s the 
television equivalent of air quotes. It matters, but it doesn’t actually matter 
at all.

American Idol will die as it lived, though – self-important and unrelentingly 
pretentious. We will be reminded that it’s a “cultural institution”. I can 
think of another cultural institution that was popular in America and used to 
be a big hit on TV: beauty pageants. Miss America and its ilk aren’t all that 
different from American Idol – they reward bland aesthetic perfection and claim 
to be life-changing moments for the winner. They’re both spectacles to the 
extreme. Pageants are about as trendy asfrosted blonde tips 
<http://famous-relationships.topsynergy.com/!photos/Ryan_Seacrest.jpg> or Fred 
Durst. The only way to get Americans to care about a beauty pageant is for
something to go horribly wrong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/22/anatomy-of-a-scene-steve-harvey-miss-universe>
. I’ll be watching the live Idol episodes this season, silently praying 
somebody screws up. Maybe J-Lo’s extensions fall out or Sanjaya comes back to 
demand his revenge. Better yet, what if Harry Connick Jr endorsed Cliven Bundy 
for president? I’ll take just about anything over the next few weeks of 
tedious, back-slapping nostalgia.

American Idol is on Fox tonight at 6pm EST
 