
Scarlett Johansson is gold dust

You only had to hear the groans at Marvel's Comic-Con panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jul/27/marvel-fans-comic-con-ant-man-avengers-age-of-ultron>
 when it was announced that a pregnant Johansson could not attend to understand 
how beloved this actor has become. The Avengers proved she could cut the 
mustard as an action star and Johansson effortlessly carriesLucy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/23/-sp-lucy-scarlett-johansson-first-look-review>
, a sci-fi actioner featuring the latest strong female character from 
EuropaCorp head Luc Besson, who gave us Leon: The Professional, La Femme Nikita 
and The Fifth Element. Universal handles the release through a distribution 
deal with EuropaCorp and at this rate, with a good international run likely due 
to Johansson's broad appear and EuropaCorp's European smarts, the $40m (£23.5m) 
movie will make a profit.

• Lucy: first look review <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lucy>
• Scarlett Johansson: five best moments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/apr/04/scarlett-johansson-five-best-moments>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMVt32qoyhi0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMVt32qoyhi0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FMVt32qoyhi0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MVt32qoyhi0>

Hercules wades into action

Not quite the muscular start that Paramount and MGM would have wanted for its 
$100m adventure starringDwayne Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dwayne-johnson>, but Hercules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hercules> has got off to a decent start in 
North America and is doing well internationally, which so often makes up 
domestic shortfall. Johnson, AKA the Rock, made a surprise appearance at 
Comic-Con on Thursday towards the end of the Paramount panel and told attendees 
he had booked out three theatres that would offer free previews that night on a 
first-come, first-serve basis. It was a smart 11th-hour marketing push by the 
studio and they will be hoping that strong word-of-mouth and ongoing free 
screenings to tastemakers and voters (Bafta LA screens the movie this week) 
will increase momentum.

• The Hercules diet: Stuart Heritage eats and exercises like The Rock for a day
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/23/hercules-dwayne-johnson-stuart-heritage-the-rock-diet>
• Peter Bradshaw reviews Hercules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/23/hercules-review-dwayne-johnson-the-rock>

And So It Goes breaks into top 10

Clarius Entertainment managed an impressive feat – landing a top-10 debut for 
And So It Goes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jul/24/and-so-it-goes-reiner-keaton-douglas-review>
, a dull-looking comedy-drama starringMichael Douglas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-douglas> and Diane Keaton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/diane-keaton> and directed by Rob Reiner 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001661/>. What were they all thinking? Just goes 
to show how a smart piece of marketing and an appropriate p&a spend can get a 
movie into the public discourse. The 1,762 theatre count suggests a marketing 
spend of $15-20m and the release was a calculated decision to provide a 
suitable theatrical uplift for what the film-makers hope will be a lucrative 
run on VOD. After all, the movie title begins with the letter A, a good hook 
for people looking for a movie from the comfort of their couch who have lazy 
thumb syndrome.

• And So It Goes – first look review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jul/24/and-so-it-goes-reiner-keaton-douglas-review>
• Diane Keaton: 'I love Woody. And I believe my friend' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/03/diane-keaton-i-love-woody-allen-i-believe-my-friend>

Woody Allen basks in the Moonlight
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLAwbwKURvm0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLAwbwKURvm0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FLAwbwKURvm0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to watch trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LAwbwKURvm0>

Despite mostly lukewarm reviews for what many critics have called a minor 
Woody Allen movie,Magic in the Moonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/25/magic-in-the-moonlight-woody-allens-film-is-as-airy-as-they-come-first-look-review>
 got off to a flyer through frequent Allen distributor Sony Pictures Classics. 
A $426,000 opening gross from 17 sites delivered the strongest average of the 
top 100. SPC has enjoyed as much success as it has because it sticks to its 
model of rolling out movies in a particular way: slowly and deliberately and 
generally within a tight expansion pattern that seldom strays above 700 if an 
Allen movie is showing early signs of fading. There are always exceptions to 
the rule, as we saw on his last two movies,Blue Jasmine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/blue-jasmine> and Midnight in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/midnight-in-paris> – arguably his finest 
movies of the past 20 years. The former peaked in 1,283 sites and finished on 
$33.4m, while Paris peaked in 1,083 and ended on $56.8m. If SPC thinks 
Moonlight hasn't got a shot of passing $10m, Allen's new release won't get into 
more than 700-800 theatres.

• Woody Allen's magic touch wows New York despite return of sex allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/19/woody-allen-film-outshines-shadows-in-his-private-life>
• Tom Shone reviews Magic in the Moonlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/25/magic-in-the-moonlight-woody-allens-film-is-as-airy-as-they-come-first-look-review>

How high can Boyhood go?

IFC are going to keep Boyhood <https://www.theguardian.com/film/boyhood> 
around for a long time – and they should.Richard Linklater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/richard-linklater>'s coming-of-age drama, 
shot over 12 years with the same actors, is a marvel of story-telling and 
deserves major honours come awards season. So far the movie ranks 14th and 
stands at $4.6m. It just expanded from 34 to 107 theatres and is entering only 
the third week. This is the kind of movie that cannot get enough word-of-mouth 
and such referral will develop the must-see cachet IFC is looking for. The 
distributor will keep it in a low number of venues and build out slowly. It 
will be interesting to see how far it goes, because IFC is typically geared 
towards ancillary platforms these days but it will to have to spend a bit if it 
wants awards glory.

• Peter Bradshaw's five star review of Boyhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/10/boyhood-review-richard-linklater-film>
• Boyhood: six quibbles with Richard Linklater's masterpiece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jul/14/boyhood-six-quibbles-with-richard-linklaters-masterpiece>

North American top 10, 25-27 July 2014

1 Lucy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/23/-sp-lucy-scarlett-johansson-first-look-review>
, $44m

2 Hercules <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hercules>, $29m

3 Dawn Of The Planet Of The Apes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dawn-of-the-planet-of-the-apes-film>, $16.4m. 
Total: $172.1m

4 The Purge: Anarchy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-purge-anarchy>, 
$9.9m. Total: $51.3m

5 Planes: Fire & Rescue <https://www.theguardian.com/film/planes-fire-rescue>, 
$9.3m. Total: $35.1m

6 Sex Tape <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sex-tape>, $5.9m. Total: $26.9m

7 Transformers: Age Of Extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/transformers-age-of-extinction>, $4.6m. 
Total: $236.4m

8 And So It Goes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jul/24/and-so-it-goes-reiner-keaton-douglas-review>
, $4.6m

9 Tammy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tammy>, $3.4m. Total: $78.1m

10 A Most Wanted Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156230/a-most-wanted-man>, $2.7m
 