
Fox executives announced on Monday that the network’s one-time ratings 
juggernautAmerican Idol would officially conclude 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/may/11/fox-cancels-american-idol>
 after its 15th season next year. The news was hardly a shock for fans of the 
show. After years of consistent ratings decline, a constantly rotating judges’ 
panel that never quite recovered from Simon Cowell’s departure, and a 
marketplace flooded with rival reality singing competitions like The Voice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/apr/01/pharrell-williams-confirmed-us-edition-the-voice>
, American Idol was well past its prime. Even so, for an Idol junkie like me 
(I’ve watched the show since season one, when Kelly Clarkson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kelly-clarkson> was crowned America’s newest 
pop princess), there was more than a little heartache in the announcement.

American Idol, despite its detractors, has launched true superstars. This is 
something that the US versions of The Voice and The X-Factor (with the recent 
exception of budding pop supergroupFifth Harmony 
<http://www.etonline.com/music/164387_fifth_harmony_on_their_summer_tour_sass_hairflips_and_girl_power/>
) – not to mentionRising Star <http://abc.go.com/shows/rising-star>, Duets 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2297363/>, Rock Star  
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0826456/>etc – have not been able to achieve, and 
it’s always given Idol an edge in the credibility department. Of course, not 
every Idol contestant has reached Clarkson’s heights of success, but artists 
likeRuben Studdard <http://www.rubenstuddard.com/>, Jordin Sparks 
<https://www.jordinsparks.com/>, Fantasia Barrino 
<http://www.fantasiaofficial.com/us/home>, Chris Daughtry 
<http://www.daughtryofficial.com/us/home>, David Cook 
<http://www.davidcookofficial.com/>, Adam Lambert 
<http://adamlambert.warnerbrosrecords.com/>, Kris Allen 
<http://krisallenofficial.com/>, Jennifer Hudson 
<http://www.jenniferhudson.com/home>, Phillip Phillips 
<http://www.phillipphillips.com/> and David Archuleta 
<http://www.davidarchuleta.com/> have found legitimate pop success with 
platinum singles and/or albums, even if their mainstream fame was sometimes 
short-lived. Perhaps no Idol alumnus has been more ubiquitously successful than
Carrie Underwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/mar/14/carrie-underwood-private-jet-american-idol>
, country music’s most successful female star at the moment.

With four multi-platinum albums, 19 chart-topping singles (which DJ Earworm 
recently mashed up <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yUK_kVwqrtI>), gigantic 
endorsement deals with brands like Almay and Olay, and the plush gig of singing 
NBC’sSunday Night Football theme <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z7ZrkIclBgQ> 
in front of over 20 million viewers each week, Underwood is the jewel of the 
Idol brand: a stunning all-American girl with powerhouse vocal abilities and 
the sales to back up her talent. She is the perfect winner of American Idol, 
embodying the show’s diamond-in-the-rough conceit. She began her run as a timid 
and wide-eyed Oklahoma girl and evolved into a belting star, unafraid to take 
musical chances and career risks.

But Underwood isn’t the only country star that Idol has spawned. The show has 
had a disproportionate presence in Nashville for most of its run, beginning with
Josh Gracin <https://joshgracin.com/>, a former marine who finished in fourth 
place during the show’s second season. Gracin scored three top five singles in 
the year after his Idol run, including the No 1 hit Nothin’ To Lose, a 
fast-rapping confection with a refrain – “Breaker breaker one-nine she’s a big 
old flirt” – that’s still rather charming a decade later.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwEIvcek1uao&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwEIvcek1uao>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwEIvcek1uao&media=>
 Josh Gracin finished in fourth place but still managed three big singles. 
In season five, a pair of North Carolina natives won over audiences. After an 
eighth place finish, Bucky Covington released a few hit singles to radio, and 
his hitI’ll Walk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=muXJK0mrvgs> remains one of 
the most audaciously absurd story songs released to radio in recent memory. (In 
the song, a young woman rejects her boyfriend’s advances on the way home from 
prom, gets out of his car, and tells him: “I’ll walk.” She’s then promptly hit 
by a truck and forced to recover in a wheelchair, but she tells the doctors: 
“I’ll walk.” And in the end ... well,you just have to listen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=muXJK0mrvgs> to believe it.)

That same season (when Idol was averaging over 30 million viewers a night), 
Kellie Pickler became a water cooler favorite with her ditzy antics, as she 
babbled over Simon Cowell’s critiques and mispronounced words like “salmon”. 
She parlayed her natural comic ability into a career that’s been one part TV 
star – she’s a very frequent guest on Ellen, a recent winner of Dancing With 
the Stars, and was a correspondent for The Tonight Show during Jay Leno’s 
tenure – and one part country musician.

After scoring with hits like Red High Heels 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-5Ri8GY57SI> and Best Days of Your Life 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JLUvO8QUmXc>, Pickler left behind her standard 
pop-country sounds and has evolved into a brassy traditionalist with a highly 
critically acclaimed album in 100 Proof, which unfortunately sold poorly. 
Pickler’s now signed on to star in a reality series about her life and career 
for CMT, to air later this year. She’s dropped all the dumb blonde routines and 
now comes across as even more likable for her candour and genuine spirit of 
independence. If she can couple the right radio singles with the airing of her 
new show, Pickler could easily become one of country’s leading ladies this 
year. Frankly, my fingers are crossed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqFQl-rrDryM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqFQl-rrDryM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqFQl-rrDryM&media=>
 Kellie Pickler auditions for the show. 
Season 10 brought Idol’s other big country acts: Scotty McCreery and Lauren 
Alaina, two then teenagers who faced off in the show’s season finale. McCreery, 
a deep-voiced crooner in the same vein as Josh Turner, ended up winning the 
show, and his debut album Clear as Day defied expectations by going platinum. 
McCreery followed up that disc with a far superior second album that launched 
the delightful singleSee You Tonight 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dFlv4O7VE-A>. In keeping with the responsible 
persona that won over grandmas across the country during his Idol run, McCreery 
is currently finishing college at North Carolina State University and using his 
summer breaks to go on tour.

Alaina, meanwhile, is working on a follow-up to her minor-hit debut, 
Wildflower, and the vocal and emotional maturity she has lately communicated is 
miles beyond where she was during her time on Idol. Alaina is, for me, one of 
the most intriguing women preparing new music in Nashville. She’sspoken openly 
<http://www.mjsbigblog.com/lauren-alaina-reveals-family-alcohol-addiction-issue-root-new-song.htm>
 about the family drama (namely, her father’s battle with alcoholism) that has 
delayed her second album’s progress, and if songs like Same Day Different 
Bottle are any indication, she could be sitting on a gold mine with her 
resulting output.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXgsdl0SHBrY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXgsdl0SHBrY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXgsdl0SHBrY&media=>
 American Idol helped launch Lauren Alaina’s career when she was a teenager. 
Beyond its individual success stories, Idol, in a broader sense, helped to 
make country music a staple of the reality genre. USA’sNashville Star 
<http://www2.usanetwork.com/series/nashvillestar/> rose in Idol’s wake, and it 
showcased talented individuals likeMiranda Lambert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jun/12/miranda-lambert-platinum-review>,
Chris Young 
<http://www.cmt.com/news/1754053/chris-young-releases-first-new-music-in-almost-three-years/>
 andKacey Musgraves 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/kacey-musgraves-announces-new-album-pageant-material-20150512>
 long before they broke into the mainstream. Today, The Voice has become the 
de-facto destination for country hopefuls as Idol has waned in popularity, and 
that’s primarily due to the massive appeal of coachBlake Shelton 
<http://www.usmagazine.com/celebrity-news/news/blake-shelton-didnt-call-adam-levine-after-sugar-bomb-incident-2015125>
. Burgeoning stars likeRaeLynn <https://www.raelynnofficial.com/>, Cassadee Pope
 <http://www.cassadeepope.com/> and Danielle Bradbery 
<https://www.daniellebradbery.com/> all got their start on The Voice under 
Shelton’s mentoring, and The Voice has learned how to generate the same 
heartland appeal that Idol once understood in how it presents its contestants 
to the public. It doubles down on family tales and sob stories, presenting its 
contestants a lot like the subjects in a country song. It’s a key component of 
the show’s success.

Even as Idol prepares to say farewell, its enduring effect on the pop culture 
landscape – and specifically in country music – will be felt for as long as its 
alumni continue to succeed.
 