
Embattled retailer American Apparel, dealing with plunging sales and 
attempting to distance itself from founder and suspended CEO Dov Charney,
unveiled a new-look board of directors 
<https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1336545/000104746914006345/a2220878zsc14f1.htm>
 on Wednesday.

Four people, including the company’s first female director, are joining the 
board, leaving one slot open. The new board will be tasked with repairing the 
company’s damaged reputation and financial situation.


Open contributions: did you choose a career traditionally held by the opposite 
gender? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jul/29/us-workplace-industry-gender-balance>


“What I think they are trying to say is: ‘American Apparel is not you Dov 
Charney,’ and I think that’s an important statement they need to make – that we 
can do this without you,” said Marcia Narine, assistant professor of law at 
Saint Thomas University. “Companies have to be able to go beyond their 
founders, go beyond their public face, or else they can’t survive.”


Charney served as CEO and chairman of the board from 12 December 2007 until 18 
June 2014, when the board voted him out of both roles. Charney facednumerous 
allegations of sexual misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/19/dov-charney-american-apparel> 
including a claim that he received oral sexwhile being interviewed by a reporter
 <http://www.claudineko.com/storiesamericanapparel.html>.


A board committee is charged with overseeing a “continuing investigation into 
alleged misconduct by Dov Charney”. Charney is entitled to his base salary as a 
consultant to the company until the committee reaches its final decision, 
though he has agreed to not interfere in the investigation or access company 
computers.


“Is this person too much of a liability to be in the company?” said Narine. “I 
would hope you don’t need a gender-based perspective to make that decision.”


Standard General, a New York-based investment firm, obtained a 43% stake in 
the company following a June deal that also gave it power to select three new 
board members. The other two slots must be filled by people agreed upon by
American Apparel <https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> and 
Standard General.


Allan Mayer and David Danziger, co-chairmen of the board, are the only 
directors from the previous iteration of the board who remain on it. The new 
directors are Colleen Brown, former chief executive of Fisher Communications; 
Joseph Magnacca, Radio Shack chief executive; Thomas J Sullivan, a managing 
partner of a financial advisory firm; and David Glazek, a partner at Standard 
General.


“This slate of directors brings significant financial, retail, and corporate 
turnaround expertise to the board,” Glazek said in a statement. “I look forward 
to working with the other new directors, as well as the board’s co-chairmen, to 
leverage the company’s strong brand for the benefit of shareholders, creditors, 
employees, and the Los Angeles community.”


Five of the seven former board members, including Charney, resigned on 9 July. 
Charney had close ties with former directors including Robert Greene, author of 
The Art of Seduction.Reporters at the LA Times 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-dov-charney-20140620-story.html> said 
Charney called Greene “a genius, El Senor and Jesus”, during one interview.


Alberto Chehebar, a board member since February 2012, profiled Charney while 
working as an editor at Loft magazine. “Brash and bold, Dov Charney talks 
faster than he thinks, and he thinks faster than any of his more-established 
competitors,”Chehebar wrote 
<http://www.americanapparel.net/presscenter/articles/20041100loft.html>, after 
depicting a scene where Charney asks for help from an assistant by saying: 
“Napkin, Erika!”

“Any board that lets the things you read about and hear about pass so easily, 
that’s not an independent board,” saidLucy Marcus 
<https://twitter.com/lucymarcus>, board director and corporate governance 
expert. “Only time will tell whether they’ve put the right people on the board 
and whether they’ll be able to do what’s necessary to shore up the company, 
because this guy aside, the company is struggling.”
 