
On the night of 1 May 2014, Egyptian police climbed the six floors to the 
offices of the Belady Foundation, an organisation aiding Cairo street children, 
and arrested everyone inside.

Officers gathered laptops and phones that would later be investigated for 
evidence, and also arrested several of the street children cared for by the NGO.

Its founders – American-Egyptian citizen Aya Hijazi, and her husband Mohammed 
Hassanein – were arrested along with two other employees. Four more were 
simultaneously arrested across Egypt’s capital.

It would be two days before Hijazi’s family members were able to locate her 
and her husband inside Egypt’s labyrinthine prison system.

It took four months for Hijazi and her co-defendants to be charged with a 
range of offences, including human trafficking, sexual exploitation of children 
and using the children for protests against the security forces.

'No end in sight': detention wears on for American who ran Egypt children's 
clinic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/17/aya-hijazi-american-egypt-detention>
“We know, they know, and everyone knows that these are trumped-up charges,” 
said Basel Hijazi, Aya’s brother.

They have since spent more than 900 days in pre-trial detention, even after a 
forensic science report commissioned by Egypt’s public prosecutor found no 
evidence that the children cared for by the Belady Foundation had been sexually 
assaulted. “Any evidence that the government might try and use against them is 
by definition fabricated,” said Wade McMullen, the head of Hijazi’s US legal 
team.


A recent report 
<http://us2.campaign-archive2.com/?u=054f3995082bb41dbd340ee51&id=fa6645ead2> 
by legal observers found that Hijazi’s case had repeatedly violated both 
international law as well as Egypt’s own constitution. But such objections may 
have little impact when Hijazi next enters a Cairo courtroom on 17 December.


Hijazi’s family members have called on the United States to intervene, but 
time could be running out for Hijazi, as the incoming Trump administration has 
already signalled it intends to build close ties with the Egyptian president,
Abdel Fatah al-Sisi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>.

Sisi has prevailed over the harshest crackdown on human rights in Egyptian 
history, targeting political opponents, journalists and NGO workers.

Yet when the pair met 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/readout-of-donald-j-trumps-meeting-meeting>
 on the sidelines of the UN general assembly in September, Donald Trump had 
only praise for Sisi’s leadership, saying that under his administration: “The 
United States of America will be a loyal friend, not simply an ally, that Egypt 
can count on in the days and years ahead.”

The Egyptian foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, met 
<http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/1/64/251122/Egypt/Politics-/Egypt-FM-meets-US-Vice-presidentelect-Mike-Pence.aspx>
 Trump’s running mate, Mike Pence, in early December. Families of those 
previously detained in Egypt say that engaging the state department to do more 
was already tough, but under Trump it could prove near impossible.

For the first two years of Aya’s detention, the Hijazi family relied on quiet 
assistance by the US embassy in Cairo but declined higher level political or 
media pressure.


“We thought that bringing in the Americans would do more harm than good,” 
explained Basel, given that so much of the initial outrage in the Egyptian 
press had been directed at Aya’s American nationality.

But after a string of deferments, the Hijazis changed tactics earlier this 
year.


“Pressure is key,” said Hanaa Soltan, the sister of Egyptian-American citizen 
Mohamed Soltan, who wasfreed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/30/egypt-frees-ohio-state-graduate-mohammed-soltan-hunger-strike>
 from an Egyptian prison in May 2015, following a 16-month hunger strike.

Soltan, said that US citizens can fall victim to broader political concerns 
when it comes to how the state department chooses to handle a particular case.


“The lesson we learned is that you have to force them to going above and 
beyond to give citizens abroad their rights, otherwise all they’ll do is show 
up for the required visit [to the prison] every four to six weeks,” Soltan said.

The Soltans, who have become the hub in a network of concerned relatives, say 
that there are far more Americans secretly imprisoned inEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>. “There are six or seven more 
families that have directly reached out to us for help,” said Hanaa Soltan. 
“But speaking to folks who are familiar with the subject, the numbers are 
higher, in the low to mid-30s.”

Trump previously vowed 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-trump-idUSKCN0XO10R> to put 
“America and Americans first” in a campaign speech. But Hijazi’s case means 
this pledge may falter over his newfound friendship with the Egyptian president.


The added uncertainty of what could happen after Trump’s inauguration has made 
Hijazi’s case all the more urgent. “It’s transition time,” said Hanaa Soltan. 
“God only knows what’ll happen after January.”
 