
American Hustle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156243/american-hustle>
 (2013)

Director: David O Russell

Entertainment grade: A–

History grade: C+

This review contains spoilers about the film. 

In 1978, the FBI launched Abscam <http://vault.fbi.gov/ABSCAM%20>, a sting in 
which "fake sheikhs" attempted to bribe public officials. The operation 
attracted controversy, including claims that it was racist and/or constituted 
entrapment.

People

"Some of this actually happened," admits a title card cheerfully at the 
beginning of the film. It begins in 1978, with conman Irving Rosenberg 
(Christian Bale) arranging his complicated coiffure before acting as a fixer 
between an obscure sheikh and Carmine Polito (Jeremy Renner), the well-loved 
and mostly decent mayor of Camden, New Jersey. In real life, the conman was 
Melvin Weinberg, and the mayor wasAngelo Errichetti 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Angelo_Errichetti>.

Readers of Robert W Green's biography of Weinberg, The Sting Man, might find 
its "hero" is less charming in real life. DirectorDavid O Russell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-o-russell> sticks broadly to the 
outline of the real story, but shifts many of the characters' internal and 
interpersonal dynamics to focus on the practical and moral difficulties both of 
hustling, and of trying to out-hustle the hustlers.

Style
 Amy Adams in American Hustle. Photograph: Allstar/Columbia 
Pictures/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
Rosenberg's cons are carried out in conjunction with his mistress, Sydney 
Prosser (Amy Adams), who masquerades as a British aristocrat. In real life, 
Weinberg's co-con-artist and mistress was a British woman called Evelyn Knight. 
He also had a wife, Marie, who was roughly analogous to Rosalyn (Jennifer 
Lawrence) in the film. In real life, Weinberg was in his 50s and Marie her late 
40s, while Bale is 39 and Lawrence is 23; and a couple of the linking lines on 
the love pentagon that emerges are also invented. This film takes so much joy 
in sexing and glamming up the 1970s, though, that it seems a bit mean to tell 
it off for this sort of thing. Plus, the film-makers makeBradley Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bradley-cooper> wear his curlers onscreen, 
which means they can be forgiven almost anything.

Investigators
 Christian Bale, Amy Adams and Bradley Cooper in American Hustle Photograph: 
Entertainment Film Distribution 
Rogue FBI agent Richie di Maso (Cooper) pushes Rosenberg into working for him. 
Di Maso occupies approximately the same place inthe story as real FBI agents 
Tony Amoroso and John Good 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/to-the-players-in-abscam-the-real-life-american-hustle-the-bribes-now-seem-quaint/2013/12/26/d67648c2-6c15-11e3-a523-fe73f0ff6b8d_story.html>
, though neither was as crackers as he is in the film, and there is no 
suggestion either secretly curled their hair either. Abscam resulted in 19 
successful prosecutions. As in the film, these included one US senator and six 
congressmen.

Race

It is true that the FBI set up "fake sheikhs" – agents posing as wealthy Arabs 
– to con public officials. The price ofoil rocketed in the 1970s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/mar/03/1970s-oil-price-shock>, 
notably in 1973 and 1979, owing to the political situation in the Middle East. 
This made the oil-producing states extremely rich, though the Arab world still 
appeared mysterious to westerners – meaning it seemed plausible, as in the 
film, that some Mexican bloke in a dishdasha could pass himself off as an 
Emirati squillionaire. For once, the truth was even less convincing than 
fiction. The real FBI didn't even bother with a Mexican. They used an Irish 
bloke.He was agent Mike Dennehy 
<http://www.northjersey.com/columnists/52564612.html>, who may not have had 
strong Arab credentials but perhaps had acting in his blood: he is the brother 
of Golden Globe and Tony award-winnerBrian Dennehy 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0001133/]>.

Happiness
 Jennifer Lawrence in American Hustle. Photograph: Allstar/Columbia 
Pictures/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 
The film's biggest strength – aside from its glorious wig and costume 
department – is the terrific performances of its five leads. Adams and 
Lawrence, in particular, stand out. Though the film only just scrapes past the
Bechdel test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/punctuated-equilibrium/2010/nov/24/2> (two 
female characters talk to each other about something that isn't a man, but it 
is nail varnish topcoat), both of their characters are complex, human and 
gripping to watch. Unfortunately, the film's happy ending is not accurate. It 
is true that Weinberg, like Rosenberg in the film, left his wife for his 
mistress – but the abandoned Marie, unlike Rosalyn, did not end her marriage by 
getting shacked up comfortably with a mobster.Instead, she hanged herself 
<http://www.people.com/people/archive/article/0,,20081447,00.html>.

Verdict

Yeah, some of this actually happened. Kind of.

• David O Russell interview: 'I identify with strivers and survivors' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/dec/18/american-hustle-director-david-o-russell-video-interview>

• Peter Bradshaw: Don't be duped by American Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/13/golden-globes-2014-american-hustle-12-years-a-slave>
 