
Virgil Hunter has said Amir Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> 
can be boxing’s “new No1” if he defies all predictions and beats Saúl “Canelo” 
Álvarez here on Saturday night – but the Californian trainer admitted: “If he 
loses focus, it could be over in a blink.”

Amir Khan, the road to Vegas – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/may/07/amir-khan-the-road-to-vegas-in-pictures>
Hunter, one of the sport’s cannier individuals, sounded as if he were drawing 
up a get-out clause for himself and his fighter, adding: “He has to take one 
round at a time. That’s what I will be saying to him this week and on fight 
night. He’s a joy to train and his instinct is to fight his way out of 
situations – not to manoeuvre, not to think his way out, fight his way out.

“A lot of times, you can’t change that. But you can train him as to what part 
of the terrain to fight on and what part of the terrain not to fight on. In the 
end, you have to let him be himself and hope that what you drilled him on shows 
up in the fight.

“In all great fighters like him, there’s a great fight in him somewhere. It 
just takes a moment like this and it can be called up. From the time he started 
boxing, fromthe Olympic silver medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2004/aug/30/athensolympics2004.olympicgames1>
 tothe first world title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jul/19/amir-khan-wins-world-title> to 
his second one, that fight is in him and he can beat anybody in that moment. I 
don’t think we’ve seen the best of him yet because he’s never been out-boxed in 
a fight.

“He could be the new No1 but, in boxing, the promoters and the media, they can 
say what they want to say. What a fighter’s peers say, that is most important 
because that’s where the most respect comes from. He can be the man if he wins 
and he should feel like he’s the man. It can do a lot of good things for him 
and his career, however long he goes. It would be a catapult to bring 
everything to fruition, from the first day he started up to this point.”

There are some encouraging thoughts there, but Hunter turned a few heads when 
he proclaimed recently that Khan could have been a global superstar on a par 
with Floyd Mayweather Jr had he been part of his stable from an early age. It 
was a put-down for all his past trainers, including Freddie Roach, who remains 
bitter abouthis split with Khan four years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/dec/13/freddie-roach-amir-khan-carlos-molina>
.

Roach made his name with Manny Pacquiao. Khan’s latest gnomic muse gets his 
self-belief from his attachment to one fighter, Andre Ward, one of the sport’s 
elusive geniuses, who has been with him since he was nine years old.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Famir-khan-saul-alvarez-wbc-middleweight-title-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amir%20Khan%3A%20it's%20my%20time%20to%20hold%20WBC%20middleweight%20title%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Famir-khan-saul-alvarez-wbc-middleweight-title-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amir%20Khan%3A%20it%27s%20my%20time%20to%20hold%20WBC%20middleweight%20title%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F05%2Famir-khan-saul-alvarez-wbc-middleweight-title-video&media=>
Amir Khan: it’s my time to hold WBC middleweight title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/may/05/amir-khan-saul-alvarez-wbc-middleweight-title-video>
Did Hunter reckon he had improved on Roach’s work with Khan?

“That’s already been proved in my estimation,” he replied. “When you look at 
what we have done and how he’s done it, I think it proves what we have worked 
on is beginning to show and has shown. But Saturday night, because of the name 
and magnitude of it all, will be much more significant.”

It is a fight that could end Khan’s career or push him to a level he cannot 
have imagined was within his grasp down at welterweight. Hunter admitted he was 
not initially keen on the fight because of the difference in weight and power.

“I hadn’t seen him in a while and the first thing that came into my mind was 
the size disparity. But he came in pretty good shape. One of the conditioning 
coaches went over to see him eight weeks before he got here. He was here five 
weeks before they even confirmed the fight. When he told me what he wanted, his 
answers let me know we could dare to go for it and be great.

“The [Luis] Collazo fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/may/04/amir-khan-shows-welterweight-class-to-defeat-luis-collazo>
 andthe [Devon] Alexander fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/14/amir-khan-delivers-on-biggest-stage-with-dominant-win-over-devon-alexander>
 proved that, when his mind is really locked in, he can pull out a fight which 
makes it very hard to beat him. I think he’s got more levels to that and in 
this fight, because there are elements of danger in every minute and every 
second, we could see that.”

Amir Khan and Canelo Álvarez team up against Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/05/amir-khan-canelo-alvarez-donald-trump-boxing>
Khan said earlier in the week he would not quit boxing until he won another 
title. Hunter is not convinced. “I pay more attention to the walk than the 
talk, but I encourage him to back up everything he says. I would like to 
support him on that. Time will tell; it’s hard for me to look past Saturday.

“We don’t know what Canelo truly weighs because he is weighed before a fight 
with his clothes on. They do that. Once you’re 160lbs and you can fight, it 
really doesn’t matter what weight the other guy is. A middleweight can knock a 
heavyweight out. I think he’s big enough, whatever Canelo weighs.

“Amir can use his speed to win on points, which is logical. I’ve seen kids cut 
up by Amir. If Canelo gets hit in an area where there are nerve endings, you 
may see something happen. Catch him on the temple, behind the ear, on the point 
of the chin … you never know.”

Fighters and trainers win together. They should lose together, as well, but 
sometimes that does not happen. While Hunter might not like to admit it, he is 
fighting on Saturday night too, for his vaunted reputation.
 