
“50 Cent’s got one, The Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/may/02/ed-sheeran-and-the-game-confirm-plans-for-a-joint-album>
’s got one and I’ve got one,” said Amir Khan, showing off one of his Jacob & Co 
custom-made watches as he lounges on his bed in Bolton. He picks up a pair of 
white basketball trainers fresh from the box. “Shaquille O’Neal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jan/21/shaquille-oneal-sworn-in-as-florida-reserve-police-officer>
, [Michael] Jordan. None of ’em have got these. Only me.”

How do I ... offer a room to a refugee?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/11/how-do-i-offer-a-room-to-a-refugee>
Outside, he demonstrates the retractable roof on his AC Schnitzer 6 Series BMW 
convertible with the A1 8OXER numberplate, one of many flash cars with 
deafening stereo systems crowding the forecourt of his family’s gated compound. 
“The thing about this car is: the fuel costs so much, you know what I mean!” he 
says from the front seat. “You put a tenner in. A tenner’s nuffin. A tenner, 
the needle doesn’t even move.” For a while after he bought it, he couldn’t get 
insured on it, he admits. “My dad wouldn’t let me drive it. It was just parked 
up.”

That was the old Amir Khan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jj1zeOXXokg>, 
filmed more than six years ago for the ITV4 show, Cribs. Then, the boxer was in 
his early 20s, his career on an upward trajectory afterwining a silver medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2004/aug/30/athensolympics2004.sport1> at the 
Athens Olympics, aged just 17.

Now 28, married with a daughter, Khan would like you to believe he’s a changed 
man.

“Some watches I bought, I think now: why the hell did I pay that much for a 
watch?” he says on Thursday, from the boardroom of his office above his gym in 
Bolton. Like how much? He ponders. “Sixty grand?” Sixty grand! You could buya 
three-bedroom house 
<http://www.rightmove.co.uk/property-for-sale/property-35244135.html> in Bolton 
for that, I say. He looks a little sheepish. “I know. But I was young then. I 
used to have Lamborghinis, Ferraris parked up outside the house – just parked 
there with no one driving them! Now I’m much wiser and I only have one car that 
I drive. What’s the point of having three cars just parked up when you don’t 
need them?”

This new parsimony has been brought about by three things: his 2013 marriage 
to New YorkerFaryal Makhdoom <https://twitter.com/FaryalxMakhdoom> (always “the 
wife” or “the missus”); becoming a father to Lamaisah in May 2014; his 
ever-expanding realm of charity work, which on Friday saw himfly to Greece 
<https://twitter.com/AmirKingKhan/status/644745020801740800> to meet a convoy 
of trucks carrying supplies he had collected in Bolton and beyond for Syrian 
refugees.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Famir-khan-i-could-buy-anything-i-want-but-id-rather-do-charity-work-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442591825329%2F3a6b64e1-9280-47bb-a662-64a071338e75-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amir%20Khan%3A%20'I%20could%20buy%20anything%20I%20want%2C%20but%20I'd%20rather%20do%20charity%20work%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Famir-khan-i-could-buy-anything-i-want-but-id-rather-do-charity-work-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amir%20Khan%3A%20%27I%20could%20buy%20anything%20I%20want%2C%20but%20I%27d%20rather%20do%20charity%20work%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Famir-khan-i-could-buy-anything-i-want-but-id-rather-do-charity-work-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442591825329%2F3a6b64e1-9280-47bb-a662-64a071338e75-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Khan helping staff and volunteers from the Amir Khan Foundation load the 
convoy bound for Lesbos that departed Bolton earlier this week. Photograph: 
Manchester Evening News 
The trip is just the latest example of Khan’s hands-on approach to 
humanitarianism via the Amir Khan Foundation, which he launched last year. 
Christmas saw him make the treacherous journey to Peshawar in north-west 
Pakistan, where the Taliban hadattacked an army-run school, killing 141 people, 
including 132 children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/16/taliban-attack-army-public-school-pakistan-peshawar>
.

Such is Khan’s global fame, following his two world titles, that he can go 
places others can’t or won’t. The Peshawar trip was organised against the 
advice of the British foreign office. His parents didn’t think he should go 
either, but he was determined. He was all set when he got a call from the 
Pakistan army offering him a helicopter escort –Raheel Sharif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/14/pakistan-press-freedom-army-journalists-military>
, chief of the army, is one of Khan’s personal friends, along with Hillary 
Clinton,who managed to stop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/12/amir-khan-more-british-than-ukip>
 US border control questioning him at length on every visit, and most of the 
Bolton Wanderers squad, past and present.

Once on the ground, he prayed for the dead, placed flowers where the children 
had died and went to visit their families. What was it like? “It was sad, man.”

He went to a hospital. “I remember one kid was in his hospital bed, you could 
see he was obviously in pain. He’d been shot in the arm or something and he 
gets up and says, ‘Amir Khan! Amir Khan!’ shouting my name. I wanted to give 
the kids confidence and say, ‘Don’t worry, the security is going to be 
different, I want you guys to go to school and work hard and study hard.’”

Khan decided to intervene in the Syrian refugee crisis just a week ago, having 
seen the picture ofthree-year-old Aylan Kurdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/03/refugee-crisis-syrian-boy-washed-up-on-beach-turkey-trying-to-reach-canada>
, whose body was washed up on a beach in Turkey last month. He put out a 
message on social media, where he has millions of followers, asking for 
donations: bedding, clothing, long-life food. Within three days, he had 
received more than enough to fill seven big vans, with so much left over that 
the surplus will go to homeless people in the north-west.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Famir-khan-i-could-buy-anything-i-want-but-id-rather-do-charity-work-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442594374932%2F10092ee7-f820-4d60-a581-440818d76ad7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amir%20Khan%3A%20'I%20could%20buy%20anything%20I%20want%2C%20but%20I'd%20rather%20do%20charity%20work%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Famir-khan-i-could-buy-anything-i-want-but-id-rather-do-charity-work-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amir%20Khan%3A%20%27I%20could%20buy%20anything%20I%20want%2C%20but%20I%27d%20rather%20do%20charity%20work%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Famir-khan-i-could-buy-anything-i-want-but-id-rather-do-charity-work-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442594374932%2F10092ee7-f820-4d60-a581-440818d76ad7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Khan after winning the WBC Silver welterweight title against Luis Collazo last 
year. Photograph: Gene Blevins/PA 
The original plan was for Khan to travel in the convoy of seven vans, all the 
way to Lesbos. That was shelved when he realised he might be more of a 
hindrance than a help. “People are going to think: why isn’t he going himself? 
But I didn’t want to be in a position where I was slowing a team down, when 
people are asking for pictures and stuff.” So he caught an early flight out to 
Athens on Friday to join the group for the ferry journey to the island.

He says he would be happy to offer one or two of his UK properties to Syrian 
families. “I’ve got a good little portfolio of properties, I’ve got 20 or 30, 
all over the country and a little bit abroad, as well. Definitely I have 
places, and I would love to show them some support.”

Most of the Khans live together in a collection of houses behind gates in 
Lostock, Bolton’s leafiest suburb. His mum and dad, who were born in Pakistan, 
have the main bungalow. He has moved into what was once the pool house: the 
ultimate bachelor pad, complete with pool, gym, steam room, sauna and a 
cavernous games room. “When I moved there, first it was more of a boys’ pad. I 
wasn’t even married then. My mates used to come and we’d play PlayStation. Then 
as soon as I got married it was like a family place. You can see the wife has 
taken a lot of the boys’ stuff out, like the PlayStation,” he says happily.

Khan’s 24-year-old wife, the daughter of a prominent New York businessman, is 
stupendously glamorous. More than 83,000 people subscribe to herYouTube channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCujYTp4fbNqQ8rJU3tfiADg>, where she holds 
makeup tutorials and posts videos such as “Get ready with me for Eid! 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kAoF3mQ3KA8>”. It’s hard to imagine her 
shopping at Bolton market, or eating a kebab under striplights: interviewed by 
the Observer Food Monthly in 2006 for a feature, in which celebrities rave 
about their favourite restaurant,Khan choose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2006/jan/29/boxing.foodanddrink> a takeaway 
joint in Bolton called Moods. “I love takeaways, I have at least one or two 
every day. Burgers, chips, curries, doner kebabs, all sorts,” he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DklZWJfpP-OM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DklZWJfpP-OM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DklZWJfpP-OM&media=>
 Khan’s wifeFaryal Makhdoom <https://twitter.com/FaryalxMakhdoom> has more than 
83,000 subscribers to her YouTube channel 
He looks sad when I ask if he’s taken the wife to Moods. “It’s closed down 
now. I can’t take her there, but I take her to local fish-and-chip shops. She’s 
very chilled, man.” Faryal recently gave YouTubersan introduction to 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=00z25CmZ-OE> her new home town: “I live in a 
small town in the UK called Bolton. It’s very similar to Staten Island, but 
Staten Island doesn’t have sheep and cows.”

He insists he eats “clean” nowadays, but has a weakness for piri piri chicken. 
He loves a Bolton mini-chain called Mash’s, as well as Nando’s: “It’s good and 
a cheap date, so the wife’s happy.”

When we meet, he shows no sign of ostentation, sporting £60 trainers and a 
T-shirt costing a tenner.Last year 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/sport/othersports/boxing/amir-khan/11303032/Amir-Khan-donates-gold-shorts-to-Peshawar-school-fund.html>
 he auctioned off the £30,000 gold-threaded shorts he wore during his victory 
over Devon Alexander, with the proceeds going to rebuild the Peshawar school.

All the charity work has made him think harder about his ostentatious displays 
of wealth, he says: “I still like the watches, but it’s about balancing it as 
well, and I think I do. If I have to buy something, I do three times as much 
charity work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Famir-khan-i-could-buy-anything-i-want-but-id-rather-do-charity-work-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442593980926%2Fcf446f08-c75e-4a1d-ab23-3cbc2de38064-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amir%20Khan%3A%20'I%20could%20buy%20anything%20I%20want%2C%20but%20I'd%20rather%20do%20charity%20work%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Famir-khan-i-could-buy-anything-i-want-but-id-rather-do-charity-work-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amir%20Khan%3A%20%27I%20could%20buy%20anything%20I%20want%2C%20but%20I%27d%20rather%20do%20charity%20work%20now%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fsep%2F19%2Famir-khan-i-could-buy-anything-i-want-but-id-rather-do-charity-work-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F18%2F1442593980926%2Fcf446f08-c75e-4a1d-ab23-3cbc2de38064-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Khan, aged 19, at his family home in Bolton with his parents, sisters and 
brother. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Like carbon offsetting? “Kinda yeah, you could say that. I know so many 
high-profile people who buy 20 times more things than me and they don’t do half 
the charity stuff I do.”

He still likes a bit of bling, but that is as much about his public image as 
anything else: “It’s what expected, but it’s part of my image. People see me as 
a cool, young fighter and you have to live up to the fashion and the bling and 
stuff.”

He continues. “God has blessed me by putting me in this position, so I never 
want to be silly with spending. If I spend silly, it’s going to look bad in a 
way because I do all this charity work as well ... It’s uncomfortable for me 
now. I’m not like I used to be. Them days I’ve put behind me. I know I could go 
and buy anything I wanted, but I would rather do charity work now.”

Another reason for the charity work is that he has a lot of time on his hands. 
There’s no season in boxing, no regular fixture list. He hasn’t fought since 
May,when he beat Chris Algieri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/30/amir-khan-fights-off-spirited-challenge-from-chris-algieri>
 in New York. He hates all the hanging around. “It annoys me, big time,” he 
says, citing as a particular frustration the refusal of the unbeaten American, 
Floyd Mayweather, to fight him.

Amir Khan fights off spirited challenge from Chris Algieri
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/30/amir-khan-fights-off-spirited-challenge-from-chris-algieri>
“I’ve been waiting for that fight for a very long time, and he’s just not 
taking that fight. I’ve triedeverything to make him take that fight. First he 
said: ‘Fight somebody in the 147lb [welterweight] category who’s decent, in the 
top 10.’ I fought three guys and beat them all. I looked really good against 
them and thought, ‘I’m going to get the fight.’ Then he said: ‘I’m going to do 
a poll.’ That was between me and a guy called Marcos Maidana. Maidana is a guy 
I’ve already beaten. I won the poll andstill he fights the other guy.”

Maybe you should try some reverse-psychology, I say, and suggest you don’t 
want to fight him anyway. Then maybe he will. “Nah,” says Khan. “If I say that, 
he’ll be happy, he’ll be like, ‘Thank God he’s off my case.’ You know, I think 
he’s called it a day now. I don’t think he wants to fight again. I think he 
will retire before he even fights me.”

Despite insisting his career has a few years yet to run, Khan admits he is 
thinking about his legacy. The foundation is the big thing, he says. Its first 
project was building an orphanage in the Gambia, and he hopes to soon do the 
same in Pakistan.

He loves Pakistan, but Bolton, where he was born and raised, will always be 
home. “The people are so lovely. They know you, they will say hi to you, smile 
at you, but leave you to it. I can wander around.” He doesn’t mind being asked 
for selfies. “Kids come up for autographs or pictures and stuff, but I’m not 
mobbed. If I go to Manchester it can get a bit crazy. In Bolton it’s not too 
bad. It’s perfect. They all know me. I think I’ve taken a picture with every 
Boltonian. It never gets tiresome. I’m happy with it. I know other fighters or 
famous people sometimes have security around them, but I never want to be in 
that position where I scare people from coming to approach me.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2yyr7TeF1kU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2yyr7TeF1kU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2yyr7TeF1kU&media=>
 Khan on ITV4’s Cribs 
After our interview and other meetings, he plans to go for a run around town. 
(At 11.5 stone, a stone above his fighting weight, he’s looking well.) “I 
always get people waving and beeping. It’s a bit of fun. Sometimes you have to 
run a bit faster. I enjoy living here. The people are great. I’ve lived here 
all my life, I’ve had a lot of love from Bolton.”

His attachment to the place is endearing. Despite his globetrotting – in the 
past six weeks he has been to Pakistan, Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Malaysia, Turkey and 
Germany – he has chosen Bolton for his biggest business venture to date: the 
construction of an enormous banqueting hall that can accommodate even the 
biggest Asian weddings (4,000 attended his own: he reckons he recognised maybe 
500 of the guests).

“It’s going to be something good for Bolton. People were saying to me: ‘The 
money you’re spending there’ – it’s going to be 6m quid – ‘why not take it into 
Manchester?’ And I said no, I want to keep it in Bolton, because in this moment 
in time I think Bolton needs it more, needs the jobs it will bring in. A place 
like that could give 100-plus jobs. It’s good for Bolton. Give a little bit, 
shine a bit of a light into Bolton, that’s what it needs. If I were to go over 
to Manchester as a Boltonian myself, well, that wouldn’t do. Plus, I wouldn’t 
want to have to travel all that way.”

Amir! It’s only half an hour, I say. “Still, half an hour there, half an hour 
back. That’s seven hours a week, man! Forget that. I’ll do something else in 
those seven hours.” These days, he’s a busy man.
 