
Kell Brook believes it would be unsafe for Amir Khan to fight him following 
his long-term British rival’s devastating knockout defeat bySaul ‘Canelo’ 
Álvarez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/the-balls-of-wrath/2016/may/09/saul-canelo-alvarez-gennady-golovkin-amir-khan-boxing>
 at the weekend.

Khan’s hopes of securing the WBC middleweight title ended in dramatic fashion 
in Las Vegas whenhe suffered the third knockout defeat of his professional 
career 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/08/amir-khan-saul-canelo-alvarez-middleweight-title-fight-boxing>
.

The Bolton fighter intimated immediately afterwards he would move back down to 
welterweight, where a much-awaited showdown with Brook, the IBF champion, could 
take place.

What next for Amir Khan? One thing is for sure, it’s not Kell Brook
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/may/09/amir-khan-next-kell-brook-fight>
Brook has courted a bout with Khan for some time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/08/amir-khan-kell-brook-saul-alvarez-gennady-golovkin>
 and reaffirmed his desire to make the encounter happen immediately after his 
compatriot’s latest setback.

However, the unbeaten Brook thinks he possesses similar power to Álvarez and 
that a clash with Khan would produce the same outcome as Saturday. “After the 
defeat this weekend, it won’t be safe for him to fight me. He’s had some bad 
knockouts,” Brook told Sky Sports News.

“He got knocked out in a really bad way. I punch just as hard as Canelo. It 
would just be a matter of time before the same thing happened. I respect Amir 
for moving up in weight and fighting him. I think they were going down the line 
of it was a win-win; he was up against it, against a heavier guy, so it didn’t 
harm anything.

“If he went the distance and lost on points, it would have been good. But 
losing in the way he did, with a devastating knockout, was nothing good for 
him. He’s had a few now and it’s going to take it out of anyone.”

Instead, Brook is focusing on a unification showdown with either the WBC 
champion Danny García or the WBO belt holder Jessie Vargas. “All I’m interested 
in myself [is] fighting the very best fighters out there,” he said. “I’m 
looking at Danny García, Jessie Vargas. I want an exciting fight. That’s what 
we’re looking at.”
 