
The Amir Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> story, which 
properly began in Athens 12 years ago, is coming towards the final few chapters 
and they could be gloriously uplifting or there may be a few blood-spattered 
pages at the end.

On Saturday night the one-time Olympic teenage prodigy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2004/aug/28/athensolympics2004.sport1> has it 
in his quick hands to determine which way the tale shifts, because his 
antagonist, Saúl “Canelo” Álvarez, for all his politeness when wearing a suit, 
is a mean and hurtful champion, one who will outweigh Khan by at least a stone 
in defence of his world middleweight title.

Amir Khan, the road to Vegas – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2016/may/07/amir-khan-the-road-to-vegas-in-pictures>
Khan needs no reminding of the danger. As we chatted earlier in the week he 
revealed for the first time the slightest concern for his own wellbeing. None 
present could recall him ever mentioning the subject before but it is as well 
that he does think about it.

He trawled his history for reference points and they all fed into his updated 
narrative – particularly Lamont Peterson, whose drug-fuelled body allowed him 
to bully Khan to defeat over 12 rounds when hetook his world light-welterweight 
title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/dec/11/lamont-peterson-beats-amir-khan-split>
 to the American’s home town, Washington DC. “As I’m getting older,” Khan says 
softly, “I’m starting to think about punches coming back. Before, I was just 
thinking about my punches, relying on my speed. Now I’ve become more of a 
technical fighter. I always liked to box on the back foot. This is where 
maturity comes in.

“The reason Peterson got so many good shots off against me [in 2012] was I was 
just standing there, not moving. [Fighters call this “photograph” boxing, 
taking a mental picture of their handiwork rather than moving away or covering 
up after landing a punch.]

“I was on the ropes and boxing square on. I was docked two points for pushing 
to keep him off. That is something I would never do again. I am more lateral in 
my movement and more side-on, not giving a full target to hit. Virgil [Hunter, 
his trainer] has taken me back to my boxing, sliding, gliding, pivoting. When 
you’re in the pocket, you’ve got to know when to block, when to move, when to 
let your hands go. Against Peterson my defence was my attack.”

That was a fight about a strong legal champion and an illegally powerful 
challenger, who was totest positive for synthetic testosterone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/may/10/amir-khan-lamont-peterson-cancelled>
. This is a fight about size, more so than most and one which Khan, in a way, 
cannot lose unless he is decisively knocked clean out inside a couple of rounds.

That would surely ignite derision among his detractors who have been bellicose 
in their snide dismissal of his challenge. More likely is a slow-burning but 
quick-fisted contest in which Khan operates like a rattlesnake taunting a bull 
until the bull ignores the stinging pain and treads on his tormentor.

There is an alternative script, of course, and it is not by any means 
implausible. Khan, whose pure ring skills are often ignored because he is 
characterised as just the fastest gun in the sport, could be so alert to the 
possibility of catastrophe that he boxes at the very edge of his ability and 
comfortably outpoints a frustrated champion over 12 rounds.

It all boils down to weight, though: will Khan be big and strong enough to 
hold at bay a fighter whose calling card is as subtle as a bailiff’s?

Álvarez is coming for Khan’s head, no question, and he will take a lot of 
stopping because of his obvious physical advantages.

At the start of the week Khan weighed 164lbs, and said: “My whole diet and 
training regime has changed. I honestly believe this could be a very good 
weight for me. I’m happier making the weight [than for welterweight at 147lbs]. 
When I get down to 155, I’ll be ripped.” And, at the weigh-in on Friday, so he 
was: totally reconstructed, almost, from the 135lb teenager whowon Olympic 
silver in 2004 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2004/aug/29/athensolympics2004.olympicgames7>
. As storm clouds gathered, in wicked metaphor, perhaps, both fighters hit the 
scales at 155lbs – and the challenger was noticeably bulkier than when at 
welterweight. When the bell goes on Saturday he will be back to around 164lbs 
and well aware that Álvarez will weigh closer to 175lbs than 170lbs. There is 
no rehydration clause. These are the alleged disciplines of a crazy sport. 
Ideally two fighters would box each other at their most comfortable size and 
weight, confident they had not stripped away the excess too far or too quickly. 
But that rarely happens.

Khan fought at just a tick over the lightweight limit for many of his early 
fights as a professional, occasionally below. Two fights after theminor 
one-round disaster that Breidis Prescott delivered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/sep/07/amirkhan.boxing> upon him, he 
tested himself at light-welteragainst a faded version of Marco Antonio Barrera 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/mar/15/amirkhan-boxing>, then, in his 
22nd bout,won the WBA’s belt at just under 10 stones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jul/19/boxing-amir-khan> against 
Andreas Kotelnik.

There he would stay for nine fights, winning handsomely until suffering 
against Peterson thenwalking indiscreetly on to the left hooks of Danny Garcia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/15/knockdown-amir-khan-danny-garcia>
.

He was done as a light-welter. Each move had followed a setback. But now there 
is nowhere else to go – except maybe back to welterweight. What has been 
consistent about Khan, though, is his continued search for perfection using the 
tools he has got. He has housed a lean package of muscle and fast-twitch fibres 
that have carried him through several outstanding performances, bringing him 
world titles at two weights, as well as evenings of pain and anguish against 
bigger and stronger opponents.

Now he is convincing himself he is a pared-down middleweight, which is 
palpably not the case. To put it crudely, one of the reasons Oscar De La Hoya 
is pitting these fine fighters against each other is they provide the almost 
perfect mix for drama.

“Why do you think there’s a rematch clause?” the promoter asked with just the 
hint of a smile. It will not be dull.
 