
From his palatial suite on the 60th floor of the Mandalay Bay, Amir Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> can see his own face half a mile 
away, blown up to Hollywood proportions at the other great boxing casino in 
this town, the MGM Grand. He likes the view. Who wouldn’t?

For 12 mega-fights in a row, the face that dressed up the outsized electronic 
billboard across the Strip was that of the fighter who sickened him to the pit 
of his stomach without even landing a punch: Floyd Mayweather Jr.

Amir Khan insists he’s ‘not interested’ in fighting Floyd Mayweather
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/03/amir-khan-floyd-mayweatehr-not-interested>
Money Mayweather was the sport’s double-down banker since 2007, when he made a 
pay-per-view bonanza with Oscar De La Hoya at the MGM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/may/07/boxing.sport>, until he won his 
49th – and supposedly final – fight in the same ring,a low-key points win over 
Andre Berto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/13/floyd-mayweather-finishes-up-unbeaten-after-one-sided-victory-over-andre-berto>
 last September.

Mayweather, who fought at the MGM 15 times, the last six of them for Showtime, 
accepted few mandatory challengers. He fought whomsoever he selected – and no 
one in boxing could do a damn thing about it. Nor did they want to. He made 
time stand still and a lot of people became very rich.

Twice, Mayweather promised Khan he could share his spotlight. Twice he reneged,
giving his place instead to Marcos Maidana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/14/floyd-mayweather-marcos-maidana-boxing-title-fight>
, whom Khan had already beaten. But the great man is gone, isn’t he? Maybe not.

On Saturday, Mayweather said he had “been talking with CBS and Showtime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/01/floyd-mayweather-boxing-return-gennady-golovkin>
” about the comeback he said he would never contemplate. Last year, it was “No 
way”; now it’s: “You never know.” He said he could make a “guaranteed $100m”.

Now, however, in a brand new stadium attached to the MGM empire, it is surely 
Khan’s moment, even if he is co-starring with another cash cow of the business, 
Saúl “Canelo” Álvarez at a ludicrous world championship catchweight of 155lb on 
Saturday night.

In the buildup to his mountainous challenge to unseat one of the world’s best 
middleweights who, for one night only, is not really a middleweight, Khan, a 
natural welterweight with dangerous ambitions, struggles to hide his 
displeasure with Mayweather, the pre-eminent practitioner in his own division 
since Sugar Ray Leonard.

“I think [Mayweather] is a little bit bitter,” Khan says, reluctantly dragged 
away from talking about Canelo. “He is walking and driving around Las Vegas, 
and people are talking about [my] fight with Canelo. He has probably seen the 
big poster at the MGM, and now it is me and Canelo. I remember him saying a 
long time ago he wanted to be the first guy to fight at this new arena.”

So that’s a small victory for the boy from Bolton.

He continues: “Basically now people aren’t talking about him and he is missing 
all this. That is why he is saying these things now to try to get people 
talking about him again. I’m sure he is missing it. This used to be his day. 
Wasn’t it this datewhen he fought Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/03/floyd-mayweather-beats-manny-pacquiao-on-points-to-remain-unbeaten>
 last year?

“My dream was to fight in Vegas, to see my name up in lights – and to see that 
big poster … this is even better than I expected. It is mad. They have even got 
posters down the sides of the hotel as well. Everywhere you go people are 
talking about this fight, there are posters on taxis, buses and even on the 
room cards. This is something you dream of. There is also a huge screen outside 
the arena where the fight is going to happen. I haven’t been there yet but I 
hope to go there tomorrow just to have a look.”

Basically now people aren't talking about him. That is why he is saying these 
things now

The words tumble forth as if from a kid who has opened the best Christmas 
present he ever had. Was it true he stopped his limo from McCarran airport to 
take a picture of himself in front of the venue?

“Ha! I’ve taken a picture of it all and put it on Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BE6-RSSAnrA/> and Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/amirkingkhan/status/727145785410736130>. I also want to go 
to the MGM and get a picture of myself standing by the big poster. I want these 
memories so I can tell my kids, maybe bring them to Vegas one day – well, maybe 
not – and tell them: ‘Your dad fought here and topped the bill.’”

There is no escaping Mayweather, however. “I think he will box again,” Khan 
says, matter-of-factly. But will he fight Danny García, as his people suggest, 
again stealing Khan’s thunder? The Philadelphianagain owns the WBC belt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/23/danny-garcia-beats-gutsy-robert-guerrero-to-claim-wbc-welterweight-title>
 heripped away from Khan at the Mandalay Bay in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/15/knockdown-amir-khan-danny-garcia>
.

“García is taking his own route. I hope to get my chance to have a rematch 
with him. I’m the 147lb mandatory and, if García doesn’t want to fight me, that 
means the title will be handed over to me.” After he lost to García, we sat in 
this same hotel suite on a down Sunday morning and he said through bruised 
lips: “I’m sick of being told what to do. I’m going to take control of my own 
life.”

Khan has been around boxing a long time. He knows the whims and changing winds 
of the business but he deserves better than a walk-on part. Finally, he’s got 
it. His name is properly up in lights at last, in the town where it matters.

He has a rematch clause with Canelo. Fighting the awesome Mexican once – as 
Mayweather did – would be enough for most fighters but Khan is not most 
fighters. He wants revenge on boxing. He wants revenge on Mayweather, too.

• Khan v Canelo is live on BoxNation <http://www.boxnation.com/> on Saturday 
night
 