
Amir Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/amirkhan> has confirmed he will 
fight the Mexican Saúl “Canelo” Álvarez for the WBC middleweight title on 7 May 
in Las Vegas.

The 29-year-old from Bolton will move up to a catchweight of 155lbs to fight 
Álvarez, who has only been beaten once in his 48-fight career:on a majority 
decision by Floyd Mayweather 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/sep/15/floyd-mayweather-beats-canelo-alvarez>
 in September 2013.
Amir Khan (@AmirKingKhan) 
Delighted to announce i will be fighting @Canelo <https://twitter.com/Canelo> 
May 7th Cinco De Mayo, Las Vegas for the 155lbs@WBCBoxing 
<https://twitter.com/WBCBoxing> title! 👊🏽 🇬🇧 🇲🇽 💥
 <https://twitter.com/AmirKingKhan/status/694566161271427072> February 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/AmirKingKhan/status/694566161271427072> 
Khan confirmed the fight on Tuesday through his Twitter account 
<https://twitter.com/AmirKingKhan/status/694566161271427072>. He wrote: 
“Delighted to announce i will be fighting @Canelo May 7th Cinco De Mayo, Las 
Vegas for the 155lbs @WBCBoxing title!”

The fight, which will be promoted by Oscar De La Hoya’s Golden Boy Promotions, 
will be Álvarez’s first defence of the title he won in November against Miguel 
Cotto. “As the middleweight champion of the world, I will take on the best 
fighters in the sport and on Cinco De Mayo weekend, I look forward to making 
the first defence of my titles,” he said in a statement. “Amir was a decorated 
amateur, a two-time world champion and is in the prime of his career. Fans are 
in for a great fight on 7 May.”

Khan added: “I know Canelo fights the best and wouldn’t pass up the 
opportunity to face me like others have. My goal is to always fight the biggest 
names and the best fighters, that is why I’m excited for this fight. Also, I 
would like to thank my team and Golden Boy Promotions for this opportunity. I 
know I have the speed and ability to beat him and will give my fans what they 
deserve on 7 May.”

Andre Berto, Brandon Ríos and Jo Jo Dan had all been tipped as possible 
warm-up opponents for Khan before a summer showdown with Danny García or Kell 
Brook, the respective WBC and IBF welterweight champions. Khan is García’s 
mandatory challenger and the WBC had ordered the American – who hada 
fourth-round knockout victory over the Bolton fighter in July 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/15/knockdown-amir-khan-danny-garcia>
 – to face him by June or lose his belt.

But Khan’s camp were also said to be interested in a lucrative Battle of 
Britain showdown with Brook and negotiations with Eddie Hearn’s promotions 
company MatchroomBoxing <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> had 
reportedly taken place.

Last month Khan sent a flurry of tweets 
<https://twitter.com/AmirKingKhan/status/690551528319537153> accusing the IBF 
welterweight champion Brook of avoiding a fight with him and claimedBrook’s 
team had demanded an unreasonable cut 
<https://twitter.com/AmirKingKhan/status/690552385392021504> of the revenues 
from any potential meeting. Brook and his promoter, Eddie Hearn, responded to 
the outburst with a public offer of a world title fight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/22/kell-brook-eddie-hearn-offer-amir-khan-world-title-fight-twitter>
. But with the Sheffield fighter set to make the third defence of his IBF 
welterweight title against the mandatory challenger, Kevin Bizier, in Sheffield 
on 26 March, Khan has turned his attention to Álvarez, the 25-year-old WBC 
middleweight champion.

In his last fight the Mexican secured a unanimous points victory over Cotto 
and many regard him as the next superstar of boxing when Mayweather decides to 
hang up his gloves.

Álvarez carries a big punching reputation and has won 46 of his 48 fights – he 
had a draw against Jorge Juárez 
<http://espn.go.com/boxing/story/_/id/9633315/the-man-matched-canelo-alvarez> 
in only his fifth contest – by way of 32 knockouts.

De La Hoya posted on his official Twitter account 
<https://twitter.com/OscarDeLaHoya/status/694566339223027712>: “Proud to 
announce on May 7th, 2016 @canelo will return to the ring to face 
@amirkingkhan.”

“We are delighted to be able to make this massive fight,” added Khan’s father, 
Shah. “I would like to thank everyone involved who made this happen including 
Golden Boy Promotions, Al Haymon and all of Team Khan. It’s going to be a great 
fight on 7 May.”
 