
Did you always want to write for young people?

Yes, when I wrote my first book, I didn't think about who I was writing it 
for, I just hoped it would find an audience. But since I had worked with 
teenagers and in schools, as an English teacher, and I read a lot of young 
adult fiction I suppose I was naturally interested in that sort of writing. I 
had seen how much books inspired young people and how excited they got when 
they really loved something, like Twilight, and it reignited my passion for 
books and stories and I thought, I want to have a go at this.

Did you set out to write about the death penalty?

The death penalty came fairly late on in the writing process actually. The 
first thing I wanted to do was write a novel about guilt. That really came 
first, the story about a central character, Zoe, caught in a love triangle 
between two boys – Aaron and Max, one of whom she ends up killing and so is 
carrying around this guilt. I like to explore themes in a larger, cosmic way 
and that's when I came up with the idea of making other characters in the book 
feel guilty about various things they have done; so there's a mother who feels 
guilty about something she has done and a sister who feels guilty. But I still 
felt that something was missing, that it was lacking an emotional punch. Then 
it occurred to me that Zoe could write to a man on death row confessing the 
secret, then that brings guilt in in another way. So actually the guy on death 
row came much later in the process, but he was the key really, that's when the 
story really took off.

What sparked your interest in the topic of the death penalty originally?

I had the experience when I was growing up of writing to a man on death row, I 
got involved in a scheme set up byAmnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> when I was 18 and I 
could use all the kinds of research that I had done myself and I could 
incorporate all the kind of anger I felt about the death penalty, and all the 
passion of how I felt that it was very wrong, and bring those in to the book 
and so it became something very special.

Did you base the website on which she finds the man in death row on a real 
website?

It's based on a number of websites. It really is surprisingly easy to find the 
contact details for someone on death row, you sort of imagine they're going to 
be cut off from the world, but you just google it and loads of different 
websites come up. It was based on my own experience really, I wrote to a man on 
death row, when I was 18 and I used that more than anything else really. I had 
been to listen to a talk by a nun organised by Amnesty and I felt really 
inspired to do something, to offer these men some sort of human companionship 
and compassion so I started to correspond with this man at death row. So a lot 
of the book was based on my own experience, though it wasn't all a confessional 
thing – I didn't actually kill anyone when I was at school.

What's more important to you, producing a work of art or delivering a 
political message?

That's a very interesting question. I think the thing that's most important to 
me is to tell a decent story. As a writer that has to come first. With this 
book, it had to work on the level of the love story and the reader has to be 
gripped by that predominantly, but when you have the reader you can bring in 
other things. I want the reader to care about issues of guilt and the death 
penalty, but I think they can only care about those things if they already care 
about the characters, so first and foremost it's the art, but the two have to 
be combined.

Isla Ratcliff is the winner of the lyric section of Amnesty Protest Song award 
with a song about Troy Davis who was on death row for almost 20 years. To find 
out more about this year's awards visitwww.amnesty.org.uk/youthawards 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/youthawards>

Inspired by the Amnesty teen takeover to get involved? Here are 10 ways to 
stand up for human rights with Amnesty

1. Inspired to write about human rights? Write an article or song lyrics and 
enter ourYouth Awards <http://www.amnesty.org.uk/youngreporter>…

2. If you are a photographer, performer, or if you're already an Amnesty 
activist or fundraiserfind out about the awards 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/youthawards> - you can win too

3. Save lives with your phone. Join Pocket Protest 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/sms> and we'll text you with urgent actions

4. Watch an Amnesty youth group in I Talk Out Loud 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/talkoutloud> and find out how you can set one up in 
your school

5. Take action right now – find out the most important thing 
<http://www.amnesty.org.uk/content.asp?CategoryID=1886> we're asking you to do 
today

6. Read a book <> or watch a film <> with a human rights theme – check out our 
recommendations

7. It's official - cakes are a great way to stand up for human rights. Raise 
money and awareness by holdingan AmnesTea <http://www.amnesty.org.uk/amnestea>

8. Sign up for email <https://www2.amnesty.org.uk/user/register>, like us on 
Facebook <http://www.facebook.com/AmnestyUK>, follow us on Twitter 
<http://www.twitter.com/amnestyuk> or Instagram 
<http://www.instagram.com/amnestyuk> for the latest news and actions to take

9. Invite an Amnesty speaker <http://www.amnesty.org.uk/speaker> to visit your 
school and give an assembly or lesson

10. Join us <https://www2.amnesty.org.uk/giving/join/youth> – for £5 a year 
you can become a youth member of Amnesty
 