
Amnesty International has called on Formula One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> to put pressure on Azeri 
authorities to improve their human rights record.

Sunday’s inaugural Azerbaijan Grand Prix in Baku 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/05/bernie-ecclestone-deal-f1-grand-prix-azerbaijan>
 is the latest example of that country’s increasing willingness to become 
involved in top-level sport.

The European Games were held there in June last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/26/silence-european-games-azerbaijan-grim-future>
 and in 2020 Baku is set to stage four games in football’s European 
Championship.

But Kerry Moscogiuri, director of campaigns at Amnesty International UK, said: 
“The arrival ofFormula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> in 
Baku must not steer attention away from the Azerbaijani authorities’ human 
rights crackdown.

“Behind the glitz the authorities are locking up their critics, have shut down 
NGOs and arrested or harassed their leaders. The recent release of some of 
those jailed on trumped-up charges should not fool anyone into thinking that 
the wind in Baku is blowing in a different direction.

“Azerbaijan has courted big international sports events to improve its image 
abroad and the Grand Prix is no different. While the world’s fastest drivers 
take to the streets of Baku in this spectacle of speed, there are many who will 
not be able to enjoy the show.

“F1 is in pole position to influence positive change in Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan>. We would like to see them 
publicly urge President Aliyev to end this crackdown and free all prisoners of 
conscience.”

This month Sports for Rights campaign co-ordinator Rebecca Vincent, while not 
asking for the race to be cancelled, didask Formula One’s chief executive, 
Bernie Ecclestone, to become involved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/07/f1-urged-to-speak-out-on-human-rights-situation-in-azerbaijan>
.

She said: “We have called on Bernie Ecclestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone> to publicly speak out on 
human rights issues in Azerbaijan and to call for the release of political 
prisoners. We wrote him an open letter and there has not been a public response 
yet.

“Mr Ecclestone is in a position where he could really do good. This is an 
opportunity to improve Formula One’s image and to help people in Azerbaijan, 
rather than just profiting and helping some very corrupt people.”

She was backed up by Phil Bloomer, executive director of the Business and 
Human Rights Resource Centre, who said: “F1 should be commended for developing 
their human rights policy. It is a decent, modest policy on human rights which 
follows quite religiously the United Nations’ guiding principles of business 
and human rights.

“But we all know too many cases where human rights policies have been 
developed and not owned by the leadership [of the sport].”
 