
Staff at Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> in Moscow say their 
office has been broken into and sealed off by municipal officials.

When employees arrived on Wednesday they found new locks on the door and a 
stamped paper across the entrance that demanded the office contact the city 
authorities, said Alexander Artemyev of human rights group’s Moscow office. No 
warning had been given.

“Our neighbours told us that five men came around 9.30am, broke in and then 
changed the locks. When asked what they were doing, the men said it was a rent 
issue,” Artemyev told the Guardian.



Sergei Nikitin (@Amnesty_Nikitin) 
Офис Amnesty International в Москве опечатан pic.twitter.com/eLVh2sSsRR 
<https://t.co/eLVh2sSsRR>
 <https://twitter.com/Amnesty_Nikitin/status/793743280500604929> November 2, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/Amnesty_Nikitin/status/793743280500604929> 
Amnesty staff members had been calling the numbers on the paper all day 
without response, so in the evening went to speak with city officials, where 
they were told authorities had taken possession of the property due to 
non-payment of rent.

“They told us we had been warned three months in advance, which isn’t true,” 
said Artemyev.


“All our computers, papers, personal effects – they’re all still in there, 
behind the locked doors,” Amnesty campaigner Ivan Kondratenko wrote on 
Facebook. He posted photographs of the old locks strewn on the floor amid 
debris.


John Dalhuisen, Amnesty International’s Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> director, said: “Given the 
current climate for civil society work in Russia, there are clearly any number 
of plausible explanations, but it’s too early to draw any conclusions. We are 
working to resolve the situation as swiftly as possible and very much hope 
there is a simple administrative explanation for this setback to our work.”

Dalhuisen said the organisation was “100% confident” that it had fulfilled all 
its obligations as tenants. Artemyev said the Moscow employees planned to 
present documents to authorities on Thursday proving they had paid rent.

He added: “It’s a ludicrous decision and an incorrect one, and we will try to 
show that. We don’t want to make any loud political statements yet; hopefully 
it is just a mistake.”

A representative of the Moscow state property department, from which Amnesty 
rents the office, said they had no immediate comment.

The climate for human rights work in Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has worsened in recent years, and a 
law has forced organisations with foreign funding to declare themselves as 
“foreign agents”.

A number of Russian rights groups have had similar problems with municipal 
authorities in recent months, but most have received warnings prior to any 
action being taken. Sealing an office without warning is a step usually more 
indicative of a criminal investigation, though this does not seem to be the 
case with Amnesty.

Tanya Lokshina of Human Rights Watch in Moscow said: “Though law enforcement 
authorities are not involved in any way, in the current political climate one 
cannot help but suspect that these developments could be aimed at putting 
pressure on the independent outspoken organisation, well known for its 
criticism of Russia’s domestic human rights crackdown and Russia’s actions in 
Syria and Ukraine.

“But we genuinely hope this is not the case, and our colleagues will be able 
to promptly return to their office and resume normal work.”

 