
A Syrian builder has been jailed for 10 years on terrorism charges in Hungary 
in a case that has become a cornerstone of the country’s crackdown on refugees, 
and whichAmnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> has called “an 
affront to justice”.

Refugee crisis escalates as migrants break through Hungarian border
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/16/refugee-crisis-escalates-as-people-break-through-hungarian-border>
The 42-year-old Syrian, named in court as “Ahmed H”, was arrested on the 
Hungarian-Serbian border in September 2015 and accused of orchestrating clashes 
between refugees and police.

The case has been central to the rightwing Hungarian government’s two-year 
campaign to stoke xenophobia and portray refugees as terrorists. It has also 
become a cause celebre for rights campaigners seeking to highlight the 
draconian character of Europe’s refugee policies.

By the time of his arrest, H was already a legal EU resident living in Cyprus 
with his wife and children. He says he only joined the thousands of refugees 
making their way from Turkey to Germany last year when his elderly parents and 
other family members fled Syria and asked him to accompany them for their 
safety.

They reached the Hungarian border just as it closed, which sparked clashes 
between police and migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/16/refugee-crisis-escalates-as-people-break-through-hungarian-border>
. In the melee H and his parents were arrested. As H had been carrying a 
loudspeaker as well as his family’s passports, he was accused of being the 
ringleader – a claim a Hungarian judge upheld on Wednesday.

The judge refused to hear the testimonies of more than 20 defence witnesses, 
and ignored the fact that the prosecution’s main witness, a police officer, 
could not be certain of H’s identity.

Hungary’s anti-refugee rhetoric dishonours its history – my grandmother could 
tell you | Alexandra Rogers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/hungary-anti-refugee-viktor-orban>
H admitted that he threw something during the fracas, but said that he had 
initially tried to calm the situation and mediate between the police and 
protesters, which was why he used a loudspeaker. “I ask the court not to 
confuse me for others,” he said on Wednesday, according to records taken by an 
Amnesty observer. “How can I be a terrorist if I tried to calm things down?”

Gauri van Gulik, Amnesty’s deputy Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> director who was present in 
court, said: “To sentence Ahmed to 10 years in prison for a terrorist act is 
absurd. Illegally crossing a border and even throwing rocks would not justify 
this ruling. This is a man who tried to get his elderly parents and other 
family members to safety, and we know he tried to negotiate between the crowd 
and police. On the basis of what we know, this ruling is an affront to justice.”

Van Gulik also highlighted the degrading treatment of H in court, where he was 
led on a leash and accompanied by two masked police officers.
Gauri van Gulik (@GaurivanGulik) 
While #AhmedH <https://twitter.com/hashtag/AhmedH?src=hash> awaits his fate, 
just consider the imagery. Literally on a leash.#roszke11 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/roszke11?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/7NFFsSwb8u 
<https://t.co/7NFFsSwb8u>
 <https://twitter.com/GaurivanGulik/status/803931804566769665> November 30, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/GaurivanGulik/status/803931804566769665> 
Hungary has frequently been criticised for its hardline stance on refugees. In 
addition to its anti-refugee border fence, it has criminalised the act of 
entering Hungary illegally, a law that contravenes international asylum 
treaties, to whichHungary <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary> is a 
signatory.

The government has whipped up xenophobic sentiment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/hungarian-jews-concerned-about-toxic-referendum-discourse>
 with the country’s largest-ever advertising campaign to raise interest ina 
referendum on refugees in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/hungarian-referendum-slam-door-migrants-new-era-europe>
. Less than 50% of the country participated in the poll, which asked 
participants whether Hungary should admit refugees, rendering the process null 
and void.


Hungary’s prime minister, Viktor Orbán, has said he sees his opposition to 
refugees as a means of wresting control of Europe away from liberal-minded 
leaders such as the German chancellor, Angela Merkel.
 