
Anti-government protests organised by the citizens of Azerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> took place in March and April 
2011, inspired by the widespread demonstrations in the Middle East and North 
Africa.

Several people were arrested in the aftermath, and while two have since been 
released, 15 remain in prison. Tural Abbasli, a 29-year-old postgraduate 
journalism student from Baku and leader of the youth wing of Musavat, one of 
Azerbaijan's main opposition parties, is one of those currently in jail.

Amnesty International considers Abbasli and the other people taken into 
custody to be prisoners of conscience, detained solely for peacefully 
expressing their views.

Abbasli was arrested on 2 April last year and is currently serving a 
two-and-a-half year sentence. He reported that he was kicked, punched and 
beaten with a baton by police officers at Yasamal district police station while 
in custody. In addition, he has been expelled from university and in the wake 
of his arrest, several members of his family have been fired from their jobs.

Azerbaijan is hosting this year's Eurovision Song Contest, which will take 
place in the capital, Baku, in May. The country will offer an opulent stage for 
voices from across Europe, but at home few critical voices are tolerated. 
Amnesty has documented severe restrictions on freedom of expression; 
journalists and activists regularly face intimidation, harassment and unjust 
arrest while working in the country.

Ahead of Eurovision, Amnesty is urging Azerbaijan to address its unsavoury 
record on human rights.

Call for Tural Abbasli's release, for an end to the reprisals and harassment 
that his family are facing and for the politically motivated trials of all 
peaceful protesters in Azerbaijan tostop 
<http://action.amnesty.org.uk/ea-action/action?ea.client.id=1194&ea.campaign.id=13969>
.
 