
Comedian Amy Schumer <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer> is 
facing backlash for her response to one of her male writers’ offensive comments 
on sexual assault.

Kurt Metzger, a regular writer for the star’s popular show Inside Amy Schumer, 
mocked rape survivors online and suggested that women lie about being victims. 
He recently made fun of women who report sexual assault and people who support 
victims,writing on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/kurt.metzger/posts/10208024119734839>: “Guys I have 
just heard some disturbing news, this guy Jiff Dilfyberg is a rapist! I know 
because women said it and that’s all I need! Never you mind who they are. They 
are women! ALL women are as reliable as my bible! A book that, much like a 
women, is incapable of lying!”

The fake “Jiff Dilfyberg” name and his commentary appeared to be a response to 
recent reports that a prominent New York City comedian is facing multiple
accusations 
<https://mic.com/articles/151826/comedian-aaron-glaser-has-been-accused-of-sexual-assault-and-women-are-speaking-out#.ij5NUBLSY>
 ofsexual assault 
<https://medium.com/athena-talks/kurt-metzger-needs-to-shut-up-f5083822e28f#.10nk0cfav>
.

After Metzger continued tweeting 
<https://twitter.com/kurtmetzger/status/765395529559924736> insults directed at 
people whospeak up <https://twitter.com/kurtmetzger/status/765399040221650945> 
about rape, Schumer weighed in on Twitter on Wednesday, saying she was 
“saddened and disappointed” and “couldn’t be more against his recent actions”. 
She also called him a “friend and great writer” in her statement.
Amy Schumer (@amyschumer) 
I am so saddened and disappointed in Kurt Metzger. He is my friend and a great 
writer and I couldn't be more against his recent actions.
 <https://twitter.com/amyschumer/status/765970023710154753> August 17, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/amyschumer/status/765970023710154753> 
Schumer further tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/amyschumer/status/765995533181804544> that Metzger “does 
not work for me” and “is not a writer on my show”.

“Please stop asking me about it. His words are not mine,” she added.

Metzger, however, has writing credits on 39 episodes of her show from 2013 and 
2015 and was listed as contributing to the most recent season finale, which 
aired in June.


Later on Wednesday night, Schumer elaborated on her tweet, saying that she had 
not fired Metzger because “we aren’t making the show anymore”. Comedy Central
announced in January 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/comedy-central-renews-inside-amy-852508>
, though, that her show had been picked up for a fifth season.
Amy Schumer (@amyschumer) 
I didn't fire Kurt. He isn't a writer for my show because we aren't making the 
show anymore. There are no writers for it.
 <https://twitter.com/amyschumer/status/766104853898727424> August 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/amyschumer/status/766104853898727424> 
Schumer also faced backlash this week after Twitter users who asked her to cut 
ties with Metzgerreported 
<https://twitter.com/JamieDresher/status/765663574584877061> that the comedian 
responded <https://twitter.com/aherman2006/status/766000370728304640> by 
blocking them 
<http://www.nylon.com/articles/amy-schumer-twitter-blocking-kurt-metzger>.
Liz Arcury (@LizArcury) 
Hey gang. Amy Schumer blocked me on Twitter for this tweet. I was such an 
enormous, obsessed fan. This is devastating. She has failed women.
 <https://twitter.com/LizArcury/status/765437989921103872> August 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LizArcury/status/765437989921103872> 
Liz Arcury, a writer and comedian, said Schumer blocked 
<https://twitter.com/LizArcury/status/765568603546644481> her after she tweeted 
at her calling Metzger “anti-woman and anti-feminism” and requesting that she 
fire him.

In an email to the Guardian on Wednesday, Arcury said she was a huge fan of 
Schumer and was disappointed by her response.

“Amy has an incredible platform to raise women up and speak out against rape 
culture and misogyny. She has done an amazing job of that in the past, and my 
fellow female comedians and I were obsessive fans and admirers. It is such a 
disappointment to see that she is not only continuing to employ him on her 
show, but is also taking the aggressive action of blocking my fellow feminists 
and I who dare to question why she continues to work with him,” she wrote.

Arcury said she was particularly upset to see Schumer call Metzger a “friend”.

“She can say that she is ‘disappointed’ all she wants, but unless she takes 
firm action, she has lost a fan in me and many women in the comedy community,” 
she said.

Schumer has skyrocketed to fame as a powerful feminist voice in comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/02/amy-schumer-interview-trainwreck-judd-apatow>
, known for critically acclaimedsketches 
<http://www.vulture.com/2015/05/see-amy-schumers-12-angry-men-parody.html> that 
satirizesexism and misogyny <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XPpsI8mWKmg> in 
media 
<http://www.salon.com/2015/05/03/15_feminist_amy_schumer_sketches_that_will_make_you_stand_up_and_cheer/>
 andsociety 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/05/14/amy-schumer-im-sorry-not-sorry_n_7276504.html>
.

Asked if she set out with a specific feminist agenda, Schumer told the Guardian
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/02/amy-schumer-interview-trainwreck-judd-apatow>
 in a 2015 interview: “It’s just who I am ... It happened naturally, just being 
myself. I think feminists are in good hands with me.”

Representatives for Comedy <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> 
Central did not respond to requests for comment, and a publicist for Schumer 
declined to comment.

Metzger’s online rants came after news began to spread that women in the New 
York City entertainment scene were accusing a prominent comedian atUpright 
Citizens Brigade 
<http://www.revelist.com/us-news/aaron-glaser-rape-ucb-ban/4247>, a premier 
comedy club, of sexual assault. A woman reportedly warned others about the 
comedian in a privateFacebook group 
<https://mic.com/articles/151826/comedian-aaron-glaser-has-been-accused-of-sexual-assault-and-women-are-speaking-out#.wNYOTeMWY>
 on Saturday.


Following his Sunday Facebook post, Metzger’s tweets mocked the outrage about 
the Upright Citizens Brigade allegations and calls for aninvestigation 
<https://twitter.com/kurtmetzger/status/765399040221650945>. 
Kurt Metzger (@kurtmetzger) 
I'm pitching my new show! UCB SVU! Dedicated to the men and women of improv 
who in-house investigate rape'
 <https://twitter.com/kurtmetzger/status/765399040221650945> August 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/kurtmetzger/status/765399040221650945> 
Metzger, who changed his Twitter bio <https://twitter.com/kurtmetzger> to say 
“Proud cuck and rape apologist”, alsocriticized 
<https://twitter.com/kurtmetzger/status/765427168197353472> women for not 
reporting sexual assault to the police. There aremany reasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/28/women-still-terrified-reporting-rape>
 survivors of assaultdon’t file reports with police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2014/nov/21/police-letting-rape-victims-down-too>
, including concerns that they will bere-victimized and re-traumatized 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/25/women-of-color-police-sexual-assault-racist-criminal-justice>
 by the process and will struggle to get any justice in court.

Metzger made fun of this in his original Facebook post, writing, “Jiff 
Dilfyberg is dangerous! So fucking dangerous that we can’t go to the police to 
report his many rapes! That would just be tooooo rapey, and the women are too 
brave for that. If we ask them to even merely also post a vague account of what 
happened before asking us to believe that would like re-raping their rape! 
These women are as BRAVE as they are sore! Now for the good news!”

Critics say Metzger, who did not respond to a request for comment, has a 
history ofharassing women online 
<http://www.dailydot.com/news/kurt-metzger-harassment-lindy-west-sady-doyle/> 
and writing offensive posts that promote rape culture.

Two outspoken critics of rape jokes 
<http://www.dailydot.com/news/kurt-metzger-harassment-lindy-west-sady-doyle/> 
in comedy claimed in 2013 that Metzger subsequently harassed them online with 
obscene images. He facedsimilar allegations 
<http://www.dailydot.com/upstream/literalporn-amy-schumer-kurt-metzger-harrassment/>
 again in 2015.

Schumer has spoken out 
<http://www.people.com/article/amy-schumer-virginity-sexual-assault-non-consensual>
 about sexual assault, and in a recent interviewrevealed 
<http://www.people.com/article/amy-schumer-virginity-sexual-assault-non-consensual>
 that her first sexual experience was nonconsensual.
 