
Amy Schumer has written an open letter to fans who walked out  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/17/amy-schumer-donald-trump-walkout-tampa-florida>
of her Sunday standup show in Tampa, Florida, after she made jokes about Donald 
Trump.

Fans walk out on Amy Schumer show after she roasts Donald Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/17/amy-schumer-donald-trump-walkout-tampa-florida>
The actor and writer read the letter aloud during her Tuesday show at New 
York’s Madison Square Garden, according toPeople 
<http://people.com/celebrity/amy-schumer-delivers-open-letter-tampa-florida-trump/>
.

“I’ve written an open letter to Tampa and I’d like to read it tonight,” she 
began. “Dearest Tampa, I’m sorry you didn’t want me, a comedian who talks about 
what she believes in, to mention the biggest thing going on in our country 
right now. How could I think it was OK to spend five minutes having a peaceful 
conversation with someone with different views?


“After the show, I want you to know that I will go straight to a rehab 
facility that will teach me how to make all people happy. Both the rich, 
entitled, white people who are gonna vote for him and the very poor people – 
who’ve been tricked into it.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Famy-schumer-booed-for-mocking-donald-trump-on-stage-in-florida-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Schumer%20booed%20for%20mocking%20Donald%20Trump%20on%20stage%20in%20Florida%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Famy-schumer-booed-for-mocking-donald-trump-on-stage-in-florida-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Schumer%20booed%20for%20mocking%20Donald%20Trump%20on%20stage%20in%20Florida%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Famy-schumer-booed-for-mocking-donald-trump-on-stage-in-florida-video&media=>
Amy Schumer booed for mocking Donald Trump on stage in Florida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/oct/17/amy-schumer-booed-for-mocking-donald-trump-on-stage-in-florida-video>
She closed referencing her controversial joke that called the Republican 
candidate an “orange, sexual-assaulting, fake-college-starting monster”.

“I shouldn’t have said that he was an orange, sexual-assaulting, 
fake-college-starting monster,” Schumer’s letter continued. “Shouldn’t have 
said that. I will never again say that he is an orange, sexual-assaulting, 
fake-college-starting monster.”


Before Tuesday’s performance, Schumer said on Instagram 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BLtMN8ojz-t/?taken-by=amyschumer> that New York’s 
show would be “squeaky clean” following the criticism she received for bashing 
Trump.

Schumer also responded in a statement, telling Entertainment Weekly 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/10/17/amy-schumer-responds-tampa-crowd-walk-out>
: “I loved the crowd and my show in Tampa last night! I want to thank the 8,400 
people who stayed. We had a great time! We have always depended on comedians to 
make us laugh and tell the truth. I am proud to continue that tradition.”


During her Tampa show, Schumer made Trump a focal point of her routine 
<http://www.tampabay.com/blogs/the-buzz-florida-politics/trump-fans-boo-walk-out-on-amy-schumer-in-tampa/2298412>
, at one point asking a Trump supporter, “preferably one with sleeves”, to come 
onstage and explain why they were picking him. A local man got up and explained 
the decision was about not liking Clinton.

“Do you get worried at all with how impulsive he is?” she reportedly said to 
him. “Do you worry he’ll be impulsive and get us in a lot of fucking trouble we 
can’t get out of?”

As audience members booed, Schumer responded: “Of course, we’re in Florida, 
you’re going to boo. I know you’re here to laugh, but you choose how you’re 
going to live your life, and it’s just too important.”
 