
Amy Schumer <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer> has defended her 
controversial Formation video, saying it was “just us women celebrating each 
other”.

Amy Schumer pens open letter to fans who left Florida show after Trump jokes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/19/amy-schumer-donald-trump-fans-walk-out-open-letter>
The comedian made a lip-sync “tribute” to Beyoncé’s hit video while on the set 
of her new film, using co-stars Goldie Hawn, Joan Cusack and Wanda Sykes as 
support. Released through Tidal, the video led to accusations of cultural 
appropriation.

“It was NEVER a parody,” Schumer wrote in an essay on Medium. “It was just us 
women celebrating each other. The videoBeyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> made was so moving and I wouldn’t 
ever make fun of that. There is absolutely no way to. I make fun of myself a 
few times in the video as I do in everything I am a part of. I loved every 
second of working with those women to make this thing that lifted us up.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_zzGzW_1jUg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_zzGzW_1jUg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_zzGzW_1jUg&media=>
Schumer also says she had Beyoncé’s approval to make the video and believes 
that many critics have confused her intent.

“If you watched it and it made you feel anything other than good, please know 
that was not my intention,” she said. “The movie we made is fun and the women 
in it are strong and want to help each other. That’s what it was about for me.”

Amy Schumer: ‘I'm not trying to be likable’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/27/amy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable>
The video was also criticized for using women of color in the background. “Amy 
Schumer uses the facets of Black womanhood that serve her best while casting 
Black women as extras and props in centering her own body,” wrote 
@FeministaJones on Twitter.

“You have every right to feel however you feel about the video and me but I 
want you to know I’m not going anywhere,” Schumer wrote. “Use whatever hashtag 
you like. My mission is to continue to work as hard as I can to empower women 
and make them laugh and feel better and I won’t let anything stop me.”

It’s not the first time that Schumer has come under fire for her stance on 
race. In some of her earlier sets, she made jokes which were later uncovered, 
such as “I used to date Hispanic guys, but now I prefer consensual” which she 
explained were “short dumb jokes”.

Schumer was also under fire for a tweet in September in response to a claim 
that she refuses to acknowledge that misogyny among men of color is no worse 
than that from white men. In a tweet that was quickly deleted, she replied: 
“how would you know? Statistically who is hollerin at you in the street more 
pa?”
 