
Amy Schumer has criticized Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> voters, calling them “kicking 
and screaming babies”.

In an Instagram post <https://www.instagram.com/p/BMmIdouDJgJ/>, the comedian 
and actor detailed her thoughts on the people who decided to vote for the 
reality TV star over Hillary Clinton.

Donald Trump at the White House: Obama reports 'excellent conversation' – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-barack-obama-white-house-us-election-live-updates>
“People who voted for him you are weak,” she wrote. “You are not just 
misinformed. You didn’t even attempt information. You say lock her up and you 
know something about the word email but what was in the emails? You have no 
clue. Well I’ll tell you if you were able to read this far through the holes in 
your sheet. They said nothing incriminating. Nothing.”

Schumer, who had been vocal about her support for the Democratic candidate, 
went on to compare her background with Trump’s.

“She dedicated her entire life to public service and got our children health 
care and education without discrimination,” she wrote. “He didn’t pay his 
workers. Started a fake college. Ripped people off. Never paid his taxes and 
sexually assaulted women and on and on.”

She also explains that under Clinton’s proposed plans, she, along with other 
celebrities, would have ended up paying higher taxes but the support was there 
because they knew would help those in need.

Robert De Niro on Donald Trump: 'I can't punch him now he's president'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/robert-de-niro-on-donald-trump-i-cant-punch-him-now-hes-president>
“She was fighting to take care of you kicking and screaming babies,” she 
wrote. “Yelling about emails you know nothing about and not liking her clothes 
or her hair she wanted to protect you even you. Well you’ve gotten what you 
asked for and now you can watch the sky open up. Literally. I am furious.”

Her second cousin is Chuck Schumer, who won his fourth Senate term during this 
week’s election and is now considered the most powerful Democrat in Washington 
as he leads the minority. The pair worked together to implore lawmakers to 
introduce tighter gun controls.

Schumer is the latest star to come out and criticize the result. Jennifer 
Lawrence has also written an essay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/jennifer-lawrence-donald-trump-election-president-protests>
 to explain her frustration. “This country was founded on immigration and today 
the only people that feel safe, that their rights are recognized and respected 
are white men,” she wrote. “I want to be positive; I want to support our 
democracy, but what can we take away from this?”
 