
Amy Schumer <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer> has defended her 
credentials to play Barbie, “an important and evolving icon”, pointing to 
backlash as evidence of why she would be a great choice.

The announcement on Saturday that Schumer was in negotiations to play the lead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/03/amy-schumer-barbie-movie-set-for-title-role>
 in Mattel’s debut movie was met with some criticism online, with some 
complaining she did not meet the physical standards embodied by the plastic 
doll.

Living doll: why Amy Schumer's the best thing to happen to Barbie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/06/amy-schumer-barbie-doll-film-sony-pictures-mattel-iconic-toy>
“Barbie is the definition of perfection,” complained a writer for a website 
called Barstool Sports that bills itself as being “by the common man; for the 
common man”.

“Mattel is completely ruining her image by letting Amy Schumer be a Barbie.”

A real woman with Barbie’s proportions would purportedly 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2308658/How-Barbies-body-size-look-real-life-Walking-fours-missing-half-liver-inches-intestine.html>
 not be able to lift her head, nor walk on two legs.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fconsumers-react-to-new-barbie-bodies-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Consumers%20react%20to%20new%20Barbie%20bodies%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fconsumers-react-to-new-barbie-bodies-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Consumers%20react%20to%20new%20Barbie%20bodies%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fconsumers-react-to-new-barbie-bodies-video&media=>
Consumers react to new Barbie bodies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/jan/28/consumers-react-to-new-barbie-bodies-video>
Schumer acknowledged criticism of her selection in a post to Instagram on 
Tuesday night. The photo, a paparazzi shot, showed her wearing a black swimsuit 
in the surf.


“Is it fat shaming if you know you’re not fat and have zero shame in your 
game? I don’t think so. ... When I look in the mirror I know who I am.”

She expressed her “deepest sympathy ... to the trolls, who are in more pain 
than we will ever understand.

“I want to thank them for making it so evident that I am a great choice. It’s 
that kind of response that let’s you know something’s wrong with our culture 
and we all need to work together to change it.”

Schumer’s post followed news of her being nominated for two Grammys: best 
comedy album for her set Live at the Apollo and best spoken-word album for The 
Girl With The Lower Back Tattoo.


Her selection as Barbie comes nearly one year on from Mattel’s makeover of the 
doll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/28/barbie-finally-becomes-a-real-girl-with-more-realistic-figure-and-skin-colours>
 to reflect a greater variety of body types, skin tones and styles.

The biggest update to the doll since 1959 gave Barbie 24 new hairstyles, seven 
different skin tones and three body types, and was featured onthe front cover 
of Time magazine <https://twitter.com/TIME/status/692688598446018561> under the 
headline “Now can we stop talking about my body?”

The new range was announced in January this year, after a 14% drop in global 
sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/16/barbie-doll-sales-fall-as-girls-turn-to-electronic-toys-and-tablets>
 of the doll in the three months to 30 September 2015 – the eighth consecutive 
quarter in which profits had fallen.

Barbie finally becomes a real woman – with a more realistic figure
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/28/barbie-finally-becomes-a-real-girl-with-more-realistic-figure-and-skin-colours>
Worldwide gross sales for the Barbie brand were up 16% on the previous year in 
Mattel’s 2016 third-quarter financial report 
<http://news.mattel.com/news/mattel-reports-third-quarter-2016-financial-results-and-declares-quarterly-divide>
, suggesting the new line was a success.

Schumer is used to scrutiny over her body. In March she hit out at “trolls” 
using that same photo <https://www.instagram.com/p/BFzID9GqUJY/> of herself in 
a swimsuit.

“I hope you find some joy in your lives today in a human interaction and not 
just in writing unkind things to a stranger you’ve never met who triggers 
something in you that makes you feel powerless and alone,” she wrote. “This is 
how I look. I feel happy. I think I look strong and healthy and also like Miss 
Trunchbull from Matilda. Kisses!”

The following month she rallied – again on Instagram – 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/07/amy-schumer-feeding-plus-size-prejudice-comedian-glamour-magazine>
 against being included in Glamour magazine’s “Chic at Any Size” issue when she 
falls “between a size 6 and an 8”: “It doesn’t feel right to me. Young girls 
seeing my body type thinking that is plus size?”

• Living doll: why Amy Schumer’s the best thing to happen to Barbie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/06/amy-schumer-barbie-doll-film-sony-pictures-mattel-iconic-toy>
 