
Hi Amy.

Good morning! Ooh, it isn’t morning where you are, is it? Well, happy new 
year. That’s a bit more neutral, isn’t it?

Thank you. How did you spend New Year’s Eve?

I was at home with my family. We rented a karaoke machine. I’m kind of a music 
nerd(1). My favourite this time was something my daughter brought to it. She 
can be quite shy about performing but she sang Katy Perry’s Roar (2). That was 
fun to watch.

There are two Lana Del Rey songs in Big Eyes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/big-eyes> (3), but I guess that’s not great 
karaoke music.

Oh, I don’t know. I’d try it. I’d try anything.

The painter you play, Margaret Keane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/26/art-fraud-margaret-walter-keane-tim-burton-biopic>
, had to fight to be heard because her husband Walter took the credit for her 
work – is that why you speak quietly for most of the film?

Margaret is a person who often used her art to express her emotions, so her 
speaking voice was not naturally her strength. She’s shy and sweet, with a 
wonderful sense of humour. Playing her with that voice felt right: it was 
authentic and it also provided a good juxtaposition with Walter [Christoph 
Waltz].

Is voice always your way in to a character?

In the films I’ve made with David O Russell, The Fighter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-fighter> and American Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-hustle>, he had a very specific 
voice in mind. Coming from a musical background, voice is a good starting point 
for me.

Is there an actor’s equivalent of the fear of the blank canvas or the blank 
page?

For me it’s when you don’t know how to be the character. With Doubt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/127948/doubt>, I got more and more 
overwhelmed during rehearsals with these giants(4), Meryl Streep (5) and Philip 
Seymour Hoffman(6), until I actually couldn’t speak. The director John Patrick 
Shanley said: “It’s the character that’s doing that to you. This is how she’s 
feeling.” I was there with these powerhouses and I was wondering why I wasn’t a 
powerhouse too. But the character was afraid.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjan%2F08%2Famy-adams-big-eyes-tim-burton-american-hustle-batman-superman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420722405754%2Fef5f90da-b7fc-469c-9dbb-0228e3eee902-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Adams%20on%20Big%20Eyes%2C%20American%20Hustle%20and%20Batman%20v%20Superman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjan%2F08%2Famy-adams-big-eyes-tim-burton-american-hustle-batman-superman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Adams%20on%20Big%20Eyes%2C%20American%20Hustle%20and%20Batman%20v%20Superman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Fjan%2F08%2Famy-adams-big-eyes-tim-burton-american-hustle-batman-superman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F8%2F1420722405754%2Fef5f90da-b7fc-469c-9dbb-0228e3eee902-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Adams as Margaret Keane in Big Eyes. Photograph: Leah Gallo/AP 
What did you and Keane discuss when you met?

We talked over some of the situations in the script but she is in her 80s and 
I didn’t want to pick at a scab, so to speak. I wanted to take only what she 
was willing to give without interrogating her. What struck me was how fresh it 
still was in her mind when she spoke about it – the abuse she suffered at 
Walter’s hands. She didn’t realise it was abuse for a long time. She was 
charmed by him. She thought: “Why did he pick me?”

Was it strange to be stared at by all those eyes in her paintings on set?

It was! I became very familiar with them. They represent how she saw the 
world. Sometimes they look confused, sometimes sad. She still paints every day. 
It’s part of her essential being.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F19%2Ftim-burton-on-big-eyes-a-weird-symbolic-version-of-the-american-dream-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1418991689744%2Fcrop_KP-57237_640_1.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tim%20Burton%20on%20Big%20Eyes%3A%20'A%20weird%20symbolic%20version%20of%20the%20American%20dream'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F19%2Ftim-burton-on-big-eyes-a-weird-symbolic-version-of-the-american-dream-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tim%20Burton%20on%20Big%20Eyes%3A%20%27A%20weird%20symbolic%20version%20of%20the%20American%20dream%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F19%2Ftim-burton-on-big-eyes-a-weird-symbolic-version-of-the-american-dream-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F19%2F1418991689744%2Fcrop_KP-57237_640_1.jpeg>
 Tim Burton speaks about his new film. 
Like another Tim Burton <https://www.theguardian.com/film/timburton> film, Ed 
Wood, Big Eyes doesn’t make any explicit statement about the quality of its 
subject’s work. But the critic played by Terence Stamp says it represents “an 
infinity of kitsch”. How do you think that felt to her?

It must have been so confusing and strange to have your work celebrated and 
torn down at the same time but also to get neither credit nor blame, to not be 
able to speak up for your work in any way. I know it was hurtful when people 
attacked the work. I know kitsch, by definition, isn’t considered art, but I 
have a lot of things in my life that would be called kitsch and I love them all.

Such as?

Lots of carved wooden birds that you get at souvenir shops, stuff like that. 
Margaret gifted me one of her paintings, which was just beyond generous.

How do you respond to criticism?

At the beginning, it was overwhelming on both sides. It’s wonderful to have 
people celebrate your work but there are definitely people who don’t like what 
I do(7). I’ve just learned to silence the outside voices because it distracts 
me. It steals joy. AfterCatch Me If You Can 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/catch-me-if-you-can>, I was paralysed by the 
idea of people paying attention to what I did. I had to learn to stay off the 
internet.

Are there any characters you’ve played that you wish you could go back to?

I’ve just had my first experience of bringing a character back, playing Lois 
Lane again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/mar/28/amy-adams-lois-lane-superman> , 
and it was fun to take her on a new journey. There are occasions where I’m 
grateful to let the character go. That’s how I felt about Sydney in American 
Hustle.

Oh no! That was the one I was hoping you’d say you loved.

Isn’t that funny? People love her. The reaction was that she was strong and 
sexy, but I saw it differently. There was something so damaged about her that 
didn’t sit well with me playing her. It was fun making the film and Christian 
[Bale] is one of my all-time favourite people to work with. And Sydney is a 
great character. But it didn’t feel good to play her. I felt her pain in a way 
that was difficult to deal with.

Your most memorable scene, where you are screaming euphorically in the 
nightclub toilet, does feel a bit twisted.

Oh, there was a lot more of that kind of … Yeah, anyway, we shot a lot of 
scenes that didn’t make it into the film. Those showed her as being more 
damaged in other ways. I totally understand why they didn’t make it into the 
film. It got pretty dark.

Big Eyes is on release. 

Foot notes

1. No kidding. From Enchanted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/120924/enchanted> to The Muppets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/145286/muppets> to playing the Baker’s 
Wife in a Central Park production of Into the Woods, music is never far from an 
Amy Adams role.

2. The screenwriter John August, a regular Tim Burton collaborator (including 
Big Fish and Corpse Bride),wrote a blog post 
<http://johnaugust.com/2013/lets-make-katy-perrys-roar-better> about the song 
(“The Oh Oh Ohs, which look ridiculous written down, are like little velcro 
loops that ensure the song sticks in your head”) and the issues he has with the 
lyrics (“She rhymes FIRE with FIRE”).

3. Big Eyes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/big-eyes> and I Can Fly.

4. Technically untrue. Streep is 1.68m. The late Hoffman was 1.77m. Perhaps 
Adams (1.63m)should have stood further away from them to make them appear 
smaller <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dS12p0Zqlt0>?

5. Adams also appeared with Streep in Julie & Julia though their characters 
(Streep played the chef Julia Child and Adams a food blogger, Julie Powell, who 
was inspired by her) occupy different eras. One enterprising viewer excised 
Adams entirely from the film, producing a new version,Julia 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/vf-hollywood/2014/11/julie-julia-amy-adams>, which 
Vanity Fair called “a delightful hour-long movie all about Julia cooking her 
way through Paris”.

6. Adams also starred with Hoffman in Charlie Wilson’s War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/122446/charlie.wilson.s.war> and The 
Master <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/146341/master>. In the latter, 
she masturbated him over a sink. Nice.

7. Really? Pah! They’re idiots. Even when she appeared as Amelia Earhart in A 
Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithsonian, it was like finding a 
Michelin-starred chef working at KFC.

8. Adams played her in Man of Steel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148371/man-of-steel> and has just 
finished shootingBatman v Superman: Dawn of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/man-of-steel-2>.
 