
For the famous, and debatably infamous, 2016 Pirelli calendar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/30/pirelli-calendar-goes-with-more-jokes-and-less-steam-this-year>
, released Monday, photographer Annie Leibovitzmade 
<http://www.elle.com/culture/celebrities/news/a32204/pirelli-calendar-launch-2016/>
 a “strong set of very simple portraits” featuring everyone from Patti Smith 
(Miss November, if you will, and looking like her punk goddess self in her 
trademark black jeans, white button-down shirt and combat boots) to Serena 
Williams (the face of April, seen from behind in only underwear bottoms, her 
strong body and strong demeanor on equal display).


But the photo that seems to be sparking the most conversation – about her 
“realness” – is that of comedian and actorAmy Schumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/amy-schumer>, wearing nothing but lacy 
panties and a pair of heels, her arm covering her breast as she looks beyond 
the camera while holding a cup of coffee.

Apparently she is more “real” than her clothed counterparts because she had 
the gall to pose nearly naked without the body of a Playboy centerfold model. 
(It seems that no one has much to say about Serena Williams’s nude form, 
however. Discuss amongst yourselves whether this is because she is an athlete, 
African American, or both.)

“Beautiful, gross, strong, thin, fat, pretty, ugly, sexy, disgusting, 
flawless, woman. Thank you@annieleibovitz <https://twitter.com/annieleibovitz>
,” the Trainwreck startweeted 
<https://twitter.com/amyschumer/status/671353092630253569> Monday, sending her 
image from the calendar out into the interwebs for the world to comment on.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fphotographer-annie-leibovitz-on-the-pirelli-calendar-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448960278068%2FKP_629821_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Photographer%20Annie%20Leibovitz%20on%20the%20Pirelli%20calendar%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fphotographer-annie-leibovitz-on-the-pirelli-calendar-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Photographer%20Annie%20Leibovitz%20on%20the%20Pirelli%20calendar%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F01%2Fphotographer-annie-leibovitz-on-the-pirelli-calendar-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F1%2F1448960278068%2FKP_629821_crop_640x480.jpg>
Photographer Annie Leibovitz on the Pirelli calendar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2015/dec/01/photographer-annie-leibovitz-on-the-pirelli-calendar-video>
And comment they did, of course. The majority of Twitter responses cheered and 
championed Schumer’s image. And they weren’t wrong – Schumer looks great. But 
she looks great for the same reason Patti Smith and Tavi Gevinson (August’s 
model), both fully clothed, look great: they’re just themselves.

Schumer apparently earns the label of “real” because a few rolls around her 
midsection are on display – because her body is less than perfect by pop 
culture standards. Would she be any less “real” if she didn’t allow her body to 
be consumed in this way? Can’t all bodies count as “real”, no matter what they 
look like and who lives in them and whether or not they choose to show 
themselves – clothed or naked?


Schumer (a woman I do not know but whose legs I have always envied in my most 
superficial television-watching moments) may have curves, but she also has 
bouncing hair, a Kewpie doll face and a ridiculously successful career – and 
the latter three would remain true with clothes, and should be lauded without 
an actress baring (almost) all.

And of course, Schumer is able to present her body from a position of 
privilege. Not all women (surely, not many women,or men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/27/queer-men-like-victims-street-harassment-nobody-talks-about>
) are able to actively consent to who is able to view their body – and when and 
how. Sadly, being able to elect to invite in the gaze, male or otherwise, is a 
rare and great privilege.

Perhaps this is what Leibovitz and Schumer intended, especially when Schumer’s 
photo is viewed in context of the other female performers featured in this 
year’s calendar. As we look at a collection of images of women, all of whom 
choose to engage in performance in some way, maybe we’re being asked to think 
about the ways women’s bodies are always on display, always engaged in 
performance, and to rethink the standards and criteria we use to evaluate them.

Or maybe it’s all a larger commentary, with Schumer playing a role: maybe she 
and Leibovitz are saying: “We know how people talk about women’s bodies, so 
we’ll beat you to the point – and point out how absurd this is that we even 
have these conversations.” Authenticity has nothing to do with the shape of a 
woman’s abs.
 