
A documentary about Amy Winehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amywinehouse> failed to convey the late 
singer’s “sense of fun”, said her father.

Mitch Winehouse said on Thursday that the film, directed by Asif Kapadia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/27/asif-kapadia-amy-winehouse-doc>, 
was “very hurtful” and had “missed a trick” by focusing on her drug addiction.

He appeared to confirm that he was planning his own tribute to the life of his 
daughter, but that it would not be a “revenge attack” on Kapadia.

“We are looking to do something positive. There are so many great things in 
Amy’s life that were missed in that film. It was a great opportunity that Asif 
Kapadia had and he didn’t grab it,” said Winehouse. “Let’s hear something new 
about Amy.”

The singer’s father was speaking at the annual Amy Winehouse Foundation Gala 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/01/amy-winehouse-charity-young-addicts>
 at the Savoy hotel in central London, which was attended by stars including 
her friend and collaborator Mark Ronson.


Mitch Winehouse on Amy the film: ‘I told them they were a disgrace. I said: 
You should be ashamed of yourselves’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/01/mitch-winehouse-interview-amy-documentary-film>
The foundation aims to help young people overcome drug and alcohol problems. 

The singer died in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jul/23/amy-winehouse-found-dead-27> 
aged 27 after a well-publicised battle with drink and drugs.

Her father said the government was failing to provide the help and support 
that many young people with addiction issues needed, but that charities aiming 
to help them faced considerable difficulty in raising funds.

“Amy loved cats. It would have been easier for us to raise shedloads of money 
and open up a cat charity or a donkey charity, we wouldn’t have any problem 
raising money,” he said.

“You try to raise money for homeless young people or people suffering from 
drug addiction or alcohol, still the prevailing thought among a lot of people 
is, ‘well no one forced them to drink’.”

He also offered an insight into his daughter’s charitable streak, telling how 
she once found a burglar in her home and offered to cook him dinner.


“A burglar broke into her house and she heard him downstairs,” he said. “She 
went downstairs and he saw it was Amy and he said ‘sorry I didn’t know it was 
you, if I had known it was your house I wouldn’t have burgled it’.

“She said ‘well, can I get you something to eat?’ She ended up looking after 
him.”
 