
The Inside Amy Schumer writer who sparked a backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/17/amy-schumer-writer-rape-kurt-metzger>
 for comments about rape victims has struck a defiant tone, dismissing his 
media critics as “assholes” and declaring that he “will never stop mocking 
victim culture”.

“If i gotta have 20 more news outlets slander me so be it. Im not being 
bullied by these cattle and i do not give a fuck. Im a comic. I cant be fired,” 
Kurt Metzger, a regular writer for the popularComedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Central show, told the Guardian.

He added: “And my bet is when people see i stood up to these assholes they 
will wanna come see me. I never directed anything at a rape victim. Im appalled 
thats the headline. Does anyone give one shit about what’s true? Anyone?”

Metzger’s initial, widely-condemned Facebook post, which was taken down on 
Thursday, was a response to news that women in the New York City entertainment 
scene had accused a prominent comedian atUpright Citizens Brigade 
<http://www.revelist.com/us-news/aaron-glaser-rape-ucb-ban/4247>, a famous 
comedy club, ofsexual assault 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/improv-comic-banned-ucb-theatre-rape-allegations-article-1.2755492>
. A woman reportedlywarned 
<https://mic.com/articles/151826/comedian-aaron-glaser-has-been-accused-of-sexual-assault-and-women-are-speaking-out#.wNYOTeMWY>
 others about the comedian in a private Facebook group on Saturday.

Amy Schumer faces backlash for response to writer's rape comments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/17/amy-schumer-writer-rape-kurt-metzger>
In his initial post Metzger mocked the alleged victims in the case in the 
online rant, which was filled with offensive references to female rape 
survivors and parodied the idea that they should be believed when they do not 
report an incident to the police. “They are women! ALL women are as reliable as 
my bible! A book that, much like a women, is incapable of lying!”

Schumer initially responded to the backlash by reportedly blocking women on 
Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/LizArcury/status/765437989921103872?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
who said they were fans and asked that she fire Metzger. She later condemned 
his comments and noted that he isn’t acurrent writer 
<https://twitter.com/amyschumer/status/766104853898727424> for the show, which 
is onhiatus <https://twitter.com/amyschumer/status/766282435520847872>. But 
critics and victims’ advocates havesaid they were disappointed 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/culture/2016/aug/17/amy-schumer-writer-rape-kurt-metzger>
 that the comedian, considered one of the mostpowerful feminist voices in comedy
 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/stage/2015/aug/02/amy-schumer-interview-trainwreck-judd-apatow>
, has not more aggressively denounced Metzger or officially severed ties with 
him.


In one of many additional public Facebook posts 
<https://www.facebook.com/kurt.metzger/posts/10208046060563346?pnref=story> 
since the controversy erupted, Metzger appeared to express regret, saying that 
he has “always been in defense of the victims of assault” and adding: “I stand 
by the points I made, but I sincerely apologize for using inflammatory language 
to make them.”

However Metzger showed less contrition in other public Facebook posts, and 
also appeared to double-down in a series of Facebook message exchanges with a 
Guardian reporter, sent in the early hours of Thursday morning.

“Don’t fucking complain about the police not helping if you didn’t bother 
going to the police at all,”he said in one of the public posts 
<https://www.facebook.com/kurt.metzger/posts/10208033140440351>.

“Rape is hard to prove. That’s why you can’t dick around on twitter first. 
Time is of the essence.” Metzger used highly-derogatory language against women 
before adding that his critics should “try actually helping victims instead of 
spotlighting how unique and enlightened you are for being against rape”.

In his exchange with the Guardian, Metzger shared messages that, he said, were 
from rape victims who wrote to him expressing gratitude for his comments.

He added: “Im the one who actually cares about victims … I really dislike this 
social media groupthink and ill be goddamned if im gonna roll over … 
Prosecuting rape on social media is wrong plain and simple.”

He also took issue with reports that characterized him as insulting survivors, 
saying: “I would never mock a rape victim … I will never stop mocking victim 
culture … There is a big fucking difference.”

Victims’ advocates have repeatedly noted that there are many reasons survivors 
of assault do not turn to the police for help. Critics argue that law 
enforcement often discount women and that the process of a criminal trialcan be 
re-traumatizing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/11/campus-sexual-assault-university-colorado-austin-wilkerson>
 without leading to any meaningful justice oraccountability for offenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/06/stanford-sexual-assault-judge-recall>
.

A US justice department 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/11/baltimore-police-gender-bias-women-justice-department>
 this month, for example, uncovered that police and prosecutors in Baltimore 
openly expressed their contempt for a woman who had reported a sexual assault, 
with one writing that the victim “seems like a conniving little whore”.

Metzger – who has writing credits on 39 episodes of Inside Amy Schumer, 
including the most recent season finale that aired in June – has in the past 
been accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/17/amy-schumer-writer-rape-kurt-metzger>
 of harassing women online.









 