
Amy Schumer has faced some tough crowds in her time and understands the value 
of getting in first and getting in funniest. In her new memoir, The Girl With 
The Lower Back Tattoo, she refers to herself variously as “a blond Shrek”, a 
woman with a “Cabbage Patch head”, the “third hottest bartender” at a chain bar 
in Cincinnati, and someone who looks, at a distance, like Alfred Hitchcock. As 
inTrainwreck <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3152624/>, the 2015 film that made 
her name, she catalogues her mishaps, prat falls and minor brushes with the 
law, as well as more serious attacks on her welfare, while navigating the 
tricky line between her comic persona and the more heartfelt demands of the 
memoirist. There is one requirement she feels no urge to fulfil. After reading 
the first draft of her book, Schumer’s publisher told her, “You come off as too 
unlikable”, to which she replied without hesitation, “I’m not trying to be 
likable.”

Likability is a big theme of Schumer’s, in both her comedy and life. On the 
morning we meet, in her favourite Manhattan teashop, she looks if not exactly 
unhappy, then profoundly ill at ease, someone for whom the business of talking 
about herself outside a performance presents certain constitutional problems. 
On stage, she is famously loud, brash, as she puts it, “that version of me 
that’s super-social at a party”. This morning, she is quiet, an “introvert” 
dressed in black, frequently glancing in the direction of Cayce Dumont, her 
sister-in-law, who helped Schumer write the book and who is sitting with her 
toddler several tables away. “Two people have taken photos of me,” murmurs 
Schumer at one point, scanning the far side of the restaurant, and when a woman 
comes over to tell her she’s a fan, Schumer flips a bright smile for the time 
it takes to pose for a photo, then snaps back to the blank stare of someone 
awaiting bad news.

Inside Amy Schumer writer Jessi Klein on 'the nonsense of being female'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/14/jessi-klein-inside-amy-schumer-the-nonsense-of-being-female>
Part of this is, I assume, Schumer’s anxiety about how the “super-revealing” 
aspects of her book will be received. It is sometimes overlooked that, at 35, 
she is fully 10 years younger thanTina Fey 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tina_Fey> and Amy Poehler 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amy_Poehler>, both of whom had nothing like 
Schumer’s exposure when they were her age. After appearing on the US TV talent 
showLast Comic Standing <http://www.nbc.com/last-comic-standing?nbc=1> in 2007, 
Schumer, in rapid succession, did a 42-city standup tour, made four seasons of
Inside Amy Schumer <http://www.cc.com/shows/inside-amy-schumer>, her sketch 
show for Comedy Central, and wroteTrainwreck 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt3152624/> with Judd Apatow, in which she also 
starred. She first won what felt to me like widespread approval with a sketch 
that, for a week in April 2015, was all anyone I knew talked about, in which 
Schumer joined Tina Fey,Patricia Arquette 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patricia_Arquette> and Julia Louis-Dreyfus 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julia_Louis-Dreyfus> to celebrate the latter’s 
“last fuckable day”. <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XPpsI8mWKmg>(“In every 
actress’s life,” Louis-Dreyfus said, “the media decides when you finally reach 
the point when you’re not believably fuckable any more.”) Schumer played the 
ingénue and the sketch, in a style typical of her best work, was profane, 
self-aware, charming and politically on the nose. It was also very funny.

She has written several sketches in the same vein, the most memorable 
skewering not just bog-standard sexism, but destructive modes of female 
discourse, that competitive orgy of self-abasement –“I’m so bad”. “No, I’m so 
bad” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HGXnlFLC0Ck> – and inability to take 
compliments (“Look at your cute little dress.” “I paid, like, $2 for it. I look 
like a whore locked out of her apartment,” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hzlvDV3mpZw>etc) via which women tyrannise 
each other and trivialise themselves, and that felt like something rarely seen 
on TV. When Trainwreck came along, and made $140m (£106m) at the box office, 
Schumer, who played a loosely autobiographical character, became the brightest 
new comedian on the block.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b59c322487bdc37d86deb168713d0d623a7878f%2F31_64_1676_1006%2F1676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I'm%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%27m%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b59c322487bdc37d86deb168713d0d623a7878f%2F31_64_1676_1006%2F1676.jpg>
 Schumer on stage aged 23. Photograph: courtesy Amy Schumer 
Against this backdrop, The Girl With The Lower Back Tattoo 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/418873/> is something 
of a departure. It is, like Schumer’s standup, raucously fun at times, explicit 
in a way that, as we’ve come to expect from her, has political bite (the first 
chapter is entitled An Open Letter To My Vagina, which may be too whimsical for 
some tastes, but is at least firmly in character). It is also painful to read. 
One chapter opens with the sentence, “When I was 14, my dad shit himself at an 
amusement park”, and there follows the story of her father’s alcoholism, 
general inadequacy as a parent and his multiple sclerosis. Another chapter 
charts her mother’s failures – boundary problems, oversharing, sexual 
incontinence – all of which contributed to Schumer’s own fluctuating sexual and 
emotional security. Like her comedy, a staple of Schumer’s subject matter is 
dating, but her feelings of inadequacy, shame and unlovability are often 
presented without edge or humour in the book. By the final page, the comic 
asides and flights of self-deprecation appear to come not, as one might once 
have assumed, from a place of supreme confidence, but from its opposite.

All of this is, needless to say, a brave performance, albeit one that gives 
rise to some awkward tonal transitions between the scattershot jokes and 
exclamatory one-liners and attempts to say something serious. “My parents lost 
it all,” she writes in an apparent parody of her own teenage self. “Which 
happened, incidentally, during the onset of my father’s multiple sclerosis. 
Cool timing, Universe!!!” Nonetheless, the very act of writing about her past 
is a reclamation of sorts. “That wouldn’t happen to me now,” Schumer says of an 
abusive relationship she got caught in in her 20s. “But my pattern, which I 
think was set up by my parents, [was] of ‘you’re this really flawed person who 
makes awful mistakes, that are clearly destructive to me, but I’m going to 
stick with you, and I’ll be the person to love you through this and I’ll be 
your support system and love you, even though you’re hurting me. And if I take 
care of you enough then you’ll be able to one day take care of me.’ That was my 
pattern.” She blinks, bleakly. “Yeah.”

My sister and I tried to navigate what the truth was. We moved so much: were 
we squatters?

Schumer’s father started out rich and lost all his money when she was nine, 
forcing them to move from a two-storey apartment in Manhattan to a series of 
less salubrious homes on Long Island. Without this reversal in fortune, Schumer 
would not be the performer she is now, with a demonstrably Long Island style. 
(For non-Americans, she explains, Long Island is a bit like “the MTV showJersey 
Shore <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jersey_Shore_(TV_series)>”.) Hers is not 
the genteel schtick of comic peers from stable middle-class families, but 
something altogether more visceral and angry. Although they were Jewish, she 
says, “where I grew up was very Irish Catholic, blue collar. My girlfriends 
from then are still my best friends now. They are just real girls, who drink as 
much or more than the guys. I’m proud of my friends in that part of Long 
Island; they’re not the prissy quiet girls. I’m the quietest one.”


Writing the book has, for Schumer and her younger sister Kim, “been 
interesting, as we’ve tried to navigate what the truth was. We moved so much. 
So many houses. We were like, were we squatters? We laugh about how dark those 
days were. But we’re pretty much always in agreement about what happened.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde6efbfa9d407e12a66ffaf667ec01028060552%2F18_131_3632_4537%2F3632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I'm%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%27m%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde6efbfa9d407e12a66ffaf667ec01028060552%2F18_131_3632_4537%2F3632.jpg>
 Photograph: Mark Seliger for Marie Claire US/Art Partner 
In broad outline, it was this: her father’s business, which sold high-end baby 
furniture, went bust and overnight the private jets to the Bahamas and rental 
of entire zoos for Schumer’s birthday disappeared. She was, she says, just 
young enough for the impact of this life change to be largely irrelevant to 
her, but concedes it must have been hard for their mother. “Three kids, and 
your husband has just become literally, financially worthless.” Over the next 
five years, her parents’ marriage fell apart, her father’s drinking accelerated 
and her mother took up with the father of one of Schumer’s best friends, 
something for which, judging by the raw fury of the account in the book, she 
still hasn’t forgiven her.

At school, Schumer was a popular kid, vivacious, motivated, well-adjusted if 
you overlook the odd shoplifting spree, but at home it was a different story. 
For the entirety of her childhood and young adulthood, Schumer identified with 
her mother over her father, something she now sees as an indication of damage. 
“I mean, it’s so complicated,” she says. “If I thought I could do a good job of 
explaining my mother to you, we could talk for a week and it would still be... 
unless you have a mother exactly like that...” She trails off.

It was only five years ago, when she first began writing the memoir, that she 
started to see her experiences in a different light. She returned, for help 
with the details, to her teenage journals, excerpts of which appear in the book 
with a series of self-belittling footnotes from Schumer. (For example, the line 
“I have been living in a world mirroring reality but not quite a part of it” is 
accompanied by the footnote, “I would love to know what the fuck I am talking 
about here. I must have been reading a heavy-handed Oprah book club pick.”) Her 
mother, she writes, had inadequate filters. She talked explicitly about sex in 
a way that was wholly age-inappropriate. She bad-mouthed Schumer’s father to 
her eldest daughter as if she were an adult, telling Schumer she never loved 
him. “The level of brainwashing and realising that’s a lot to lay on a kid,” 
she says. “I’m not a parent but I can’t imagine doing that to your child.” Her 
account of these years is so unequivocally negative – at one point, she calls 
her mother’s behaviour “gross and creepy” – that I assume her mother hasn’t 
read the book.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F861d4bb0dedf69a937be9a65fab5360408761409%2F74_187_1120_1400%2F1120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I'm%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%27m%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F861d4bb0dedf69a937be9a65fab5360408761409%2F74_187_1120_1400%2F1120.jpg>
 With her father on her Vogue cover shoot in 2016. Photograph: Courtesy Amy 
Schumer 
“Oh, no,” Schumer says. “My mom read everything. I said if you want me not to 
put any of this in, I won’t. If there are any lines you want taken out; if you 
want to write a response. Her only thing was [to say that] Hebrew school was on 
Sunday not Saturday. I said OK.”

Clearly, this was not the first time Schumer and her mother had been over this 
ground and, while the first time Schumer brought it up, “I was really angry and 
upset, now it’s five years and our relationship is... fine. But I’m very 
withholding.” Does her mother acknowledge the validity of Schumer’s charges 
against her? There is a long pause. “Sometimes,” she says.

There was one uncomplicated moment of closeness between them, when Schumer’s 
mother told her to hold off for as long as possible before losing her 
virginity. “I love that advice,” Schumer says – and she took it, too, waiting 
until she was 17 and dating a boy whom she trusted. What happened next was 
about as far from her romantic fantasies as she could possibly get. While 
dozing one night in front of the TV at her house, her boyfriend, without 
preamble, discussion or any form of consent – without, as she puts it “even 
confirming I was awake” – penetrated her. Schumer writes: “When I startled and 
looked down, he immediately removed himself from me and yelled quickly, ‘I 
thought you knew!’” He abruptly left her house; Schumer cried; the next day, he 
came around to apologise and she comforted him.

Schumer does not in any way downplay this incident. It warped her sexual 
identity for her entire 20s and even now, she says, she is not free of a 
certain defensiveness and self-protection that she traces back to that night. 
She wishes she had gone to her mother, but she was in denial and instead, with 
fake brightness, approached her a few weeks later and told her she had just 
lost her virginity and it was all wonderful. “I wanted to pretend it was 
different,” she says.

In the book, Schumer follows up the story with a battery of sexual assault and 
rape statistics, but she describes her own experience thus: “He was inside of 
me in a way I hadn’t consented to.”

I'm so not racist. I used to make jokes like that, but you want to be sure 
people are laughing for the right reasons

I ask if this wording came at the behest of her publishers’ lawyers. No, she 
says. “Why didn’t I use the word rape? That wasn’t a decision. In my mind, when 
I think about that night, the word rape – there’s a definition; I wasn’t 
grabbed into an alley and brutally raped.”

You wanted accurately to represent what you felt at the time?

“I was so concerned for him. Which was the heartbreaking thing. I realised the 
next day I was angry, but he was still my boyfriend who I liked.”

This exchange, which is full of stops and starts, and what Schumer admits to 
be a fear of sensationalist headlines, is an indication of how hard it is to 
talk about sexual assault with any kind of nuance. In a jokier part of the 
narrative, she writes, “Damn, it’s hard to write a book and not get yelled at”, 
and the distinction she makes between her account and rape by a stranger will 
be deemed inadequate in some quarters, just as last week she was deemed by some 
to beinsufficiently condemnatory of Kurt Metzger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/17/amy-schumer-writer-rape-kurt-metzger>
, a former writing colleague who sent a series of tweets mocking rape survivors.

In fact, Schumer does an admirable job of delineating the fallout from that 
night. In the years that followed, she made a series of bad relationship 
choices, including the decision at the age of 21 to move in with a man with a 
volatile temper, who she says threatened, pushed, pinched and belittled her. 
Part of the reason she didn’t walk out sooner, she says, is that, “I didn’t 
know that was something that happened to women who were strong”, but her 
strength is shot through with self-doubt. At every turn, both in the book and 
in conversation, Schumer is at pains to point out that she is a “kind” person, 
that she is generous (“Being able to help people, that makes me feel so good. 
Being able to give someone an amount of money that I know will be 
life-changing. Hearing people come up and say they appreciate what I’m doing. 
That I’ve made them feel better”) and that she has lots of good friends, as if 
these facts were somehow in doubt. She talks about her strength to a degree 
that makes it sound less like a statement of fact than of wish-fulfillment.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXPpsI8mWKmg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXPpsI8mWKmg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DXPpsI8mWKmg&media=>
 Schumer’s Last Fuckable Day sketch. 
A main source of Schumer’s stability is her relationship with Kim, her younger 
sister, whom she persuaded to move to New York from Chicago a few years ago, 
and to whom she gave a job as a writer on herComedy Central 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/comedy-central> show. Kim has since moved 
back, but Schumer says they remain close. When I ask, jokingly, how to get my 
two daughters to have a relationship as good as Schumer and her sister’s, she 
shoots back, “They’ll bond over hating you”, and smiles widely for the only 
time in the interview.

Amy Schumer is a 'sex comic' – and a radical one at that
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/26/amy-schumer-hbo-live-at-the-apollo-sex-comic>
The other constant during those years of emotional turmoil was work, and 
Schumer threw herself at the standup comedy circuit with a ferocious and 
admirable ambition. For this, she returns to the fact of her father losing his 
fortune. “The kids I know who grew up with money are the most fucked up. I 
worked from such an early age – the work ethic, the struggle – I appreciate it 
now. I appreciate having money now.”

She is good with money, has never lived beyond her means and is a shrewd 
enough operator to have changed publishers andresold her memoir for a reported 
$8m (£6m) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/23/amy-schumer-lands-book-deal-8m-10m-advance-essays>
 – eight times its original value – after her stock rose dramatically some way 
into writing it. Schumer keeps a line in her head of where she will and won’t 
sell out for money. “I mean, I’ll do an Old Navy commercial or a Bud Light 
commercial, but I don’t want to do a movie where I’m doing some dumb shit that 
I’m not proud of, that isn’t going to be funny.” She just finished filming a 
mother/daughter comedy with Goldie Hawn in Hawaii, isco-writing a film with 
Jennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/06/jennifer-lawrence-mess-new-comedy-amy-schumer>
 (Lawrence reportedly got in touch with Schumer and asked if she’d like to 
collaborate), and would love to work with Apatow again. Meanwhile, she is 
touring, hanging out with her friends, watching a lot of TV (she loves British 
crime dramas, specifically,Happy Valley 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Happy_Valley_(TV_series)>) and dating Ben 
Hanisch, a furniture designer she met online last year. She remains cautiously 
optimistic about relationships, whether or not they last. “You try and you 
don’t give up hope, and then, out of nowhere, somebody comes along. And then 
you break up and think you’ll never meet anyone again. And somebody else comes 
along.”

Since two people were shot dead at a screening of Trainwreck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/24/hollywood-reacts-to-shooting-at-cinema-showing-trainwreck>
 in Louisiana two years ago, Schumer has also become an active campaigner for 
gun control, appearing with her cousin, the senatorChuck Schumer 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chuck_Schumer> at a news conference and publicly 
campaigning for tighter gun laws.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F980541b0f407cd753f3e83ef75c9b917af167430%2F114_108_1786_2230%2F1786.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I'm%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%27m%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F980541b0f407cd753f3e83ef75c9b917af167430%2F114_108_1786_2230%2F1786.jpg>
 Schumer with recent collaborator Jennifer Lawrence. Photograph: Handout/Getty 
Images 
In some ways, she is politically naive. During those early years of her 
career, Schumer made some jokes that have since come back to haunt her, most 
conspicuously her flippant use of a “dumb white girl” persona, in which guise 
she made a joke about all Hispanic men being rapists. When this, and other 
similar lines surfaced last year, she was roundly condemned. To her credit, 
Schumer will still engage with critics online, “because sometimes I learn”, she 
says. “They’ll explain why something offended them and I’ll say all right, 
thank you. Unless they’re a troll.”

In this case, she says, “I think I said something like I’m a comic, I’m going 
to say some things you’re going to like and some you aren’t, but I promise I 
have good intentions. People were like, that’s not good enough. And then I was 
like, OK. You’re right. I have more of a responsibility than that. But then, I 
don’t make jokes like that any more. At the time I was hustling, making my 
way.” She pauses and smiles. “I’m so not racist.

Does she think satirical “racist jokes” are problematic if actual racists 
still find them funny? “When I used to make jokes like that, you want to make 
sure people are laughing for the right reasons.” Which is a hard thing to do.

“Yeah. I mean, you can’t control it that much, but I think if I realised that 
enough people were thinking it was a call to arms, I would stop.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe137cd547b8ed67bd009081232bb19008cabc0b2%2F31_630_3344_2006%2F3344.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I'm%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%27m%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe137cd547b8ed67bd009081232bb19008cabc0b2%2F31_630_3344_2006%2F3344.jpg>
 Starring in Trainwreck with Bill Hader. Photograph: Everett/REX Shutterstock 
Standup is still her main source of income, and now that she plays venues the 
size of Madison Square Garden, it dwarfs anything she can make in film and TV.

Trainwreck was satisfying not just for its critical success, but for the way 
in which it flushed out the double standard in the way men and women behaving 
badly are perceived. Given the title of the film, Schumer was bizarrely 
sensitive to the suggestion that the title character was a mess, but she was 
also justified in pointing out that men who get drunk and have sex are not 
disparaged in the same way that she was. No one called Seth Rogen a “skank” for 
his role inKnocked Up <http://gb.imdb.com/title/tt0478311/>.

After the film came out, Schumer was offered a lot of unenticing follow-up 
roles – too much slapstick or losers. “I’m not going to be the woman who drives 
a moped through plate glass, or the girl at the wedding, who’s like I can’t 
meet [anyone].” She says, “It loses me money to go out and do a movie”, so it 
has to be good.

Schumer does not consider herself someone who plays the Hollywood game. It 
took her three years to persuade enough people to be involved in the Last 
Fuckable Day sketch because, she says, “actresses didn’t want to do it. Tina 
said if Julia does it, she’d do it. Patricia had won the Oscar and talked about 
equal pay, so she said, ‘I’ll do it’. It worked out.”

She doesn’t disparage their cautiousness. “Well, they’re smart. I’m naive, I 
don’t really know much. They’ve navigated it this long.” Still, for as long as 
she can get away with it – which is to say while she’s still considered “the 
cool thing; that’s what it’s all about. It’s all really gross” – Schumer will 
do precisely as she pleases. It’s the attitude that powers her life, as her 
humour. “I’m not going to play the games that they play.”

• Amy Schumer’s UK tour starts on 30 August. For tickets, go to 
livenation.co.uk <http://www.livenation.co.uk/>

‘He looked like a fake Greek sculpture of a man; he was so handsome, you 
couldn’t look at him for very long’




An exclusive extract from Amy Schumer’s new book

My sister Kim and I got really fat one summer. I’m not fat-shaming us. It was 
worth it. We both like to expand and contract like accordions. That summer, we 
were not wanting for anything.

Amy Schumer is fuelling plus-size prejudice, not fighting it | Phoebe-Jane Boyd
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/07/amy-schumer-feeding-plus-size-prejudice-comedian-glamour-magazine>
I was blessed with a mother who made junk food completely contraband. Her 
restrictions did not have the desired effect. Instead of giving me a healthy 
in-moderation-only attitude towards shitty-for-you food, any time I was around 
soda or pizza at a birthday party, I went full-metal-jacket crazy eating it 
all. Once, when I was nine, I went to the circus with my friend Lauren. Her mom 
offered to grab me something from the concession stand, and I was like, “I can 
have whatever I want?” She said – get this – “Yes.” My vision blurred and I 
blinked maniacally, unable to respond. She must have thought I was waiting for 
her to read me the menu of options – which is what she did.

“Well, honey, they have peanuts, popcorn, cotton candy, pretzels, giant 
chocolate chip cookies, lollipops, soda and hot chocolate.”

To which I answered, “Yes.” Then I ate so much, it’s a miracle my little 
stomach didn’t explode all over a dancing elephant.

Even as a full-grown adult woman, I still have this habit. I curb it within 
reason. But there is no other way to describe that particular summer: Kim and I 
got fat. I was just about to start filming the second season of my TV show, so 
I panicked and asked her to lose some weight with me. There is no reason she 
should have said yes. She’s very married and is not on camera very much. Kim is 
one of those girls with a natural Playboy-model type of body – the kind that, 
if it were mine, I would have had so much fun with. I’d be carrying every 
disease known to man and monkey. Instead, I’m shaped like a cactus, and when I 
don’t shave for four hours, I feel like one, too. But Kim agreed to work out 
and eat well with me, because she is kind.

I can have low self-esteem, but I’m also always completely ready to believe 
that I am prettier than I ever realised

We signed up for this insane CrossFit-type workout. It’s one of those 
programmes that puts you through Navy Seal–style guerrilla warfare training 
that is completely over the top and unnecessary, unless you’re a runway model 
or about to compete in the Hunger Games.

There was one instructor who was so beautiful and charismatic that it was 
confusing. This instructor, whom I’ll call Neal, looked like a fake Greek 
sculpture of a man; he was so handsome, you couldn’t look at him for very long. 
He spread his attention evenly in the class, walking around and winking and 
squatting next to us as we did wall-sits and crunches.

Kim and I are annoyed by physically perfect people, because fuck you. They 
can’t also be funny. But even we were not immune to his charm.

Neal always made it very clear in class that he was available via the internet 
to provide extra personal training outside. One day, I said to my sister, “I 
kind of feel like he was saying that specifically to me… because he kind of 
likes me.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc16fd80f17b7b681a55a10a7eed9ba47f0bd8f0%2F259_48_2173_2716%2F2173.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I'm%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amy%20Schumer%3A%20%E2%80%98I%27m%20not%20trying%20to%20be%20likable%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Faug%2F27%2Famy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc16fd80f17b7b681a55a10a7eed9ba47f0bd8f0%2F259_48_2173_2716%2F2173.jpg>
 Schumer with her sister Kim at a New York gym. Photograph: Courtesy Amy Schumer
I was fully ready for her to tell me I was an idiot. Kim has often messed with 
me when I have a crush on a guy and he has zero feelings for me. There was a 
guy who worked on my TV show whom I was crazy about. He wouldn’t give me the 
time of day, even though I was literally paying for his time of day. One 
afternoon while shooting, Kim said, “Oh my God, Aim, don’t turn around – he is 
looking at you!” “Really?!” I shrieked. I slowly turned around and he was 
sleeping on a pile of equipment. But after I asked her about Neal, she said, 
“Dude, me, too – I felt like he was saying it to you!” This was all I needed.

I can have low self-esteem at times, but I’m also always completely ready to 
believe the fact that I am prettier than I ever realised. On the evolution 
chart, this guy and I were at opposite ends. I was dragging my knuckles, 
throwing my own faeces at tourists, and he was a Disney prince but with more 
sex appeal. I reached out and was all, “Can you help me with my diet?” and he 
was all, “Sure, let’s meet up at this healthy-eating place,” and I was all, 
“Here comes the bride.”

We wound up hooking up a couple times, always at my place, and I could tell 
that he hoped I was going to just blow him. But he didn’t realise how lazy 
homegirl is. To be honest, I never really enjoyed making out with him, because 
the whole time I was thinking, “Why would he do this with me? I saw all the 
actual real-life, young-as-fuck supermodels in class swooning over him. It 
makes no sense.” Until one night I found out about his secret bad habit.

We all have habits we don’t want people to know about. Some people only eat 
fast food in secret, and some people, like my sister-in-law, watch reality TV 
that is so trashy, it should be illegal. How do I know that? Because I watch it 
with her and make her watch even worse TV. The night I found out about Neal’s 
secret, we were progressing – he had enough confidence to actually confuse me 
into thinking we might even start dating for real. So we went to a fundraiser 
for a disease, Lyme or alcoholism or something, and it was embarrassing to be 
there with him, because everyone was looking at me like, “Give me a break, 
bitch.” You can be with someone kinda a li’l bit hotter or less hot than you, 
but if the levels are too off, people are furious. It’s sick and sad.

I got myself nice and drunk to deal with the humiliation. We left hand in 
hand. Walking to the car, I thought, is this my next boyfriend?

I said, “Let’s go to your place.” “OK,” he said, “but it’s kind of a mess.” I 
let him know I wasn’t the type of girl who would ever care.

That night, he opened his door – and there it was. What had probably once been 
a beautiful studio apartment had become an overstuffed locker. The kitchen and 
bathroom were black with mould, all porcelain surfaces coated in hair and 
grime, and there were unwashed dishes and towels covering every inch of the 
counters. It’s not that uncommon for a guy to have a disgusting apartment, 
especially if he’s single. I actually think it’s endearing. But Neal’s 
apartment went far beyond endearingly dirty. It was like Jumanji. Filled to the 
brim with unnatural things that didn’t belong in an apartment. Piles of books 
and clothes and sneakers and furniture sitting on top of other furniture. There 
were magazines and papers stacked in tall symmetrical towers. Big haphazard 
pyramids of exercise contraptions and unopened packages. Protein powders, 
healthfood products, junk mail and paperwork, CDs, rolled-up posters, jump 
ropes, empty grocery bags, knee pads… It was a filthy, stacked-to-the ceiling 
nightmare. You had to walk sideways through the narrow pathways he’d cleared. 
This boy was a hoarder.

I instantly sobered up. 

“I told you it was messy,” he said. “Is it bad?”

“No!” I shrieked too loud and fast. “It’s a really nice apartment.”

I shut myself in the bathroom and noticed a bra hanging on the door. I’d 
previously been suspicious he had a girlfriend – some little model walking in 
Paris at fashion week, even though I don’t know when fashion week is. I don’t 
think this bra could have belonged to a recent girlfriend. Based on the expired 
time stamp of everything else in that apartment, that bra could have been 
hanging there for years. It could have been Amelia Earhart’s bra. I stalled in 
the bathroom, marvelling for a moment at the fact that a man so perfectly waxed 
and so expertly coiffed could emerge from this bottom-of-an-orangutan-cage 
bathroom every morning.

After I pulled myself away from the bathroom, he continued leading me through 
the pathways he’d cleared. It was like being led through a maze. It smelled 
dusty and like his dog, a sweet pitbull who followed us single file. He offered 
me a drink and I said no. That’s how bad it was. He led me to the only clear 
area – the love seat in front of the TV – and we watched TV. Rather, I 
pretended to watch TV, unsure of how to leave.

So what did I do? Well, Amy, you obviously left. No, that is what a normal 
person would do. What I did was let him lead me to his mattress that had no 
sheets on it. It was an out-of-body experience. I was looking around the room 
at the stacks of things he had accumulated over the years. The dog and I made 
eye contact. I felt like we were sending each other the same message: “HELP!” I 
got dressed. I remember making myself pause to feel what it felt like to be in 
my 30s and having a sexual encounter like this. Never again, I thought. I said 
good night and walked back out to the city street full of steaming trash where 
things were nice.

I went home and showered for eight years. I don’t know what caused his 
condition. My only guess is that maybe he grew up without a lot – and maybe 
material things and just having stuff makes him feel successful. This analysis 
is based on watching three episodes of Hoarders and asking no one.

All human beings have secret compulsions. But now, any time I see someone who 
is so physically beautiful they almost don’t look human, I remember there’s 
definitely something totally fucked about them that will bring them right back 
down to Earth•

• This is an edited extract from The Girl With The Lower Back Tattoo, by Amy 
Schumer, published this week by HarperCollins, £20. To order a copy for £16.40, 
go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/418873/>, or call 
0330 333 6846.

 