
Take a stroll down the traffic-clogged streets of any British city and your 
already overloaded senses are going to be bombarded by dozens of not-so-subtle 
entreaties for you to buy something.

This delicious beer comes with a wonderful dash of Italian style. Drink it and 
you too can havela dolce vita. Or what about the latest fragrance, which will 
probably make you slim, glamorous and quite possibly someone whom everyone 
desires? Who wouldn’t want a splash of that on their bodies of a morning?

On and on: new books, download-ready albums, lovely clothes worn by models 
with just a whisper of the hipster as they meet your gaze – lingeringly, 
defiantly. Come on! Give in. Start buying. After all, everyone’s a consumer 
now, aren’t they?

Maybe so. But of course, we’re a lot more than that as well: citizens, family 
members, trade unionists, members of political parties, local historical 
society enthusiasts. That’s a lot of viewpoints, a lot opinions.

Which brings me to the matter of our Human Rights Act campaign adverts. Yes, 
adverts – or public information posters – which we put up around the UK on 
Tuesday to tell people about that much maligned piece of legislation, theHuman 
Rights Act <https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act>.

If you’re travelling on the London Underground or waiting at a bus stop or 
just walking the dog, you may see one of these. They spell out a very simple, 
unperfumed, alcohol-free message about everyone’s basic human rights in the UK: 
that the Human Rights Act has helped theHillsborough families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hillsborough-disaster>, Peace in Northern 
Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/12/scrapping-human-rights-act-would-breach-good-friday-agreement>
,Gary McKinnon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gary-mckinnon>, Celia Peachey 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/sponsored/2016/11/sponsored-post-celia-peachey-my-mums-murder-made-me-think-differently-about-the-human-rights-act.html>
,Frank and Janet Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/apr/29/stafford-hospital-death-second-hearing-adjourned>
,Jan Sutton 
<https://savetheact.uk/jans-story-i-began-to-feel-like-a-human-being-again/> 
and many more ordinary people.

It works. Our message was simple: save the act <https://savetheact.uk/>. Trade 
Gothic script in Amnesty’s usual livery, yellow on black. Whack the candle logo 
in the corner. Take or leave it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Famnesty-international-poppy-political-network-rail-advert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1b9a5decfe88f608c9cf36c27431ff8b641a60c%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20Amnesty%20billboard%20or%20a%20poppy%20%E2%80%93%20which%20was%20%E2%80%98too%20political%E2%80%99%20for%20rail%20bosses%3F%20%7C%20Laura%20Trevelyan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Famnesty-international-poppy-political-network-rail-advert%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20Amnesty%20billboard%20or%20a%20poppy%20%E2%80%93%20which%20was%20%E2%80%98too%20political%E2%80%99%20for%20rail%20bosses%3F%20%7C%20Laura%20Trevelyan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Famnesty-international-poppy-political-network-rail-advert%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1b9a5decfe88f608c9cf36c27431ff8b641a60c%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘We were trying to mount a little counter-offensive in the recent war of 
messaging.’ Photograph: Graeme Weston/Amnesty International 
We were trying to mount a little counter-offensive in the recent war of 
messaging around this legislation. After pundits and politicians have tried to 
rubbish the act, we’re pointing out that it’s a vital underpinning of basic 
rights – something that could help you or me or any of our families if we or 
they suffered an injustice at the hands of a hospital, a care home, a police 
force or indeed a government department.

OK, so maybe this isn’t quite as glamorous as that sparkly winter coat or 
dazzling 4x4 (with diamond-stitched leather seating as standard), but isn’t our 
message-drenched high street able to accommodate a few alternative ideas as 
well?

Not according to Network Rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/15/network-rail-pulls-amnesty-posters-on-human-rights-act>
. Earlier this week it told us it wouldn’t allow our Human Rights Act 
billboards to be displayed in train stations in Liverpool, Manchester, 
Edinburgh, Glasgow, Birmingham or London Waterloo and Victoria. They apparently 
didn’t fit with Network Rail’s “rules on political advertising”. This despite 
the fact that they were booked and ready to go, and the ad agency JCDecaux was 
running them elsewhere in the country.

It’s a shame that the custodians of our railway network should jam the brakes 
on in this way, and it throws an interesting spotlight on what is and isn’t 
“political” in our country. As we’ve seen recently,poppies can be held up as 
examples of “apolitical remembrance” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/02/england-players-to-defy-fifa-ruling-and-wear-poppies-in-armistice-day-match>
 while even a government decision to fly flags at half-mast after King 
Abdullah’s death in Saudi Arabia can be largely depoliticised,reconstrued as a 
pragmatic matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/03/david-cameron-union-flag-king-abdullah-saudi-arabia-half-mast>
 to do with showing respect for an ally country engaged in defeating terrorism.

Despite Network Rail’s late-in-the-day cancellation, our modest campaign is 
still on track. We’re assailing a few eyeballs with our message and you the 
citizen – the consumer – can read it, digest it, take action, contest it or 
simply glaze over. But one of the things the Human Rights Act does is remind us 
that things like free speech matter.

Some of our billboards this week has been travelling around on those flat-bed 
trucks, ad vans with a difference. Perhaps they make a welcome change from 
aggressive Home Office messages about deporting migrants [orvans seeking to 
entice you to a “gentleman’s club” 
<http://www.windsorexpress.co.uk/gallery/windsor/102834/councillor-calls-for-gentleman-s-club-licence-to-be-stripped.html>
.

So here, as the advertisers say, is the proposition: the Human Rights Act 
protects and enshrines our basic rights. We need it, and the politicians should 
stop threatening to scrap it. There. Are you buying?
 