
Last year I attended a masterclass given by the American actor William H Macy, 
star of such movies as Fargo and Boogie Nights. Macy was fascinating, giving a 
shrewd and compelling insight into the process of creating a character and 
building a role. After his talk, I asked him a question: what are you supposed 
to do if, having carefully created your character, you find that the costume 
designer has decreed that you perform it in treacle-coloured bootees, dove-grey 
tights and a suede codpiece?

Macy smiled knowingly at me before replying. "Ah, you've worn that outfit as 
well, have you?" he asked sympathetically.

Make friends with costume designers, for God's sake. Because they can cripple 
you - literally, in extreme cases. Gone are the days when, before any decisions 
were made, you discussed with them in a civilised manner what your character 
might wear. Now they've mapped it all out for you weeks beforehand. They arrive 
in taxis on the first day of rehearsal, carrying huge folders full of sketches 
drawn on fine cartridge paper and annotated swatches of material.

One by one the actors are invited to stare glumly at the illustrations, while 
being given a monologue on how the designer envisages the part. Discussion is 
rarely invited. Any misgivings are met with a withering stare. Last week, a 
friend returned from a bruising experience as one of the witches in a touring 
production of Macbeth, in which she was forced to wear a white silk robe, white 
stiletto heels and white satin gloves. The designer had claimed his concept was 
inspired by Japanese No theatre. And, she added dryly, it was: "No questions. 
No discussion. No bloody idea."

Many companies, of course, can't even afford costumes, let alone a costume 
designer - but at least you have the chance to argue the toss as you trawl the 
charity shops in your lunch break. But this can bring its own problems too. A 
boulevard comedy I once saw in a provincial seaside town was ruined by a vile 
stain on the lapel of the leading character's tweed jacket. It was mesmeric. I 
barely noticed what was going on, so fascinated was I by how it might have got 
there. Later, I heard that the garment had been purchased from the local branch 
of Age Concern and had proved unresponsive to multiple visits to the dry 
cleaners.

But most productions in this image-conscious age will have somebody whose job 
is to shape how you look. If they're clever, inspired and sensitive (and many 
are), you'll be OK. But if not, you'll be doomed before you've even highlighted 
your script.

Which brings me back to the treacle-coloured bootees, dove-grey tights and 
suede codpiece. I was persuaded to wear this combustible mixture for a Jacobean 
tragedy in which I once appeared. I also had to suffer a long flowing wig. 
Worse still, the production was touring secondary schools.

At the initial fitting, I tried to remonstrate with the costume designer. "You 
can't send me out there in this," I said. But she was adamant. "You look 
terrific," she assured me. "What's more, strangely sexy. Trust me." I did. As I 
stepped out for my first entrance at a large comprehensive in Lambeth, I 
repeated her words in my head like a mantra: "Strangely sexy. Trust me."

I had to wait nearly a minute for the hooting and jeering to stop before I 
could deliver my first line. Each time I moved, I was met with gales of raucous 
adolescent laughter. Ken Dodd would have struggled to achieve such a reaction. 
It never got any better in subsequent shows; in fact I later realised that I 
had got off lightly that first day with only a minute of humiliation.

Weeks later, I tracked down the designer. She explained her predicament. Her 
budget had been risible, but at the last minute she had managed to borrow a job 
lot of costumes from the 1981 BBC2 television drama The Borgias. "You had to 
wear it," she admitted. "I had no money. It was that or nothing. At least you 
got Oliver Cotton's." That was when I realised that she would have talked me 
into the codpiece even if it had been Billy Cotton's.

Â· Michael Simkins is currently playing Billy Flynn in Chicago at the Adelphi 
Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>, London.
 