
George Brandis’ fifth tranche of tighter national security laws was introduced 
into the Australian parliament the day before the terrorist attacks unfolded in 
Paris on Friday night.

The bill has been referred to the parliamentary joint committee on 
intelligence and security for inquiry. The committee was due to report back by 
15 February.

Swift passage is ensured for the legislation, with minimum tinkering by the 
committee. Government security agencies are now the front-line insurance 
policies in which politicians have lavishly invested in an imperfect attempt to 
save citizens from attack.

Malcolm Turnbull confronts 'act of war' with message of inclusion | Lenore 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/15/malcolm-turnbull-confronts-act-of-war-message-inclusion-paris-attacks>
Apparently, our agencies are the “best in the world” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/15/turnbull-on-risk-of-paris-style-attack-we-are-a-successful-multicultural-country>
, according to braggadocios from PM and the minister for justice, Michael 
Keenan.

What happened in Paris shows that an ever more stringent security arsenal is 
not a guarantee of national safety.

After all, in May the French parliament passed legislation for the bulk 
collection of internet communications 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-32587377> and the creation of a new 
supervisory body, the National Commission for Control of Intelligence 
Techniques (CNCTR).

France’s constitutional council, with minor tweaks, approved the increased 
surveillance powers in July –powers described by the UN as “excessively broad” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/24/france-big-brother-surveillance-powers>
.

 The requirement for service providers to collect and retain the electronic 
communications of userscame into force last month 
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/Mediareleases/Pages/2015/FourthQuarter/13-October-2015-Data-Retention-Act.aspx>
 in Australia.

Brandis echoed the outgoing director general of security, David Irvine, when 
he saiddata retention was an absolutely “essential tool” 
<http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2015/s4184359.htm> to fight terrorism and 
other crimes.

While police forces and spies have been clamouring to get this level of access 
to personal information for many years, as the experience of Paris now shows 
there are limits to its crime fighting capacity. This is not to say it has been 
completely ineffective, it’s just that we don’t know how effective.

We know full well that communications can be conducted on the “dark” side of 
the internet or without the internet at all. Electronic fingerprints can be 
avoided altogether in an analogue world of plotting in bars or cafes.

Handwritten notes, with or without invisible ink, will doubtless make a long 
overdue comeback. Yet, that has not stopped theBritish government upping the 
ante still further 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/04/theresa-may-surveillance-measures-edward-snowden>
 with proposed legislation to extend surveillance to web browsing.

Can we be far behind in the catch-up chase?

The French are mourning, but by sticking together we can overcome | Natalie 
Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/15/france-mourning-overcome-islamic-state>
Senator Brandis claims that police have conducted 10 counter-terror operations 
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/Mediareleases/Pages/2015/FourthQuarter/12-November-2015-New-Counter-Terrorism-Legislation.aspx>
 since the public alert was raised to “high” in September 2014, with 25 people 
charged with terrorism offences. In that time there have been three attacks in 
Australia that could be described as terrorist inspired.

The French authorities have uncovered at least half-a-dozen plots since the 
Charlie Hebdo atrocities in January. However, the pace of threats has escalated 
and according to reports from Le Monde the French security agencies have been 
overwhelmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/french-intelligence-under-scrutiny-paris-attacks>
.

We may be facing the same problem here. The attorney general says there are 
currently 400 high-priority Asio counter-terrorism investigations 
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/Speeches/Pages/2015/FourthQuarter/6-November-2015-Address-to-the-Centre-for-Independent-Studies.aspx>
 being carried out.

Brandis’s fifth tranche adds little to the scheme of things, largely being a 
response to the murder of police accountant Curtis Cheng by 15-year-old Farhad 
Jabar. The age at which control orders can be imposed is to be lowered to 14, 
along with wider monitoring and surveillance powers over people subject to 
control orders and a new criminal offence of “advocating genocide”. We got an 
“advocating terrorism” offence last year, and so far there have been nil 
prosecutions.

The genocide provision is largely a theatrical flourish. However, there is one 
important provision which allows courts in control order proceedings to keep 
secret from the respondent information about how the police and Asio went about 
their work.

The creep of secrecy and the suppression of information that can be withheld 
from defendants or respondents in terrorism cases is an insidious development 
and is another erosion of traditional rights.

The fifth tranche comes on top of a busy year in which more and more 
superstructure was added to the counter-terror arsenal.

Why Syrian refugee passport found at Paris attack scene must be treated with 
caution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/15/why-syrian-refugee-passport-found-at-paris-attack-scene-must-be-treated-with-caution>
Aspects of reporting and journalism were criminalised under the “special 
intelligence operations” amendments to Asio’s legislation; there was earlier 
fiddling with the threshold for seeking control and preventative detention 
orders;there were new foreign incursion and allegiance to Australia laws; and 
the AFP was given search powers without warrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2015/oct/19/all-of-australias-national-security-changes-since-911-in-a-timeline?CMP=soc_568>
.

And let’s not forget the warrantless access to the retained telecommunication 
interactions of citizens.

It’s not just legislation. Lots more money is also part of the political 
response. In 2014 security agencies were allocated an additional $630m over 
four years, of which Asio’s allocation was $197m. Another $40m over four years 
is being spent on programs for countering violent extremism. This is only 
expenditure at the commonwealth level, for the states too have upped their 
financial and legislative commitment to the cause.

Brandis estimates that Isis generates 100,000 social media messages a day 
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/Speeches/Pages/2015/FourthQuarter/6-November-2015-Address-to-the-Centre-for-Independent-Studies.aspx>
. If that is so, our counter-violent extremism response seems modest, to say 
the least.

What is unsettling is that the rate of terrorism related activity increases 
with the increase in our counter-terrorism powers.

You can see this, for instance, with control orders. They were introduced in 
2005, during the Howard era, and since then they have been applied six times – 
four of them in the past year when Brandis’ legislative and financial response 
was most energetic.

More than a third of all the arrests for terrorism related offences since 
September 2001 have taken place since the alert level went to high in September 
2014.

We’re now in a cycle where the overblown political bombast is accompanied by 
more and state powers and resources that are funnelled into a problem that 
increases much more rapidly than our capacity to handle it.

• Due to a production error, this piece was originally published under the 
wrong byline
 