
Adrian Mitchell <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Adrian_Mitchell> died at four in 
the morning of 20 December. He had been suffering from pneumonia and while in 
care in hospital had a heart attack from which he didn't recover. He was 76.

Adrian was a socialist and a pacifist who believed, like William Blake, that 
everything human was "holy". That's to say he celebrated a love of life with 
the same fervour that he attacked those who crushed life.

He did this through his poetry, his plays, his song lyrics and his own 
performances. Through this huge body of work, he was able to raise the spirits 
of his audiences, in turn exciting, inspiring, saddening and enthusing them.

His output ranged across poems and plays for the youngest children, 
anthologies he edited, to political satires, adaptations and translations of 
classic literature, to blues and jazz lyrics.

As a teenager, I watched him performing his poem To whom it may concern 
<http://www.cs.rice.edu/~ssiyer/minstrels/poems/28.html> from the plinth at 
Trafalgar Square in London. I was used to reading poetry to myself in my 
bedroom, or at best, hearing it on the radio. But here was a poetry that 
responded to political events of the moment and talked to a movement of 
hundreds and thousands.

Many years later, as Adrian adapted the last lines of the poem: "Tell me lies 
about Vietnam ..." to include Iraq and Afghanistan, he explained to his 
audience at Marxism 2006 that the poem had started out as an expression of what 
he called "compassion fatigue". He couldn't bear to hear of yet more wars.

Alongside such explicitly political work – and his collection For Beauty 
Douglas <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Beauty-Douglas-Collected-Poems/dp/0850314003> 
is one of the truly great volumes of political poetry written in English – he 
revelled in language itself.

He would point out how society crushes the inventiveness and play in children, 
and he created poetry for children that is full of wordplay, mystery, absurdity 
and music.

Very recently, I received through the post a sample of a forthcoming book for 
children based on the Roman poet Ovid's Metamorphoses. To attempt it was so 
typical of him: he takes this set of earthy, erotic, subtle narratives and 
observations of change and has created a staggering cornucopia of poetry 
available for all.

I hate it that Adrian has died. There are more than 50 years of revolutionary 
literature that he has given us. He has sung, chanted, whispered and shouted 
his poems in every kind of place imaginable, urging us to love our lives, love 
our minds and bodies and to fight against tyranny, oppression and exploitation.

When he heard the news that Victor Jara 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Victor_Jara>, the Chilean poet, singer-songwriter 
had been tortured and killed by Pinochet's thugs, he wrote a beautiful and 
wonderful poem that was both a celebration and lamentation.

To think of the poem as I write this is to think of Adrian, a brother and 
father to hundreds of us. Goodbye dear friend and dear teacher. Many of us 
loved you.

• This piece originally appeared on the Socialist Worker 
<http://www.socialistworker.co.uk/> website.
 