
Anyone who has seen the horribly fascinating documentary Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/24/anthony-weiner-review-huma-abedin-documentary>
, about the disgraced New York mayoral candidate and sexting addict 
Anthony Weiner, will have had an up-close-and-personal look at the real 
political face of 2017, and maybe even the Democratic presidential candidate of 
2024. This is Weiner’s stylish wife, the elegant and cerebralHuma Abedin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/06/huma-abedin-hillary-clinton-anthony-weiner-documentary>
, who is standing by her idiot of a husband. She is also the most trusted aide 
of Hillary Rodham Clinton. Abedin’s face in that movie is a picture of 
suppressed dismay. How on earth does such a classy, contained person handle 
this kind of rackety farce?

Huma Abedin shuns limelight, but is a compelling protagonist in Weiner film
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/06/huma-abedin-hillary-clinton-anthony-weiner-documentary>
The question occurred to me again this week as more Clinton emails were 
released 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/08/23/from-wolverhampton-footballers-to-bahrain-princes-how-the-clinto/>
. In 2009, poor Abedin had to deal with a request from the media executive 
Casey Wasserman, who represents English footballers, lobbying to get a visa for 
a Wolves player with a criminal record to join his teammates in Las Vegas for a 
“celebration break”. As this case landed in her lap, Abedin must have been 
wondering what she had done to deserve it. Her email discloses that the Wolves 
footballer made her “nervous”. Who can blame her? But as she continues in 
politics, Abedin will have to deal with an endless parade of unnerving people 
like this footballer, and Anthony Weiner.

Comedy golds

This week the BBC published its poll of the top 100 films of the 21st century 
<http://www.bbc.com/culture/story/20160819-the-21st-centurys-100-greatest-films>
, as voted for by film critics around the world – though sadly not me, as I had 
returned from holiday to find my invitation to participate nestling in the junk 
folder. The moment the list was published, my Twitter timeline featured 
comments from David Baddiel, Edgar Wright and Sam Bain on the scandalous fact 
that no actual comedy featured on the list. And this doesn’t mean the 
perennially acceptable seriocomic complexities of the Coen brothers or Wes 
Anderson – just straight-ahead comedy.

Well, comedies are largely looked down on by critics (though not this one). Is 
it because we’re a bunch of miserable arthouse nerds? I suspect it’s the 
opposite: critics all fancy themselves as wits and humorists at certain movies’ 
expense. Laugh-at is easier than laugh-with. Oh well. I would take this BBC 
list, boot outAlfonso Cuarón’s Children of Men  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2006/sep/22/juliannemoore.thriller>and 
Cameron Crowe’s horribly overratedAlmost Famous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001/feb/09/1> and replace them with Sacha 
Baron Cohen’s masterpieceBorat  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/borat-comedy>and Jemaine Clement 
and Taika Waititi’s wonderfulWhat We Do in the Shadows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/20/what-we-do-in-shadows-review>. 
And I want to find a way of inserting Adam McKay’s glorious cop satireThe Other 
Guys <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/16/the-other-guys-review>, 
along withTed <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/aug/02/ted-review>. That 
would be a start.

A bigger splash

The melancholy footnote to this year’s triumphant Olympics comes from the 
action movie legend Jason Statham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/01/jason-statham-i-want-to-be-the-next-james-bond>
. He began his career in the public eye as an athlete, representing England in 
diving at the 1990 Commonwealth Games in New Zealand, but sadly never at any 
stage “medalling” – as no one used to say in 1990. Now he has bittersweet 
emotions about Team GB’s glory.

“It’s a bit of a sore point I never got to the Olympics,” he says. “I just 
heard they got seven million or something for the diving per year. They deserve 
it. The divers we’ve got now are just terrific. I started too late. I should 
have done a different sport.”

Surely not. Greater success in some other event – dressage? – might have led 
Statham into a disastrous career cul-de-sac. Diving’s loss was a showbusiness’s 
gain, and Jason is on the long road to national treasure status.
 