
Bernie Sanders, Democratic presidential candidate and noted folk music singer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/26/bernie-sanders-album-we-shall-overcome>
, also enjoyed a short-lived career as an actor, briefly appearing in a couple 
of films in the late 1980s and early 1990s.

The Vermont senator had more than two minutes on screen in the 1999 romantic 
comedyMy X-Girlfriend’s Wedding Reception <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120488/>
, playing a baseball-obsessed rabbi named Manny Shevitz who rambles extensively 
about the Brooklyn Dodgers during a wedding toast.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYWl6TLvlFEk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYWl6TLvlFEk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYWl6TLvlFEk&media=>
Although the film is nearly 20 years old, the character of Shevitz still looks 
and sounds much like Sanders in his speeches today (or, like thisparody account 
<https://twitter.com/berniethoughts>). For instance, Shevitz becomes 
increasingly agitated while making a speech celebrating a newly married couple 
that devolves quickly into a lament on the Dodgers moving to Los Angeles.

“I remember when the Dodgers played the Yankees, and you bought a ticket – 
that ticket was good for 10 years,” Shevitz says. “Now you go to the stadium 
and you look out on the field: you see the Red Sox, the Orioles, the Cleveland 
Indians, but you don’t see the Yankees versus the Red Sox.”

Sanders is not the only one seeking office to have spent some time on film. 
Republican presidential candidateDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> appeared as himself for a few 
seconds in Home Alone 2: Lost in New York to give young Kevin McCallister – on 
his own in New York City – directions to the lobby in the Plaza Hotel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2F2016-presidential-candidates-film-counterparts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36208b79dd772fcc72a7e5b6462f39700d365092%2F0_14_1024_615%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=And%20the%20nomination%20goes%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20the%202016%20candidates%20and%20their%20film%20counterparts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2F2016-presidential-candidates-film-counterparts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=And%20the%20nomination%20goes%20to%20%E2%80%A6%20the%202016%20candidates%20and%20their%20film%20counterparts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F04%2F2016-presidential-candidates-film-counterparts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36208b79dd772fcc72a7e5b6462f39700d365092%2F0_14_1024_615%2F1024.jpg>
 Donald Trump in Home Alone 2. Photograph: youtube 
Many have also compared Trump with Biff Tannen, the bullying and villainous 
character in Back to the Future Part II. The connection wasconfirmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/23/back-to-the-future-writer-bad-guy-biff-was-based-on-donald-trump>
 by the film writer, Bob Gale, who told the Daily Beast last year that Biff was 
based on Trump.

Other leading presidential candidates have not yet enjoyed time in fictional 
on-screen worlds, although Hillary Clinton will change that with aguest 
appearance on Broad City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/11/hillary-clinton-guest-appearance-broad-city-season-three>
 this year.

Only one contender will eventually win the presidential election come 
November.So in case any of the losing candidates are looking for a career 
change, here are some other film roles for each one to reprise.

Ted Cruz as Reverend Parris in The Crucible 

 * (originally played by Bruce Davison)
 Ted Cruz and Bruce Davidson in The Crucible. Photograph: Allstar & Getty 
Images 
Cruz, who played Reverend Parris in a staged adaptation of The Crucible during 
his first year at Harvard Law School, could readily reprise the role in Arthur 
Miller’s allegorical play about McCarthyism. A highly polarizing figure, Cruz 
has drawn the hate ofseemingly everybody 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/128808/everybody-hates-ted> in politics and 
beyond, much like the irredeemable Reverend Parris did.

As the Boston Globe noted 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/news/politics/2013/11/10/ted-cruz-was-polarizing-figure-harvard-law-foreshadowing-his-partisan-profile-senate/gEUPs0iVgOyoidafkNe94H/story.html>
 in 2013, Parris’s lines – “Do you understand that I have many enemies? There 
is a faction that is sworn to drive me from my pulpit. Do you understand that?” 
– still apply to Cruz today. It also helps that the presidential candidate 
somewhatresembles Joseph McCarthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2015/aug/12/republican-presidential-candidate-lookalikes-in-pictures#img-13>
, the Republican senator and anti-Communist organ whose public accusations 
toward hundreds of Americans inspired Miller to write The Crucible.

Cruz, however, is busy working on his audition for Princess Bride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/dec/02/ted-cruz-princess-bride-impersonation-iowa-video>
.

Hillary Clinton as Meredith Morton in The Family Stone 

 * (originally played by Sarah Jessica Parker)
 Hillary Clinton & Sarah Jessica Parker in The Family Stone. Photograph: 
Allstar & Reuters 
Remember The Family Stone? Sarah Jessica Parker plays the struggling, uptight, 
neurotic Meredith Morton, a high-up New York executive who cannot bond with her 
boyfriend’s snarky, liberal family. Clinton – who hasworried about likability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/02/hillary-clinton-wins-iowa-caucuses-bernie-sanders-young-voters>
 – has already been cast as the Meredith Morton of politics. The scene in the 
film where Meredith attempts to play charades with the Stone family evokes the 
same painful awkwardness that rises when Clinton promotes T-shirts with her 
face on it, that say “Yas Queen” – all in an effort to connect with the youths.

Jeb Bush as Clark Griswold in National Lampoon’s Vacation 

 * (originally played by Chevy Chase)
 Jeb Bush and Chevy Chase in European Vacation. Photograph: Corbis & Rex 
Features 
Bush’s painfully awkward campaign thus far has been the equivalent of Clark 
Griswold’s disastrous attempt to drive his family across the country to get to 
the Walley World theme park (the Griswolds get there eventually only to find 
that the park is closed).

In the film, the bumbling Clark does many foolish things, like accidentally 
drag a dog from the back of his car and not notice that his aunt Edna has died 
in the backseat. Recent gaffes by Bush, who is trailing far behind Cruz and 
Trump in the polls, include the Republican presidential candidateprompting an 
audience 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/politics/2016/02/04/jeb-bush-audience-please-clap-new-hampshire-sot.cnn>
 at New Hampshire campaign event to “please clap” and telling a college student 
who said he will be a first-time voter: “I want to be your first.”

Marco Rubio as Lieutenant Pete ‘Maverick’ Mitchell in Top Gun 

 * (originally played by Tom Cruise)
 Marco Rubio and Tom Cruise in Top Gun. Photograph: Getty Images & Rex Features
Rubio, a trained-and-true staunchly conservative politician, has doggedly 
pursued political office since the age of 24, and became Florida’s youngest and 
first Cuban American speaker of the house. No points for second place for 
Rubio, who is quite like the highly skilled, highly ambitious Maverick in Top 
Gun. Furthermore, Rick Santorum, who recently dropped his presidential bid,
endorsed Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/04/santorum-drops-out-republican-primary-race-endorses-marco-rubio>
, making the former Pennsylvania senator the perfect Goose to Rubio’s Maverick.
 