
Newcastle United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/newcastleunited> look 
set to make Chancel Mbemba their second signing of the week from the Belgian 
side Anderlecht after the Democratic Republic of Congo defender confirmed he 
has agreed to move to St James’ Park.

As reported at the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/19/newcastle-aleksander-mitrovic-chancel-mbemba-anderlecht>
, the versatile 20-year-old will joinAleksandar Mitrovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/21/newcastle-alesksandar-mitrovic-anderlecht-confirm>
 on Tyneside in the next few days having been left out of the Anderlecht side 
that beat Lazio 3-1 in a pre-season friendly on Sunday.

“The transfer is not finalised yet. There are still some details to work out 
but it will go (through) and I’m proud of myself,”said Mbemba 
<http://www.chroniclelive.co.uk/sport/football/newcastle-united-transfers-chancel-mbemba-9705593>
.

“I worked very hard for it to arrive and it’s a childhood dream come true. In 
Congo, everyone dreams of one day playing in the Premier League. In my country, 
it is the place to be.”

The only stumbling block could be that DR Congo are not ranked inside the top 
50 by Fifa, meaning the club may have to appeal for him to qualify for a work 
permit under new rules introduced by the Football Association in May. However, 
it seems likely that Mbemba will be given special dispensation to make the £7m 
move given that the Champions League qualifiers Borussia Mönchengladbach and 
Atlético Madrid were both interested in signing him.

“I went to visit Mönchengladbach’s facilities. I had a good interview with 
their management, and the coach tried to sell it to me but the club could not 
pay whatAnderlecht <https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> 
requested,” he said.

“Atlético have also made an offer, but it was refused for the same reasons.”

Mbemba added: “This competition is a showcase. I think it’s mostly at home to 
Arsenal when I tabled my business card to English clubs.

“When I arrived in 2011 I had nothing. I did not even know if I was going to 
eat every night. And now here I am. It’s also cool that Mitrovic is in 
Newcastle too. But I also look forward to seeing Cheikhou Kouyaté when we face 
West Ham.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2Fe6tLeqwIW6E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2Fe6tLeqwIW6E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fvine.co%2Fv%2Fe6tLeqwIW6E&media=>
 Rolando Aarons 
Newcastle showed plenty of signs of the defensive frailty that marred the 
second half of last season in the 4-3 friendly defeat to the MLS side Portland 
Timbers on Tuesday night. Two goals from the winger Rolando Aarons –including a 
brilliant overhead kick <https://vine.co/v/e6tLeqwIW6E> – and another from the 
new signing Georginio Wijnaldum were not enough to stop Steve McClaren’s side 
sliding to defeat.

Aarons, who missed much of last season through injury but scored in the 
Capital One Cup victory against Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/oct/29/manchester-city-newcastle-united-capital-one-cup-match-report>
 in October, is expected to sign a new contract this week.
 