
Brexit is a feminist issue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/20/women-europe-referendum-debate-brexit>
Could Anders Breivik <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik>
 be pro-EU, I wonder? It seems unlikely – he doesn’t seem pro very much at all. 
Then again, he’s certainly not pro-Norway (or at least not 
pro-Norway-as-it-is-currently-constituted – he’s 
pro-some-horrible-fascist-reimagining-of-Norway), and Norway is anti-EU. Or 
rather, it’s outside the EU. I’m sure it’s thoroughly warm and loving in its 
thoughts about the EU, just like the Brexiteers say we in the UK will be once 
we’ve bravely, happily and optimistically told it to fuck off. Nevertheless 
Norway would warmly and lovingly rather not be in it.

For those who want Britain to leave the EU, Norway is surely a favourite 
example to cite. It’s a much more attractive case than Switzerland, which 
always vaguely smacks of amorality, Serbia, with its history of sectarian 
violence, or Iceland, which recently went bankrupt.Norway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> seems pleasant, prudent and, thanks 
both to its oil resources and its pleasant, prudent use of them, rich.

He’s definitely anti-Isis, which picks a pretty big hole in the ‘my enemy’s 
enemy is my friend’ approach to life

For liberally minded self-doubting Brits, the image projected by countries 
like Norway seems like an excellent national role model: humane, relaxed, 
affluent, sexually quite up for it but in a totally non-exploitative way, 
modern, tasteful and packed with all those fishy oils that are so good for the 
heart. One vaguely hears rumours about astronomically expensive booze and a 
high incidence of suicide but, even if those things are true, who’s to say they 
don’t also reflect a certain kind of cultural wisdom?

The only problem faced by the Brexit camp in deploying this lovely 
minimalistically-furnished-with-spectacular-views-of-a-wooded-lake image to 
advance its cause is that, of the countries like Norway, only Norway itself is 
outside the EU. The other three countries like Norway are in it. For countries 
like Sweden (excluding Norway, which is quite like Sweden, though more like 
Norway), such as Denmark, membership of the EU doesn’t necessarily clash with 
the Scandinavian idyll. And last week Denmark was declared, by the United 
Nations’World Happiness Report <http://worldhappiness.report/>, to be the 
happiest country in the world.

Still, Norway remains an attractive case study. Its only well-known 
embarrassments are itshistory of enthusiastically slaughtering whales 
<http://www.ifaw.org/united-states/our-work/whales/which-countries-are-still-whaling>
 and Anders Breivik with his history of enthusiastically slaughtering people. 
Everyone likes whales and no one likes Anders Breivik. So, if the whales came 
out against the EU, and Breivik came out in favour, it would be a great coup 
for Brexit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fanders-breivik-endorsement-prison-microwave-food-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad9f2bab4c28b953b05ce23e25ee8dcbe6120a5b%2F0_333_5124_3074%2F5124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anders%20Breivik%3A%20the%20worst%20endorsement%20in%20Europe%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fanders-breivik-endorsement-prison-microwave-food-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anders%20Breivik%3A%20the%20worst%20endorsement%20in%20Europe%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fanders-breivik-endorsement-prison-microwave-food-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad9f2bab4c28b953b05ce23e25ee8dcbe6120a5b%2F0_333_5124_3074%2F5124.jpg>
 Norway: a vision of life outside the EU? Photograph: Alamy 
The whales, as ever, will not be drawn. The same cannot be said for Anders 
Breivik who is, even his worst critic would have to admit, generous with his 
opinions. The problem is that Breivik’s views have tended not only to be evil, 
but also rather too grandiose for application to any real world issues. 
“Killer” and “Nazi” are slurs that get bandied around too often in the 
thoughtless hyperbole of lazy political debate and protest, butAnders Breivik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik> is that rare thing: 
a self-confessed killer and Nazi.

He is a man who not only espouses Hitler’s views, he also thinks that 
admiringly citing Hitler andpublicly performing Nazi salutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/15/anders-behring-breivik-norway-court-inhuman-treatment-utoya>
 in courtrooms might be an effective way of advocating those views in a liberal 
democracy. Trying to use Breivik as a way of discrediting your opponents in any 
mainstream context would be like attempting to employ a thrashing, 
out-of-control fire hose to moisten the back of a stamp.

Until recently, that is. Breivik now seems to have turned his attention to 
more practical concerns. The just and forbearing treatment with which the 
Norwegian legal system responded to Breivik’s atrocities appears to be really 
winding him up – an outcome from which I can’t believe even the dispassionate 
Norwegian judiciary can entirely avoid deriving a certain satisfaction. He is 
suing the government for breaking human rights laws in the way he’s being 
imprisoned.“For five years the state has tried to kill me,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/16/anders-breivik-norway-mass-killer-claims-state-trying-to-kill-him>
 he said, claiming that his isolation was “torture” and that it would have been 
more humane to just shoot him, though his judgment on how humane it is to shoot 
people is partial, to say the least.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fanders-breivik-endorsement-prison-microwave-food-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff559eb201823e84dc690969d4ff801466f902d0%2F0_190_3508_2106%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anders%20Breivik%3A%20the%20worst%20endorsement%20in%20Europe%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fanders-breivik-endorsement-prison-microwave-food-eu-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anders%20Breivik%3A%20the%20worst%20endorsement%20in%20Europe%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F20%2Fanders-breivik-endorsement-prison-microwave-food-eu-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff559eb201823e84dc690969d4ff801466f902d0%2F0_190_3508_2106%2F3508.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
The conditions of his imprisonment sound exactly as benign as you’d expect 
from a country like Norway, and it’s clear that what Breivik is raging against 
is the realisation that all that now remains to him is a long, comfortable wait 
to die. He’s got three cells, a TV, a computer, books, puzzles and newspapers: 
if the state is trying to kill him, it’s certainly not trying very hard.

But some of his specific gripes are fascinating. He bemoans cold coffee and 
the use of plastic cups and plates – I was horrified to realise that I agreed 
with him on more issues than the malignity of Isis (he’s definitely anti-Isis, 
whatever his faults, which picks a pretty big hole in the “The enemy of my 
enemy is my friend” approach to life). He also claims that having to eat 
microwaved meals, manufactured by firms such as the Norwegian company 
Fjordland, was “worse than waterboarding”, and that his growing enthusiasm for 
the reality TV showParadise Hotel <http://www.tv3.no/paradise-hotel> was “clear 
evidence of serious brain damage caused by isolation”.

You’d have to be quite a zealous adherent to the notion that no publicity is 
bad publicity to consider this revelation a boon for either Fjordland or the 
producers ofParadise Hotel. The quotes “worse than waterboarding” and “I loved 
it – clear evidence of serious brain damage” aren’t really usable for marketing 
purposes, even coming from so discredited a source. The fact that a mass 
murderer likes a work of entertainment or art is actively bad news for its 
originators, unfortunately forParadise Hotel – and a reflection from such a 
person that it was only recent brain damage that rendered the work enjoyable 
does little to take the curse off the endorsement.

By that reasoning though, you’d think Fjordland would be pleased: “this evil 
man hates our product – so it must be good”. Sadly for the company, while that 
might hold true for a book, film or play, it doesn’t really work for food. 
Breivik’s mind may be twisted but there’s no reason to believe that his palate 
isn’t sound. I wouldn’t rush to read Stalin’s favourite novelist, but I’d feel 
no compunction not to give his favourite chocolate bar a try.

So, though Fjordland has defended its nutritional standards and dismissed 
Breivik’s comments as absurd, one can’t help suspecting that, over this, as 
with cold coffee, the mass-murdering fascist may have a point.
 