
Andrew Strauss has praised England’s assistant coach, Paul Farbrace, for his 
leadership duringthe recent series against New Zealand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/20/england-new-zealand-fifth-odi-cricket>
 and hopes he will become the head coach in the future.

When the position became available in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/09/andrew-strauss-confirmed-director-england-cricket-ecb>
, Farbrace indicated to Strauss that he did not want to be considered for the 
top England job but would be happy to continue as the assistant.

David Warner lifts lid on Walkabout bar run-in with England’s Joe Root
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/03/david-warner-lifts-lid-walkabout-bar-jo-root-england-australia>
Speaking at an event to promote Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> for Heroes, an all-star Twenty20 
match being played at the Kia Oval in September, Strauss said: “I very much 
hope Farbrace has now had his appetite whetted for the job at some point in the 
future.” The England director of cricket added: “I dealt with him quite a lot 
over the month he was in charge and I found him absolutely outstanding in every 
department.

“He’s more than happy to go back to being No2 now but I hope that at some 
stage he’ll put his name forward [for the head coach role].”

Farbrace is credited with being instrumental in turning the England squad into 
the more relaxed and entertaining one seen against New Zealand and Strauss 
believes he andthe new head coach, Trevor Bayliss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/25/trevor-bayliss-england-cricket-head-coach>
, who already have a strong relationship, will complement each other superbly.

“Paul is quite similar to Trevor. He doesn’t overcomplicate the game and he 
was very conscious not to try and fill the void left by the absence of a coach, 
and instead hand it over to the players. They responded very well to that,” 
Strauss said, with the Ashes series against Australia starting on Wednesday.

Fabrace is very familiar with Bayliss’s approach, having been his assistant 
coach with Sri Lanka from 2007 to 2009 before taking over the No1 job himself 
in 2013. The two men have a clear bond and a shared philosophy after working 
together for so long.

Asked why he thought Farbrace did not want to be considered for the head coach 
role, Strauss said: “I think he probably felt he was just getting used to the 
England set-up and wasn’t quite ready to go on to the next level. It’s a moot 
point, though. Ultimately, Trevor is in position now and we hope he has a long 
and productive association with English cricket.

“I’ve got confidence he will do a great job but Farby is a fantastic guy and 
everything we’ve seen suggests he could do the job really well, too.”
 