
Andrew Michael Hurley <https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrew-michael-hurley>
 likes to know which part of The Loney unsettles you the most. It’s different 
for everyone: is it the setting – a decrepit house on a “wild and useless 
length of English coastline”? Or the occasional touch of gothic – a girl’s face 
glimpsed in a window, an effigy of Jesus found hanging in a wet wood, a crown 
of thorns topping a sheep skull? Or simply the relentless tension – who will go 
the furthest to cure a mute boy: his fanatical mother or the presence she 
believes is God, but the reader knows, deep down, is something else entirely?

In person, Hurley is a little rumpled, but cheerful. He has just won the best 
debut and book of the year prizes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/09/the-loney-wins-book-of-the-year-british-book-industry-awards>
 atthe British Book Industry awards 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/british-book-industry-awards> (BBIA) and is 
living what sounds like a debut author’s dream: after 300 copies of The Loney 
were published quietly by small Yorkshire press Tartarus in November 2014, two 
months later a few doozy reviews brought it to the attention of one of the UK’s 
most venerable publishers, John Murray. It was picked as a book of the year by 
the Sunday Times, Daily Mail, Daily Express, Daily Telegraph and Times. Horror 
grandmaster Stephen King called it “an amazing piece of fiction”. In January 
2016, Hurleywon the Costa first novel award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/26/frances-hardinges-the-lie-tree-wins-costa-book-of-the-year-2015>
.

Today, he’s in his publisher’s office in London, with a sore head but two 
fresh BBIA’s under his belt (he texted his kids to tell them he had won a 
prize, but they were more interested that he sat next to Youtube celebrity Joe 
Sugg).

In conversation, he frequently anticipates imaginary accusations of flippancy 
in the face of his success: “It has been totally bewildering and strange and 
brilliant. No one has been more surprised than I have. I know that sounds like 
false modesty – but I think all writers feel the same. But The Loney has been 
so universally loved, which is astonishing. I was just so happy for it to be 
published, I didn’t really have much more ambition for it than that – oh, that 
sounds daft, doesn’t it?”

The Loney follows a family on their annual pilgrimage to a decrepit house on a 
bleak coast: the 15-year-old narrator, his mute brother and their timid father 
and fanatically Catholic mother, who believes her son can be cured with a visit 
to a local shrine. With their local priest and a gaggle of fellow churchgoers 
in tow, tensions build and rituals become increasingly sinister. The feeling of 
being on the brink of something awful, something unseen, pervades The Loney 
like a sickness. Hurley’s young narrator observes: “There was so little of the 
modern world there that it was difficult not to think of the place being at a 
sort of standstill and – how shall I put it –primed in some way.”

The Loney by Andrew Michael Hurley review – eerily good
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/may/01/the-loney-andrew-michael-hurley-review>
Is The Loney horror? Literary fiction? A thriller? No one really knows – but 
no one seems unduly bothered. It’s the confidence of the debut that resonates, 
even with those wary of horror. “People said, ‘Where will this go in a 
bookshop?’ and I couldn’t answer that for a long time,” Hurley says, smiling. 
“It’s funny that the thing I thought would be a drawback made it remarkable.”

Hurley, who is 41 and has previously published two short story collections, 
spent spent three or four years to writing the novel, plotting it out in the 
evenings and weekends while he worked part-time as a creative writing teacher 
and librarian. He sent The Loney out into the world to a chorus of polite 
‘no’s, before he found and approached Tartarus. “They had this caveat on their 
website that said ‘unless it’s very strange, we probably won’t be interested’. 
That was perfect for me,” he says.

Writing short stories first taught him the power of economy, he says. He loves 
the great names of the genre – Raymond Carver, Hemingway, John Cheever, 
Chekhov. Brevity pairs well with gothic horror, he says, as it leaves gaps for 
readers to invest in. “Leave them more questions than are answered. For me the 
most genuinely unsettling stories are those ones where you don’t see 
everything. There is no place more terrifying than your own mind – if the 
monsters exist in there, that will unsettle you more than if it is spelled out 
for you.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fandrew-michael-hurley-there-is-no-place-more-terrifying-than-your-own-mind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bc763f3316f6523fd712b0b1f40d085b70b0962%2F142_918_5406_6755%2F5406.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Michael%20Hurley%3A%20'There%20is%20no%20place%20more%20terrifying%20than%20your%20own%20mind'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fandrew-michael-hurley-there-is-no-place-more-terrifying-than-your-own-mind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Michael%20Hurley%3A%20%27There%20is%20no%20place%20more%20terrifying%20than%20your%20own%20mind%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F11%2Fandrew-michael-hurley-there-is-no-place-more-terrifying-than-your-own-mind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bc763f3316f6523fd712b0b1f40d085b70b0962%2F142_918_5406_6755%2F5406.jpg>
 ‘Gothic literature says: ‘No, nature does not care about you and it can hurt’ 
… Andrew Michael Hurley. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
The Loney has an open ending, leaving the readers to construct the horrors 
beyond. This took a lot of drafts, Hurley says, but it was important that “you 
knew something had happened, but quite what it was or why, you weren’t entirely 
sure.” (He, however, knows what it is.) Horror writer MR James, particularly 
his short storyOh, Whistle, And I’ll Come To You, My Lad 
<http://www.thin-ghost.org/items/show/150>, was a huge influence, he says. “At 
the end he describes this crumpled face of linen. That’s all it is, but it is 
this horrific, unsettling, uncanny image, of an entity whose motivations are 
never disclosed. That is quite disturbing.”

Hurley’s odd title (“It is a bugger to Google”) comes from an actual place: a 
local nickname for a wasteland on the River Ribble, in his hometown of Preston, 
Lancashire. “It was a place you were warned away from by parents: ‘You don’t go 
to the Loney as strange people hang out there.’ Of course, all kids went there. 
When it came to writing my novel I had my title immediately. I just had to lift 
it from Preston and put it on the coast.”

One element of Hurley’s debut that has been most frequently remarked on is the 
sense of place. Even without knowing England’s coast, you can smell the salt in 
the air, imagine trudging through sodden, fetid leaves. There, time doesn’t 
“leak away as it should” but “collected as the black water did on the marshes 
and remained and stagnated in the same way”. Gone is any sense of the English 
pastoral; The Loney shrieks with storms, looms in drizzle. Hurley is fascinated 
by humanity’s refusal to accept nature’s indifference. “Yes, there is something 
comforting in the idea that your tiny little insignificant life could be mapped 
out and there is order and purpose to it,” he says. “The cycle of the seasons 
being representative of an afterlife, that spring will always come after the 
winter kills everything … gothic literature says: ‘No, nature does not care 
about you and it can hurt.’ There is a sort of existential angst about these 
places.”

Mummer, the overbearing matriarch, attributes the landscape’s fury as evidence 
of God, a link Hurley is fascinated by: “She believes these elemental forces 
are examples of God at work, that it is something quantifiable or benevolent 
even when it is wild. But no, there is something malevolent about that weather; 
it can kill you.” He drew on memories of pottering about in nature with his 
older sister: “I remember those feelings of being frightened by it. You look at 
those mountain ranges in the Lake District and suddenly the cloud comes down … 
when even the adults are edgy about it, that’s when nature becomes quite scary 
and serious.”

Hurley was bought up in a big Catholic family and was an altar boy before he 
stopped believing. “I lost my faith when I was 12 or 13, but the imagery and 
the language of mass stayed with me as an adult.” Despite his atheism, he is 
fascinated by the church and the purpose of faith; while writing The Loney, 
Hurley thought of his grandparents, whose social lives revolved around their 
religion. “It gave them a very simple framework to live by. I completely 
understand why people want that in their lives, why wouldn’t you? But you only 
have to switch on the TV on any given day of the week to see what religion also 
permits – the worst atrocities you can imagine. Trying to square those two 
things is what The Loney is about.”

Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Hurley has just submitted his second novel (“a blessed relief”) and has ideas 
for a nonfiction book on solitude and nature. After the success of his first, 
it is understandable that second book fears are weighing on him a little. “I do 
have to put that out of my mind or I’ll never write another word,” he chuckles. 
But he’s sticking to the form: “It’s a beautiful playground,” he says. “A 
fascinating, maddening, disturbing, beautiful thing.”

He’s planning a “loose trilogy” of unconnected novels about the Lancashire 
landscape, with the second set on the moorlands near where he lives and looking 
at myths and reinterpretations. “It will be dark and unsettling,” he promises, 
cheerfully.
 