
In Chicago's Museum of Contemporary Art this December, there will sprout up a 
peculiar kind of forest: 50 horned speakers, each standing between 19 and 26in 
high across the atrium, their bells upturned like blackbird mouths. This "sonic 
arboretum <http://mcachicago.org/performances/now/all/2011/742>" is a project 
dreamed up by the musicianAndrew Bird <http://www.andrewbird.net/> and the 
sculptor and instrument-makerIan Schneller <http://www.specimenproducts.com/>, 
the product of a long friendship and a shared fascination with sound.

It is Schneller who makes the speakers – or "hornlets and hornlings", as he 
calls them – using a combination of recycled newsprint, dryer lint and baking 
soda, impregnated with shellac. They are wonderful beasts: most handsomely 
shaped and exquisitely burnished.

Bird provides the sound. He will record compositions on-site at the museum, 
then send different musical information to different groups of horns through 
multiple loops. Subsequent changes occur off-site – layering and looping and 
transmitting the resulting sounds to the museum by computer.

This is not the first time Bird, Schneller and the hornlings have stepped out 
together. In late summer 2010, they wereunveiled at the Guggenheim 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6crVGgybJjY> in New York. Bird explained to PBS 
how he was inspired by time spent at the farm he owns in Illinois. This is 
where he writes music, crafting loops that "fit with the landscape, with a 
field of soybeans in the wind, the way the wind will blow through and make this 
pattern. What we can do with these hornlets is create that movement of wind."

It also encouraged him to think of how sound falls in the landscape, of the 
way it is echoed and absorbed in a way that is tangibly different to a concert 
hall or gig venue. "Usually you think of acoustics in closed spaces because 
sound bounces off of things," Bird said. "But if you're in Zion National Park 
or the Sandstone Cliffs, you create this acoustical space with different 
textures of the plants in our area … And that's what we're trying to 
appropriate."

Music in the landscape is something I think about often: not just the seasonal 
acoustic spaces of the summer festivals, nor only the landscape references that 
crop up in song – the sycamore of the Mamas and the Papas'Dream a Little Dream 
of Me <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ajwnmkEqYpo>, say, or Van Morrison's 
Redwood Tree <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yj0rgghHhvU>, which "smells like 
rain, maybe even thunder" – but the music the land itself produces, the wind 
making patterns in the soybean fields, the rain falling heavy on broad green 
leaves, the sudden stir of a branch as a bird takes flight.

One of my favourite places in Britain is a real arboretum: Westonbirt 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/westonbirt>, in Gloucestershire. Though it has no 
hornlets or hornlings, it owns its own sonic charms. I first visited there in 
late autumn, when the light faded early, and the rain pattered on the soft 
earth of the pathways, on the smooth, dark rhododendron bushes. And there was 
music, too, in the scent of wet bark and damp soil, in the caramel smell of the 
katsura, and the deep, mulchy fragrance of the fallen leaves; a song in the 
sudden flames of colour on the branches; in the dark and the shadows and the 
birdsong, clinging to the light.

It reminded me of Vaughan Williams's first composition, a musical 
interpretation of a poem by William Barnes,Linden Lea 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nvoYHwYDYLA>, which pined for the woodland of 
his Dorset home: "By the oak trees' mossy moot,/ The shining grass blades, 
timber-shaded,/ Now do quiver underfoot;/ And birds do whistle overhead,/ And 
water's bubbling in its bed,/ And there for me the apple tree/ Do lean down low 
in Linden Lea."

It made me think how the sounds of our landscape are changing. The music of 
the fields and the woodlands giving way to the sounds of the city, and the new 
housing estates, and the motorways; of how the streetlights make their own kind 
of song, and the high-speed trains dance faster than their steam-powered 
cousins. And as we gain these new sounds, I wonder about the patterns, the 
rhythms we are losing, the songs of the lapwing and the wagtail, the bunting 
and the barley field. "Translating mistakes, and the trees and the stake," as 
Bird once sang. "And the trees for the woods and the sound of the trash/ For 
the sound of the blowing leaves along the Southfield Freeway."
 