
Australia's World Twenty20 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> 
plans were thrown into disarray when their all-rounder Andrew Symonds was sent 
home on the eve of the tournament for "breaking a number of team rules related 
to alcohol and other issues" only a week after arriving in England. A 
tempestuous 11-year international career is surely over.

Such was the frustration at Symonds' latest misdemeanours that press 
conferences were held in quick succession in Melbourne by Cricket Australia's 
chief executive, James Sutherland, and in London by the Australia captain,Ricky 
Ponting <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ricky-ponting>, in an attempt to 
deal swiftly with the affair before the team's opening game against West Indies 
on Saturday. Cameron White will replace Symonds in Australia's squad.

Sutherland described his behaviour as "the final straw", although Symonds, 34 
next week, may choose to retire beforeCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia inevitably declines to 
renew his central contract at the end of this month. Ponting, meanwhile, was 
scathing about a player he has publicly backed in the past despite a string of 
adverse and often alcohol-related headlines.

"I don't think Cricket Australia could have done any more for him," Ponting 
said. "He's been stood down on a number of occasions and he has been working 
through some processes off the field over the last 12-18 months to make himself 
better in different aspects of his life. He has had plenty of opportunity, 
that's for sure. James Sutherland made it pretty clear it was an 
alcohol-related incident. We're talking about commitments he made to himself 
and the team, so as much as anything he has let himself down, his team-mates, 
and he's let Cricket Australia down."

Speculation immediately centred on what exactly Symonds had done to be ordered 
home ahead of a tournament in which his all-round skills were expected to play 
a central part. Whispers of general surliness will not have helped, although it 
is thought he was part of a small group of Australian players who watched the 
State of Origin rugby league game on TV in a bar from 11.30am yesterdaybefore 
heading to a dinner for the Professional Cricketers' Association benevolent 
fund last night, when his behaviour was described by one guest as "obnoxious".

Symonds was then confronted in the morning by Ponting on behalf of the team's 
four-man leadership group and was told they had recommended to the Australian 
board that he be sent home immediately. For a man who recently topped the 
batting averages for the Indian Premier League winners Deccan Chargers, earning 
around Â£400,000 in the process, it looks like an unpleasantly swift reversal of 
fortunes.

Symonds' troubles

June 2005

Banned for two matches after turning up drunk to a one-day international 
against Bangladesh in Cardiff during the run-up to the Ashes series. Australia, 
astonishingly, lost the match and went on to lose the Ashes.

January 2008

Became embroiled in a race row after he was subjected to alleged "monkey" 
taunts from India's Harbhajan Singh in a Test at the SCG. Harbhajan was 
initially handed a three-game ban but the suspension was revoked on appeal.

March 2008

Shoulder-charged a male streaker who had run on to the pitch during a one-day 
international against India but did not face assault charges.

August 2008

Went fishing in Darwin instead of attending a team meeting and was sent home 
to Queensland before the one-day series with Bangladesh. Stand-in captain 
Michael Clarke questioned Symonds' commitment. He was duly left out of the team 
to tour India in October.

November 2008

Was selected to play the Test series against New Zealand. He did not play any 
significant role in the first Test which Australia won. However, after the end 
of the Test, on 22 November, he was involved in an incident in a bar in 
Brisbane. Symonds said he was provoked by a member of the public which led to 
an altercation and the man being removed by security staff. He was cleared by 
Cricket Australia to play in the following Test in Adelaide on 26 November.

January 2009

Called New Zealand wicketkeeper-batsman Brendon McCullum a "lump of shit" 
during an interview on a radio show with the Australian comedy duo Roy and HG. 
Symonds was referring to McCullum's signing for New South Wales to play in a 
domestic Twenty20 final when he made the comment. He was reportedly drunk at 
the time. He publicly apologised but was charged by Cricket Australia with 
violating the code of conduct and was fined. Cricket Australia then blocked 
Symonds' selection for the tour to South Africa. He was told to seek 
counselling to prove his commitment to the team before he would be considered 
for selection again. Fortnightly reports were sent to Cricket Australia about 
his progress.

June 2009

Left out of the Ashes squad, Symonds was nevertheless given a chance in the 
ICC World Twenty20 and was expected to feature in Australia's one-day side 
later in the summer. Instead he was sent home before the World Twenty20 began 
for another "alcohol-related issue".
 