
'Sometimes it feels like one song could be a whole record, a whole world unto 
itself," Andrew Bird says, sitting in his darkened hotel room, wearing two 
scarves and sniffing at the cold London weather. There are a number of strange 
and wonderful worlds onthe singer-songwriter's most recent album, Break It 
Yourself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/mar/01/andrew-bird-break-yourself-review>
: where clouds merge into mountains, where there are holes in the ocean floor, 
and refrains written for frog puppets – as well as rhythms that carry the 
flavour of Morocco, the Caribbean and America's deep south.

Building these worlds can take time. After touring his fifth album, 2009's 
Noble Beast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jan/30/andrew-bird-noble-beast-review>, 
Bird, a multi-instrumentalist famed forhis whistling, sublime violin-playing 
and the near-jabberwocky of his lyrics 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WHkqoamZ76U>, stumbled into a kind of 
sabbatical. "I was burned out, and I didn't really want to go home to 
Illinois," he says. "So I stopped on the west coast, on my way back from Asia, 
and rented a house in Venice Beach, rode my bike around and wrote a bunch of 
songs forthe Muppet movie <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3oFRWp7ZhuY>."

Bird's only previous experience of scoring for film had been on the indie flick
Norman <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BUE8EiBsriY>. Writing for Jim Henson's 
menagerie was a different task. "It was all on spec," Bird says. "They have 
probably 20 writers, and there's no guarantee your songs will be used. But 
you're writing for the love of the challenge of writing for the Muppets. And 
there's something satisfying about it, about feeling like a real writer."

Not all of Bird's Muppet compositions made their way into the soundtrack, but 
he was able to use "little bits and pieces" of those that weren't chosen. "Even 
if I'm writing about the Muppets, I'm putting my spin on things," he says. "One 
song in particular,Lazy Projector <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2XqxBGmVwIU>, 
is about selective memory, deciding how we remember a certain relationship – 
who's putting that story together, who's omitting certain things. I had this 
song I wrote for Kermit about why the Muppets broke up, and I added [Lazy 
Projector] on to give the song a lift at the end." He smiles faintly. "If it's 
a slight non sequitur, that's OK with me. I'm not a linear songwriter."

After his California sabbatical, Bird headed home to his barn outside Chicago 
to run through the new songs with his band. Remarkably, that first ad-hoc 
try-out provided the meat of the finished record. "They were glorified 
rehearsals, jam sessions. You hope you'll get something out of that, but I 
didn't think any of it would be so complete after eight days. And, through the 
ebb and flow of each day, you get different performances out of yourself. The 
morning songs are the kind of agitated ones, and then you get the late-night, 
falling-off-a-chair performances."

This fluid recording environment makes for a record that, while still a little 
wistful, is strikingly happy. "I was just in a good place in my head after a 
long time of not being," is how Bird explains it. One imagines his marriage and 
the birth of his son in the years since Noble Beast may well have been a 
factor; indeed, on one track, there is a brief sample of his son merrily 
burbling away.

The most notable difference between the new album and his previous work is the 
more complex approach to rhythm. He refers to its "polyrhythmic loops" and 
"really odd basslines", and to a track calledOrpheo Looks Back 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_qFBFrYW_kE>, the only song not recorded live. 
"It was constructed from two free-jazz solo loops I had worked on and recorded, 
and which happened to be close enough in tempo to layer. The song sounds a 
little north African, and that section I wrote in Venice Beach. When I hear 
something in my head, I hammer away at it for hours and hours until it works."

He thinks the exuberant Danse Caribe 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wQmmgzFXZyk> is the album's "most stylistically 
clear song. I've always been interested by music from the American south into 
the Caribbean, down to Haiti," he says. "And maybe that song didn't go in the 
direction I was hoping, which would have been more like a stomp – it went more 
Afropop. But that's fine. It's hard not to have a blast playing that kind of 
music, because it's only three chords and it's really joyful."

Does this signal a change of direction? He gives a slow shake of his head. "I 
wouldn't want to make it a direct homage, I just want to feel it under my skin. 
But [Afropop] is one of the most elusive rhythms to recreate. I can always 
conjure other types of music, but that requires a state of mind you can't 
always harness." How does he get himself into the right mindset? "You have to 
be very open. You stumble upon it. It can't be pieced together by physical 
memory. Some people find that frustrating, but I like that – one day it's there 
and the next day it's not. That's what makes me get up in the morning."

• Andrew Bird <https://www.theguardian.com/music/andrew-bird> tours the UK in 
June and plays the Roundhouse, London NW1, on 8 November.
 