
An Abbott government minister has accused the broadcaster Alan Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> of promoting a “racist” scare 
campaign about foreign ownership of Australian farmland and greater trade links 
with Asian countries.

In an fiery interview on Radio 2GB on Wednesday, the trade minister, Andrew 
Robb, sought to defend the government’s trade deals with China, South Korea and 
Japan and the ongoingTrans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/01/australia-walks-away-from-trans-pacific-partnership-trade-deal-talks>
 talks.

TPP trade deal: Abbott chastises critics for 'short-term, xenophobic politics'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/30/tony-abbott-chastises-tpp-critics-for-short-term-xenophobic-politics>
“I defend what we’re doing in the most aggressive way,” Robb said. “It is 
creating jobs. What are we here for? I’ve got kids, I’ve got grandchildren, and 
I feel that I’m helping secure a magnificent future for these kids and 
grandchildren.”

Jones repeatedly raised concerns about foreign ownership, and said Japan and 
China “won’t need our exports [because] they’re going to buy up our dairy farms 
and buy up our beef farms”.


Robb countered that the argument was “just a scare campaign” and insisted only 
1% of agriculture was owned by the Chinese “and yet most people would think 
it’s probably 20% … with all of the ranting by the unions and everyone else”.

Throughout the exchange, Jones cited examples of Chinese and Korean buyers 
buying large tracts of Australian farmland or signalling their intention to do 
so.

Robb said Australia was a capital-limited country and “we have needed for 200 
years other people’s capital to develop those resources”. Foreign investment 
helped develop agricultural supply lines, railways, storage and other 
infrastructure, and Australia also gained jobs and tax revenue, the minister 
said.

“Let me take you back 100 years, though, Alan,” Robb said. “Vestey’s [a UK 
company] owned all of the north.”

Robb fired up after the broadcaster dismissed the Vestey’s example. “We’re 
talking about China, South Korea and Japan,” Jones said. “No scare campaign – 
I’ll tell you what, you’re in trouble.”

Robb replied: “No, it’s a racist … ”

When Jones protested, Robb said: “Well, people are out there playing that 
card. The CFMEU … I can’t believe that you’ve been peddling, all last week, all 
of the CFMEU lines … They’re the most corrupt union in Australia, Alan. They’re 
in bed with the bikies who control 15% of the drug trade in Australia. Give me 
a break.”

Penny Wong backs fight against free-trade clauses that let companies sue 
Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/24/penny-wong-expected-to-fight-free-trade-clauses-that-let-companies-sue-australia>
Robb said the CFMEU – which was campaigning against the labour movement 
provisions in Australia’s free trade agreement with China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/17/union-calls-for-labor-to-block-free-trade-agreement-with-china>
 – had “totally misrepresented” the deal. “Why do they use the word China every 
second word? Because they know it produces a nervous response throughout the 
community, rather than looking at the facts.”

The CFMEU’s national secretary, Michael O’Connor, said the union would 
“happily put our record up against the Liberal party’s” and Robb should explain 
why a colleague attended a Reclaim Australia rally.

“In contrast, our union stands up for workers from overseas when they are 
being exploited on work sites in Australia,” he said. “The China FTA is a bad 
deal for Australia at a time of high unemployment, and the facts demonstrate 
that.”

After the interview, Jones told his listeners: “If I am a racist for trying to 
ensure that the best of Australia isn’t sold to foreign interests then I’m 
happy to wear that tag.”

Trade is building as a political issue. At its national conference last month, 
the Labor partycommitted to seek to remove investor-state dispute settlement 
(ISDS) clauses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/24/penny-wong-expected-to-fight-free-trade-clauses-that-let-companies-sue-australia>
 from existing trade agreements amid concerns about foreign companies being 
able to sue the Australian government.

The prime minister, Tony Abbott, said last week that the free trade agreements 
were too important “to be sacrificed at the altar of short-term xenophobic 
politics”.


Labor’s trade spokeswoman, Penny Wong, said at the time that there was “no 
place for racism” in the debate over the China free trade agreement, but the 
opposition was concerned about the impact on jobs and the ISDS mechanism.
 