
Andrew Mitchell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell>, the UK 
international development secretary, has been nominated as one of three 
co-chairs on a new panel bringing together traditional aid donors, developing 
countries and emerging economies.

The panel represents what is being termed a global partnership on development 
co-operation following thefourth high-level forum on aid effectiveness in Busan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/fourth-high-level-forum-on-aid-effectiveness>
, South Korea, in December. Busan sought to bring in key aid players from the 
global south – Brazil, India and China – and set out a common framework on aid 
effectiveness, particularly on governance and transparency.

Mitchell, who is set to serve in the role for 18-24 months, said: "Last year's 
conference underlined how aid programmes will only succeed if developing 
countries are at the very heart of our approach. I will work with the other 
co-chairs to … set down concrete steps to develop our partnership at the first 
ministerial meeting next year."

Mitchell's appointment reflects Britain's strong role in development. In 
April, Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary-general, askedDavid Cameron to co-chair a 
committee to establish a new set of millennium development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/may/09/johnson-sirleaf-yudhoyono-cameron-development>
 to follow the present goals, which expire in 2015. The UK government has stuck 
to its commitment to increase overseas aid to 0.7% of GDP, despite the 
recession.

It had been hoped that a two-day post-Busan meeting in Paris, which began on 
Thursday, would see all three co-chairs named. But African countries have been 
caught up in the contest toappoint a new chair of the African Union (AU) 
following deadlock at the last AU annual summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/jan/30/african-union-limbo-leadership-impasse>
 in Ethiopia in January.

Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, the Nigerian finance minister, has been mentioned as the 
most likely candidate from a developing country, while Mexico may provide the 
emerging country representative. The new deadline for the appointments is the 
end of July.

In effect, the global partnership represents a changing of the guard from the 
old system dominated by the group of industrialised countries in the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) development 
assistance committeetoa more inclusive aid architecture taking into account the 
emerging economies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2012/jun/28/western-donors-brazil-development-aid>
.

A political body, the partnership's role is to maintain the momentum for more 
effective development co-operation and ensure accountability for implementing 
the commitments agreed at Busan.The important caveat is that participation of 
the emerging economies is on a voluntary basis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/dec/01/china-india-aid-partnership>
. The partnership, which is expected to work with the UN Development 
Co-operation Forum and the G20 group of industrialised countries, is to hold 
ministerial-level meetings every 18 to 24 months.

As expected, none of the big three emerging economies have put themselves 
forward for the steering committee, consisting of 18 members including the 
three co-chairs. The role of the steering committee is to be the "glue" between 
the global partnership and the networks of aid recipients. The committee will 
steer the work of the ministerial meeting, identifying strategic priorities and 
setting the agenda.

"South-south providers have still seen themselves as aid recipients until 
recently," said an OECD official. "They need time to adjust. They want to be 
part of the global partnership but not take a leading role … Brazil doesn't 
want to be at the table but uses every opportunity to air its views. More 
important is what goes on at the country level."

Busan and previous aid effectiveness conferences emphasised the key role of 
the developing countries themselves – channelling aid through a recipient 
country's budget system, so it decides its priorities while at the same time 
building up its capacities. Rwanda is frequently cited as a successful example 
of the approach of giving a developing country autonomy on how it chooses to 
spend aid money.

Aid delivered through budget support, however, is not always possible. Britain 
suspended budget support for Malawi in July because of clashes on economic 
policy and governance under the previous government. It has not yet fully 
restored bilateral aid,despite Mitchell's praise for the new president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/jun/13/andrew-mitchell-malawi-budget-aid>
, Joyce Banda.

The working party on aid effectivenes signed off on other elements of the 
global partnership, including co-operation between the OECD, with its expertise 
in data and analysis, and the UN Development Programme with its wide reach and 
on-the-ground knowledge, and a global monitoring framework to track the use of 
country systems, the role of civil society in development and the untying of 
aid.

NGOs welcomed the adoption of a common standard on transparency – the 
InternationalAid <https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/aid> 
Transparency Initiative – to make publicly available the full range of 
information on publicly funded development activities, their financing, terms 
and conditions, and contribution to development results, subject to legitimate 
concerns about commercially sensitive information.
 