
Andrew Strauss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss>, the 
director of England cricket, has urged supporters intending to follow the team 
in Bangladesh this autumn to make their own assessment of the situation in the 
country based on advice from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.

While claiming to have considered the safety of fans and media during a recent 
risk assessment by its security adviser, Reg Dickason, the England and Wales
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board’s decision to proceed 
with the month-long tour from the end of September has been made on the basis 
of the plan outlined for players and team management.

England’s winter tour to Bangladeshgets security clearance to go ahead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/25/england-cricket-winter-tour-bangladesh-security-clearance>
“That’s all we can control,” said Strauss, who confirmed he will be part of 
the travelling England party. “Any supporters going out there, it’s worth 
stressing they should be making their own assessments and refer to Foreign 
Office advice.

“Everyone’s personal circumstances are different and people have to make their 
own decisions. The reason we have allowed the tour to go ahead is that we are 
comfortable with the safety plan the Bangladesh government have for our players 
and management. For me to make any other comment beyond that is wrong.”

England’s tour was placed in doubt following the terrorist attack in the 
country’s capital, Dhaka, on 1 Julythat resulted in the death of 20 hostages 
and two police officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/dhaka-bangladesh-restaurant-attack-hostages>
as well as the decision by Australianot to send either their senior 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/01/cricket-australia-poised-to-call-off-bangladesh-tour-amid-security-fears>
 or Under-19 team in the past 12 months.

The FCO’s current advice for people travelling to Bangladesh states: “There is 
a heightened threat of further terrorist attacks and foreigners, in particular 
westerners, may be directly targeted; crowded areas where westerners are known 
to gather may be at higher risk of attack; you should minimise your exposure to 
these areas.”

The Bangladesh Cricket Board said on Friday that, as well as security at the 
two international grounds being used, supporters who contact the governing body 
with their travel plans in advance will also have provisions made at their 
hotels. While not every tour group which specialises in regular cricket travel 
is arranging tours, the Barmy Army has already spoken to the BCB regarding 
travel arrangements.

“We will make sure that not just the players but their family members, fans 
and the reporters will get security in the stadium and hotel,” said the BCB 
president, Nazmul Hassan. “They have to inform us where they are staying and 
contact us. We believe that there won’t be any problem with regards to this 
England tour.

“The Barmy Army [England’s supporters group] had contacted us and we 
immediately told the Bangladesh high commission to ensure that their visas 
aren’t delayed. We also asked for a list of those who are coming so that we can 
help them out.”

England’s one-day players leave for Bangladesh on 30 September for a 
three-match series that begins with two fixtures in Dhaka before switching to 
the coastal town of Chittagong, before the Test squad arrive for one warmup 
fixture and the first Test at the same ground.

The tour concludes with the second Test at the Sher-e-Bangla national stadium 
in Dhaka starting on 28 October before Alastair Cook’s side travel to India for 
a five-Test series that runs up until Christmas.
 