
Andrew Wakefield <https://www.theguardian.com/society/andrew-wakefield>, the 
doctor who was struck off the medical register after triggering a health scare 
linking autism to the MMR vaccine, is suing the editor-in-chief of the British 
Medical Journal for defamation.

In a complaint filed to a district court in Texas 
<http://www.courthousenews.com/2012/01/04/42742.htm>, lawyers acting for 
Wakefield claim that articles, editorials and other statements that appeared in 
the BMJ were "false and make defamatory allegations" about the doctor.

The lawsuit names Fiona Godlee, the BMJ's editor-in-chief, and the British 
investigative journalistBrian Deer <http://briandeer.com/>, who has covered the 
controversy over the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine, which led to a drop in 
MMR vaccination rates to dangerous levels.

Documents filed with the court say the action arises in part from the 
publication in January 2011 of an article by Deer in the BMJ titled "Secrets of 
the MMR scare: how the case against theMMR 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> vaccine was fixed" and an 
accompanying editorial by Godlee.

It is alleged that the articles accuse Wakefield "of fraud and of fraudulently 
and intentionally manipulating and falsifying data and diagnoses". The case has 
been filed in Austin,Texas <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>, where 
Wakefield now lives, because the allegations concern his work there.

In a statement, the BMJ and Deer said they awaited formal service of the 
papers, but stood by the articles and had instructed lawyers to defend the 
claim vigorously.

Wakefield has taken legal action against Deer before. He sued the journalist, 
along with Channel 4 and 20/20 productions, over a documentary on MMR in 2004, 
but later dropped the action and agreed to pay legal costs.

Wakefield's case before the General Medical Council lasted 217 days, making it 
the longest in the regulator's history. The GMC panel found Wakefieldguilty of 
serious professional misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/may/24/andrew-wakefield-struck-off-gmc>
 in May 2010 on several charges relating to research involving 12 autistic 
children published in theLancet medical journal in February 1998 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736%2897%2911096-0/abstract>
.

The regulator said Wakefield abused his position, subjected children to 
invasive procedures that were not justified or ethically approved, and brought 
the profession into disrepute. The study, which linked the MMR vaccination to 
autism and bowel problems, was retracted by the Lancet in light of the GMC 
judgement.

Fears over a possible link between the MMR jab and autism led to a substantial 
drop in take-up of the vaccine. In 2004, only 80% of children received the 
triple jab, far short of the 95% required to achieve the "herd immunity" that 
prevents disease taking hold in a community.

In a statement, the BMJ said: "The BMJ is on notice that Andrew Wakefield has 
issued defamation proceedings, not in London as might be ordinarily expected as 
concerns a predominately English publication, but in Texas, USA, where he now 
lives.

"Following the findings of the British General Medical Council's Fitness to 
Practice Panel and Mr Wakefield's history of pursuing unfounded litigation, any 
action brought against the BMJ and Mr Deer in London would have been 
immediately vulnerable to being struck out as an abuse of process."

The statement continued: "Despite the findings of the GMC's Fitness to 
Practice Panel and his co-authors having publicly retracted the causation 
interpretation put forward by the Lancet Paper, it would appear from the Claim 
filed at court that Mr Wakefield still stands by the accuracy of the Lancet 
paper and his conclusion therein, thereby compounding his previously found 
misconduct.

"While we await formal service, unsurprisingly the BMJ and Mr Deer stand by 
the material published in the BMJ and their other statements and confirm that 
they have instructed lawyers to defend the claim vigorously."
 