
Andrew Strauss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss>, the 
director of England cricket, has confirmed that this summer’s fixtures against 
Sri Lanka and Pakistan will be played as two multi-format “Super Series” in a 
move he hopes will modernise international cricket.

Under the new system, four points will be awarded for Test victories, two for 
wins in the one-day and Twenty20 internationals, and the spoils shared in the 
event of a draw, tie or washout, to see an overall winner emerge from each 
tour. A nominal prize fund of £25,000 is in place, to be shared by the 
victorious players.

“We believe the Super Series will provide that context and relevance by 
connecting the formats and ensuring that every game counts for something more 
than just itself,” said Strauss.

“Fans of a certain format will hopefully feel more connected to the other 
formats, more interested in the other formats. The by-product of this almost is 
that our players in very different and quite separate teams will feel more 
connected to each other and by something greater than their own immediate 
interests.”

Steven Finn to retain England spot for first Test against Sri Lanka
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/18/steven-finn-england-sri-lanka-first-test>
The concept was first used in the 2013 women’s Ashes, although its 
introduction in the men’s game is not planned to decide the men’s equivalent in 
future. Strauss insists the Super Series idea instead sits above and across the 
three formats of the game, with individual trophies still competed for.

England face Sri Lanka in three Tests, starting at Headingley on Thursday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/18/steven-finn-england-sri-lanka-first-test>
, then five one-day internationals and a one-off Twenty20 in Southampton in 
early July. Pakistan’s three-month tour will then begin with a four-match Test 
series, before five ODIs and one Twenty20 at Old Trafford in September.

Under the system, England’s most recent tour of South Africa would have been a 
16-14 victory for the hosts, with Alastair Cook’s Test teamwinning their series 
2-1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jan/16/south-africa-v-england-third-test-day-three-live>
 before the limited-overs teams, under Eoin Morgan,lost 3-2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/14/south-africa-england-fifth-odi-match-report>
 in the one-dayers and2-0 in the Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/21/south-africa-ab-de-villiers-t20-series-england-collapse>
 matches. The last of those would therefore have been a final.

Such a finish is unlikely to be the norm, however, and the points system could 
in theory detract from later matches should one side dominate early on. Were 
England to whitewash Sri Lanka 3-0 and go on to win the first one-day 
international, for example, it would give them an unassailable 14-point lead 
and mean five dead rubbers, in the context of the overall Super Series, follow.

Asked if he would have brought this in during an Ashes year, Strauss replied: 
“One thing we don’t want to do is stick our heads in the sand and just keep 
things going the way they have always been at a time when the game is evolving 
and developing very quickly.

“The Ashes will always be the Ashes played over five Test matches, that will 
never change, certainly we have no plans to change that and nor should we, but 
we have a responsibility to ensure that international cricket remains relevant 
in people’s lives and this is one way to do that.

“I think the point we are trying to get across more than anything is that the 
ECB are very keen to be at the forefront of efforts to modernise the 
international game and we feel this is a good way of ensuring that the game 
remains relevant in both fans’ and players’ minds moving into the future.”

Strauss insists both Sri Lanka and Pakistan fully supported the idea when 
first put to them, while Investec, Royal London and NatWest – the individual 
sponsors of the three formats – are also on board. The players, he claimed, are 
open to the idea although all-rounder Ben Stokes has already gone on record to 
say it is “rubbish”.
 