
The Australia all-rounder Andrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> is being sent home from the 
World Twenty20 tournament for disciplinary reasons, Cricket Australia confirmed 
today.

Symonds, whose career has been dogged by off-field problems, had been ordered 
home after breaking a number of team rules relating to alcohol and other 
issues. The 33-year-old, who had returned to the Australia set-up after a spell 
out because of disciplinary issues, was absent from training today.

"We have stood Andrew down from the World Twenty20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/worldtwenty20> championship," said James 
Sutherland, chief executive of Cricket Australia. "The decision was made by the 
Cricket Australia board following recommendation from management. The 
recommendation from management was made following recommendation from the 
leadership group, who were unanimous in recommending this course of action.

"Andrew has had his fair share of challenges recently and Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia have tried to support 
him. But it's a constant balancing act and has gone too far today. Andrew is 
disappointed and upset but there shouldn't be any surprise by what's happened.

"In the last 24 to 48 hours he has broken a number of team rules," Sutherland 
added. "In the context of commitments Andrew has made to his team-mates and to 
Cricket Australia in the last six months, it's the last straw. I'm disappointed 
in Andrew and I'm disappointed for Andrew. I'm quite sad about it."

The incident is the latest in a long line of off-field misdemeanours involving 
the player. In January,he was fined over a remark he made in a radio interview 
while in August 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jan/28/cricket-andrew-symonds-australia-south-africa-england>
, he was sent home from Australia's one-day squad to play Bangladesh in Darwin 
aftermissing a compulsory team meeting to go fishing 
<http://article.wn.com/view/2008/08/30/Fishing_trip_gets_Symonds_into_hot_water/>
.

Symonds played in Australia's two World Twenty20 warm-up matches, against New 
Zealand and Bangladesh, and it is unknown if Cricket Australia will find a 
replacement for his place in the squad.
 