
Andrew Bolt says his children have had to be moved out of the family home 
after receiving death threats from a supporter ofIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>.

The News Corp columnist made the revelation on Thursday night during an 
interview withPauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson> on his Sky News 
Australia program, The Bolt Report.

“I just spent some of my day moving my kids out of my home after yet another 
death threat from an Islamist supporter of Islamic State,” a visibly upset Bolt 
told Hanson.

The elites v Pauline Hanson. We don't have to choose one or the other – we can 
reject both | Jeff Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/08/the-elites-v-pauline-hanson-we-dont-have-to-choose-one-or-the-other-we-can-reject-both>
“Two of my colleagues have had to move house completely because of these guys.”

A spokeswoman for News Corp declined to comment on whether the “colleagues” 
were journalists with the newspaper company or Sky News presenters.

The threat came the day after Bolt wrote a column for the Herald Sun 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/opinion/mufti-proves-we-are-right-to-be-alarmed/news-story/8df0604278fb862904119d407c964d13>
 condemning a letter written by the Grand Mufti of Australia following theprime 
minister’s Iftar dinner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/16/malcolm-turnbull-uses-iftar-dinner-to-warn-against-division-after-orlando-massacre>
for Muslim leaders.

Bolt said the letter proved Hanson was right to “feel threatened by Islam in 
this country”.

Hanson told Bolt she was calling for a royal commission into Islam in 
Australia.

“Ibrahim Abu Mohammad has written an astonishing letter warning that to 
criticise even a gay-hating imam is to risk inciting terrorist attacks against 
us,” Bolt wrote.

“His inflammatory letter perfectly demonstrates why Prime Minister Malcolm 
Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> was a 
fool to hold an Iftar dinner for the Mufti and other troubling Muslim leaders 
during the election campaign.

“Again and again, whether the Mufti means this or not, the clear inference is 
that if we criticise Islam or his clerics, we risk death,” Bolt said.

Andrew Bolt demands Turnbull resign as conservatives turn on each other after 
election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/02/andrew-bolt-demands-turnbull-resign-as-conservatives-turn-on-each-other-after-election>
“What free society can tolerate such an implied threat or danger? How can the 
Mufti not see that the true responsibility for Islamist terrorism lies not with 
the victims but with the perpetrators – and with the faith which seems to 
­licence them to mass murder?”


In the interview with Hanson, Bolt angrily accused race commissioner Tim 
Soutphommasane of double standards forwarning that Hanson’s anti-Muslim and 
Asian comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/05/pauline-hanson-could-unleash-hatred-and-violence-says-tim-soutphommasane>
 could unleash hatred, division and violence.

“And Tim Sou … what’s his name … Soutphommasane, if he’s really worried about 
hate preachers and violence in the streets, why doesn’t he say something about 
these hate preachers and the violence they inspire?

 “I’m sorry to lose my temper it’s been a very stressful day.”

 Sky News has been approached for comment.
 