
In my sixth form at school we had weekly discussions about topics that were 
meant to sharpen our minds for life, and help to get us into a university: “The 
bomb: a justifiable evil?”; “Explain RG Collingwood’s philosophy of history” 
(our teacher likedCollingwood’s <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R._G._Collingwood>
 work); “The pursuit of happiness”. This last provoked the only conversation I 
can remember joining with any real confidence. My mother had recently suffered 
a serious accident and was dangerously ill in hospital; I had decided that life 
was an affair of random violence, and there wasn’t much point in chasing 
happiness. Besides, I’d started to write poems, and had already voted myself 
everlasting membership of what I later heard Hugo Williams call“the sadness 
club” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/authorinterviews/10768611/Hugo-Williams-I-need-poems-more-than-they-need-me.html>
. It seemed the only organisation in the world worth joining.


Not that I was continuously miserable, but I was already convinced that 
happiness is much more likely to be something we find in the margins of 
whatever else we might be pursuing (love, adventure, money or reputation). It 
was – it is – an incidental thing, rather than a safe and secure destination.

And yet we still want it (so in that sense we pursue it), because we even more 
definitely don’t want its opposite: unhappiness. Which means that all of us 
stay more or less alert to the possibility of finding it. Yet as we look around 
for it (or rather, as we retune our watchfulness), we immediately have to admit 
that part of the difficulty we face in tracking it down is knowing how elusive 
any definition of happiness must prove. Because the existence of happiness 
depends, in some important respect, on our being beside ourselves, on our 
setting aside our self-consciousness, perhaps even our rational and 
intellectual engagement with life, and surrendering instead to some other 
governing principle: our instincts, perhaps, or our senses. The sort of 
rapture, at any rate, that Seamus Heaney catches at the end of his poem
Postscript <http://www.smith.edu/poetrycenter/poets/postscript.html>, where he 
feels

neither here nor there,

A hurry through which known and strange things pass

 As big soft buffetings come at the car sideways

And catch the heart off guard and blow it open.”

Then there are other problems, still right near the beginning of things. The 
necessary self-surrender means that our evocations of happiness are likely to 
be retrospective (because in the moment of enjoyment, we’re not equipped to 
comment), which in turns means we have to ask: does this mean that they’re all, 
in a sense, unreliable? Maybe, to the extent that they all grant structure and 
expression to something that contains elements that are not compatible with 
shaping and saying. This is partly what Philip Larkin meant to suggest, when he 
quoted the French novelist Henry de Montherlant to the effect that“happiness 
writes white” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2008/jan/15/doesmelancholyliteraturedee>
. He meant that happiness cannot be captured and articulated: the blissfulness 
of bliss depends on it being wordless.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fandrew-motion-dont-hurry-be-happy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414598875900%2F4148899f-5c1f-42a7-916e-aa4585840419-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Motion%3A%20don't%20hurry%2C%20be%20happy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fandrew-motion-dont-hurry-be-happy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Motion%3A%20don%27t%20hurry%2C%20be%20happy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fandrew-motion-dont-hurry-be-happy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F29%2F1414598875900%2F4148899f-5c1f-42a7-916e-aa4585840419-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Happiness writes white,’ said French novelist Henry de Montherlant. 
Photograph: Alamy 
But de Montherlant’s excellent phrase can be read in other ways as well. One 
of them is not so much to do with notions of what can and cannot be said, as 
with what can and cannot be seen. White writing is only invisible on a white 
background; against any colour darker than itself it’s plain for all to read. 
Bearing this in mind, we could argue that even the most melancholy and 
despairing pieces of writing have whiteness in them: between the lines, for 
instance; between the individual letters; across about half of the page, in 
fact, and maybe creating a kind of counterweight to whatever is being said in 
the words themselves.

To put all this another way, happiness might be present in a piece of writing 
even when it isn’t spelled out or made manifest by some other means. We might 
say, for instance, that the very fact of a poem’s existence (or a novel’s, or 
whatever) represents a form of happiness because it is a little miracle of 
something-from-nothing, an affirmation of humanity. Think of Thomas Hardy’s 
second wife Florence meeting a visitor at the door ofMax Gate 
<http://www.maxgate.co.uk/> and telling him that he couldn’t disturb her 
husband just yet, because Tom was in his study writing one of his miserable 
little poems and grinning all over his face. Hardy may have been smiling 
because he enjoyed impaling his characters on the thorns of life. But even if 
he was, it doesn’t rule out the possibility that like everyone else who has 
ever written anything, he felt that he was striking a blow against nothingness.

To put it another way again, true happiness (as opposed to mere escapism) can 
only exist within hailing distance of its opposite. Furthermore, its quality is 
likely to improve when the balance between opposite states of mind is most 
finely poised, when the fundamental paradoxes of existence are most tightly 
bound to one another. In writing, this would mean clinging tight to Samuel 
Beckett’s words fromWorstward Ho <http://www.samuel-beckett.net/w_ho.htm>: 

Ever tried. Ever failed. No matter. Try again. Fail again. Fail better.” 

In philosophical terms, it would mean remembering John Keats’s lines in the 
Ode to Melancholy <http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/173743>: 

Ay, in the very temple of Delight

 Veil’d Melancholy has her sovran shrine,

Though seen of none save him whose strenuous tongue

Can burst Joy’s grape against his palate fine” 

The point being that even the most self-confident creator knows (or should 
know) that their best efforts are going to fall short of the ideal they 
imagine, in just the same way that everyone who has ever enjoyed themselves 
knows their pleasure has a multitude of strings attached, and might even have 
to admit the possibility of distaste.

Which quite properly implies: as in art, so in life. Like most people, I know 
that my own best chance of happiness is likely to occur in the particular areas 
of activity I already know that I enjoy most. (That sounds obvious, but it can 
take a while to find out what these areas might be.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fandrew-motion-dont-hurry-be-happy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414673665103%2Fec1cee08-d45e-4072-b6ff-20954ba7ae95-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Motion%3A%20don't%20hurry%2C%20be%20happy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fandrew-motion-dont-hurry-be-happy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Motion%3A%20don%27t%20hurry%2C%20be%20happy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fandrew-motion-dont-hurry-be-happy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F30%2F1414673665103%2Fec1cee08-d45e-4072-b6ff-20954ba7ae95-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A landscape can delight us with its beauty while simultaneously troubling us 
with its fragility 
But even here, the critical and defining element is paradox. I can be happy 
when I’m at work teaching, for instance, though I also sometimes find it 
frustrating. I can be happy walking through a landscape, or even simply looking 
at a landscape, though these days I am also and simultaneously very bothered by 
its fragility. I can be happy when I’m reading, or looking at pictures, or 
listening to music, yet often the thoughts and sensations that occur to me 
while I do these things are to do with the sadness of the creatures. I can be 
happy sharing the happiness of others, but I know it won’t last for long.

I’m not saying anything here about my happiness at home – only because home is 
private. But happiness is there all right, believe me, more than anywhere else 
and less acquainted with its opposite.

So does all this mean that nothing much has changed in my apprehension of 
happiness since that sixth-form classroom? On the face of it, yes: I still 
think I’d be on a hiding to nothing if I set off in pursuit of happiness as an 
end in itself, and I even more deeply feel that such happiness as I do 
experience is brought into being by my familiarity with its opposite. 
Especially now that I’m the age I am, and can see “the only end of age 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/178052>” more clearly than ever. It means 
that the beauty of every spring, the beauty of everything, is fanned into 
happiness by a sharper and sharper sense that I will see it only a few times 
more.

And yet at the same time, or rather, over the same time as these convictions 
have hardened in me, I have also learned something else that seems to pull in a 
slightly different direction. Which is that while I accept unhappiness as an 
inevitable part of the human condition, and appreciate its role in stimulating 
happiness itself, I also found myself having to fight harder and harder to hold 
the balance between the two: to keep the paradox a paradox, to maintain the 
poise. Because life is always trying to tip it in the direction of unhappiness, 
and too much of that … well, I don’t need to finish the sentence. Better to 
remember what Alexander Pushkin said about these things 
<http://www.poetryloverspage.com/poets/pushkin/pushkin_ind.html]>, and to 
ponder what more he implied: “They say that misfortune is a good school. Yes, 
true. But happiness is the best university.”

Andrew Motion’s second Treasure Island sequel, The New World 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/new-world.html>, is published by Jonathan Cape
 