
Regrettable answer phone messages are usually the province of the drunk or the 
overly-emotional or both. But rarely do they form a substantial part of a 
national broadcast. Unless you areFonejacker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/audio/2008/oct/23/comedy>, in which 
case it's aBafta-winning career choice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/apr/21/television.itv>. Depressingly.

On Saturday October 18, in a segment pre-recorded for his regular Radio 2 show,
Russell Brand <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2006/jun/18/broadcasting.arts>
, and his studio guestJonathan Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/dec/18/comment.broadcasting> were 
supposed to conduct a phone interview with the actorAndrew Sachs 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=QJBKhdfmAHo>.

When Sachs failed to answer his phone at the agreed time, a high-spirited Ross 
suggested that they might leave him a message. And there beganseveral minutes 
of excruciating radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/oct/27/russell-brand-daily-mail-fawlty-towers>
 – remember this was pre-recorded – in which the two highly-paid entertainment 
professionals sniggered cretinously about Brand having been intimate with 
Sachs' granddaughter. (He later said that he hadn't.) And that Sachs might hang 
himself after listening to their message.

It's not the emotional hurt or the possible legal implications I'm interested 
in. That's a matter for Sachs and his family. But to use this drivel on air, to 
actually broadcast such a mind-numbingly poor item during the show was a crime 
against listeners, not to mention comedy.

As listeners, most of us would surely be insulted that this was passed as 
adequate material for a national radio station. Ross and Brand clearly thought 
they wereDerek and Clive <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Derek_and_Clive> when 
they were actually verging onBeavis and Butthead 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beavis_and_Butthead>.

In truth, most of the shockingly unfunny statements were made by a hepped-up 
Ross who just didn't seem to want the "fun" to end. You could practically hear 
him bouncing up and down on his seat as he offered up a mock apology; "I don't 
know what came over me. And I'm sure you've heard THAT before, Russell!" Let me 
write this down. Amazing.

Russell Brand has since made a similarly limited apology 
<http://ukpress.google.com/article/ALeqM5iLkuZinW_TW1gixwIARIA6t4CPHw>, still 
insisting that the phonecall was "funny". Oh dear. However subjective humour 
may be, two prats bereft of wit and brimming with cruel bravado would fail to 
raise a smile with most people when they make a nationally admired personality 
their target. I dare say there were a few teenage boys who looked up briefly 
from their copy of Nuts. But otherwise, tumbleweed from here to the horizon.

"It was his idea. I just wanted to impress Jonathan Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jonathan-ross>," Brand whined as several 
thousand listeners tried to puzzle out how two developmentally challenged 
teenagers had hacked into Radio 2's frequency. "In many ways, I was a loveable 
cutie, while you were a brute," sneered Brand to Ross as their wearisome 
two-hander continued.

After his entirely misjudged phonecall to a rape crisis line during a gig and 
a stunt, similar to the Sachs one, in which he announced he'd "had a go" on Rod 
Stewart's daughter, I'd say that "cheeky" persona is starting to wear thin. 
Other comedians of greater wit may have gotten away with similar antics, but 
that's because they're funnier than he is.

As for Ross, he was genuinely funny once and is undoubtedly far more 
intelligent than his latest partner in crime. So what happened here, I'm 
afraid, is anyone's guess.
 