
Andrew Sachs <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-sachs>, who has died 
aged 86, was never more effective than when playing a bewildered victim 
unfailingly eager to please his sometimes equally comic tormentors. The most 
popular and inspired example came in the role of Manuel, the waiter from 
Barcelona who spent most of his waking hours being abused by Basil Fawlty (John 
Cleese) in the BBC’s Fawlty Towers (1975-79). Manuel – short, shoulders sloping 
in submission – was a star of the television show, which attracted more than 15 
million viewers and became a comedy classic.


Sachs was grateful to Manuel for making him famous, but often counted the 
cost. He tried to persuade Cleese, who co-wrote the series, to stop short of 
actual violence in rehearsals, but there was still plenty of hitting – often 
involving a spoon on the head.

One memorable episode had Manuel setting fire to himself and later, as a 
reprise, emerging from the hotel kitchen with smoke billowing behind him. The 
“fire” was heat-free, but some of the chemicals used to produce the flameless 
smoke caused acid burns to his arms. Nonetheless, Sachs still felt that Manuel 
was the best thing that ever happened to him.

Andreas Sachs was born in Berlin at the time when the Nazis were beginning to 
persecute Jews. His father, Hans, was a Jewish insurance broker who had been 
awarded the Iron Cross in the first world war. His mother, Katharina (nee 
Schrott-Fiecht), a Catholic, decided to remain in Berlin with her children 
after their father fled to Britain in 1938. She thought that as her son was 
only half-Jewish he would be safe – a supposition that became increasingly 
shaky.

The family eventually joined Hans, who died in 1944. Andrew left William Ellis 
school, north-west London, two years later, then went to a local acting school 
for just two terms, before making his first professional appearance in 1947 in 
a seaside repertory production of Ronald Millar’s Frieda at the De La Warr 
Pavilion, Bexhill-on-Sea, East Sussex.

The play concerned the German bride of a British soldier who finds a mixed 
reception in the postwar UK. Sachs put the essence of his art down to 
detachment, an ability to sit on emotional and intellectual fences that had 
been produced by his birth in Germany and his residence in Britain.

He admitted that he had at first wanted to act in order to be a “star” and 
only later had discovered that he was motivated to do the work for its own 
sake. The outcome was a wide range of stage parts, from romps of the No Sex 
Please: We’re British, Not Now Darling, Dry Rot and Let Sleeping Wives Lie 
genre to John Mortimer’s touching A Voyage Round My Father, Shakespeare’s 
Twelfth Night and, for BBC TV, The Tempest, as Trinculo in a 1980 production 
led by Michael Hordern as Prospero.

After undertaking national service in the Royal Armoured Corps (1949-51), for 
the next couple of years Sachs was in repertory in Worthing and Liverpool. His 
first West End appearance was at the Whitehall theatre as Grobchick in John 
Chapman’s Simple Spymen, which ran for more than 1,200 performances between 
1958 and 1961. Recruited byBrian Rix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/21/lord-rix-obituary>, he gained 
his introduction to Whitehall farces, which supported him for 20 years until 
his television work brought him wider fame.


Following Fawlty Towers, he played a vague and bespectacled vicar in the ITV 
series Lovely Couple (1979). His films included Hitler: The Last Ten Days 
(1973), Revenge of the Pink Panther (1978) and Consuming Passions (1988).

Sachs was also a writer, contributing sketches to the Yorkshire TV series Took 
and Co (1977), with Barry Took, but never made a mark in that activity. He 
wrote radio plays, including one without words, Revenge (1978), in which an 
escaped prisoner communicates with the audience only by his heavy breathing, 
running footsteps and other special effects.

His stage play The Stamp Collectors was produced in Worthing in 1977. Another, 
Made in Heaven, staged at Chichester two years previously, was said by Michael 
Billington of the Guardian to be the product of random jokiness rather than a 
sustained comic vision.

Fortunately his acting was better received. His performances in Fawlty Towers 
gained him the Variety Club of Great Britain award for most promising artist of 
the year in 1977, although he was no youth. He became a familiar face on 
television through the 80s and 90s, taking the title role, Alfred Polly, in the 
BBC version of HG Wells’s comic tale The History of Mr Polly (1980), and in 
Every Silver Lining (1993), a sitcom in which he played opposite Frances de la 
Tour.

Detective stories on BBC Radio 4 provided a rich seam. Sachs took the role of 
GK Chesterton’s Father Brown (1984-86), and played Dr Watson to Clive 
Merrison’s Sherlock Holmes (2002-10). Radio was a favourite medium of his, and 
brought the opportunity to play another great scene-stealing subordinate, PG 
Wodehouse’s Jeeves, valet to the upper-class buffoon Bertie Wooster, played by 
Marcus Brigstocke, in The Code of the Woosters (2006).

He also supplied the voices for several children’s animations, such as 
William’s Wish Wellingtons (1994-96), and Asterix and the Big Fight (1989). A 
popular narrator with a distinctive voice, Sachs can be heard on all five 
series of BBC’s Bafta award-winning TV show about business life, 
Troubleshooter, as well as two audiobooks of Thomas the Tank Engine and 
Friends. In 2000 he reached a new comedy audience by narrating That Peter Kay 
Thing, a spoof documentary series on Channel 4 created by the Bolton comedian. 
He also appeared in Coronation Street (2009), playing Norris Cole’s brother, 
Ramsay, in 27 episodes.

All his roles seemed to be marked by good nature, and this made him a 
much-liked figure. He retained it even under provocation, when, in 2008, rowdy 
telephone answering machine messages were left for him by Russell Brand and 
Jonathan Ross during Brand’s BBC Radio 2 show. At one point Ross shouted out 
that Brand had “fucked your granddaughter”. The result was recorded and then 
passed by BBC executives for broadcasting. Sachs was not amused and the public 
sympathised.

So seriously was the Ross-Brand incident regarded by the BBC top brass that 
Ross was taken off air for three months, effectively fining him £1.5m from his 
£6m yearly contract. In the subsequent media inquest, the attitude of Sachs 
himself was that he really did not know what the telephoning had been about; 
that he had no personal animosity towards whoever had phoned; and that he had 
scarcely noticed the whole business since his wife was in hospital at the time. 
As for suggestions that some newspapers were using him to boost their 
circulations, he said: “Oh yes, but that’s their job.” He also said: “My 
profile’s up – great! They did me good. Thank you very much.”

At the time he had written 40,000 words of his autobiography but had only got 
as far as the age of 14. He said he doubted whether Brand or Ross would play a 
prominent part in the book. When it appeared in 2014, he drew on a memorable 
Fawlty Towers line for the title, I Know Nothing!

His final film role came in Quartet, Ronald Harwood’s story set in a home for 
retired musicians, directed by Dustin Hoffman and released in 2012, the year 
that Sachs was diagnosed with vascular dementia. His final TV role was in 2015, 
as Cyril Bishop in EastEnders.

In 1960 Sachs married the actor Melody Lang. She survives him, along with 
their daughter, Kate, and sons, Bill and John.

• Andrew (Andreas Siegfried) Sachs, actor and writer, born 7 April 1930; died 
23 November 2016


• Dennis Barker died last year
 