
Sir Andrew Motion and more than a dozen authors and judges honoured by the 
prestigiousWellcome book prize <http://wellcomebookprize.org/home> have called 
on the huge medical charity to sell off its investments in fossil fuel 
companies.

The Wellcome Trust, whose £19bn endowment makes it the second biggest health 
charity in the world, says “climate change is one of the greatest contemporary 
challenges to global health”. It is among the targets ofa fast-growing climate 
change movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/08/fossil-fuel-divestment-a-brief-history>
 calling for divestment from fossil fuels.

Motion, who chaired the 2014 judging panel and was the UK’s poet laureate 
until 2009, told the Guardian: “The Wellcome Trust does magnificent work in all 
sorts of ways, but its investment in fossil fuels contradicts many of its own 
policies. By divesting from fossil fuels it would show leadership in keeping 
with its reputation and ideals.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430131584387%2F81a932d2-7851-4804-a095-06941dde88cc-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Motion%20and%20Wellcome%20book%20prize%20authors%20call%20on%20charity%20to%20divest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Motion%20and%20Wellcome%20book%20prize%20authors%20call%20on%20charity%20to%20divest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430131584387%2F81a932d2-7851-4804-a095-06941dde88cc-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Baroness Helena Kennedy 
The 2015 prize, worth £30,000, is for fiction or non-fiction books with a 
medical or health theme and will be awarded at a ceremony in London on 
Wednesday. The leading lawyer, Lady Helena Kennedy, one of this year’s judges, 
recently co-chaired theInternational Bar Association’s Climate Change and Human 
Rights task force <http://www.ibanet.org/PresidentialTaskForceCCJHR2014.aspx>. 
“The full nature of the threat became very clear to me,” she said. “I admire 
the work of Wellcome enormously and know how much good they do so it seems to 
me that their lead on divestment would send an incredibly powerful message to 
the world.”

Another of this year’s judges, author Mark Haddon, also called on Wellcome to 
divest.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430131766202%2F0bcaee47-9d69-4786-80dd-2513583dee70-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Motion%20and%20Wellcome%20book%20prize%20authors%20call%20on%20charity%20to%20divest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Motion%20and%20Wellcome%20book%20prize%20authors%20call%20on%20charity%20to%20divest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430131766202%2F0bcaee47-9d69-4786-80dd-2513583dee70-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Marion Coutts 
Of those on the 2015 shortlist, writer and artist Marion Coutts supported a 
Guardian campaign calling on the trust to divest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/mar/16/keep-it-in-the-ground-guardian-climate-change-campaign>
 from fossil fuels, as did two other shortlisted authors who preferred to 
remain anonymous. The prize began in 2009 and of the authors and judges 
contacted by the Guardian, just one said Wellcome was probably right to refuse 
to divest.

Adam Rutherford, a geneticist, writer and broadcaster shortlisted in 2014, 
said: “I fear that divestment looks like gesture politics, and that an open 
policy of change from within a shareholding capacity might be more fruitful and 
influential.”


The Wellcome Trust chair, Jeremy Farrar, has said that he believes 
confidential behind-the-scenesengagement with fossil fuel companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/25/wellcome-trust-fossil-fuel-divestment-not-way-reduce-carbon-emissions>
 is a better approach than divestment.

A series of analyses have shown that existing fossil fuel reserves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/07/much-worlds-fossil-fuel-reserve-must-stay-buried-prevent-climate-change-study-says>
 areseveral times greater than can be burned 
<http://www.carbontracker.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/Unburnable-Carbon-Full-rev2-1.pdf>
 if the world’s governments are to fulfil their pledge to keep global warming 
below the danger limit of 2C. But coal, oil and gas companies continue to spend 
billions on finding new reserves. Afast-growing divestment movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/08/campaign-against-fossil-fuel-growing>
,supported by the UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/15/climate-change-un-backs-divestment-campaign-paris-summit-fossil-fuels>
 andNobel prize winners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/08/nobel-laureates-echo-calls-for-charities-to-divest-from-fossil-fuels>
, argues that fossil fuel investments are athreat to both the climate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/07/much-worlds-fossil-fuel-reserve-must-stay-buried-prevent-climate-change-study-says>
 and health and also to investors, as action tocombat climate change could 
render the fuel reserves worthless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/03/bank-of-england-warns-of-financial-risk-from-fossil-fuel-investments>
.

Petition sign up 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2015/03/climate-embeds/campaign-form/update/promos/campaign-embed-form.html>
The Guardian campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/mar/16/keep-it-in-the-ground-guardian-climate-change-campaign>
 calls on Wellcome and the world’s biggest health charity, the Bill and Melinda 
Gates Foundation, to join over 180 institutions that have already divested from 
fossil fuels. The Guardian Media Group announced earlier in April that it will
divest its £800m fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/01/guardian-media-group-to-divest-its-800m-fund-from-fossil-fuels>
, the largest to date to sell off all fossil fuels.

A Wellcome Trust spokesperson said: “Reducing carbon emissions is of crucial 
importance, but there are differing views as how this is best achieved. The 
network of people with whom the Wellcome Trust enjoys relationships is broad 
and it would be surprising if this community did not contain a diversity of 
opinion about fossil fuel investments. We believe engagement rather than 
divestment gives us the best opportunity for change. This is an issue on which 
reasonable people who share environmental goals will reach different 
conclusions, and we are entirely comfortable with alternative views to our own.”

The Wellcome Trust is the world’s second largest non-governmental funder of 
medical research, last year dispensing £727m in grants. It was a co-founder of 
the Human Genome Project; it has funded pioneering work on cancer and malaria; 
and it has been at the forefront of the fight against Ebola.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430131920670%2F3352e5d1-7ecb-4022-8cfa-881d1986519c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Motion%20and%20Wellcome%20book%20prize%20authors%20call%20on%20charity%20to%20divest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Motion%20and%20Wellcome%20book%20prize%20authors%20call%20on%20charity%20to%20divest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430131920670%2F3352e5d1-7ecb-4022-8cfa-881d1986519c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Alice LaPlante Photograph: Anne Knudsen/PR 
The 2011 winner of the Wellcome book prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/wellcome-book-prize>, Alice LaPlante, backed 
the call for the Wellcome Trust to divest, as did 2014 judge Lisa Appignanesi. 
Neuroscientist and former Wall Street banker, John Coates, shortlisted in 2012, 
said there were good financial reasons to divest, as well as ethical ones.

“It’s important for medical research that the Wellcome Trust remain flush,” 
Coates said. “The sagest piece of financial advice I was given during my 13 
years running a trading desk on Wall St [was] don’t bet against engineers. And 
what engineers are increasingly focusing on is increasing the efficiency of 
alternative energy, something they are achieving at a stunning rate. So now is 
a good time to swap into it and out of carbon. Solar, wind, hydro, and tidal 
companies are the companies of the future. The Wellcome Trust should divest its 
carbon companies before they go the way of Kodak.”

Professor Havi Hannah Carel, a philosopher of medicine at Bristol University 
and recipient of a £1.5m Wellcome Trust grant in 2014 for theLife of Breath 
<http://www.lifeofbreath.org/> project, was shortlisted for the book prize in 
2009 and has given her support to the divestment campaign.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F23%2Fwhat-fossil-fuel-divestment-why-matter-climate-change-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F23%2F1427107287375%2Fsmoke-stack-divestment-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20is%20fossil%20fuel%20divestment%20and%20why%20does%20it%20matter%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F23%2Fwhat-fossil-fuel-divestment-why-matter-climate-change-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20is%20fossil%20fuel%20divestment%20and%20why%20does%20it%20matter%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmar%2F23%2Fwhat-fossil-fuel-divestment-why-matter-climate-change-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F23%2F1427107287375%2Fsmoke-stack-divestment-017.jpg>
 What is fossil fuel divestment and why does it matter? 
One of the judges who shortlisted Carel’s book, the doctor and philosopher 
Professor Raymond Tallis, said: “The Wellcome Trust has a well-deserved 
reputation for initiatives that make the world a safer and better place to live 
in. However, we now face a challenge greater than any has hitherto confronted 
us: man-made climate change, which is driven in a large part by the burning of 
fossil fuels. If the Wellcome is to remain true to its mission, it should 
divest itself of funds in businesses that seem to be committed to continuing, 
and possibly increasing, fossil fuel consumption.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430132252280%2F903dd44f-a636-4366-838a-f031b13f7a6c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andrew%20Motion%20and%20Wellcome%20book%20prize%20authors%20call%20on%20charity%20to%20divest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andrew%20Motion%20and%20Wellcome%20book%20prize%20authors%20call%20on%20charity%20to%20divest&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandrew-motion-and-wellcome-book-prize-winners-call-on-charity-to-divest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F27%2F1430132252280%2F903dd44f-a636-4366-838a-f031b13f7a6c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Ruth Padel Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the Guardian 
Further calls for Wellcome to divest have come from 2010 shortlisted author 
Tim Parks, novelist and 2011 judge Tim Lott, poet and 2012 judge Ruth Padel and 
2012 shortlisted writer Peter James. “None of us, individually, can change the 
world, but all of us can play a part, by remembering that no man ever made a 
greater mistake than the man who did nothing because he could only do a 
little,” said James.

Broadcaster and 2009 judge, Quentin Cooper, said: “I am a huge admirer of what 
the Wellcome Trust has done and continues to do across science, medicine and 
beyond. However by investing in fossil fuels they are working against some of 
their own goals, so I would urge them to reconsider the wisdom of their current 
policy and make a Wellcome change.”
 