
If you can keep your head when all about you are losing theirs, then you 
probably haven’t grasped the seriousness of the situation. In the wake of 
England’s 405-run steamrollering by Australia at Lord’s one thing is certain:
Trevor Bayliss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/trevor-bayliss> is calm.

We can be pretty sure of this as, according to pretty much everyone who knows 
him as a coach, Bayliss is always calm.This is not to say England’s head coach 
lacks passion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/20/trevor-bayliss-england-australia-ashes-changes-third-test>
. In among the talk of Zen-like silences there have been references to 
roastings handed out, riot acts read, and this may be no bad thing right now. 
Occasionally, when you’re being chased by a bear for example, or menaced by a 
vengeful Australia pace attack, a swift change of tack is the correct response.

The problem for England is that what was so attractive in Bayliss – a fresh 
start, a clean slate – is also a handicap when change is in the air. Bayliss 
admitted as much after Lord’s, pointing out he has little knowledge of the 
talent available in county cricket, in which his experience is limited to a 
brief spell at Kent 12 years ago.

There are two problems here, both of which will ease with time. First, one of 
Bayliss’s key skills is a kind of high-end coaching-by-reassurance, the ability 
to remind elite players in poor form what it was that got them there in the 
first place. As a skill this is diminished a little when you’ve only ever seen 
Adam Lyth nicking behind and Gary Ballance batting so deep in his crease the 
next logical step is to take guard behind his own stumps.

More pertinent, with three members of England’s top six struggling, is the 
fact Bayliss has less first-hand knowledge of possible replacements than the 
average casual spectator. Change may or may not come before Edgbaston but the 
process is hardly helped when England have a coach who could give you a list of 
the five most promising young Aussie top order batsmen, but who right now 
barely knows his Lees from his Leaning.

It must be said Bayliss is completely blameless in this respect. He never 
claimed to know much about English cricket. He didn’t pitch for the job.

With this in mind, perhaps he could even consider giving Peter Moores a call. 
Bayliss’s predecessor may have failed in other areas, but he excelled at 
picking players out of county cricket. Moores and Duncan Fletcher have been the 
best at this by some distance. In less than two years Moores brought Graeme 
Swann back, forged the James Anderson-Stuart Broad alliance, and picked out 
Matt Prior and Chris Tremlett.

In his time Fletcher oversaw the debuts of a complete playing eleven of some 
of England’s finest Test players, including the current top Test run scorer, 
top Test wicket taker and England’s two most successful Test captains. 
Bolstered by his time in charge of Glamorgan he knew enough about Marcus 
Trescothick – a medium pace-bowing all-rounder two years before – to back him 
as the aggressive all-surface Test opener England still haven’t ever really 
replaced.

No doubt in time he will get round to taking a whistle-stop survey of domestic 
cricket and to forging a set of useful opinions on the available talent. But 
right now it is perhaps time to look at this another way. If anyone is 
qualified to make a call on the best option for change it isAndrew Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss>.

The ECB management tier can look a little mob-handed at times, the exact lines 
of responsibility blurred. But Strauss is England’s man here. His job 
description demanded a recent international player, someone who understands the 
specific demands of elite cricket. Strauss is a selector. But unlike, say, 
James Whitaker, who rises or falls by his judgments on players, Strauss is 
freer to take a chance, to make a big ballsy call. Whatever his thoughts now, 
stick or twist, this would be the perfect moment to step in and take the lead.

Exactly what England will do from here is another matter. In the central 
contracts era there has been an unchecked retreat from the feckless 
chop-and-change of the 1990s. The tendency has been to opt for extreme 
stability instead, a new orthodoxy that states backing your man is a sign of 
strength and hair-trigger change leads only to confusion.

And yet at times like these perhaps there is something to be said for 
selecting the way football teams select, where points of weaknesses are 
ruthlessly culled, where an opponent’s key strength dictates your own instant 
decision on tactics and personnel.

There is no doubt Australia will be perfectly happy for England to show a 
steady hand, to keep selecting three left-handers at the top, and to keep 
thrusting Ballance and Lyth at them in the vague hope of some sudden shift in 
the balance of power with a bowling attack that right now has their number.

Alternatively, England can accept that few batsmen have ever successfully 
clawed their way back into a series from a standing start against rampant fast 
bowling. The most likely option for change involves dropping Ballance and 
shuffling the rest up one place, with Jonny Bairstow the obvious new man at 
No5, Alex Hales the outsider. It’s a sensible choice. Bairstow would surely 
score more runs at five than Ballance has at three.

The more interesting, more unlikely option would be a new opener, which would 
involve a hunch call on somebody like Nick Compton or Alex Lees.

In these circumstances the usual process of selection by committee is often 
not the best course. What is required is a gamble, a gut feeling by the man 
closest to the team. It is unlikely England will go down this road just yet. If 
there is a frustration here it is simply that they do not have a head coach 
capable of making the call in any case.
 