
For three days at the end of January, the Renaissance hotel in Washington DC 
fills up with television executives from around the world.The Realscreen Summit 
<http://summit.realscreen.com/> is where the makers of reality TV gather to 
discuss ideas, negotiate deals and discover the next Apprentice or I'm A 
Celebrity. Among the estimated 2,200 people who had paid up to $1,600 (£1,050) 
this year to try to snag face time with an exec from Freemantle, TLC, Discovery 
or National Geographic was an Englishman in his mid-50s wearing jeans, a crisp, 
white shirt and loafers, and carrying a MacBook. On his badge were the words 
"Autism Team".

This man's pitch was a reality TV series about autism, and he had a short 
trailer <http://www.youtube.com/watch?%20feature=player_embedded&v=5lTGrAkW8hU> 
on his laptop: an autistic child screams; another bites his mother's hand; 
another repeatedly and violently slams a book against his head. Then a narrator 
tells us that "every day across the world, medical symptoms of hundreds of 
thousands of people with autism are being ignored". Cue piano music and the 
titles, The Autism Team: Changing Lives.

The premise is that the autism symptoms suffered by the children in the promo 
(Jon, 14, who is "wasting away"; six-year-old twins "still not potty trained"; 
and 15-year-old Jack, who is "non-verbal and very self-injurious") have left 
their parents feeling helpless and alone — until, that is, theAutism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/autism> Team steps in to save the day.

One member of that team is Arthur Krigsman 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_Krigsman>, a paediatric gastroenterologist 
who, we are told while we view images of Jon unconscious in a hospital bed, 
breathing apparatus attached to his mouth, is investigating the little boy's 
intestinal symptoms. "He has the autism-associatedenterocolitis 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enterocolitis>," Krigsman says. "That's exactly 
what he's got." He adds: "It's all treatable." Jon's mother says Krigsman's 
diagnosis is the answer to everything. Jon's father tells us the subsequent 
change in his son has been "absolutely dramatic". Finally, as the short teaser 
wraps, the narrator says that "groundbreaking work by the Autism Team means 
that children can be treated effectively. So join us and follow their journey."

The man in the white shirt and jeans punting the prospective TV series that 
day wasAndrew Wakefield <http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/andrew-wakefield>, 
coauthor ofa now notorious 1998 study, published in the Lancet 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(97)11096-0/abstract>
, that suggested a possible link between autism, gastrointestinal disease (it 
was Wakefield who coined the term "autistic enterocolitis" 
<http://www.pediatricsdigest.mobi/content/125/Supplement_1/S1.full>, which 
Krigsman diagnoses in the Autism Team trailer), and the measles, mumps and 
rubella (MMR) vaccine. Afterwards, Wakefield called for the suspension of the 
triple jab, which caused widespread panic and is said by his critics to have
resulted in a drop in the number of parents choosing to vaccinate their children
 <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3004684/#i1998-1929-3-1-46-b16>. 
Cases of measles rose from 56 in 1998 to nearly 1,400 in 2008. In 2006, a 
13-year-old boy became the first person in more than a decade to die of the 
disease in Britain.

An investigation by journalist Brian Deer <http://briandeer.com/> found that 
Wakefield had been paid £435,000 to advise lawyers for parents who believed 
their children had been harmed by MMR 
<http://briandeer.com/solved/bmj-wakefield-3-2.htm> and that he'd given 
children at his son's birthday party cash in return for blood samples for his 
research.A subsequent two-and-a-half-year General Medical Council (GMC) hearing 
concluded in January 2010 that Wakefield was guilty of serious professional 
misconduct, and that he had acted "dishonestly and irresponsibly" in his 
research 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2010/jan/28/andrew-wakefield-mmr-vaccine>. 
He had, the panel concluded, subjected 11 children to unwarranted invasive 
tests such as lumbar punctures and colonoscopies without necessary ethical 
approval. The Guardian reported at the time that the GMC hearings also found 
that, before the paper was published, Wakefield had filed a patent as the 
inventor of a vaccine to eliminate measles and treat inflammatory bowel 
disease. In May 2010,the GMC struck him off 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2010/may/24/andrew-wakefield-struck-off-gmc> 
and the Lancet eventually retracted the 1998 paper.

In 2001, Wakefield, his wife, Carmel, and their four children packed their 
bags and moved to Texas, to a house in the hills west of Austin. There he 
founded Thoughtful House Center for Children to further his work on autism and 
served as its executive director on a salary of £164,000, before resigning in 
February 2010 following the GMC ruling. Krigsman also worked at Thoughtful 
House, as director of the gastroenterology clinic, and left soon after 
Wakefield.

Wakefield then set up the nonprofit Strategic Autism Initiative to commission 
studies into the condition, and is currently listed as a director of a company 
called Medical Interventions for Autism and another called theAutism Media 
Channel <http://www.autismmediachannel.com/>, which produced the TV trailer.

Since that notorious Lancet paper, numerous studies on MMR and autism have 
failed to find a link 
<http://leftbrainrightbrain.co.uk/2011/04/15/studies-on-the-autism-vaccine-hypothesis/>
.One of those studies <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1071313/>, 
which reviewed the medical records of 500 autistic children born in a specific 
area of London since 1979, found no difference in MMR vaccination rates between 
children with autism and those of the general population, and no evidence that 
children vaccinated with MMR at younger ages developed autism any earlier than 
children vaccinated later.

Another, published in 2008 
<http://www.plosone.org/article/info:doi%2F10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0003140>, 
found "strong evidence against association of autism with... MMR exposure". 
According to the USNational Institutes of Health <http://www.nih.gov/>, 
evidence from the UK against an MMR-autism link has been accepted by the 
American Medical Association, the American Academy of Pediatrics and the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

In his book Callous Disregard, Wakefield claims his findings of autistic 
enterocolitis have been "independently confirmed in five different countries". 
He cites five studies, two of which were authored by his friend, collaborator 
and Autism Team star Arthur Krigsman. One of those studies appeared in Autism 
Insights,a medical journal on whose board Krigsman sat in 2010 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20110930061010/http://www.la-press.com/journal.php?pa=editorial_board&journal_id=155>
. Two other studies were by Italian doctor Federico Balzola. According to the
justthevax blog <http://justthevax.blogspot.co.uk/>, the first of these was a 
case report of a single adult autistic patient with an inflamed bowel, and the 
second a "meeting abstract" that "never saw the light of day as a peer-reviewed 
study". The last one,a study by Dr Lenny Gonzalez 
<http://www.imbiomed.com.mx/1/1/articulos.php?method=showDetail&id_articulo=39160&id_seccion=1755&id_ejemplar=4032&id_revista=113>
, while not reporting finding a distinct "autistic enterocolitis", concludes 
that "autistic children have a high incidence of gastrointestinal disease".

In May 2010, just a few days after he was struck off by the GMC, I interviewed 
Wakefield in Chicago for another story. For someone so vilified in his own 
country, he was remarkably self-assured. He was there to promote his book, 
which he describes in the prologue as "a story of how the system deals with 
dissent among its doctors and scientists". Although soft-spoken and polite, he 
had harsh words for the British medical establishment, which he felt had 
suppressed his work. In 2011 he issued a statement saying he continued to 
support independent research "to determine if environmental triggers, including 
vaccines, are causing autism and other developmental problems".

Then, in January 2011, Brian Deer, writing in the British Medical Journal 
(BMJ), accused Wakefield of outright fraud, saying he had altered the medical 
histories of his patients to support his claims and that he sought to exploit 
theMMR <https://www.theguardian.com/society/mmr> scare for financial gain.

Wakefield maintains that the BMJ and Deer are pursuing a vendetta against him, 
and says these allegations are false. He sued the magazine, its editorFiona 
Godlee <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fiona_Godlee> and Deer in Texas, and 
although his case was initially struck out on technical grounds, he is 
appealing and continues to maintain that the scientific research he conducted 
was not fraudulent.

In January, Wakefield told a media outlet in Austin 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=4mmVzXnPrvc#!> that 
there has been a "relentless assault on the few – perhaps five, 10 – scientists 
in the world who are prepared to work on the possible association between 
vaccines and childhood developmental disorders like autism".

The fact that science hasn't furnished us with answers as to what exactly 
causes autism, and that we still don't have a cure (although the concept of 
finding a "cure" for autism is in itself controversial), has meant treating 
someone on the spectrum has become an area of considerable contention among 
some doctors and parents, and created a landscape ripe for people peddling all 
kinds of therapies, supplements and biomedical interventions, many of which are 
not supported by peer-reviewed scientific studies.

The UK's Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics 
<http://www.well.ox.ac.uk/home>, a research institute of the University 
of Oxford,estimates that "genetic factors may contribute about 90% to autism, 
while environmental factors contribute no more than 10%" 
<http://www.well.ox.ac.uk/autism-2>. Similarly, according to the American 
Medical Association <http://www.ama-assn.org/ama>, "autism is strongly 
genetically determined".

But some people, Wakefield included, insist that the cause of autism is 
largely environmental. "You do not have a genetic epidemic," Wakefield told 
Wisconsin's Lakeland Times 
<http://www.lakelandtimes.com/m/Articles.aspx?ArticleID=15077> last year. "The 
cause is environmental." And this view – that environmental toxins cause autism 
– directly impacts what treatments proponents of the hypothesis recommend.

The Autism Media Channel website contains videos with titles such as Not Born 
With It – a reference to the belief that autism is far from genetic, which 
leads it to advocate biomedical interventions such as nutritional supplements 
as well as gluten- andcasein <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Casein>-free diets 
(one video is entitled How To Afford A Gluten And Casein Free Diet). Other 
videos recommend that parents of autistic children cook food using 
stainless-steel or ceramic pots so metals don't "leach into the food and give 
more toxic overload to your kid".
 Dr Michael Fitzpatrick and his son James: ‘You just have to play with them 
and love them as best you can.’ Photograph: Kate Eshelby 
In his book MMR And Autism: What Parents Need To Know 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/MMR-Autism-What-Parents-Need/dp/0415321794>, Michael 
Fitzpatrick says that a 1996 review of methods of assessment and intervention 
for young children with autism conducted by the New York State department of 
health concluded that "special diets, including elimination diets, are not 
recommended as treatment for autism in young children". The report noted, 
Fitzpatrick wrote, that there were "no known advantages to special elimination 
diets for children with autism, and expressed concern that they may cause the 
child to get inadequate nutrition…"

The presenter of many of the Autism Media Channel videos is Polly Tommey, who 
is also registered with the Texas secretary of state as a co-director of the 
company, along with Wakefield. Tommey, who recently moved to Austin from the UK 
with her husband, Jonathan, and their three children, first appeared on the 
autism radar in 1999 when she and Jonathan were guests on Tonight With Trevor 
McDonald. That evening they announced that they had given their autistic son, 
Billy, an infusion of the hormone secretin, extracted from pig intestines, 
which stimulates digestive fluids in the pancreas, produces pepsin in the 
stomach and bile in the liver and, they said, resulted in "excellent progress".

In his book on autism, Fitzpatrick writes that secretin was "enthusiastically 
endorsed by some prominent figures in the world of alternative autism" but, by 
December 1999, "the secretin bubble burst" when a double-blind 
placebo-controlled trial of 60 autistic children concluded it was not an 
effective treatment. Four later trials echoed the conclusion, according to 
Fitzpatrick. Then, a 2004 review of 15 double-blind, randomised, controlled 
trials of secretin for autism showed almost none reported any significant 
effects and none concluded that secretin was effective.

In 1999, Tommey started The Autism File <http://www.autismfile.com/>, a slick 
magazine and website designed to showcase "anything relevant to autism". One 
story suggested, "We, as parents and physicians, need to implement strategies 
to reduce our children's chemical and heavy metal toxicity levels", and 
advocated thehighly controversial procedure known as chelation therapy 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1750946712000724>, whereby 
heavy metals are removed from the body using "chelating" agents — the 
presumption being that autism is caused by mercury in vaccines or that people 
with autism spectrum disorders find it harder to filter "environmental toxins".

Chelation is the introduction of chemicals (and there are several, including 
dimercaprol <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dimercaprol>, which was used during 
the second world war as an antidote to the chemical warfare agentLewisite 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lewisite>), either orally or intravenously, which 
then bind to poisonous metals such as mercury, arsenic and lead so they can be 
excreted.

Although it has approval for treating people with heavy metal poisoning, it 
can be dangerous 
<http://www.fda.gov/downloads/NewsEvents/Newsroom/.../UCM230032.pd...> and is 
not approved for use in treating autism 
<http://researchautism.net/autism_treatments_therapies_intervention.ikml?print&ra=25>
. In 2005,a British boy, Abubakar Tariq Nadama, died of a heart attack while 
undergoing chelation 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Health/TheLaw/doctors-sued-autism-chelation-therapy/story?id=10045951&page=2#.UVLzO7_yA3g>
 in America. Last spring, a doctor in Hertfordshire was given an official 
warning by aFitness to Practise Panel 
<http://www.gmc-uk.org/concerns/hearings_and_decisions/fitness_to_practise_panels.asp>
 after she used chelation on an autistic child without measuring his blood lead 
concentration or referring him to a toxicology specialist. What's more,an 
analysis in the US of five chelation studies 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1750946712000724> showed 
that none provided any certainty that any benefits shown in the children were 
due to chelation itself, "and not another treatment or just kids getting older".

According to Mike Stanton, British author of Learning To Live With High 
Functioning Autism 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Learning-Live-High-Functioning-Autism/dp/1853029157> 
and the father of a son with Asperger's syndrome, the Tommeys are now "linked 
to these people in America who think diseases are better than vaccines – that 
diseases will give you immunity and vaccines will kill you. [Tommey] knows 
Wakefield is a busted flush over here. That's why they've gone over there."

In 2007, Tommey started the Autism Trust <http://www.theautismtrust.org.uk/> 
to "raise awareness" and fund the building of a residential centre for adults 
with autism. Wakefield's wife, Carmel, sits on the board of directors; Imogen, 
the Wakefields' daughter, is listed as a member of the "junior advisory board".

Three years later, Tommey launched a campaign aimed at getting David Cameron, 
Gordon Brown and Nick Clegg to put autism in their general election manifestos. 
To get their attention, she appeared on billboards wearing a bra."Hello boys," 
the poster read. "Autism is worth over six million votes. It's time to talk…" 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Society/Pix/pictures/2010/4/2/1270227398826/Autism-Trust-poster-001.jpg>
 In her campaign video, she even brought up the "safety of our vaccinations", 
claiming the issue "wouldn't go away". It proved polarising thanks to Tommey's 
support for Wakefield and her call for residential centres for people with 
autism when other charities believed care should be brought into the wider 
community.

In 2012, Tommey's then-16-year-old daughter Bella launched a charity campaign 
called Give Autism A Chance. Its aim was to demonstrate that people with autism 
could contribute to society. In London, Bella set up Billy's Cafe, named after 
her brother, in which autistic people could work. The aims of Give Autism A 
Chance were noble, but proceeds would, Bella said at the time, be given to her 
mother's charity, the Autism Trust. Later the same year, Bella took the 
campaign to Texas with the help of Wakefield's daughter, Imogen, and they 
launched it at a cafe in Austin.

Meanwhile, Jonathan, Tommey's husband, who has a sports science degree and a 
foundation degree in nutritional therapy, set up theAutism Clinic 
<http://www.theautismclinic.com/> in Berkshire to offer "specialist autism 
treatment", including "diagnostic tests" and an array of supplements and 
vitamins that he prescribes and makes available from his online shop. He also 
features in some of the programmes on theAutism Media Channel's YouTube page 
<http://www.youtube.com/user/AutismMediaChannel>. In one of those films, 
Jonathan Tommey – The Biomedical Imbalances In Autism 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o46O49esa7A>, he recommends "supplementary 
intervention" such as "vitamins and herbs" for children with autism. In the 
same film he discusses chelation therapy. "As nutritionists, we can't use 
chelating agents. They are prescriptive medications," he says, adding, "They 
are available on the web. My suggestion is you've got to be very careful doing 
this without professional guidance, and unfortunately in this country there are 
not many practitioners that do chelation." But, he adds, "Chelation has been 
used to a good level of success."

According to his website, an initial consultation at the Berkshire clinic is 
£300. Follow-up consultations "and communications" are £90 an hour. In his 
online shop, Antioxidant Complex costs £34.70; Immunoguard, £24.15; Kids 
Complete Complex, £12.95 – and something he calls Mood Food is £24.45.

The Autism Science Foundation, which helps fund autism research, warns against 
what it regards as non-evidence-based treatments 
<http://www.autismsciencefoundation.org/what-is-autism/autism-diagnosis/beware-non-evidence-based-treatments>
 that haven't undergone rigorous, well-designed scientific studies. 
Gluten-free, casein-free (GFCF) diets, it says, are promoted by those who 
"claim that children with autism have 'leaky guts' [a theory Wakefield 
espouses] that allowopioids <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Opioid> to escape 
into the bloodstream and then travel to the brain and cause autistic 
behaviours". But, according to the foundation, there is no evidence for the 
claim, "and studies have found that compared to typically developing children, 
children with autism have no more opioids in their blood. Furthermore, children 
on the GFCF diet have been found to have lower bone density than controls, 
which could lead to osteoporosis." As for vitamins, it says doctors may 
recommend nutritional supplements to people "with and without autism" as part 
of a "healthy and balanced diet", but it says, "Use of supplements can be 
problematic… when they are misused in an attempt to cure an individual of 
autism. There is no scientific evidence suggesting that vitamin supplements can 
cure autism [and] some supplements (such as vitamin A) can be toxic when taken 
in high doses for sustained periods." Aninvestigation into alternative 
therapies for autism by the Chicago Tribune in 2009 
<http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2009-11-22/health/chi-autism-treatments-nov22_1_child-takes-more-pills-complex-treatment-regimen-failure-and-anaphylactic-shock>
 found many had "little basis in science" and amounted to "uncontrolled 
experimentation on children".

The Autism Media Channel's YouTube page also features numerous interview clips 
of Wakefield defending himself against the allegations that emerged during the 
GMC hearings and later in the BMJ. Looking relaxed in a pink shirt and sitting 
in front of a bookcase, he is asked questions such as: "What exactly were your 
findings with regards to the MMR vaccine and autism?" His response to that 
question: "In the Lancet study, the report that we provided was what the 
parents told to us. And that, for eight of the 12 children, was that after a 
period of normal or near-normal development, their child had a vaccine and 
shortly after that, regressed into autism."
 Polly Tommey believes giving her son Billy the hormone secretin, from pig 
intestines, has resulted in 'excellent progress' 
There is a considerable body of opposition to the approaches advocated in many 
of the films on Wakefield and Tommey's Autism Media Channel.Steve Silberman 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Silberman>, a contributing editor to Wired 
magazine in the US and author of an upcoming book on autism, NeuroTribes: 
Thinking Smarter About People Who Think Differently, doesn't pull his punches. 
He calls the images of autistic children undergoing violent outbursts at the 
start of the trailer a "horrifying freak show [which] demeans people on the 
spectrum of all ages". He believes that Wakefield should be advocating 
investment in desperately needed lifelong support and services. "The last thing 
autistic people and their families need is more stigmatising stereotypes – 
which encourage bullying and despair."

Martine O'Callaghan, who runs the Autismum blog <http://autismum.com/> from 
her home in Wales, is the mother of an autistic son, Cledwyn, who is four and a 
half. "From the point of view of another mum with an autistic child, I don't 
like Polly Tommey's idea that autism is something to cure," she says. "The idea 
that autism is something to be fixed is dehumanising. It deeply offends me."

Kassiane Sibley agrees. She is autistic and describes herself as an activist 
and advocate for autistic people. She finds Wakefield's concept for a reality 
TV show appalling. "Their whole paradigm for autism is really insulting to us… 
How would you like it if somebody portrayed all British people as violent, 
tortured souls who could be Americanised into calm, non-violent 'real' people?"

Sibley profoundly disagrees with Wakefield's approach. She feels the Autism 
Team are "completely divorced from scientific reality". In her view, they are 
using the media to push what she regards as a "completely false view", and she 
worries that's "going to hurt a lot of people… There have been many studies 
showing that these biomedical treatments don't help."

As a child, Sibley says, she was given vitamin B6 in an attempt to cure her 
autism. "Take too much and you getneuropathy 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Peripheral-neuropathy/Pages/Introduction.aspx>," 
she tells me. "That's a fun one, and by fun I mean not fun at all, because you 
can't feel your toes and your fingers, and they burn, and then you're yelled 
at for walking on your toes when you're just desperately trying to get the 
feeling back. If you read anything about alternative medicine, you'll know much 
of it works on the placebo effect."

Ari Ne'eman <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ari_Ne%27eman>, who in 2009 became 
the first person with an autistic spectrum disorder to sit on the USNational 
Council on Disability <http://www.ncd.gov/> (he was appointed by Barack Obama), 
calls the autism trailer "unquestionably offensive". He says it's a "very old 
trope in the autism world, and it really presumes the only way that we as 
autistic people can have value is if somebody swoops in to try to save us.

"The idea," he says, of "the poor, pitiful disabled person that we need to 
save, because Lord knows they're not worth anything otherwise, belongs on the 
ash heap of history."

Ne'eman says Wakefield and Tommey's message doesn't address the practical 
services or support that he insists the autistic community – in both the UK and 
US – needs. As for accusations that people such as Ne'eman don't want to focus 
on research into the actual causes of autism or "cures", he laughs. "In America 
we've spent over a billion dollars on autism research. What have we got for 
that? We've not seen anything that's appreciably impacted the quality of life 
of autistic people, regardless of their place on the spectrum. Quite frankly, 
we've spent $1bn figuring out how to make mice autistic and we'll spend another 
$1bn figuring out how to make them not autistic. And that's not what the 
average person wakes up in the morning aspiring to. They think: am I going to 
be able to find a job, to communicate, to live independently, either on my own 
or with support? Those are the real priorities."

Despite the opposition, Polly Tommey and Andrew Wakefield seem determined to 
see the Autism Team TV series reach beyond their current niche on Information 
TV channels. Speaking to theAge Of Autism blog <http://www.ageofautism.com/>, 
Tommey said, "The TV networks in the US need numbers, and we have to prove that 
autism is an issue that people are interested in so they'll be willing to 
broadcast this series."

Neither the Tommeys nor Wakefield would speak to me for this story. Instead, I 
sent a list of questions to them via email, and Polly Tommey and Wakefield 
responded through their US lawyers. In a 10-page letter, their attorney 
insisted that the scientific research conducted by Wakefield was not 
fraudulent. Referring to the treatment of autistic children portrayed in the 
Autism Team trailer specifically, it said, "Extensive references to 
observational and controlled clinical studies confirm the excess risk of 
gastrointestinal symptoms in children with autism… confirm the presence of 
functional and pathological changes in the intestine of children with autism, 
and… document the benefits of dietary exclusion, particularly using a gluten- 
and casein-free diet in children with autism." It said the treatments depicted 
on the Autism Media Channel and in the Autism Team trailer were not used to 
treat autism, but to "treat gastrointestinal disease and related pain in some 
autistic patients. My clients have not claimed that they or anyone else can 
'cure autism'. What they do suggest is that some symptoms suffered by some 
children with autism can be treated and the lives of those children can be 
improved."

The letter went on to say the Autism Clinic (run by Jonathan Tommey) "is not 
part of or affiliated with the Autism Media Channel". It said, "An extensive 
review of the relevant medical and scientific literature based upon over 150 
published research studies has been provided by Dr [James] Adams and is 
essential reading for anyone seeking to comment on the merits of nutritional 
and dietary interventions in autism."

It's worth pointing out here that Adams, whose work they recommend, is a 
doctor in materials engineering.He also directs the autism/Asperger's research 
programme at Arizona State University 
<http://autism.asu.edu/Background/Background.html>, was the lead author of the 
2005 report on Treating Mercury Toxicity In Children With Autism, and also 
advocates GFCF diets, vitamin supplementation and chelation therapy. "There is 
substantial evidence to suggest that many children with autism suffer from 
exposure to mercury, and probably other toxic metals and toxic chemicals,"he 
wrote in a 2007 Summary Of Biomedical Treatments For Autism 
<http://autism.com/pdf/providers/adams_biomed_summary.pdf>.

Michael Fitzpatrick, author of MMR And Autism: What Parents Need To Know and 
Defeating Autism: A Damaging Delusion 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Defeating-Autism-A-Damaging-Delusion/dp/0415449812>, 
is a recently retired London GP. He and his wife, Mary, are the parents of an 
autistic son, James. Fitzpatrick tells me the key problem, still, for parents 
of autistic children is that doctors will say they don't know what causes it 
and that there's nothing you can do about it – two things that are difficult to 
live with. He describes the impotence he felt watching James regress at 18 
months, after he had been developing normally. For parents witnessing that 
happen to their child, the need to "do something" can be overwhelming, he says. 
"And then someone else comes along and says your doctor's useless, that they 
know what caused it, and that you can do something about it."

He says one reason special diets are so popular, despite being unproven, is 
that they give parents something to do on a daily basis. Luckily, it's the same 
with behaviour therapy, whichhas been proven to benefit some children. "You 
just have to play with them and love them as best you can," Fitzpatrick says. 
"James's behaviour was very demanding. He'd injure himself, and if you tried to 
stop him, he'd be very aggressive, but we finally got him into a school that 
could really manage him and he thrived. He went from being very withdrawn to 
being happy in himself and much more socially engaged."

James, now 20, has never spoken, and he won't be able to work, but Fitzpatrick 
says he has seen a change in his son that's very gratifying. He has just moved 
into an assisted-living home with two boys from school. "And it's working," 
Fitzpatrick says. "He is a lovely boy. He's great fun."

As for chelation, hyperbaric oxygen chambers, or even more innocuous 
treatments such as dietary supplements, Fitzpatrick calls them a "colossal 
waste of parental energy and a distraction. We need to find out what really 
does cause it, but most importantly what works in terms of helping people with 
it. That's where we need to concentrate our energies. It's better than chasing 
phantoms."

And what of Wakefield? In the UK at least he appears something of a phantom 
himself: in a phone call to theNational Autistic Society 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/>, asking for a comment for this story, the press 
officer said, "I'm sorry – who's Andrew Wakefield?" And unless his TV series is 
snapped up by a broadcaster over here, perhaps that's the way it'll stay.
 