
Andrew Strauss insists the England team have finally moved on from the Kevin 
Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> saga and made it 
clear there is no way back for the record run-scorer.

Strauss, the England and Wales Cricket Board’s director of England cricket, 
was the man whotold Pietersen earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/12/kevin-pietersen-andrew-strauss-england>
 he would play no part in the Ashes against Australia – and he believes the 
decision to provide what he termed clarity has helped the team.

England’s Ben Stokes praised for ‘philosophical’ response to run-out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/07/englan-ben-stokes-response-run-out>
Speaking at the Soccerex conference in Manchester, Strauss said: “I think the 
danger at that time is that particular issue would overshadow everything that 
happened on the pitch over the course of the summer. I would hate to say just 
because I made that decision we won the Ashes; I don’t think that’s true at 
all. What I was trying to do was provide clarity going forward, so everyone 
knew where they stood and that could allow the players to concentrate on what 
was going on in the middle rather than some of the other stuff that was 
surrounding. I think that clarity has helped, to be honest, but it’s up to the 
players to go out and perform.”

He added: “I think the team has moved on and the team is in a pretty good 
place. I think some of those young guys have established themselves. You look 
at Joe Root,Ben Stokes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ben-stokes>, Moeen 
Ali as three guys over the past 18 months that have really come through and 
have the makings of top-quality international players. That’s what we will be 
focusing on taking England forward.”

Strauss also conceded England have been “woeful” in World Cups and believes a 
shakeup to the County Championship could help that cause.

He said: “I think blocks of white-ball cricket is fundamental to making 
improvements. That’s why we have proposed reducing the Championship by two 
games. I don’t think it’s going to have a massive effect on our four-day 
cricket but hopefully will have a massive effect on our one-day cricket.

“We need a fundamentally different focus on white-ball cricket, one-day 
cricket and T20 cricket because the game has been so geared towards Test 
cricket for decades and we’ve been consistently woeful in World Cups.”

Strauss also said he believed Stokes had merely been taking evasive action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/07/ben-stokes-england-obstruct-field-australia>
 rather than trying to deliberately obstruct the flight of the ballwhen he was 
given out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/05/ben-stokes-incident-australia-england-second-odi>
 in the one-day international defeat by Australia on Saturday.

He said: “My personal point of view is he was [taking evasive action] but I 
wasn’t the umpire, the third umpire or out on the pitch.”
 