
The Labour party has selected the shadow home secretary, Andy Burnham, as its 
candidate to fight theGreater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> mayoral election in May 
2017.

Burnham won 51% of a vote from party members in the region, beating the area’s 
police and crime commissioner and interim mayor, Tony Lloyd (29%), and the MP 
for Bury South, Ivan Lewis, who was a government minister under Tony Blair and 
Gordon Brown (19.8%).

The MP for Leigh won the contest with 3,792 votes to Lloyd’s 2,163 and Lewis’s 
1,472, on a turnout of 65.3%.

“To be selected as Labour’s candidate for the first elected mayor of Greater 
Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> is a great honour and I 
thank our members for the faith they have shown in me,” he said.

“I will repay it by devoting all my energy to uniting the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> family here, working to win back 
the voters we have lost and building a policy programme with broad appeal. I 
will bring forward real answers to our housing crisis and give new hope to our 
young people.

“Today I have a clear message for the prime minister – you and your party were 
elected on a series of promises to the north of England and I will not let you 
walk away from them. Youpromised us a powerhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/19/andrew-percy-northern-powerhouse-minister-sheffield>
 and now you must give us the tools and investment to build it.”

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, congratulated Burnham, saying the mayoral 
race would be an opportunity for Labour to take its message for social justice 
to the region’s 2 million voters in next year’s election. “It’s crucial that we 
have a mayor willing to do everything possible to improve the lives of everyone 
in Greater Manchester and in Andy we have that candidate,” he said.

Burnham said he would stand down as an MP at the “first and earliest 
opportunity” if he wins the race to become mayor next May, as appears likely 
given that almost all of Manchester’s council seats are filled by Labour.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fandy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F101c5f0cc44533271736ea962f8852fa83d79364%2F0_88_2741_1645%2F2741.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Burnham%20selected%20as%20Labour%20candidate%20for%20Greater%20Manchester%20mayor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fandy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Burnham%20selected%20as%20Labour%20candidate%20for%20Greater%20Manchester%20mayor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fandy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F101c5f0cc44533271736ea962f8852fa83d79364%2F0_88_2741_1645%2F2741.jpg>
 Tony Lloyd and Ivan Lewis sit next to Andy Burnham. Photograph: Peter Byrne/PA 
Asked whether he would resign from the shadow cabinet, Burnham said: “Next 
month there will be a decision on the leadership of our party going forward and 
it will then be for the leader of the party to decide whether or not I remain 
in the shadow cabinet.”

In the West Midlands, the region’s MEP and the former Labour MP for Birmingham 
Erdington,Siôn Simon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/feb/03/sion-simon-to-stand-down>, 
was selected as Labour’s candidate on Tuesday morning, winning 71% of the vote. 
He beat Steve Bedser, a former Birmingham city councillor and local businesman, 
who won 29%. A total of 3,817 ballots were cast.

Simon, another former minister in Brown’s government, campaigned for the city 
to have an elected mayor before an unsuccessful referendum on the proposal in 
2012. He said Labour could do “a better job of running our own region ourselves 
than the Tories ever have of running it from London”.

“We need a West Midlands voice in the Brexit discussions. Scotland, Wales, 
Northern Ireland and the City of London can’t be the only ‘special interests’ 
at the table,” said Simon. “The West Midlands is a £110bn economy, and it’s one 
that Whitehall doesn’t understand.”


Greater Manchester and the West Midlands are Labour strongholds, meaning that 
Burnham and Simon will be odds-on favourites to win the elections next year. 
The party will announce its candidate formayor of the Liverpool city region 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/31/luciana-berger-liverpool-mayor-should-be-global-ambassador-for-city-says-labour-hopeful>
, another Labour-dominated area, on Wednesday.

The creation of elected mayors is a condition of devolution arrangements 
agreed by the former chancellor George Osborne and a series of “metro” regions, 
including the West Midlands, Greater Manchester, the Liverpool and Sheffield 
city regions, the Tees Valley, the north-east, and Greater Lincolnshire.

The West Midlands combined authority includes Birmingham, Coventry, Dudley, 
Sandwell, Solihull, Walsall and Wolverhampton and has a population of about 4 
million. The new mayor will have responsibility for transport, adult skills and 
planning, and will oversee a £1.1bn, 30-year investment fund.

The mayor of Greater Manchester, a city region with a population of 3.5 
million, which covers Bolton, Bury, Manchester, Oldham, Rochdale, Salford, 
Stockport, Tameside, Trafford and Wigan, will have control over a portfolio of 
public services, a £900m, 30-year investment fund and will sit on a board that 
oversees a devolved £6bn health and social care budget.

Voting to select the candidates closed at 12pm on Friday. To be eligible to 
vote, Labour members were required to live in the relevant city region and have 
been a member of the party before 19 July 2015, a rule that has excluded a high 
proportion of the party’s new membership. The poll was conducted using the 
alternative vote system, and votes were cast by post and online.

 * This article was amended on 9 August 2016. It originally stated that “Andy 
Burnham’s win means he will stand down as MP for Leigh”. To clarify, Burnham 
said he would stand down from his role as an MP if he wins the mayoral election 
next May.
 