Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FYLD27abHrf0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FYLD27abHrf0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FYLD27abHrf0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Days after Andy Gray returned to the frontline of British televised football 
with BT Sport, a new video of sexist behaviour during hisSky Sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports> days has emerged to embarrass 
the pundit.

Gray, who has been working alongside his former Sky colleague Richard Keys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> at BeInSport in Qatar after 
he was fired by Sky in 2011 following the emergence of leaked tapes that showed 
them making sexist off-air comments, was hired by BT last weekend for 
Stevenage's FA Cup tie against Everton.

But his future employment opportunities might be affected by the emergence of 
new footage,posted on the Football Ramble website 
<http://www.thefootballramble.com/latest/entry/exclusive-andy-gray-and-richard-keys>
 and understood to be genuine, that shows an exchange between the pair and 
touchline reporter Clare Tomlinson in which they sing "get your tits out for 
the lads". Although it is not clear when the footage dates from, it appears to 
be from the period in the early 2000s when major finals were held at the 
Millennium Stadium in Cardiff during the building of the new Wembley Stadium.

Apparently recorded before they went on air, it shows Keys and Gray first 
joking with Tomlinson and telling her to get off the pitch. They then burst 
into a chorus of "get your tits out for the lads" and the camera cuts back to 
them in the studio laughing.

BT received some criticism from viewers for bringing Gray back in a one-off 
capacity to stand in for Michael Owen, although his on-screen performance as a 
co-commentator was well received.

The newly leaked footage appears timed to cause Gray maximum embarrassment and 
could also damage BT Sport's reputation at a time when it has highlighted its 
ambitious plans for women's sport and given a prominent role to Clare Balding, 
a passionate advocate of equality in sport.

A BT Sport <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bt-sport> spokeswoman said on 
Thursday night: "Andy Gray made a guest appearance last weekend and we were 
happy with his commentary." She refused to comment on whether the broadcaster 
would employ him again. One Sky source said: "We recognised this as an issue 
three years ago and we dealt with it."

Keys and Gray were the face of Sky's football coverage for 20 years, during a 
period when the pay TV giant became the dominant force in sports broadcasting 
but their Sky careers came to an abrupt end when atape of them discussing 
female linesman Sian Massey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/audio/2011/jan/24/andy-gray-richard-keys-sexist-audio>
 was leaked to a newspaper andthey were suspended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/24/andy-gray-richard-keys-sexist-comments>
.

Further leaked footage then emerged of Gray making a lewd comment to colleague 
Charlotte Jackson before they went on air and of Keys making sexist remarks to 
pundit Jamie Redknapp. Amid claims there was a culture of sexism around the 
football department at Sky, later denied by Sky Sports managing director Barney 
Francis,Gray was sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/26/andy-gray-richard-keys> and 
Keys then resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/26/richard-keys-resigns-sky-sports>
.In a lengthy resignation speech on TalkSport, the radio station that later 
employed them for a daily show, Keys admitted their culpability but also railed 
against the "dark forces" behind their demise. "I hope this starts the process 
of recovery and that everybody now can just step back and understand that you 
know these boorish and bullish guys understand the magnitude of what happened," 
said Keys at the time.

They have both since claimed there was an agenda to force them out, with Keys 
saying that they were "bugged".

Gray said later that the episode left him suicidal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/mar/06/andy-gray-considered-killing-himself-sacking>
. "This was a private bit of banter released to the social media and for some 
reason the press etc tore us apart," he said. "I have no problems with a woman 
referee. It wasn't a criticism, it was a light-hearted quip."

After a spell at TalkSport, the pair were employed by Al-Jazeera owned 
BeInSport in Doha to front their live Premier League coverage.
 