
Andy Garcia <https://www.theguardian.com/film/andy-garcia> has stepped into 
the shoes of Georgia's maverick president, Mikheil Saakashvili, for a Hollywood 
thriller set against the backdrop of the 2008 conflict between Russia and the 
former Soviet republic.

Directed by Die Hard 2's Renny Harlin, the picture began shooting at the 
weekend on location inGeorgia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/georgia-news>. 
It is billed as an anti-war film about an American journalist and his cameraman 
who get caught in the crossfire and struggle with their duty to be impartial.

Garcia, whose credits include The Godfather: Part III and Ocean's Eleven, 
arrived in Georgia on Sunday as shooting moved from the former Russian-held 
town of Gori to the capital, Tbilisi. Harlin says the film – provisionally 
entitled Georgia – will be impartial, even though Papuna Davitaia, an MP from 
Saakashvili's ruling United National Movement, is one of the producers on the 
project.

"I've waited a long time to find something with substance and reality," Harlin 
said in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/04/renny-harlin-south-ossetia-film>. 
"I want to make a film that says something about the human condition, and even 
if only a few people see this and feel its impact and its anti-war message, 
then I will have done something that's important and I will be proud of it."

"Our main concern was to show war as a bad thing," executive producer Michael 
Flannigan told Georgian television. "We had an opportunity to make a really 
anti-war film."

Saakashvili, who has embraced relations with the west to Russia's chagrin, was 
blamed fortriggering the 2008 conflict  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/30/georgia-attacks-unjustifiable-eu>
by launching an assault on pro-Russian South Ossetia following a period of 
frequent border clashes and rising tension with Moscow. However, a European 
Union report released last month concluded that Russia's retaliation, which saw 
it invade its neighbour and occupy the territory, violated international law.

Some 850 people died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/oct/01/russia-georgia-south-ossetia>
 during the conflict and more than 100,000 fled their homes as the Russian 
military carried out air strikes and sent tanks deep into Georgia.

Meanwhile, Serbian film-maker Emir Kusturica revealed yesterday that he had 
rejected a Russian offer to direct a separate film about the war. "I didn't 
accept it because I have a binding contract for the next four years," he told 
Reuters.
 