
The two best players in the world, Andy Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> and Novak Djokovic, are not 
exactly having an easy time of it in the last tournament of the season. They 
head for an almost nailed-on weekend showdown, the 35th of their careers, 
unbeaten and resolute but looking just a little weary, with maybe a twist or 
two to come.

The Scot, buoyed by an O2 crowd of 17,000 fans as unequivocally behind him as 
ever they were for Tim Henman, saved nine of 11 break points over three hours 
and 20 minutes – the longest match in the eight years of theATP World Tour 
Finals <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/atp-world-tour-finals> at this venue 
– to get past Kei Nishikori 6-7 (11-9), 6-4, 6-4.

Andy Murray battles back to beat Kei Nishikori – ATP World Tour Finals!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/16/andy-murray-v-kei-nishikori-atp-world-tour-finals-live>
There was a late-night complication when Stan Wawrinka beat Marin Cilic 7-6 
(7-3), 7-6 (7-3), putting the Croat out of the tournament and leaving the Swiss 
lurking as a dangerous wildcard. If Nishikori beats Cilic in their final 
round-robin match, Murray will need a strong finish against Wawrinka on Friday 
to guarantee avoiding Djokovic in the semi-finals. He would still go through if 
he wins only a set, but in second place – and that is not where the world’s new 
No1 would ideally like to be. Disaster is not imminent. However, as history 
tells us, this tournament is a crazy beast.

Murray said: “It could come down to a match between me and Novak [in the race 
for No1 in the world]. Who knows what’s going to happen the next few days. From 
my side, I will concentrate on trying to win my own matches, get through as 
many as I can, make it as tough as possible for Novak to jump me.”

Getting through the second match of his group was a minor marathon, more 
white-knuckle edgy than the Serb’s stop-go progress through two wins in the 
round-robin stage on the other side of the draw. It says much about the 
physicality of the Tour that its best champions are close to exhaustion just as 
they prepare for one last round of the fight.

Still, they remain on track to meet in Sunday’s final and slug it out for 
Murray’s ranking. That is where the core fascination of the tournament has 
resided since the first match, when Djokovic came from a set downto beat 
Dominic Thiem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/13/novak-djokovic-dominic-thiem-atp-world-tour-finals>
.

Djokovic, who surrendered the top spot in Paris, where Murray went on to win 
his fourth title in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/06/andy-murray-sets-sights-atp-world-tour-finals-paris-masters>
, briefly moved back in front of him in the rankings on Tuesday night when it 
took him two tight sets toblunt the power-serving of Milos Raonic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/novak-djokovic-milos-raonic-atp-world-tour-finals>
.Murray had not won two matches in a row in this end-of-season tournament since 
his first appearance in Shanghai during 2008. But, a semi-finalist three times, 
in 2008, 2010 and 2012, he is a more mature and self-assured player at 29. And 
a knackered one.

His second win on the spin here, 21st over the past two months and eighth in 
10 matches over Nishikori, was far tougher than his commanding 6-3, 6-2 workout 
in the first round of his group, against Cilic.

Murray’s coach Ivan Lendl, a five-times winner of this title, joined his 
year-round assistant, Jamie Delgado, courtside and probably was more impressed 
with the player’s trademark resilience than his fluency. When Murray belted a 
regulation forehand into the high section of the net rather than going for the 
angle on set point, Nishikori held to force the first set tie-break.

It had seemed inevitable from the first ball. Murray was 20-8 in shootouts for 
the season, Nishikori 16-10, although the Scot was looking the more agitated, 
constantly chuntering to himself. After giving up three set points he showed 
extraordinary anticipation to hunt down an impossible get and stick a running 
backhand winner behind Nishikori, and the arena rose to applaud probably the 
shot of the tournament.

However, he blew set point, handed two more back to Nishikori and struck his 
final shot disappointingly wide to conceded what had been a ragged, tense set 
after an hour and 25 minutes. The tie-break alone had taken 18 of them.

The snap-back arrived quickly, Murray catching Nishikori off-guard at the 
start of the second; but after two hours of the match his own tired legs 
contributed to his dropping serve for 4-4. Within minutes Murray broke back, 
saved two break points and served out the set. Heaving for breath on his third 
set point he twice faltered in the ball toss – thanks to a boorish interjection 
from the crowd – but finished the job when Nishikori’s forehand missed the 
outer edge of the baseline.

Novak Djokovic finds a way to edge past Milos Raonic yet again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/16/novak-djokovic-milos-raonic-atp-world-tour-finals>
As some suspected it might do from no more than 20 minutes into the match, it 
all came down to the third set, Murray territory. He had won a draining 
five-setter against Nishikoriin the Davis Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/06/andy-murray-great-britain-davis-cup-kei-nishikori>
 but lost in fivein the quarter-finals of the US Open 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/07/andy-murray-kei-nishikori-five-set-epic-us-open>
.

Murray broke early again. Could he get to the line this time without giving 
the fans a nervous breakdown? Paradoxically the standard rose as tiredness 
consumed both players. It was a monumentally committed spectacle. Neither held 
serve with comfort. Both fought for every point, serving or receiving. No ball 
was too far away to chase. Each success was celebrated as if it were for the 
final of a slam.

By the time Murray had pulled away to lead 5-1, the crowd, surely, could relax 
at last... not quite. Nishikori held for 2-5. Just. Murray double-faulted for 
5-3. Nishikori scrambled magnificently for 4-5. And Murray held to love to seal 
it.

It was sport in the raw, at times ugly, and indisputably passionate.
 