
Andy Murray <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andymurray> has heard the talk 
of more awards – from the sports personality of the year to a knighthood in the 
New Year honours list – but he is more concerned about returning to Scotland to 
celebrate his father’s wedding.

After beating Novak Djokovic in straight sets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/20/andy-murray-novak-djokovic-atp-tour-finals>
 at the O2 Arena on Sunday to win his first ATP World Tour Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/nov/20/andy-murray-v-novak-djokovic-atp-world-tour-finals-live>
, the world No1 blushed and said being introducedon court in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/australian-open> next month as Sir Andrew 
Murray would be “nice” – but he was not banking on a visit to Buckingham 
Palace. Nor was he sure about becoming the first British athlete to win theBBC 
accolade for a third time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/dec/20/bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year-2015-live>
, although he is an unbackable favourite.

“It is the highest honour you can get in this country,” he said of a strongly 
rumoured knighthood, “but I don’t know, I feel, like, too young for something 
like that.”

Andy Murray’s work ethic is behind his rise to No1 and he can stay there | 
Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/21/andy-murray-world-no1-novak-djokovic>
Would he feel uncomfortable being an active athlete and a knight of the realm? 
“Yeah, possibly. I don’t think about that stuff much, really. When I win any 
award or am presented with anything it is nice because it is recognition for 
what you have given your life to, up to now anyway. I am still young and there 
are still a lot of things that can go wrong, I could still mess up and make 
mistakes, do stuff wrong. I am just trying to keep doing what I am doing, 
working hard, and achieving stuff.”

Murray doubted he would be able to attend the Spoty ceremony in Birmingham on 
18 December because his father, Willie, is remarrying next month. “I don’t 
think I am going to be able to go this year,” he said. “I’ve got my father’s 
stag do next weekend, then he is getting married the following weekend. So I 
will go up to Scotland on Saturday, come back down to London for four or five 
days then come back up to Scotland. Then I go to Miami the day after my dad’s 
wedding.”

Nor was he sure he would be the Scottish Andy from Dunblane to win the BBC 
accolade. “Andy Butchart [the Olympic 5,000-metre runner and boyfriend of 
Caitlin Watson, who is the daughter of Andy’s father’s fiancée, Sam] did 
great,” Murray said. “And the Brownlee brothers [triathletes Alistair and 
Jonny], what they have done throughout the whole year is pretty amazing. I see 
that as pretty cool, because I have a similar thing with my own brother [Jamie, 
world No1 in doubles with Bruno Soares]. And the thing that happened a few 
months after the Olympics was a nice thing to see, that it is not just a 
win‑at‑all‑costs mentality.

Andy Murray fights fatigue with fire to end 2016 in blistering fashion | Jacob 
Steinberg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/nov/20/andy-murray-fights-fatigue-with-fire-to-end-2016-in-blistering-fashion>
“I have no idea who will win it but, in an Olympic year, it is always tough to 
pick because there are always so many great performances.”

If there was an award for self-deprecation, it is unlikely Murray would have 
many challengers.
 