
Beryl Dykes is doing a bit of shopping in Stockport when she spots Andy Burnham
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> and shouts at him across 
the pavement. “Why did you not get in instead of that daft twit?”

It’s a fair question, one that Andy Burnham admits that he’s spent a long time 
thinking about, though he’s too diplomatic to point out that he’s still in the 
daft twit’s cabinet; is, in fact, the daft twit’s shadow home secretary. 
“Honestly! You must have been able to do a better job than him,” she says. And 
then: “I thought you would have gone for it again this time.” Burnham smiles. 
“I think that ship has probably sailed.”

Yet “never say never” might be the motto of Burnham’s career. He’s gone from 
being an up-and-coming junior minister in Tony Blair’s last government to 
practically the last man standing in Corbyn’s and having stood and failed in 
the 2010 Labour leadership election, and stood and failed in the 2015 one, he’s 
now standing and hoping not to fail in his bid to be the mayor ofManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>.

Don’t you worry about losing again? I ask him. “Of course. It’s a stressful 
thing to do. But you learn from those experiences and you take stuff from that 
and bring it into this contest… Though it is quite punishing at times.”

It seems like a bit of an understatement, this. In the current situation, 
mayor of Manchester is an absolutely plum job: a newly souped-up role in charge 
of a massive budget with devolved health powers in a staunchly Labour city, 
plus – and who wouldn’t want this in the current political climate? – an exit 
route out of the bloodbath currently engulfing the heart of the party. “I did 
declare my intention to stand in May well before any of this,” he points out 
when I bring this up. And anyway, first, and crucially, he needs to secure the 
Labour party nomination in a tough fight against the incumbent,Tony Lloyd 
<https://www.greatermanchester-ca.gov.uk/councillors/11/tony_lloyd>, and 
another local MP,Ivan Lewis <https://twitter.com/IvanLewis_MP>. Lloyd has a 
strong power base, not least from the unions Unite and Unison, which have both 
come out for him, and both campaigns were well under way before Burnham threw 
his hat in the ring.

There’s an inbuilt snobbery to Westminster. It doesn’t take well to people 
with accents

It’s a tense time. He has exactly one week left to reach the 11,574 people in 
theGreater Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> area 
eligible to vote, one of whom, it turns out is Beryl Dykes. She’s been a member 
of the party her whole life, she tells him proudly.

“Manchester has done well, hasn’t it?” he says to her. “But the other places 
like Stockport, they need a bit more attention, don’t they?” I hear this 
several times over the course of the day. Burnham is pitching himself to the 
doughnut around Manchester, the Oldhams and Boltons and the Wigans, many of 
which voted Leave, including his own constituency of Leigh.

And he’s good at it. He has an easy way with people and though he’s running 
late for his next meeting, he stops and chats with Beryl Dykes and her extended 
family and they joke good humouredly about this and that. He’s a nice bloke, 
Burnham, even his enemies seem to agree on that. A local boy from an ordinary 
family who got himself to Cambridge and then, via what was the standard 90s 
route from researcher to special adviser to safe seat, to the secretary of 
state for culture and then health.

Those days seem like an awfully long time ago, however, and in recent more 
fractured times, Burnham’s name has become as divisive as almost anyone’s in 
politics. A Corbyn victory, Burnham argued in the leadership campaign, would 
lead to 20 years of Tory rule, but as one by one his cabinet colleagues 
resigned, Burnham stayed put. A piece in theDaily Telegraph last week was 
headlined:“Missing, presumed lost: Andy Burnham’s spine.” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/07/27/missing-presumed-lost-andy-burnhams-spine/>
 And one political journalist tells me that “his name is literally a swearword 
now. That’s what one of his former colleagues in the shadow cabinet told me 
recently. He’s reviled more than anyone else. He’s hugely pissed off everybody 
down here and now that he thinks the party’s fucked, he’s leaving. He’s 
leaving, but he’s not helping. He just appears to be totally in it for himself.”

Another tells me what a nice and genuine man he is and how he really does 
think he’s acting out of conscience, but then concedes that “he’s got himself 
into a bizarre position. Clearly he doesn’t want to piss off Corbynistas in the 
run up to the mayoral election. And he really does believe in loyalty. But at 
the same time, he knows how rubbish Corbyn is.”

The most generous interpretation, perhaps, is that he’s in a lose-lose 
situation, condemned for standing by Corbyn, as he would have been condemned if 
he’d stepped down. You’ve had a lot of flak for it, haven’t you?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fandy-burnham-ready-to-leave-westminster-mayor-manchester-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff71cd8576b41b96a1ea3759a43ae6f1a729253c5%2F0_291_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Burnham%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20am%20ready%20to%20leave%20Westminster%20and%20devote%20myself%20to%20Manchester%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fandy-burnham-ready-to-leave-westminster-mayor-manchester-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Burnham%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20am%20ready%20to%20leave%20Westminster%20and%20devote%20myself%20to%20Manchester%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fandy-burnham-ready-to-leave-westminster-mayor-manchester-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff71cd8576b41b96a1ea3759a43ae6f1a729253c5%2F0_291_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Andy Burnham talking with Labour members in Stockport. Photograph: Gary Calton 
for the Observer 
“Yes. People are in different positions right now, aren’t they? The position 
I’ve taken is highly consistent with what I’ve always done, in that if you 
remember in 2006, I think it was, there was a kind of effort to remove Tony 
Blair. When people asked me to take part in that, I didn’t. In 2009, my good 
friendJames Purnell resigned on a local election night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/jun/04/james-purnell-resigns-gordon-brown-cabinet>
 [and called upon prime minister Gordon Brown to do the same], and I was asked 
to take part in that, and I didn’t. I’m pretty consistent in the way that I do 
these things. I personally fear that there’s a problem where MPs look like 
they’re trying to dictate an outcome the party is not on board with.”

At the same time, we’re a parliamentary democracy, I say, and if you can’t 
actually lead the party in parliament, you don’t have a functioning opposition, 
do you?

“Well, that’s why I wanted the mediated talks, because you’re right, there 
needs to be a functioning opposition. You’re absolutely right about that. In 
the midst of all this, I have been doing my job. I don’t know if you’ve 
noticed, but I called for a statement on hate crime in the aftermath of the 
referendum. I called a debate on the legal status of EU nationals and 
challenged the government to secure the status of EU nationals. I had an urgent 
question on Orgreave this week. I’ve been trying to do my job, because I do 
think we need a functioning opposition right now.

“And the rules of the Labour party have changed, by the way. I know you say 
that it’s all about parliamentary democracy, but the leadership rules changed. 
The MPs used to have much of the control of the nomination of theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leadership, but also a third of 
the electoral college. That’s now changed. The vote is now a pure one member, 
one vote. And that’s probably why I lost the last leadership election.”

It’s a sore point. He was first out of the blocks in the last leadership 
election and favourite to win until Corbyn appeared from nowhere. “Would I have 
won if the 2010 leadership rules had been in place in 2015?” he asks his 
campaign manager at one point. His manager nods.

“Which is pretty hard for me to take. Though I still think the rules are 
right. Not that £3 thing, but it being members of the party deciding.”

But it doesn’t change the fact that here the Labour party is, in what looks 
like its death throes, at which point you jump ship and hotfoot it up to 
Manchester. Stay, I say. Fight in the trenches.

“If you don’t mind me saying it politely, I think that represents the old 
thinking that Westminster’s the be-all and end-all. That you’re nothing unless 
you’re in Westminster and that’s where everything is happening. I take the view 
that if Labour stays in Westminster, it’s not going to sort itself out from 
there. It’s become dysfunctional. It needs to embrace a new way if doing things 
and the devolution of power to the rest of England is a big opportunity for the 
party to do that.

“I’ve been entirely consistent over a decade or more in saying, ‘Labour is too 
London-centric.’ I’ve run two leadership campaigns saying that… and I am ready 
to leave Westminster and devote myself here.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fandy-burnham-ready-to-leave-westminster-mayor-manchester-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c55bdd961a8fdb950dc55ebdc863865101cc1ae%2F0_376_5644_3387%2F5644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Burnham%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20am%20ready%20to%20leave%20Westminster%20and%20devote%20myself%20to%20Manchester%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fandy-burnham-ready-to-leave-westminster-mayor-manchester-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Burnham%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20am%20ready%20to%20leave%20Westminster%20and%20devote%20myself%20to%20Manchester%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fandy-burnham-ready-to-leave-westminster-mayor-manchester-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c55bdd961a8fdb950dc55ebdc863865101cc1ae%2F0_376_5644_3387%2F5644.jpg>
 Andy Burnham joins Kenny Dalglish and Hillsborough survivors and families in a 
rendition of You’ll Never Walk Alone at a candlelit vigil for those who died in 
the disaster, April 2016. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Yes, but who wouldn’t want to do that at the moment?

“I think there’s a bit of a contradiction there. You were saying that 
Westminster is where all the attention is and the glamour is…”

Glamour! There’s nothing glamorous about Labour in Westminster at the moment. 
It’s a wholly unglamorous shitstorm. But you do actually need senior members of 
the Labour party to get stuck in and be part of it.

“This is somewhere where I know I can make a difference. Labour is losing its 
connection in the north. It needs a stronger northern voice.”

One of the political correspondents I talk to tells me a joke about Burnham 
playing up his roots that he says was doing the rounds during the leadership 
election: “It was ‘What’s Andy Burnham’s favourite flavour of crisps?’ And the 
answer was ‘coal’.” This might, though, actually play to his point about the 
Westminster-centrism. And in fairness to him, he really has stayed rooted to 
where he came from. He lives in his constituency. His family is there. It’s 
pretty basic, this, and yet it’s not true of so many MPs. “I’m very lucky. I’m 
very rooted in my area and I’ve got such support from local people. The people 
who my kids are at school with, play sport with. There’s a kind of protective 
environment there and it’s quite special to me.”

Did you consider doing it the other way? Like Cooper and Miliband and Osborne 
and Clegg and all the other MPs who base themselves in the leafier bits of 
London and nip up to their constituencies for their surgeries? “Everybody 
advised me against it. It was kind of the Westminster way, you have your kids 
down there. I was like, ‘Nope.’ Because my networks are here, my mum and dad, 
my brothers, my, you know, support system. I never really thought of that.”

And his wife runs a tight ship, I’ve been told. He’s almost impossible to get 
hold of at weekends and he is clearly very close to the extended Burnham clan. 
And it’s notable that his greatest political triumph is rooted here too. After 
a humiliating moment at the 20th Hillsborough anniversary when he wasbooed and 
jeered by a crowd of thousands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2009/apr/16/hillsborough-tragedy-andy-burnham-liverpool-full-disclosure-documents>
, he came out and fought hard for many years for justice for the Hillsborough 
families. I watch theYouTube video of his speech 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rQrl5ivhLYU> in the House of Commons on the 
day the Hillsborough inquest published its findings and it’s a shame that it 
wasn’t that Andy Burnham who was around during the leadership campaign. It’s 
quite brilliant: passionate, moving, properly serious. MPs rarely clap. It’s 
against the Harry Potter-esque rules that govern the chamber. But at the end, 
they burst into applause.

Theresa May has nowhere near the decency of Jeremy Corbyn

The problem is that apart from Hillsborough, perhaps, it’s been hard to know 
exactly what Andy Burnham does stand for. Jonn Elledge,writing in the New 
Statesman 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2015/08/andy-burnham-seems-nice-bloke-i-havent-clue-what-he-stands>
 this time last year, wrote that Burnham “brings to mind the quote widely 
attributed to Alexandre Auguste Ledru-Rollin, a leading figure in France’s 1848 
revolution: ‘There go my people. I must find out where they are going, so I can 
lead them.’”

You were very much part of the New Labour project, weren’t you?

“Absolutely and I’m very proud of the many things that we achieved.”

And you’ve gone from that, from the New Labour idea that it’s fundamentally a 
good idea for Labour to have power, to where you are now, propping up Corbyn.

“I don’t know. I honestly don’t… how?”

By serving as his shadow home secretary, one of the great offices of state.

“Some people have a difference of view about what it means to stand up and 
fight for the Labour party. There are a lot of people who say you’re not doing 
that unless you are resigning and protesting. I have a different view. My view 
is that the Labour party is in a dangerous position. I argued against plunging 
ourselves into a bitter and divisive leadership contest. I’m still worried 
about the lasting damage that this will cause.”

And, in fairness, when we get to the coffee shop in Stockport where he’s due 
to meet a collection of local members, they’re pretty much in agreement with 
him. There’s obviously been a political calculation made. The leaflet being 
handed out states he is “a radical mayor… to rival London”, a turn of phrase 
that suggests he’s borrowing some of Jeremy Corbyn’s anti-establishment 
glamour, but Liam Hopley, a 28-year-old who’s come along, tells me that he does 
respect him for his loyalty.

“I think he has shown a willingness to steady the ship and I think that’s 
really important at a time like this. It’s commendable. I wasn’t sure about him 
up until a couple of weeks ago. But I think he’s really proved himself.”

It’s a casual meeting, but the crowd of 20 or so actively wants to hear what 
Burnham has to say for himself and he riffs on his big themes. Manchester 
versus London. Neglected outer Manchester versus pampered inner Manchester. He 
hedges on HS2 but speaks keenly aboutHS3, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/27/what-is-hs3-proposed-sub-penning-rail-line-explained>
 the trans-Pennine system that’s been proposed to link the major northern 
cities together, though he won’t actually have the power to do anything to 
bring this about. And then he outlines what he’d do with the NHS. This is 
Burnham’s Big Idea. He could, arguably, have decided to run for mayor of 
Liverpool, where he was born, and where he now, post-Hillsborough, has a solid 
fanbase, but it’s the Manchester mayoralty that is going to have devolved 
health powers. And for the one-time secretary of state for health and shadow 
health secretary, this is what he’s itching for.

He wants to integrate the social care system into the NHS. It’s a policy he’s 
championed for years, to take social care out of the private sector and into 
the heart of the NHS, and if he did become mayor of Manchester, he would have 
the chance to put it into action. However, even just a year ago, he was arguing 
vociferously against devolved health powers for the region. “I did,” he says. 
“Because was it right that six weeks before the general election, we hear that 
the leaders in Greater Manchester have done a deal with George Osborne? We 
hadn’t been told about it. I hadn’t been told about it [he was shadow health 
secretary at the time]. That is a clear illustration of what is wrong with 
Greater Manchester politics.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandy-burnham-lambasts-south-yorkshire-police-over-hillsborough-failings-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Burnham%20lambasts%20South%20Yorkshire%20police%20over%20Hillsborough%20failings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandy-burnham-lambasts-south-yorkshire-police-over-hillsborough-failings-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Burnham%20lambasts%20South%20Yorkshire%20police%20over%20Hillsborough%20failings%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fandy-burnham-lambasts-south-yorkshire-police-over-hillsborough-failings-video&media=>
Andy Burnham lambasts South Yorkshire police over Hillsborough failings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/apr/27/andy-burnham-lambasts-south-yorkshire-police-over-hillsborough-failings-video>
The audience in Stockport nods approvingly when he explains his NHS plan. 
Katherine McDermott, 36, who’s organised the meeting and only joined the party 
after the election last year, tells me that she’s a huge fan. “Do you want 
someone who’s just going to jump ship when times get tough? We need someone 
like him in Manchester. I mean, look what’s going on in Westminster. You can 
always rely on the Labour party to make things worse, can’t you?”

And Burnham’s politics and desire to make a difference seem to come from a 
very genuine place. It’s just, perhaps, with him that you also get to see the 
cogs and wheels of modern politics at work just beneath the surface. In this 
instance, a sense that he’s trying just a bit too hard to make today’s Andy 
Burnham fit the narrative demands of this latest chapter in the Andy Burnham 
playbook: the Westminster refusenik who fought the establishment and is now 
heading home, where the heart is.

He tells me a bit too emphatically how fed up with “the Westminster 
shenanigans” he is. You say that, I reply, but you’ve literally spent your 
entire career engaged in the shenanigans, haven’t you?

“There’s always been facets of it I don’t particularly like. There’s a kind of 
inbuilt snobbery in the place. It doesn’t take too well to people with accents. 
The more I’ve seen of this country at close quarters, in terms of the 
establishment, that frightens me.”

But, Andy, I say, you are the establishment.

“Well, no.”

You were a secretary of state. You can’t get much more establishment than that.

“You’re here today, gone tomorrow as a minister. It’s the permanent civil 
service, the leading figures in the police, I would include the media in it. If 
you look at some of the historical injustices we’ve been working on in recent 
times, what they all have in common is a kind of nexus of power between people 
in politics, the police, the press and the civil service. And I’ve never felt 
part of that.”

He almost was, though. And it’s a bit poignant, looking back through some of 
his older press cuttings. David Blunkett saying he’d put good money on Andy 
Burnham being prime minister in 15 years’ time. James Purnell and Andy Burnham 
as the Blair and Brown of their generation. Purnell slipped off and slid 
seamlessly into a £295,0000-a-year job at the BBC. Don’t you sometimes look at 
that and think that looks quite nice? I ask.

“I look back at our generation, everyone has kind of... life has thrown us in 
slightly different directions. But no. No, I’m in this to try and make a 
difference still, in whatever way I can. Politics has got harder, you’re right 
that it has. It’s not the world I came into.”

We talk about his leadership campaign. The decisive moment in it, some people 
argue, was Iain Duncan Smith’s Welfare Reform bill. Harriet Harman urged the 
party to unite behind it. Corbyn defied the party whip and voted against it. 
And Burnham, in the popular terminology, “flip-flopped”, going from saying it 
was “unsupportable” to, well, supporting it. Burnham’s line is that he got the 
shadow cabinet to change its position and it was that which succeeded in 
getting a “reasoned amendment” on it. “I do my politics in private,” he said. 
But it is something he’s thought about a lot, he concedes. “I chose party 
loyalty. Party unity. Possibly to my cost.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Burnham%3A%20could%20an%20Evertonian%20be%20mayor%20of%20Manchester%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Burnham%3A%20could%20an%20Evertonian%20be%20mayor%20of%20Manchester%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview&media=>
Andy Burnham: could an Evertonian be mayor of Manchester? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/18/andy-burnham-mayor-manchester-video-interview>
If you’d followed your conscience, instead of doing the loyalty thing, I point 
out, the campaign might not have swung against you so decisively. You might 
have won and if you had been leader of the Labour party, it’s possible you 
might have campaigned a bit more vigorously for Remain, seeing as how you’re 
married to an actual European. (His wife is Dutch.)

“A true, real-life European.”

In which case, we might not now have Brexit…

“There’s quite a lot of ‘ifs’ in there.”

He does seem to ponder it though. Has pondered it, in all probability. The 
Andy Burnham that might have been. A counterfactual that should maybe haunt us 
all.

He’s forceful and convincing when he talks about loyalty, but he did tell an 
undercover journalist from theSun last year that Corbyn would be a “disaster” 
and it’s noticeable that in the more than three hours I spend with him, he only 
once, and once only, says one thing in any way positive about the leader to 
whom he’s so loyal towards.

What do you think of Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay>? I ask him at one point. You 
singled her out for praise, didn’t you, in your Hillsborough speech?

“I did. I could only respect how she’d handled herself and her team. It was 
very impressive.”

More impressive than, say, Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>?

“Wrong values, wrong party.”

Well, she’s obviously a Tory, I say.

“I would say she’s ruthless in protecting her own.”

But nonetheless in her personal skills? In her leadership ability?

“She has nowhere near the decency of Jeremy.”

That’s it. The ringing endorsement in full. “I’ve been in the cabinet and then 
the shadow cabinet for 10 years,” he says at one point. “That’s a long time.” 
It is. And honestly, it’s hard to blame him for wanting out. Especially now.
 