
Labour metropolitan mayors need to work together to establish “a distinctive 
brand of northern Labour”, the shadow home secretary,Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham>, has said, as he pledged to 
work with the party’s new candidate for mayor of the Liverpool area to create a 
“north-west powerhouse”.

Steve Rotheram, Jeremy Corbyn’s parliamentary private secretary, won a 
decisive victory on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/10/corbyn-ally-steve-rotheram-named-as-candidate-for-liverpool-city-region-mayor>
 over the mayor of Liverpool, Joe Anderson, and the MP for Liverpool Wavertree, 
Luciana Berger, to become the party’s candidate for mayor of the Liverpool city 
region.

The election was conducted under the alternative vote system. In the first 
round, Rotheram, the MP forLiverpool <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> 
Walton, won 42%, Anderson 34% and Berger 25%. In the second round, once Berger 
voters’ second preferences were redistributed, Rotheram won 55% and Anderson 
42%.

Corbyn ally named as candidate for Liverpool city region mayor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/10/corbyn-ally-steve-rotheram-named-as-candidate-for-liverpool-city-region-mayor>
Rotheram said he wanted to send a message to Theresa May: “Prime minister, you 
may have backtracked on the idea of a northern powerhouse, but with Andy 
Burnham as the mayor ofGreater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester> and me as the metro mayor 
of the Liverpool city region, it’s our intention to create a north-west 
powerhouse.”

Burnham, who was selected to be Labour’s candidate in Greater Manchester on 
Tuesday, said: “I think Steve and I, and the other mayors that come through, 
need to create a distinctive brand of northernLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>. In a way that the party hasn’t 
done in recent times, it needs to speak very directly to people and represent 
them properly in terms of the way people think and feel.”

Labour’s dominance in the two regions means Burnham and Rotheram are odds-on 
to win their mayoral races in May 2017. The pair will appear together at a 
press conference next month to call for improved rail links in the north-west, 
which Burnham said would give the public a flavour of how the two politicians 
would work together.

“I think it’s a shift in the centre of gravity,” he said. “This idea that 
Westminster is the be all and end all is dysfunctional. I think Labour needs to 
learn from what happened in Scotland where arguably, after [the inaugural first 
minister of Scotland] Donald Dewar died, we neglected the development of 
devolution.

Andy Burnham selected as Labour candidate for Greater Manchester mayor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/andy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor>
“People didn’t move out of Westminster to build it up and I wouldn’t say it 
completely explains our predicament in Scotland, but it partly explains it and 
we mustn’t make the same mistake again.”

The MP for Leigh said the new metropolitan mayors across the north of England 
– roles created as a result of a series of devolution deals – could join 
together. “I think any government of the day would be taking a major political 
gamble if they were to ignore the collective wishes of that cabinet of the 
north if we were able to construct such a thing,” he said.

Burnham said he wanted to make it clear that he was not “empire building” and 
that he would always put the needs of Greater Manchester first. “When the sharp 
elbows are needed I’ll be banging [Rotheram] out of the way. We are very 
competitive on a football pitch, so it’s not all brotherly love”.

The pair met in 2008 when Burnham was unexpectedly made culture secretary 
following the resignation of Peter Hain and Rotheram was lord mayor of 
Liverpool when it was city of culture. “He thought because it was a Lib Dem 
council that I was a Lib Dem, so he was a bit standoffish at first,” Rotheram 
said.


Burnham and Rotheram went on to work together on the campaign to win justice 
for the families of the victims in the Hillsborough disaster. “We got on like a 
house on fire since day one,” Rotheram said.

To be eligible to vote for Labour’s mayoral candidates, members have to have 
lived in the relevant area and been a member of the party since before 19 July 
2015, a rule that excludes many of its new, largely Jeremy Corbyn-supporting 
membership.


Rotheram acknowledged that his support for the Labour leader had helped him in 
the race, but said many of those who voted for him were not Corbyn supporters.


“The freeze date was 15 July 2015, so most of the Corbynites hadn’t joined the 
Labour party by then so it didn’t have a massive impact,” he said. “But I think 
loyalty played a part … I’ve been criticised for being too loyal, but loyalty 
is a commodity in short supply in national politics.

“People have looked at [the situation] and thought: ‘Well I might not agree 
with Corbyn and I might not support him, but I don’t think what’s happened to 
him is right, so it’s right to be loyal’.”


The Liverpool city region has a population of 1.5 million and covers five 
Merseyside councils – Knowsley, Liverpool, St Helens, Sefton and Wirral – plus 
Halton in Cheshire. The area’s new mayor will oversee transport, planning and 
education for the over-16s, as well as a £900m, 30-year investment fund.
 