
Two former Anglo Irish Bank executives have been spared jaily despite being 
found guilty of handing out illegal loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/17/former-anglo-irish-executives-found-guilty>
 from the financial institution at the heart of Ireland's economic collapse.

Justice Martin Nolan said it would be wrong to jail Patrick Whelan, the bank's 
former head of lending inIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, 
and William McAteer, its former chief risk and finance officer, because the 
then financial regulator failed to warn them about the illegality of their 
attempt to prop up the bank's share price with a loan scheme.

Neither of the men – who were given community service instead – made any 
comment to the media as they left the court in Dublin on Tuesday afternoon.

The judge said it would be unjust to impose custodial sentences after Whelan, 
52, and McAteer, 63. The pair had faced up to seven years in prison after being 
convicted of breaking the law by lending tens of millions of euros to 10 
investors just months before Anglo Irish imploded.

The decision not to send the duo to jail is likely to cause outrage across 
Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/apr/20/allied-irish-bank-mortgage-borrowers-whelan-mcateer>
 given that the Irish taxpayer had to pay more than €30bn (£24.6bn) to prevent 
the bank's collapse in late 2008.

Propping up Anglo Irish and two other banks accused of reckless conduct pushed 
the Irish Republic to the edge of bankruptcy and forced the previous government 
to seek a €67.5bn (£55bn) bailout from the International Monetary Fund, the 
European commission and the European Central Bank.

In a pointed reference to Ireland's financial watchdog at the time, the judge 
told the court: "I find it incredible that red lights did not go off somewhere 
in the regulator's office."

During the trial lawyers for Whelan and McAteer said both men did not know 
they were doing anything illegal in relation to a loan to the Maple 10 group of 
investors in the summer of 2008, and believed they had been given the legal 
green light for the deal from the regulator.

Brendan Grehan, Whelan's senior counsel, said: "[The banker] didn't for one 
moment think he was involving himself in something that was unlawful, something 
that would find himself before a court on indictment." Patrick Gageby, for 
McAteer, said there were no malign intention on the part of his client, unlike 
many other white collar crimes which were committed from "a base motive".

Whelan and McAteer's convictions followed the acquittal of former Anglo Irish 
chairman Sean FitzPatrick, who was cleared of 16 similar charges. All three had 
denied the charges.

The trial focussed on a deal to try and reduce the influence of Ireland's 
one-time richest man Seán Quinn who held millions on future shares inAnglo 
Irish Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> In the 
summer of 2008 the bank tried to sell on Quinn's control of those shares to the 
Maple 10 group, which the jury found was an illegal transaction in the case of 
McAteer and Whelan.
 