
The head of the bank that almost bankrupted Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> has been granted bail under strict 
conditions including the surrender of his passport and having to report to 
police twice a day.

David Drumm appeared in Dublin district court on Monday morning to face 33 
charges relating to the now defunctAnglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank>.

Drumm fought a four-month battle against extradition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/13/former-anglo-irish-bank-chief-david-drumm-faces-33-criminal-charges-in-us>
 from the US to Ireland. He dropped his legal challenge against extradition in 
February.

Within hours of Drumm arriving back in Dublin from Boston, the 49-year-old 
former chief executive of the bank was formally charged at Ballymun Garda 
station in the north of the city.

Drumm was accused of forgery and false accounting for loans in 2008 designed 
to rescue Anglo Irish Bank’s share price. The Dublin-born banker denies any 
wrongdoing. The charges carry prison sentences ranging from five years to an 
unlimited term.

In 2009 Anglo Irish Bank was nationalised, with the Irish taxpayer having to 
pay €30bn (£23bn) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/sep/29/anglo-irish-bank-bailout-cost>
 to rescue a financial institution that was once the preferred bank of builders 
and property speculators.

During the hearing, which began at 11am on Monday, the Garda Síochána said 
they opposed bail due to, they said, Drumm being a flight risk and due to the 
seriousness of the charges and potential penalties.

But court judge Michael Walsh agreed to bail once Drumm surrendered his Irish 
passport and gave assurances he did not possess a US one. He was also ordered 
to sign on twice a day in Balbriggan Garda station in north county Dublin.

The judge instructed Drumm to offer up two independent sureties of €50,000 
each; €25,000 must be lodged in cash and the other €25,000 must be shown in a 
bank account.

After the bank bailout Drumm left Ireland for the US and refused repeated 
requests to come home and be questioned over the bank’s affairs.

During the extradition hearing Drumm was moved from his home in an upmarket 
area of Boston to the Plymouth county correctional centre which his lawyers 
described as “unrelentingly harsh” and “uncomfortable”.

After the rescue of Anglo Irish Bank, it was nationalised and renamed the Irish
Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Resolution Corporation.

The sharp practices at the bank during the Celtic boom, when it became the 
major financier for over-stretched Irish developers and investors playing the 
global property market, caused national outrage in Ireland.





 