
Two bosses from the bank that almost bankrupted Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> have been given 240 hours of 
community service for an illegal multimillion-euro loan scheme to rich 
investors.

Former Anglo Irish Bank <https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank>
 chiefs Pat Whelan and William McAteer were told in Dublin's circuit criminal 
court on Thursday that they had one year to complete the sentence. The orders 
imposed by Judge Martin Nolan were in lieu of a two-year prison sentence.

The pair were found guilty this year in the same court of illegally lending to 
the so-called Maple 10 – a group of investors Anglo Irish Bank sought out as 
alternative investors to Seán Quinn, Ireland's one-time richest man who had 
bought millions of shares in the bank.

There was widespread outrage in the Irish Republic after Whelan and McAteer 
escaped a custodial sentence following a 47-day criminal trial. While they were 
found guilty of theMaple 10 illegal loan scheme 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/courts/who-were-the-maple-10-30196885.html>
, their co-accused and ex-Anglo Irish Bank chairman Seán FitzPatrick was found 
not guilty of all charges against him. Whelan and McAteer were also found not 
guilty of making unlawful loans to six members of Quinn's family.

Quinn's dealings with the Anglo Irish Bank and his use of loans to speculate 
on the international property market resulted in the former billionaire being 
declared bankrupt after the financial and property crash of 2008-2009.

FitzPatrick launched a legal challenge in the Dublin courts earlier this week 
to overturn a ruling that he is not entitled to legal costs relating to the 
trial.

Nearly €30bn (£25bn) of taxpayers' money had to be pumped into the bank in 
2008 to rescue it and the entire Irish banking sector from total collapse. The 
bank has since been nationalised and renamed the IrishBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Resolution Corporation.

The multibillion-euro rescue of the debt-ridden bank came back into public 
focus last year when tape recordings emerged of Anglo Irish executives 
discussing the bailout they had sought from the Irish government.

As Whelan and McAteer left the court on Thursday, Nolan told them: "Enjoy your 
community service."
 