
Angus Fraser, the Middlesex <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/middlesex> 
managing director of cricket, has welcomed England's decision to end Steven 
Finn's Australian nightmare, and believes that the seamer should spend a period 
rebuilding confidence with his county rather than returning to the 
international fold for the World Twenty20.

Finn was included in England's provisional 30-man squad for the tournament, 
which is still due to be held in Bangladesh in March and April, on the same day 
that his early departure from a miserable Ashes tour was confirmed.

Fraser, a former England stalwart whose views on Finn's development have 
occasionally differed from those of the national bowling coach, David Saker, 
thinks the 24-year-old would be better served playing a decent stint of county 
cricket with Middlesex.

"The most important thing is that we come up with a fully co-ordinated and 
clear plan with the coaches from Middlesex and England so that Steven is 
confident in what's taking place, and we get him opening the bowling and taking 
wickets for England again," Fraser told Sky Sports News.

"Playing for Middlesex at the start of the season would be my suggestion. 
There is a World Twenty20 coming up but whether that's going to be too soon, I 
suppose we'll find out in the next week or two. The most important thing is 
that Steven returns to being the bowler we know he can be.

"He's had a very difficult tour. He's not found the form and rhythm he was 
looking for and it seems that the harder he's tried, the worse it's got. 
Sometimes you get in this cycle where you're looking to correct things 
immediately and I think the fact that you're looking for that immediate cure 
rather than being able to take a step back doesn't help.

"So I think this is the right decision. There have been some conversations 
between myself, Middlesex and England over the last couple of days and I think 
allowing Steven some time away to get back to where he wants to be is the right 
way forward."

Middlesex start the season on 6 April at Hove against a Sussex team who will 
almost certainly include Matt Prior as he launches his bid to reclaim his Test 
position, underlining the extra interest in county cricket that England's Ashes 
capitulation could stir.

Jonathan Trott could also make his return that week against Oxford University 
at the Parks before facing Prior and Sussex in Warwickshire's opening 
Championship fixture, and there have even been suggestions that England's team 
director, Andy Flower, may require Kevin Pietersen to make some spring 
appearances for Surrey â€“ although at this stage he is still planning to enter 
the Indian Premier League auction next month.

James Harris, Finn's Middlesex team-mate who has spent the week at the 
National Performance Centre in Loughborough preparing for the Lions tour of Sri 
Lanka, revealed that Mitchell Johnson may already have sown the seeds of a 
revival.

"He'll be gutted," Harris said of Finn. "There's nothing worse than things not 
going how you'd like, something not clicking technically. Finny's had the last 
six weeks or two months trying to find something and that can get on top of you 
at times.

"But we've seen how good Finny is and we know he's going to get back there. 
He's got a bit of technical work to do. I spoke to Angus Fraser the other day 
and he said Finny had a chat with Mitchell Johnson. I think the same thing can 
happen. Johnson's gone from being completely off the radar to one of the 
hardest bowlers in the world to face. Finny's in that category, he'll be back 
in and flying and continue his international career."

Another Middlesex bowler, the off-spinner Ollie Rayner, has been training with 
the Lions in Loughborough this week as cover for Simon Kerrigan, the Lancashire 
left-armer who suffered a back injury this month.

But Kerrigan, who endured an Ashes nightmare of his own on an ill-fated Test 
debut at The Oval in August, remains hopeful of joining them, having withdrawn 
from the Performance Programme in Australia before Christmas to continue the 
process of recovering from his Oval mauling in Loughborough and Lancashire.
 