
Even before Anish Kapoor’s installation at the Château de Versailles was 
vandalised this weekend for the second time there were concerns thatFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> was in the grip of a wave of 
“cultural fascism”.


The contemporary work – officially called Dirty Corner but nicknamed the 
queen’s vagina – had already been defaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/anish-kapoor-queens-vagina-sculpture-at-versailles-vandalised-again>
 this June and was cleaned. This weekend it was daubed with antisemitic 
slogans, which Kapoor has said will remain on the work as a witness to hatred.


The perpetrators may be, as everyone agrees, a minority in a country that 
places a high value on cultural and artistic expression, as epitomised by the 
Frenchl’exception culturelle, but the recent targets have been high profile.


Last October, vandals deflated a American sculptor Paul McCarthy’s massive sex 
toy-shaped sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/20/paul-mccarthy-butt-plug-sculpture-paris-rightwing-backlash>
at Place Vendôme, the symbolic heart of Parisian luxury. The damaged work was 
removed.

The vandalism is reminiscent of attacks on Daniel Buren’s black-and-white 
striped columns, Les Deux Plateaux,which were controversial when they were 
installed at the Palais Royal 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/les-deux-plateaux-monument-to-the-french-malaise-768339.html>
 in 1985. They have since become part of the Paris cultural landscape, but when 
they were installed, antisemitic slogans including “Out Socialist Jewish 
columns” were pasted over walls around the site . Then Socialist Party culture 
minister, Jack Lang, was accused of supporting “Jewish art”.

Fabrice Bousteau, editor-in-chief of Beaux Arts magazine and a commissioner of 
contemporary art exhibitions, said that each time a contemporary work was 
vandalised it could be linked to peaks in support for the far-right Front 
National (FN) in France. “We saw this vandalism at the end of the 80s with 
Daniel Buren’s columns in the Palais Royal. These were also the object of 
antisemitic inscriptions … Buren was shocked, saying it was the first time he 
had seen such inscriptions since the second world war,” Bousteau told the 
Guardian.

“There is a minor faction of the French population that is fascist about 
culture and especially about what it considers to be degenerate art. Most 
French people are respectful of contemporary art, but these people see it as an 
expression of France’s degeneration.


“Anish Kapoor has said he will keep the inscriptions, and in the sense that 
his work is a sociological statement, he is right to do so.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fanish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7119c4755c143203dda7c3086570fcede3a66e2c%2F0_34_5106_3272%2F5106.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anish%20Kapoor's%20'queen's%20vagina'%20vandals%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20cultural%20fascism%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fanish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anish%20Kapoor%27s%20%27queen%27s%20vagina%27%20vandals%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20cultural%20fascism%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fanish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7119c4755c143203dda7c3086570fcede3a66e2c%2F0_34_5106_3272%2F5106.jpg>
 Dirty Corner in the gardens of the Château de Versailles, one of the symbolic 
places in the French republic. Photograph: Charles Platiau/Reuters 
Bousteau added: “The Palais Royal, Place Vendôme, the Château de Versailles: 
these are symbolic places in the French republic. The vandals reject 
contemporary art, which they see as a loss of values. Listen to the FN and you 
realise its only view of culture centres on the conservation of heritage.

“And each time the vandalism is against a contemporary work in a symbolic 
place open to the public. It doesn’t happen in a museum.”


Kapoor’s giant steel and rock sculpture, on display in the Versailles gardens 
facing the palace and measuring 200 feet long and 33 feet high, is a huge 
funnel, which the 61-year-old artist has admitted is “very sexual”. Shortly 
after it was unveiled in June, it was splattered with yellow paint. This was 
subsequently cleaned off.


This week, French president François Hollande condemned the latest attack and 
the antisemitic slogans sprayed on the sculpture as “hateful”. Culture minister 
Fleur Pellerin said she was “angry and shocked”.


“This nauseating act constitutes a further step towards abscurantism. Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> can stimulate debate, even 
shock, but should never be subject to destruction,” Pellerin said.


Bousteau added: “What is even more abhorrent about this vandalism is that the 
Château de Versailles was, at the time it was built, a contemporary experiment.”


“I’m very happy with the government’s reaction to this. As the minister said 
it is cultural fascism, and she is exactly right. It ties in with images we 
have seen recently of Daesch’s destruction of heritage in Syria. It’s a war of 
images.”


In June, the magazine InRocks wrote: “These attacks have nothing to do with 
aesthetic disagreements; they are part of a long political strategy by the 
extreme right in France. For a long time, the Front National and its satellites 
(the family associations, the newspaper Minute, various websites …) have made 
contemporary art their chosen target. This strategy is wide and varied and uses 
a large range of actions: complaints and legal actions, public protests, 
diatribes, caricatures and, finally, vandalism.”

Catherine Pégard, president of the Palace of Versailles, said she was 
“scandalised” by those who had defaced a work of art by a great international 
artist with “the most abominable references”.

Other notable attacks on art

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fanish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3decdd0d1ead7d6ea3fbb860894898cffd7194be%2F148_0_3327_2280%2F3327.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anish%20Kapoor's%20'queen's%20vagina'%20vandals%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20cultural%20fascism%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fanish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anish%20Kapoor%27s%20%27queen%27s%20vagina%27%20vandals%20and%20the%20rise%20of%20cultural%20fascism%20in%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fanish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3decdd0d1ead7d6ea3fbb860894898cffd7194be%2F148_0_3327_2280%2F3327.jpg>
 The Alain Mila fountain was repainted 
<http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/29/french-far-right-mayor-repaints-fountain>
 by the far-right Front National party mayor in Hayange. 
1993: “Behavioural artist” Pierre Pinoncelli relieved himself in a urinal by 
conceptual artist Marcel Duchamp on display at Nîmes, and then smashed it with 
a hammer. The urinal, entitled Fountain, was worth around €2.8m.


2007: Rindy Sam kissed a painting by Cy Twombly 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/europe/6910377.stm> on display at Avignon, 
leaving lipstick marks on the piece. Afterwards, she told a court: “It was just 
a kiss.”

2014: The town fountain at Hayange, in Moselle, created by Alain Mila and 
featuring a rock and an egg-shaped form, was painted blue on the orders of the 
Front National mayor.

 * This article was amended on 17 September to remove a reference to Place 
Vendôme as the “epicentre of Parisian luxury”.
 