
Like some corporate-sponsored mega rock band on a mammoth world tour, there is 
a type of international artist whose epic-scale installations are must-see 
events in a string of major cities. One such visual superstar is the 
Indian-born British sculptorAnish Kapoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/kapoor>, whose grand projects tend to 
be discussed in terms of their dimensions: height, length,tonnage.

His large signature sculptures have been seen in New York, London, Chicago, 
Istanbul, Jerusalem and Delhi, among other places. On Tuesday, his latest work 
officially goes on view at the Chateau de Versailles outside Paris.

It’s 300 years since the death of Louis XIV, whose baroquely opulent style has 
been imitated, but never matched, by everyone from Nicolae Ceausescu to 
Liberace. The Sun God’s greatest legacy is Versailles, a gilded triumph of 
regal architecture and formal gardens.

It is in these immaculate gardens that Kapoor has set Dirty Corner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/04/anish-kapoor-versailles-vagina-controversy-france>
, a massive steel funnel with limbs of broken stone that the artist described 
in one French publication as “le vagin de la reine qui prend le pouvoir” or, 
excuse my French, the vagina of the queen taking power.

The discordant sight of the steel vulva and splayed rocks amid the ornate 
splendour of one of France’s most treasured buildings has not been to 
everyone’s taste.

“It’s difficult to understand why so much money is being spent to inflict this 
trial on the visitors who have paid for a normal visit to the park,” wrote the 
essayist Christian Combaz inLe Figaro, and accused Kapoor of employing the much 
photographed backdrop to produce “a €10m selfie”.

There have also been disapproving murmurings among nationalists and 
monarchists, to whom Kapoor’s intervention is as about as welcome as, well, the 
giant green butt plug that decorated the Place Vendôme last year in the guise 
of Paul McCarthy’sTree sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/20/paul-mccarthy-butt-plug-sculpture-paris-rightwing-backlash>
. The word “provocation” was used on that occasion and it has been bandied 
about once more with regard to Kapoor. Yet the French, who have previously 
played host toJeff Koons’s  
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCIQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.jeffkoons.com%2F&ei=x7hyVfC9CeOU7Qb4m4PQCA&usg=AFQjCNGUohDU1WWQhkY4_grbCIbAJMI97A&sig2=t2qgK0M6RmsC3jtpE-txyA&bvm=bv.95039771,d.ZGU>
kitsch inflatables at Versailles, have long appreciated a provocative gesture. 
More than that, they appreciate Kapoor.

It was in Paris’s Grand Palais in 2011 that he displayed Leviathan 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Leviathan+anish+kapoor+images&biw=1440&bih=793&tbm=isch&imgil=jVAejfH0x2ukQM%253A%253BqlMp9qFPBxgk8M%253Bhttp%25253A%25252F%25252Fcontent.time.com%25252Ftime%25252Fphotogallery%25252F0%25252C29307%25252C2071451%25252C00.html&source=iu&pf=m&fir=jVAejfH0x2ukQM%253A%252CqlMp9qFPBxgk8M%252C_&usg=__HwwZRzLBGvLMheso-Flkvx8GaJQ%3D&ved=0CDQQyjc&ei=OrlyVfvQMsTR7Qa4j4GQAQ#imgrc=jVAejfH0x2ukQM%253A%3BqlMp9qFPBxgk8M%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fimg.timeinc.net%252Ftime%252Fphotoessays%252F2011%252Fkapoor%252Fkapoor_0523_01.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fcontent.time.com%252Ftime%252Fphotogallery%252F0%252C29307%252C2071451%252C00.html%3B611%3B404>
, his celebrated zeppelin-size installation that he dedicated to the artistAi 
Weiwei <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei>, who at the time 
was being held without charge by the Chinese government. That vast inflatable 
was compared to a womb and it’s clear that female reproductive anatomy plays a 
vital part in shaping Kapoor’s sensually dramatic projects. One critic noted 
the influence of Freud and baldly declared: “Anish Kapoor is extremely keen on 
vaginas.” In response, Kapoor said: “How can I put it? I’m endlessly obsessed 
with the question of the interior… Of course I was in psychoanalysis for 20 
years, so some of this stuff did come up.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F07%2Fanish-kapoor-sculpture-versailles-controversy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F6%2F1433586506271%2F3bece846-d89a-4561-940e-48c8153d7702-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anish%20Kapoor%3A%20superstar%20sculptor%20who%20loves%20to%20court%20scandal%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F07%2Fanish-kapoor-sculpture-versailles-controversy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anish%20Kapoor%3A%20superstar%20sculptor%20who%20loves%20to%20court%20scandal%20%7C%20Observer%20profile&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fjun%2F07%2Fanish-kapoor-sculpture-versailles-controversy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F6%2F1433586506271%2F3bece846-d89a-4561-940e-48c8153d7702-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dirty Corner - the sculpture in Versailles that has attracted some 
disapproval. Photograph: Charles Platiau/Reuters 
Kapoor entered psychoanalysis in his 20s during a period in which his sense of 
identity was under siege. Born in Bombay to a Hindu Punjabi father and an Iraqi 
Jewish mother, he attended the elite Doon school, known inevitably as India’s 
Eton. He “hated” his school days. His “wonderfully modern” parents were keen 
for their children to travel. So in 1970, at the age of 16, he moved to Israel 
with one of his brothers, first living on a kibbutz and then studying 
electrical engineering at university. But apparently put off by the maths, he 
dropped out and instead decided he wanted to become an artist.

In 1973, he relocated to England to study at the Hornsey College of Art and 
then the Chelsea School of Art and Design. He has described this period as 
“total liberation”, not least from his ongoing psychological anxiety.

At this early stage of his life, he could describe himself as a former private 
schoolboy kibbutznik Jewish Indian engineering dropout artist living in London. 
It was a lot to assimilate in one so young. “I was seriously fucked up,” he 
later recalled, “full of inner conflict that I didn’t know how to resolve.”

His work at art college, by his own reckoning, was “very symbolic” and “quite 
sexual”, descriptions that can be applied to much of his subsequent output. Art 
seemed to offer a vital means of expression to a troubled Kapoor but what it 
couldn’t provide in the 1970s was a means of living.

He earned money making furniture for the well-connected interior designer 
Nicky Haslam. He also taught for a while at Wolverhampton Polytechnic, which 
was probably not the locus of his dreams when he set out to be an artist.

It was on a trip back to India, though, that he experienced a kind of 
epiphany. Suddenly, he realised that what he found in art was a sense of 
ritual, an almost devotional application of craft, so that the act of making 
art was itself a kind of artistic performance.
 The ArcelorMittal Orbit sculpture in the Queen Elizabeth Olympic park. 
Photograph: Alamy 
His pigment pieces and work with limestone, granite and marble drew acclaim 
and by 1983, a little to his surprise, he was able to start supporting himself 
through art. Thereafter, his trajectory was rapidly and conspicuously upwards. 
Key moments were picking up the best young artist’s prize at the 1990 Venice 
Biennale and then landing the Turner prize the following year.

In 1995, he married the German-born art historian Susanne Spicale. They have 
two children, but were rumoured to have separated a couple of years ago, around 
the time Kapoor began to be photographed with his former assistant, the then 
27-year-old Sophie Walker. Kapoor has never been one to divulge private details 
of his life. The fact that this personal story made it into the press had 
everything to do with his prominent profile. And his prominence had much to do 
with his steel-structuredMarsyas  
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-modern/exhibition/unilever-series-anish-kapoor-marsyas>
installation that spanned the vast Turbine Hall of the Tate Modern in 2002. It 
was that piece, in terms of mass public recognition, that provided his 
breakthrough moment.

As if to confirm his popularity, some 280,000 people attended his 
retrospective at the Royal Academy in 2009, a record figure for a sculpture 
exhibition in London. By then, Kapoor had become a brand-name artist whose work 
sold for millions. He employs a team of 25 at his London base in Camberwell, 
another 30 in other parts of the world, and is estimated to be worth £100m. Two 
years ago, he was knighted for services to the visual arts.

Anish Kapoor at Versailles - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/jun/06/anish-kapoor-at-versailles-in-pictures>
Kapoor is forthright about the dimensions of his success. “Good artists have 
money and I’m not going to pretend that’s not true,” he has said. “It’s a big 
operation that I need to fund. Sculpture is not like painting, it takes months, 
sometimes close to a year. It’s a time-consuming affair. I’m very lucky that 
there are people who want to buy what I make. I have a very sophisticated 
relationship with money.”

Nonetheless, with his kind of wealth and status, Kapoor could easily have 
found himself subsumed by the industrial process of big statement art, a 
complacent figurehead lending his name to uninspired but expensively in-demand 
public works.

Indeed, the criticism that his 376ft ArcelorMittal Orbit 
<http://arcelormittalorbit.com/> London Olympic tower attracted was doubtless 
informed by the suspicion that an overstretched Kapoor was rich in cash (he was 
not paid for the Orbit) but short on ideas.

“I think he goes in for a visual grandstanding, which can be a weakness,” says 
the art critic Matthew Collings. “The Olympic tower is pretty ugly. He loads on 
intimations of profound content sometimes, which can be off-putting too. But he 
mostly balances delicacy with impact. He is a big talent and a genuine artist. 
I rate his sculpted objects for their sensual deliciousness.”

Whether the sensual deliciousness of his work is appreciated by visitors to 
Versailles is another matter. AsCatherine Pégard 
<https://news.artnet.com/art-world/versailles-president-catherine-pegard-on-anish-kapoor-lee-ufan-and-the-palaces-artists-260845>
, who commissioned Kapoor for the royal domain, said: “The biggest difficulty 
of working in Versailles is Versailles itself. Anish Kapoor’s work enters a 
sort of dialogue and confrontation with this place and history.” Exactly what 
kind of dialogue was overheard by Kapoor when two American tourists passed him 
atDirty Corner. “What’s that thing doing blocking the view?” one asked the 
other.

Kapoor heartily approved of the outraged reaction. “In the end, art is not 
dealing in knowable niceties,” he said. “What’s the point of another pretty 
thing in a nice place? I don’t need another nice place to show and Versailles 
certainly doesn’t need another pretty thing. One wants to look at something and 
wonder, ‘What the hell is this? Why is it here?’”

If nothing else, it seems certain that there will be plenty of visitors to 
Louis XIV’s sumptuous palace this summer grappling with precisely those 
fundamental artistic questions.

THE KAPOOR FILE

Born 12 March 1954 in Mumbai (then Bombay). His father was a hydrographer in 
the Indian navy and his mother came from a family of Iraqi Jews.

Best of times There have been many highlights, but the record-breaking 2009 
retrospective at the Royal Academy stands out for confirming Kapoor’s 
pre-eminent role in contemporary British art.

Worst of times His late teens and early 20s were a period of great internal 
turmoil that sent him into almost two decades of psychoanalysis. In terms of 
his art, the Olympic tower has been notable for the strength of criticism it 
has generated.

What he says “I think we’ve gone totally public sculpture mad. Public 
sculpture... oh God, even the phrase makes me feel tired.”

What others say “People here were unhappy about certain statements that he 
made, saying that he was not an Indian artist, but a British artist. But now I 
think there has been a shift, because he can accept that he belongs everywhere 
and nowhere.” Roobina Karode, director of the Kiran Nadar art museum in 
northern India.
 