
There isn’t much room for ambiguity. It is clearly Anish Kapoor’s Cloud Gate 
<http://anishkapoor.com/210/Cloud-Gates.html>, the bulbous monument in Chicago 
known as the Bean, whose shiny metal surface reflects the sky in ever-changing 
ways.

Except this one is not in Chicago, and it is not by Kapoor. It has been built 
in the Xinjiang region ofChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> in 
what appears to be an insouciant act of plagiarism.

The British sculptor is livid. “It seems that in China today it is permissible 
to steal the creativity of others,” Kapoor raged. “I feel I must take this to 
the highest level and pursue those responsible in the courts … the Chinese 
authorities must act to stop this kind of infringement and allow the full 
enforcement of copyright.”

The sculpture in the town of Karamay and the outrage about it raises 
fascinating questions. Why would a city in China think it could just knock up a 
copy of a living artist’s work without permission? Is this a malign act, or a 
magnificently naive one? Do people in the west make too much of the rights of 
the individual author?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fanish-kapoor-bean-china-cloud-gate-copycat-intellectual-property%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439464512439%2Fcbf5f7b3-6600-4cd0-a7b5-7405ac9d9f36-2060x1355.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anish%20Kapoor%20is%20right%20to%20be%20livid%20about%20China%20stealing%20his%20big%20Bean%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fanish-kapoor-bean-china-cloud-gate-copycat-intellectual-property%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anish%20Kapoor%20is%20right%20to%20be%20livid%20about%20China%20stealing%20his%20big%20Bean%20sculpture&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fanish-kapoor-bean-china-cloud-gate-copycat-intellectual-property%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F13%2F1439464512439%2Fcbf5f7b3-6600-4cd0-a7b5-7405ac9d9f36-2060x1355.jpeg>
 Spot the difference … Anish Kapoor’s Chicago sculpture Cloud Gate, 
affectionately known as the Bean. Photograph: Alamy 
William Hogarth would sympathise with Kapoor. The great 18th-century artist 
was so frustrated by pirated editions of his prints that he successfully 
lobbied for aBritish copyright act 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artists/william-hogarth-265>, known as Hogarth’s 
Act. The Engraver’s Copyright Act was repealed by the Copyright Act 1911.

The right of artists and authors to not have their work copied wholesale is a 
result of a commercial market in culture: Hogarth was one of the first artists 
to sell his work in the open marketplace. Today, every work of art in Europe, 
the US and many other places is someone’s property, and protected as such.

Are the rules different in China? Kapoor’s case is not the country’s first; 
copycat culture is rife in art and architecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/jan/07/china-copycat-architecture-seeing-double>
. And it extends to music, too. Fans of Frozen were troubled, or amused, when 
they heard howremarkably familiar the “new” Beijing Winter Olympics anthem was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/04/chinese-winter-olympics-anthem-rip-off-frozen-song-say-critics>
 to the film’s song Let It Go.

Does China simply have different attitudes to creativity? Does it believe less 
in the Romantic idea of artistic genius? It is nonsense to stereotype 
contemporary Chinese culture in this way. The creative individual has been at 
heart of Chinese art for a long time.Painters and poets 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/nsong/hd_nsong.htm> of the Song dynasty, 
during the 12th century <http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/nsong/hd_nsong.htm>, 
were celebrated as distinctive creators at a time when European art embodied 
the labour of anonymous artisans and scribes.

Seeing double: what China's copycat culture means for architecture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2013/jan/07/china-copycat-architecture-seeing-double>
There’s no reason to think that China placed a low value on the creative 
individual – until the 20th century, that is.

When Mao Zedong launched the Cultural Revolution in China in the 1960s, young 
zealots were encouraged to root out intellectuals and elitists. Writers 
suffered along with anyone else, such as schoolteachers, who could be 
identified as an elitist. The Cultural Revolution undoubtedly attacked the idea 
that individual creativity should be celebrated or protected.

Andy Warhol perceptively identified Mao with the idea of the copy 
<http://culturoid.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/mao_andy-warhol-1973.jpg> in 
his silkscreen portraits of the communist leader. Today’s China is remote from 
the one Mao wanted to create – economically, at least. But asAi Weiwei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ai-weiwei> keeps reminding the world, 
it is far from a democratic state. And perhaps now the ghost of Mao is smiling 
at Xinjiang’s mockery of bourgeois western artistic values.
 