
Scott King 
<http://www.saatchigallery.com/artists/scott_king.htm?section_name=new_britannia>
 is nervous. He was nervous back in 2014, when his miniature graphic novel,
Anish and Antony Take Afghanistan 
<http://www.jrp-ringier.com/pages/index.php?id_r=4&id_p=6&id_b=2597>, was 
exhibited in New York – entirely by coincidence – on theanniversary of 9/11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/11/america-9-11-anniversary-ceremonies>
. The problem is that the book ends in an orgy of terrorist violence – a swarm 
of passenger planes crashing into buildings. He’s nervous today because the 
same work is being shown in London, and again the timing is bad. After all, he 
tells me, he’s not really making a point about foreign policy, or even 
terrorism.

You could be forgiven for thinking otherwise. The magazine art director turned 
artist has created a strip, illustrated in Victor magazine style byWill Henry 
<http://www.itsnicethat.com/articles/scott-king-anish-and-antony-take-afghanistan>
, which tells the story of Anish Kapoor and Antony Gormley “regenerating” 
Afghanistan through monumental art. It is a hallucinatory romp in which the 
country’s turbo-gentrification comes before a devastating fall. But this is a 
parable, King tells me, and a copy ofSwift’s A Modest Proposal 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Modest_Proposal> on his desk hints at the 
tradition he’s working in. The story is less about Helmand than Hartlepool.

“Lots of people immediately read Afghanistan as a metaphor for the north-east 
and how New Labour attempted to regenerate through totemic sculpture,” he says. 
King, originally from Goole in east Yorkshire, wanted to point out how absurd 
it was that, “in areas that have been wilfully run down and had their industry 
removed”, the solution could be gargantuan art. ThinkGormley’s Angel of the 
North 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/artblog/2008/feb/13/happybirthdayangeloftheno>
 orTemenos, Kapoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2010/jun/10/anish-kapoor-sculpture-temenos-art>
’s 110m-long slinky spring, which straddles Middlesbrough dock. In King’s work, 
both men come off as preposterous narcissists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fscott-king-anish-kapoor-antony-gormley-take-afghanistan-graphic-novel-will-henry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86e018d1949d091046e15ff64737a72ae63f4d57%2F40_363_877_1040%2F877.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anish%20and%20Antony%20to%20the%20rescue!%20Can%20the%20sculptors%20gentrify%20Afghanistan%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fscott-king-anish-kapoor-antony-gormley-take-afghanistan-graphic-novel-will-henry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anish%20and%20Antony%20to%20the%20rescue%21%20Can%20the%20sculptors%20gentrify%20Afghanistan%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fnov%2F30%2Fscott-king-anish-kapoor-antony-gormley-take-afghanistan-graphic-novel-will-henry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86e018d1949d091046e15ff64737a72ae63f4d57%2F40_363_877_1040%2F877.jpg>
 ‘My complaint is that there is a degree of arrogance and disconnectedness to 
what [Kapoor and Gormley] are doing’ … Scott King 
“I don’t hate them,” he insists. “You might say I was jealous of them, but I’m 
not. I’m really not. My complaint is that there is a degree of arrogance and 
disconnectedness to what they’re doing.” Gormley’s sculptures are based on his 
own body, although the aim is to conjure up a sort of contemporary everyman. 
King concedes this, but says if you strip that explanation away, “This is a 
65ft-tall version of himself with wings. Similarly, his proposal for the 
Olympic site was a 390ft-tall statue of himself. This is what dictators do. 
They build 400ft statues of themselves.”

King doesn’t like the word satire – he says it suggests “a kind of temporary 
pin-pricking” – but much of his work has been about cleverly taking the piss 
out of art and pop culture. Which is maybe why it’s a surprise to find that, in 
person, he’s down to earth, warm, and endearingly unsure of himself. He’s 
represented by the buzzyEast End gallery Herald St <http://www.heraldst.com/>, 
in London, and byBortolami in New York 
<http://bortolamigallery.com/artist/scott-king//works/>, but tells me “I’ve 
done some crap work”. And although he was art director ofI-D 
<http://i-d.vice.com/en_gb> at only 24, producing covers with Kate Moss, Björk 
and Drew Barrymore, he doesn’t have the air of an arbiter of cool.

We sit in a small room in his house, sipping milky tea amid stacks of books 
about art, old records and scribbled Post-it notes. He is a strong physical 
presence, but not intimidating: stubbled, wearing T-shirt and jeans. Someone 
you might see reading in a quiet corner of your local. He says he never 
entirely bought into the dizzy world of parties and openings. “I look back 20 
years and think I was an idiot because I used to go to the pub with my 
notebook, scribbling Joy Division misery.” He has the words Love Will Tear Us 
Apart tattooed on his right arm.

“I was in a privileged position as art director … you get into gigs for free, 
you don’t queue any more. I certainly didn’t exploit it in the way I could 
have.” He yearned to be a “real” artist. “I used to look at theYBAs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2013/apr/30/yba-25-years-damien-hirst>
 and think that looks so much better than sticking down photocopies of pictures 
of Kylie or whatever.”
 A frame from Anish and Antony Take Afghanistan by Scott King, with 
illustrations by Will Henry. Illustration: courtesy the artist and Herald St, 
London 
He didn’t have to wait too long. He recalls the night of his 30th birthday in 
1999, basking in the glory of curating a show at the Institute of Contemporary 
Arts in London. “Where I’m from, coming to that! I remember going into the ICA 
bookshop having come to London to sign on and not being able to afford a book – 
[from that] to actually having a show.”

His particular combination of media savvy and art-world cachet attracted the 
attention of the Pet Shop Boys and Morrissey, for both of whom he has designed 
record sleeves. I almost get the impression he’s more comfortable in the world 
of music than art. He released a single in 2013 calledYou’re My Favourite Artist
 <https://soundcloud.com/thevinylfactory/scott-king-youre-my-favourite>, a 
funny and dancable satire on fandom. The likes of Mumford & Sons get both 
barrels – he once told an interviewer that the band “represent everything that 
is wrong with this country today”. Now he remarks that Adele is “ruining our 
lives” with her brand of “dreadful pub karaoke”.

Despite King’s relative success, this still feels like punching up. At 46, he 
occupies an odd place in the art world. He’s neither blue chip like Kapoor and 
Gormley, nor Turner fodder like his friend Jeremy Deller, nor the latest hip 
young thing – a status he reckons the art industry sets far too much store by. 
He laments the lack of support for artists in the middle of their careers, of 
medium status. There’s also the “baggage” of what he calls “this design thing” 
that includesCher Guevara 
<http://www.saatchigallery.com/artists/scott_king_articles.htm>, a poster he 
created to give away free to students, and which, 15 years on, refuses to die. 
“It’s something I regret deeply,” he says, but adds: “It was a good thing, it 
was quite funny.”

It’s this tension between self-belief and regret, and his sense of himself as 
an eternal outsider, that makes King appealing, despite his stinging critiques. 
He is a walking antidote to the artist-as-saviour. And if he ever does get that 
big public sculpture commission, we can be sure it won’t be tall, and it won’t 
be him.

• Anish and Antony Take Afghanistan <http://www.heraldst.com/anish-and-antony> 
by Scott King, with illustrations by Will Henry, is at Herald St –Golden 
Square, London W1, until 12 December. Tel: 020-7168 2566.
 