
Anish Kapoor <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/kapoor>, it turns out, 
is not only a brilliant artist but a brave one. Faced with an antisemitic attack
on his open-air sculpture Dirty Corner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/08/anish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france>
, he has chosen to defiantly leave the ugly, vicious daubings as they are, to 
let his art bear the scars of contemporary Europe’s darkest impulses: a dirty 
corner indeed, stained by racism and ignorance.

It is the second time this sensual, suggestive work of art has been vandalised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/19/anish-kapoor-versailles-sculpture-vandalised-how-should-i-respond>
 – and of course there’s a very laudable political logic in Kapoor’s decision 
to let the rancid markings stay. “The vandalised sculpture now looks like a 
graveyard,” he says, in explanation of his decision to let racism and 
intolerance “expose itself fully, in full view for all to see”.

Anish Kapoor's 'queen's vagina' vandals and the rise of cultural fascism in 
France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/08/anish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france>
So an ambitiously organic, ripely coloured and textured, overflowing and 
tumultuous addition to the classical landscape of Louis XIV’s palacehas now 
become something else 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/08/anish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france>
, a damaged mirror in which France can see the bigoted face of its minority of 
“cultural fascists”, not to mention the strange ideology and prejudices of 
people who are monarchists in a country that has been a republic since 1848.

But it’s not fair to Kapoor’s beautiful work of art to let it be wrecked, 
however noble the cause of fighting racism. This is about the kind of artist 
Anish Kapoor is. Clearly he is prepared to be combative when he needs to be. In 
recent years his public art has become increasingly controversial. Its sheer 
scale and exuberance invites criticism – not everyone understands his crazy 
blood-red London Olympic follythe Orbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/may/11/london-olympics-orbit-anish-kapoor>
, though it has not attracted anything like the attacks that have been 
inflicted on Dirty Corner. Kapoor’s forays into controversy have in fact 
rescued him from almost stultifying levels of establishment acclaim. But this 
is getting silly. His art is not aggressive or straightforwardly political. It 
is on the contrary spiritual, sublime, contemplative and richly aesthetic, and 
it deserves to be enjoyed as such.

His art bears the scars of Europe’s darkest impulses: a dirty corner indeed, 
stained by racism and ignorance

Anish Kapoor is not Banksy <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/banksy>. 
His art is not some simplistic “statement”. It does not “make you think” so 
much as make you feel. He is a sensualist – and I am not necessarily talking 
about vaginas. Maybe Dirty Corner is vaginal, maybe not, but like all his work 
since he first became well-known in the 1980s, it is a masterpiece of chromatic 
and spatial poetry. Kapoor is one of the two greatest colourists alive – the 
other is the American light artistJames Turrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/james-turrell>, and his real genius – 
that’s not too strong a word – is to use colour and light, shade and shadow and 
the darkness of voids and recesses to create expansive, moving, sometimes 
utterly disorientating artistic experiences.

To experience a work by this artist is to be seduced by deep reds or cosmic 
blues, to get confused between reality and illusion – what looks like a blue 
surface may turn out to be a deep void – and to be enriched and inspired by a 
deep, dark, bloody sense of the human interior or the shimmering infinity of 
the cosmos. Vile graffiti adds nothing to that experience – but it can destroy 
it.

The vandals are idiots who – even in the most culturally conservative terms – 
have picked the wrong target. There is plenty of art around that is vulgar, and 
that would make a mockery of Versailles. Kapoor, however, is one of the most 
genuinely gifted, aesthetically rewarding, talented and imaginative artists of 
our time – one of the few whose work is guaranteed to be admired a century from 
now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fanish-kapoor-dirty-corner-cleaned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718205729%2F71a1dfe9-a2c7-46b6-bfc6-f7202f4abdd3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anish%20Kapoor%20must%20reconsider%20%E2%80%93%20Dirty%20Corner%20should%20be%20cleaned%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fanish-kapoor-dirty-corner-cleaned%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anish%20Kapoor%20must%20reconsider%20%E2%80%93%20Dirty%20Corner%20should%20be%20cleaned%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fanish-kapoor-dirty-corner-cleaned%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441718205729%2F71a1dfe9-a2c7-46b6-bfc6-f7202f4abdd3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Richard Serra’s sculpture The matter of Time at the Guggenheim Museum in 
Bilbao, Spain. Photograph: Afredo Aldai/EPA 
Public art often gets scarred by battles over its meaning or even its right to 
exist.Rachel Whiteread’s House <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/whiteread> 
– a concrete cast of the interior of an east London house and the best 
sculpture created by the “young British art” generation in the 1990s – got the 
words “Wot for?” written on it. They remained. But clever postmodern theories 
of meaning aside, it is a brute tragedy with no redeeming features that 
philistine attitudes of the kind expressed by that graffitist led to House 
being demolished, and Britain losing a great work of art.

When artists get embroiled in arguments about public sculpture, it is tempting 
and perhaps reassuring for them to see the art itself as a political manifesto. 
Thus the American sculptorRichard Serra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/serra> got into a dispute with 
cultural conservatives who loathed – and eventually demolished – his sculpture
Tilted Arc 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/context-comment/articles/gallery-lost-art-richard-serra>
. But in the end, the controversy over this massive steel abstract monument in 
Manhattan in the 1980s is one for the history books, an academic talking point 
to be gone over by PhD students. It is dull and insignificant set beside the 
living, awe-inspiring, thrilling power of Serra’s surviving masterpieces, like 
his permanent installation in theBilbao Guggenheim 
<http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/artists/1377>.

Kapoor should reconsider. He is giving bigots the oxygen of publicity and 
letting them ruin a beautiful work of art. Dirty Corner deserves to be cleaned 
and properly protected by the French police. That would be the true victory for 
culture over barbarism. Even better, make it a permanent addition to 
Versailles. It is lovely enough.
 