
British artist Anish Kapoor <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/kapoor> 
announced at a press conference on Wednesday that a Versailles politician is 
taking him to court for choosing to display antisemitic information on his 
sculpture Dirty Corner.

“I think it’s a wonderful reversal; I’ll see him in court,” said Kapoor. “It 
shows how insane the whole thing is.”

The sculpture on display at the Château de Versailles – a large steel 
structure surrounded by large rocks, dubbed by French reporters “the queen’s 
vagina” – was vandalised last weekend with hateful, antisemitic graffiti for a 
second time, which Kapoor has decided not to scrub off.

Le Parisien 
<http://www.leparisien.fr/flash-actualite-culture/l-artiste-anish-kapoor-recu-par-hollande-a-l-elysee-08-09-2015-5073613.php#xtref=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.google.de%2F>
 reports that Versailles municipal councillorFabien Bouglé 
<https://twitter.com/vfavenir> filed a complaint to the local public prosecutor 
against Kapoor and the president of Versailles palace, Catherine Pégard.

In a copy obtained by AFP 
<http://www.exponaute.com/magazine/2015/09/09/anish-kapoor-a-versailles-retour-en-cinq-dates-sur-les-degradations-de-dirty-corner/>
, Bouglé said the artwork now incites racial hatred and insults, citing the 
artist and Versailles president as being “perfectly aware” and able to “fully 
recognise the antisemitic content of these entries”.

Anish Kapoor's 'queen's vagina' vandals and the rise of cultural fascism in 
France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/08/anish-kapoors-queens-vagina-vandals-and-the-rise-of-cultural-fascism-in-france>
In June, when the work was first vandalised, the right-leaning Bouglé 
commented on the sculpture’s first attack 
<http://www.franceinfo.fr/actu/faits-divers/article/oeuvre-vandalisee-versailles-une-certaine-intolerance-anish-kapoor-693942>
 as “a response to art with art”.

Kapoor recently met with French president François Hollande in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>. He also visited his vandalised 
artwork. “I was there yesterday and I felt like crying,” said Kapoor. “It’s 
really nasty.”

When asked why he had decided to leave the graffiti up, he said the response 
was complicated.

“It feels the right thing to do is leave the scar there,” he said. “The work 
is called Dirty Corner, the piece seems to push something dirty, now we see 
dirty politics. It’s complicated partly because it’s the home of how France 
views itself – there are three or four sites like that inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, and this happens to be one of them.”

According to Kapoor, Hollande said he supported the artist’s choice to leave 
the graffiti untouched.


“He said he supported my choice from a pedagogical view,” said Kapoor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fanish-kapoor-sued-racist-graffiti-versailles-sculpture-queens-vagina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441892425808%2Fc366124d-2269-4b62-9537-38a1a5d30b0f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anish%20Kapoor%20sued%20for%20leaving%20racist%20graffiti%20on%20his%20'queen's%20vagina'%20sculpture%20at%20Versailles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fanish-kapoor-sued-racist-graffiti-versailles-sculpture-queens-vagina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anish%20Kapoor%20sued%20for%20leaving%20racist%20graffiti%20on%20his%20%27queen%27s%20vagina%27%20sculpture%20at%20Versailles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fanish-kapoor-sued-racist-graffiti-versailles-sculpture-queens-vagina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441892425808%2Fc366124d-2269-4b62-9537-38a1a5d30b0f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 François Hollande, president of France, left, with Anish Kapoor at the Elysée 
palace, Paris, on 8 September. Photograph: Alain Jocard/EPA 
“What is the right thing to do?” he asked. “I don’t really know the answer. 
It’s really violent, I want to get rid of it, but maybe this is what the work 
is asking for.” Even if Versailles wants to clean it off, he said, “it’s not 
their work.”

A request for comment to the Palace of Versailles was unanswered.

“It’s a very strange situation for an artist to be in,” said Kapoor.

When he first made the abstract artwork, Kapoor referred to it in the 
feminine, calling it “she”. It was, after all, in Versailles, which he defined 
as “where a certain type of male power has been”. In the press, it was swiftly 
nicknamed “the queen’s vagina”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fanish-kapoor-sued-racist-graffiti-versailles-sculpture-queens-vagina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441892897293%2F4c23e245-1085-4e4a-b490-65b75df9b828-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anish%20Kapoor%20sued%20for%20leaving%20racist%20graffiti%20on%20his%20'queen's%20vagina'%20sculpture%20at%20Versailles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fanish-kapoor-sued-racist-graffiti-versailles-sculpture-queens-vagina%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anish%20Kapoor%20sued%20for%20leaving%20racist%20graffiti%20on%20his%20%27queen%27s%20vagina%27%20sculpture%20at%20Versailles&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fanish-kapoor-sued-racist-graffiti-versailles-sculpture-queens-vagina%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441892897293%2F4c23e245-1085-4e4a-b490-65b75df9b828-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Dirty Corner was unveiled in June in the gardens of the Palace of Versailles. 
It was defaced within days. Photograph: Charles Platiau/Reuters 
“If you take a teacup and put it on its side, it’s a vagina?” he asks, shaking 
his head.

Kapoor made his comments at the Convent La Tourette, a Le Corbusier-designed 
monastery in Eveux, where his latest exhibition opens today as part of the 13th 
Biennale de Lyon.

Despite his love of symbolism, Kapoor said he tried not to overload his art 
with meaning. “Art is a process of experimentation where certain things arrive 
and you try to follow them,” he said. “In the end, one has to trust the work 
does its own thing.”
 