
The conviction of Anjem Choudary  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/16/anjem-choudary-convicted-of-supporting-islamic-state>
marks a significant moment in the history of British jihadism, but it is 
unclear what kind of an impact it will have. Terrorist groups and networks do 
suffer when they lose charismatic leaders. Their removal is unlikely to 
completely destroy a group, but it does change the dynamic.

Terrorist networks are, at their core, groups of people gathering around an 
ideology. Individuals are drawn in for various (often deeply personal) reasons, 
but to function as an effective unit that works to advance an ideology requires 
organisation and leadership. Otherwise, it is just a cluster of angry people 
with no particular direction.

Anjem Choudary case raises questions about terror laws, says watchdog
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/17/anjem-choudary-case-raises-questions-terror-laws-watchdog>
It is here that leadership figures are key. They provide direction and can 
help motivate others, as well as offering some practical experience and, 
crucially, contacts. An individual who has risen to the top of a terrorist 
network after a long period of time will develop an understanding of what 
works. The relationships they will have developed over time are hard to 
replicate.

He was a charming and charismatic fellow who would make people laugh while he 
told them about brutal punishments

Choudary is a prime example. Involved in the formation of the UK-based 
jihadist groupal-Muhajiroun <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-muhajiroun> in 
the mid-1990s, Choudary had pedigree and trust among the community of 
individuals drawn to the group as well as the wider extremist community. This 
included those who joined the group pre- and post-9/11. He understood the 
mechanics of how to organise protests and attract media attention, providing 
the kinds of soundbites news organisations wanted to use. And he was a charming 
and charismatic fellow who would make people laugh while he told them about the 
brutal punishments that would be meted out in the perfect Islamic state he was 
seeking to achieve. All of this made him a very persuasive figure to the lost 
or curious young men and women who were drawn to him after seeing or hearing 
him in the press. In his absence there is no doubt that the network will suffer 
to some degree, even if Choudary’s own reputation is enhanced to some degree by 
the perception that he is martyr to the cause, possibly adding to his street 
cred among followers when he is released.

Other terrorist groups and networks have suffered as a result of the loss of 
such figures.The Shining Path 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/02/fifty-four-adults-children-peru-captive-decades-rescued-shining-path>
 in Peru largely shrank back into drug smuggling networks after its leader 
Abimael Guzman was arrested in 1992. Al-Qaida has never quite been the same 
since Osama bin Laden was killed and the less charismaticAyman al-Zawahiri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayman-al-zawahiri> took over. After Abu 
Musab al-Zarqawiwas killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/jun/09/guardianobituaries.alqaida>, 
al-Qaida in Iraq faced a period of decline. In all of these cases, the groups 
did find ways of picking up or evolving subsequently, but the removal of 
leadership figures had a noticeable impact.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fanjem-choudary-conviction-terror-networks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c5e28bd99525795c4d026e4dbc74bc428feb361%2F0_65_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anjem%20Choudary%20was%20a%20leader.%20His%20conviction%20will%20damage%20terror%20networks%20%7C%20Raffaello%20Pantucci&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fanjem-choudary-conviction-terror-networks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anjem%20Choudary%20was%20a%20leader.%20His%20conviction%20will%20damage%20terror%20networks%20%7C%20Raffaello%20Pantucci&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fanjem-choudary-conviction-terror-networks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c5e28bd99525795c4d026e4dbc74bc428feb361%2F0_65_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 ‘Al-Qaida has never quite been the same since Osama bin Laden was killed and 
the less charismatic Ayman al-Zawahiri (r) took over.’ Photograph: HO/REUTERS 
The importance of these charismatic leaders is both inspirational and 
practical. Choudary was famous for being the face of al-Muhajiroun and knew the 
lines. But he was also an organiser – which is important in ideological 
networks that aim to get people excited about ideas. They need not only to 
deliver the ideology persuasively, but also to help others organise themselves 
to hold protests, send out messages and establish websites. Choudary was very 
aware of this role and used the ease of contact and travel around Europe as a 
way of further internationalising his cause. Describing his relationship with a 
pair of radicals in Norway who helped establish the local equivalent of al 
Muhajiroun, Profetens Ummah, Choudary said: “There are no administrative links 
between us, but I am a mentor and adviser for them.”

The jailing of Choudary for a few years will not end the story of British 
jihadism. Partially because there are others like him, but also because the 
narrative he was espousing has entered the mainstream to the extent that his 
role as a megaphone for radicalisation is less important. But his imprisonment 
will have an impact on his immediate group and some of the contacts he had 
developed over time. For some time at least, he will be silenced and unable to 
spread his hateful ideology so publicly. Unless he is managed carefully, it is 
possible he might end up causing some damage in prison by radicalising fellow 
inmates, but the mere fact of his removal from the public conversation for an 
extended period will certainly do no damage to the cause of countering 
terrorism in the UK. Meanwhile, some of the people who were drawn into 
Choudary’s orbit and subsequently groomed or recruited by jihadist networks 
will, thanks to his absence, have a new hurdle to cross.
 