
For years Anjem Choudary deflected claims that his words and actions were 
designed to push his followers into terrorism by claiming he believed in a 
“covenant of security”; that meant because Britain gave a home to Muslims, it 
should not be the target of violent jihad.


Anjem Choudary convicted of supporting Islamic State
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/16/anjem-choudary-convicted-of-supporting-islamic-state>
But the fact is that again and again, people connected to him and his Islamist 
groups became involved in terrorism. The sheer weight of that pattern, 
involving 100 people in Britain alone, points to this being not a coincidence 
but a deliberate aim.

The lifting of legal restrictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/16/anjem-choudary-convicted-of-supporting-islamic-state>
 on Tuesday means the public can be told of his conviction for encouraging 
support for Islamic State. Choudary and his co-defendant, Mohammed Rahman, 33, 
were convicted in July but details of the trial, including the verdict, could 
not be reported until now. It comes after years of widespread bafflement as to 
how he avoided going to jail for terrorism offences.

The view that Choudary played a pernicious role in funneling people towards 
terrorism has remarkable levels of agreement across the political and religious 
spectrum.

It is shared by intelligence agencies across Europe, with one saying his 
groups had a sometimes “explicitly violent ideology”. But it is also shared by 
groups on the political left and right, as well as moderate Muslims. Even some 
alleged extremist Muslim figures in Britain privately say they suspected all 
along that Choudary was pushing young Muslims towards terrorism, and were 
suspicious when he was not stopped.
Who is Anjem Choudary? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=anjem_choudary>
Choudary first came to prominence as a spokesman for al-Muhajiroun. It was set 
up by Omar Bakri Muhammad, the “Tottenham Ayatollah”, and Choudary has proudly 
described himself as a student of Bakri Muhammad.

Bakri Muhammad set up al-Muhajiroun (“the emigrants”) after he was fired in 
1996 as the leader of the UK branch of Hizb ut-Tahrir (Party of Liberation), 
which he had turned into Britain’s fastest-growing Muslim group with his 
anti-Israeli, anti-homosexual, anti-liberal rhetoric. He was ousted when Hizb 
ut-Tahrir’s Middle Eastern leadership decided he was too extreme.

By 2005 at the latest, the authorities in the UK had information showing 
al-Muhajiroun’s willingness to support jihad, according to documents seen by 
the Guardian.

In a sworn statement, the terrorist-turned-supergrass Mohammed Junaid Babar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/may/01/terrorism.politics> said Bakri 
Muhammad had funded jihad and was willing to do so again.

Babar attended a terrorist training camp in Pakistan with Mohammad Sidique Khan
 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/jul/14/july7.uksecurity5>, the ringleader 
of the London suicide bombings on 7 July 2005.

In a statement made after his arrest, Babar described events in 2001-02 as a 
group of jihadis and associates plotted an attack in Britain: “Around the same 
time Omar Bakri had given money to [name of suspect] for the jihad.” That money 
was used to fund those in Afghanistan fighting western forces.

Bakri Muhammad also agreed on another occasion to give money for jihad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7688f54f7b7016b8e06568c26835aabb720fa19f%2F0_99_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anjem%20Choudary%3A%20a%20hate%20preacher%20who%20spread%20terror%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anjem%20Choudary%3A%20a%20hate%20preacher%20who%20spread%20terror%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7688f54f7b7016b8e06568c26835aabb720fa19f%2F0_99_2048_1228%2F2048.jpg>
 Omar Bakri Muhammad in Beirut in 2005. Photograph: Nabil Mounzer/EPA 
Babar’s statement emerged during the UK investigation into a plot to bomb 
targets such as the Bluewater shopping centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/oct/30/uk-security-crime> in Kent. A 
number of the plotters had al-Muhajiroun links.

Al-Muhajiroun <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/al-muhajiroun> was disbanded in 
2004 before it could be legally banned and Bakri Muhammad left Britain. It 
re-emerged as a new group, frequently changing its name after being 
re-proscribed, with Choudary in effect its leader, in regular contact with 
Bakri Muhammad.

Choudary courted publicity and controversy, making frequent media appearances, 
and managed to evade prosecution.

In 2015, just before his arrest, Choudary claimed he was merely engaged in a 
“verbal jihad”.Questioned by America’s CBS News 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/recruiting-for-isis-60-minutes-2/>, Choudary used 
an argument he had relied on over the years to rebut claims that he was a 
terrorist menace. He said: “There was a report out recently which said that I 
inspired 500 people, in fact, to carry out operations here and abroad. And if 
that were really the case, don’t you think that I’d be arrested and I’d be 
sitting in prison?”

He was on television so much he even has his own listing 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2552418/> on the actor database IMDb.

In the Muslim community, several sources said the view on the street was that 
Choudary was a spy or informant. One figure said: “Other people got banged up 
and nothing ever happened to this guy.”

“He is a very clever individual,” said Commander Dean Haydon, the head of 
counter-terrorism at Scotland Yard, who denied Choudary had been allowed to 
remain active for the purposes of gathering intelligence, saying police would 
have leapt at the chance to prosecute: “If we had the evidence we would have 
done.”

Some took matters into their own hands. There was even a secret British Muslim 
effort to entice some of his followers away. Some of those who left gave an 
insight into the style and content of his message.

Two sources with knowledge of al-Muhajiroun recruits said Choudary would 
never, even in private, break the law by directly urging the carrying out of a 
specific terrorist act.

His statements in public enticed those attracted by the idea of violent 
extremism. Then in private, sermons and lectures pointed them in the direction 
of violent jihad. He said Islam not only permitted violence but commanded it. 
With recruits ideologically primed, they were let loose.

Again and again, people who joined his groups, attended the lectures and 
accepted his worldview went on to be involved in terrorism.

Perhaps the best known example is Michael Adebolajo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/feb/26/lee-rigby-killers-michael-adebolajo-adebowale-whole-life-ruling>
, who in May 2013 led an accomplice in the hacking to death of the soldier Lee 
Rigby on a London street. Adebolajo was a convert who learned his understanding 
of Islam from Choudary and his acolytes. “He was on our ideological 
wavelength,” said Choudary, days after the attack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa608f4a8230bfd373e9c68e04e269cbf75f30bbc%2F0_26_1272_1589%2F1272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anjem%20Choudary%3A%20a%20hate%20preacher%20who%20spread%20terror%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anjem%20Choudary%3A%20a%20hate%20preacher%20who%20spread%20terror%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa608f4a8230bfd373e9c68e04e269cbf75f30bbc%2F0_26_1272_1589%2F1272.jpg>
 Michael Adebolajo at a protest in 2007. Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP 
Adebolajo was a regular at the al-Muhajiroun stall on Woolwich High Street, 
handing out extremist literature. He attended meetings and demonstrations run 
by al-Muhajiroun and successor groups for at least five years, from around 2005 
to 2011, during which he heard an extremist interpretation of Islam.

Bakri Muhammad, talking to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/23/woolwich-attack-suspects-extremism> 
days after Rigby’s murder horrified Britain, seemed to be verging on bragging. 
He said Adebolajo received special attention as a new convert: “In 2004 Muslims 
were feeling a lot of pressures from new laws and from Iraq.”

Adebolajo asked the group when violence could be justified. “He asked these 
type of questions, like many others,” said Bakri Muhammad. “He was asking what 
to do, he was most likely affected by the situation in Iraq and Afghanistan.”

Also tied to Choudary’s extremist groups was Brusthom Ziamani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/feb/19/london-teenager-brusthom-ziamani-guilty-of-plotting-to-behead-soldier>
, who said he was en route to behead a soldier when he was arrested on aLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> street in 2014 carrying a knife and 
hammer in his bag. Ziamani, 19 when convicted, said he had been inspired by the 
killers of Rigby, describing one of them as “a legend”.

He had been radicalised by members of al-Muhajiroun and the trial judge told 
the convert he had been “adopted and totally absorbed by a twisted 
interpretation of the holy Qur’an”.

Members of al-Muhajiroun gave him clothes and a place to stay after he was 
asked to leave home by his parents. Ziamani in turn attended their talks and 
joined al-Muhajiroun’s demonstrations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd0e4b2f25d70a67129eeacd71bbc004db158ac3%2F0_289_1239_1548%2F1239.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anjem%20Choudary%3A%20a%20hate%20preacher%20who%20spread%20terror%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anjem%20Choudary%3A%20a%20hate%20preacher%20who%20spread%20terror%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbd0e4b2f25d70a67129eeacd71bbc004db158ac3%2F0_289_1239_1548%2F1239.jpg>
 Brusthom Ziamani in a picture taken from social media. Photograph: 
Metropolitan police/PA 
This year two men, again linked to al-Muhajiroun and its successor groups, 
were jailed for plotting to kill a soldier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/13/delivery-driver-jailed-planning-terror-attack-us-troops-britain-junead-khan>
.

Junead Khan, 25, used his job with a pharmaceutical firm as cover to scout US 
Air Force bases in East Anglia to plan an attack on military personnel. He was 
also convicted alongside his uncle Shazib Khan, 23, of preparing to go to Syria 
to join Isis. The judge in their trial said both men had been radicalised by 
al-Muhajiroun.

As well as plots against the UK, members travelled to join Isis in Syria. 
Siddhartha Dhar, a convert from Hinduism who was close to Choudary,went to Syria
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/26/terror-suspect-on-run-siddartha-dhar-taunt-shoddy-uk-security-services-twitter>
 and produced a recruitment pamphlet for Isis called A Brief Guide to the 
Islamic State.

But away from Britain, Choudary is also tied to the spread of the message of 
violent jihad.

In Belgium, which is coping with the aftermath of fatal terrorist attacks and 
fears more in future, Choudary helped set up Sharia4Belgium. In 2015 it was 
declared a terrorist group and 45 of its followers were charged. Thirty-six of 
them were absent fortheir trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/11/leader-of-belgian-islamist-group-sentenced-to-12-years-in-prison>
 and were believed to be fighting in Syria or to be dead on the battlefield. 
All bar one was convicted and Choudary’s response to the jailing of its leader 
for 15 years was to laud him as a hero.

According to Europol, Sharia4Belgium “engaged in organised indoctrination and 
recruitment of young people to participate in the armed conflict in Syria”.

Choudary’s influence in Europe was such that the Dutch intelligence agency 
AIVD assessed him to be a key influence in the spread of the country’s jihadi 
movement. A spokesperson for AIVD told the Guardian it still stands by its 
assessment of Choudary’s central role, set out in a 2014 document: “Since the 
1980s the UK has harboured an active Islamist movement propagating an 
antidemocratic, intolerant and sometimes explicitly violent ideology.

“At its heart is the now banned group Islam4UK, previously known as 
Al-Muhajiroun, al-Ghurabaa and Muslims Against Crusades. Its most familiar 
faces are Omar Bakri (currently resident in Lebanon) and Anjem Choudary, who 
acts as its spokesman. Modelling itself closely on this British movement, 
Sharia4Belgium was active in Belgium for several years but subsequently 
disbanded itself in a blaze of publicity.”

Not for the first time a European intelligence agency was raising questions 
about how Britain dealt with a key jihadi player.

The case of Choudary has parallels with that of Abu Hamza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/20/abu-hamza-arrest-take-so-long-us-terrorism-charges>
. In this cleric’s case, France led the incredulity at Britain’s failure to 
stop his activities, with Hamza and the Finsbury Park mosque in north London he 
controlled being linked to numerous plots. Like Hamza, Choudary operated for 
years in plain sight, with some dismissing him as a clown.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb32f620503c9fad4f4bffe206e91e98a0a873d31%2F0_38_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anjem%20Choudary%3A%20a%20hate%20preacher%20who%20spread%20terror%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anjem%20Choudary%3A%20a%20hate%20preacher%20who%20spread%20terror%20in%20UK%20and%20Europe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fanjem-choudary-hate-preacher-spread-terror-uk-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb32f620503c9fad4f4bffe206e91e98a0a873d31%2F0_38_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Abu Hamza addressing a rally in Trafalgar Square, London, in 2002. Photograph: 
Ian Waldie/Reuters 
The leftwing, anti-extremist group Hope Not Hate, which usually targets 
rightwing fascists, investigated Choudary and his groups because of the damage 
they inflicted in communities.

Nick Lowles, of Hope Not Hate, said: “Although he was treated as a somewhat 
clown-like, go-to figure for the press as a rent-a-quote extremist, he clearly 
promoted the disgusting and divisive ideals ofIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, while dozens of his supporters have 
been connected to terrorist plots, violence or heading overseas to fight in 
Syria, Iraq and other conflicts.”

In a report on Choudary called Cheerleading for Islamic State, Hope Not Hate 
said: “While Syria and the Islamic State has been the most recent target for 
[al-Muhajiroun] activists, the organisation and its network has a long history 
of being a conduit through which jihadists have been funnelled to various war 
zones.”

Lowles added: “In the six months following the creation of Islamic State, 
Choudary was its biggest cheerleader in the English-speaking world and the 
network he helped create became the largest recruiter for IS in Europe.”

Many Muslims have long been puzzled why this man was regularly approached by 
the media to give outrageous statements
Miqdaad Versi, Muslim Council of Great Britain 
One expert in counter-radicalisation said Choudary was useful for Isis in the 
early days, when it was looking to gain traction in the UK. But the likes of 
him are now needed barely at all because Isis’s reputation in jihadi circles 
and its online machine has grown so much. “They don’t need a middle man,” said 
the expert, who has knowledge of cases where those who attended Choudary’s 
lectures now bitterly resent ever becoming involved with him.

Scotland Yard’s Haydon said of al-Muhajiroun: “It has been a force for the 
radicalisation and recruitment of both extremists and terrorists here in the 
UK.”

The police chief added that Choudary was a “key individual in the UK”, 
enticing people to join Isis in Syria by posting vast amounts of material 
online that radicalised them.

British Muslims had complained about the media attention paid to Choudary, the 
impression given to audiences that he was representative of British Islamic 
thought.

Miqdaad Versi, of the Muslim Council of Britain, said on Tuesday: “Mr Anjem 
Choudary has long been condemned by Muslim organisations and Muslims across the 
country, who consider him and his support for Daesh [Isis] to be despicable and 
contrary to the values of Islam and our nation. Many Muslims have long been 
puzzled why this man was regularly approached by the media to give outrageous 
statements that inflamed Islamophobia. We hope the judgment serves as a lesson 
for anyone who follows this path of advocating hate and division.”

His case, and the brazen nature of it, raises issues about the UK’s terrorism 
laws: do we need yet more, or to learn to better use the plethora we have 
already?

During his trial Choudary seemed relaxed, chatting to one journalist as if at 
a garden party: “How long have we known each other? Twenty years?”, with a shy 
and uncertain smile coming across his face.

“He was always a bit loopy,” says one long-term Muslim acquaintance of 
Choudary. But he got more extreme in the last 15 years: “He fell off the edge 
and got worse and worse.”

It has been quite a journey for the son of a market trader who grew up in 
south-east London and went to Southampton University, where he was nicknamed 
“Andy” and knocked back pints in the student bar. He gained a law degree and 
worked at the Commission for Racial Equality for a while but left as he became 
increasingly consumed by Islamism.

The married father-of-four spent his time propagating violent extremism 
without any income other than state welfare payments.


As Choudary prepares for a long jail sentence there is a bitter reality for 
those trying to combat violent jihad. In his own malevolent terms, the number 
of people Choudary helped recruit to terrorism and the fact he did it under 
their noses represents a victory for his cause, and an added challenge to those 
whose values oppose it.
 