
Mothers were none too pleased with me when I wrote an article, Why Women Still 
Can’t Have It All 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/07/why-women-still-cant-have-it-all/309020/>
. I betrayed the faith. They’d been telling girls: “We broke down barriers, you 
can’t go back to the home now.” Arianna Huffington told me her daughter showed 
up to Thanksgiving with underlined copies of the article. It has had almost 
2.5m views online.

You can’t have the kinds of jobs I’ve had and be universally liked. When I 
used to get upset, I’d think: “I’ve worked for Hillary Clinton – she’s had more 
horrible stuff said about her than anybody. If she can do it, I can.” The 
negative stuff’s been harder on my mother than me.

I always felt different. My mother is Belgian and in summer we would leave our 
conventional, suburban Virginia environment for Brussels, where my grandparents 
lived in an apartment and ate lunch with silver and crystal, wine and multiple 
courses. Most of my friends had never heard of Belgium.

You can’t have everything. I felt huge disappointment when I left my US state 
department job [Slaughter was director of policy planning from 2009-2011], but 
I just didn’t have a life. During the week I was in Washington DC, then I’d get 
home late Friday and the weekend was a blur of errands and arguing with our 
sons.

When I need my soul enriched I turn to nature. I’m very sensitive to beauty. 
It can be a rain puddle, it doesn’t have to be a grand vista.

My father raised me to have a career. As I was growing up he saw all these 
women getting divorced and being left high and dry by their husbands. He vowed 
his daughter would be able to support herself.

We’ll look back on Obama as a great president. He turned the ship on 
healthcare. In foreign policy, I’m highly critical of him on Syria – he should 
have acted in 2012 – but he’s opened relations with Iran, Cuba and Burma. He’s 
laid the foundations for a new America.

I’ve never been the lead parent. For the first seven years of our kids’ lives 
my husband and I were co-parents. Then as my job got bigger, more fell to him. 
Women still think care is our job and men just help. But it’s not a woman’s job 
any more than breadwinning is a man’s.

I became a poster child for something I spent my life trying to disprove. I 
was trying to say women can do it if we remove thebarriers of discrimination 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/dec/03/women-legal-discrimination-worldwide-consequences>
, but that’s not a neat narrative. The worst criticism was being set up as a 
dichotomy to Sheryl Sandberg’sLean In <http://leanin.org/book/>. I’d be 
introduced with: “Sheryl says women can do anything if they try hard enough but 
Anne-Marie says women can’t.”

Both my sons want to be artists. I tell them they’re headed for lead-parent 
stuff. I asked one if it would bother him if his wife out-earned him. He looked 
at me like: “Are you crazy? That would mean I married well.” You’d never ask 
that question of a girl.


The Intelligence Squared podcast 
<http://www.intelligencesquared.com/events/what-next-for-feminism-with-anne-marie-slaughter/>
 of ‘What Next For Feminism?’, featuringAnne-Marie Slaughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/anne-marie-slaughter>, is now available on 
iTunes and SoundCloud (intelligencesquared.com/podcast)
 