
I was having a tough time and needed to clear my mind and fill myself up again 
with what I care about. I have learned over the years how to look after myself 
and my work, and know that at a certain point it's good to go off and find a 
different road. It is a matter of stopping and refuelling, filling yourself up 
again before you lose all feeling. Bringing yourself back.

Pilgrimage, the title of my new collection of photographs, is a very strong 
word. To me, it means a search, going on a trip looking for something. The idea 
was more of a meditation, actually. I was inspired by walking into the house of
Emily Dickinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/feb/13/emily-dickinson-lyndall-gordon>
's brother, now preserved as a museum in Massachusetts, and noticing that it 
hadn't changed since Victorian times. The wallpaper was rotting on the walls. I 
stopped dead in my tracks and started to take snapshots on a digital camera.

I didn't look at that work until a few months later, along with pictures I had 
taken on a family visit to Niagara Falls. My children had been standing there 
mesmerised, and I wondered what they were looking at, so I stood behind them 
and took a picture. I started to accumulate these photographs – shots that had 
no agenda other than me having been moved to take a picture when I felt like 
taking one. Then I made myself a list of places I wanted to go to. I'd had a 
similar idea withSusan Sontag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/dec/29/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
, tentatively called The Beauty Book, which was all about giving us the chance 
to travel to places we'd always wanted to go to, again taking pictures without 
any kind of agenda.

I had a list of about 10 just off the top of my head. Then I seemed to bump 
into other subjects. I had always wanted to go to the Isle of Wight because I 
never understood howJulia Margaret Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/interactive/2011/oct/24/v-and-a-photographs-gallery>
 could take pictures there that gave no sense she was on an island. Her garden 
studio isn't there any more, but her garden wall is – and Tennyson's gate, too. 
So it was like a treasure hunt.

Everything had a domino effect. I went to Concord, Massachusetts, to photograph
Walden Pond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/apr/26/walden-pond-thoreau-guy-grieve>
, which led me to the house of the 19th-century poet and essayistRalph Waldo 
Emerson <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/24/philosophy>. When I was 
driving back and forth to Emerson's house and theConcord museum 
<http://www.concordmuseum.org/>, I would pass Orchard House, home to Louisa May 
Alcott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/dec/22/little-women-louisa-may-alcott>
, writer of Little Women. I kept saying to myself: "I'm not going in there, I 
don't need to do Louisa May Alcott." Then finally one day I stopped and went 
in, and of course was smitten and started to do some work there.

If you had to find a heart in the book, it would probably be the Georgia 
O'Keeffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/may/15/cookbooks-georgia-o-keeffe>
 visits. I think I was always sidestepping O'Keeffe. She is such a big, looming 
figure as an artist and subject, but never really a person I admired or 
emulated. I was being given an award at theGeorgia O'Keeffe museum 
<http://www.okeeffemuseum.org/> in Santa Fe, New Mexico, and they kindly 
offered to take me toGhost Ranch 
<http://www.ghostranch.org/museums-and-activities/o%27keeffe-tours> and to her 
house in Abiquiú, up on a hill overlooking the valley. So I went, and as I 
walked into her studio I started to cry. Something just hit me about the way 
she lived. Her frugality – all of her linens were frayed – is a reminder that 
we don't need much. She had a simple life: she worked every day, grew a 
vegetable garden and ate well, walking on this land that she was so drawn to. 
She was the real thing.

I was lucky. The museum's curator, Barbara Buhler Lynes 
<http://click.si.edu/Story.aspx?story=700>, showed me around. She had written a 
book about where O'Keeffe painted. There's a red hill in some of the paintings 
that looks like a mountain; in reality, it is only about 12ft high, almost an 
anthill. What's remarkable about the house is that it's pretty much been left 
the way she had it when she was alive. The pastels that O'Keeffe made herself 
are in the museum. Seeing them, you really have the sense that she held and 
used them. They are the colours of New Mexico: the reds are the sand in the 
hill, the blues are the sky.

O'Keeffe was shrewd and very much in control. There is a state-of-the-art 
phonograph and stereo equipment, with a sign on it saying: "Do not touch 
volume." I thought one of the curators had done that, but apparently it was 
O'Keeffe. She walked every day. I remember seeing pictures of her out. She was 
always bent over, but I didn't know what she was doing. Of course, as soon as I 
got there and saw all of these rocks around her house, I realised. She brought 
buckets of them back home. On her walks, she killed rattlesnakes and would 
scare her visitors by pulling out a box of their rattles. One snake was even 
encased in a glass-topped table next to her couch.

I spent over two years on this project. I don't think it is so different from 
my other work: it's note-taking that builds up a portrait. Photography has so 
many different aspects and ways to be used. This was about looking for an 
emotional place where your heart and your soul come together. There was a lot 
to be inspired by.

• Pilgrimage by Annie Leibovitz is published by Jonathan Cape, price £35. The 
work will be shown at Hamiltons Gallery, London W1, from 8 December to 20 
January. Details:hamiltonsgallery.com <http://hamiltonsgallery.com>

• The photos accompanying this article have been removed as our copyright has 
expired.
 