
Annie Proulx <https://www.theguardian.com/books/annie-proulx> loves trees. For 
the past 10 years she has studied them, written about them and travelled the 
world looking at them. Recently she moved to a house set in a forest of lofty 
red cedars. It was here she discovered that not all trees love her.

“I’ve been sick since I’ve arrived,” she tells me as we settle into comfy grey 
sofas at her home 20 miles outside Seattle, Washington. “Finally we figured out 
that, ironically, I’m really allergic to red cedar, which is all around me. It 
brings on asthma and other symptoms. It affects my whole immune system, so I 
have to pull up stakes and go somewhere else where it won’t follow me.”

The Pulitzer prize-winning author of The Shipping News and Brokeback Mountain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/29/annie-proulx-regrets-writing-brokeback-mountain>
 has created an oasis here, amid her five acres of woodland. Shrubs and 
saplings have been planted in the gardens, encouraging unwelcome visits from 
nibbling deer and even a bear. The four-bedroom wooden house (yes, red cedar, 
she thinks) has been renovated inside using natural tones and materials – 
creamy walls, slate and wood for the floors. We sit in front of a stone 
fireplace flanked by well-stocked bookshelves and a coffee table whereA History 
of Men’s Fashion tops another pile of books. Picture windows frame views of the 
distant Cascade Mountains. It’s cosy and serene.

But she plans to move to New England, where she and her four younger sisters 
lived as children, and one sister lives still. While she doesn’t relish the 
upheaval, she’s not wedded to Washington – especially not Seattle, the thriving 
tech city where she briefly lived.

“It’s just a place that is more irritating to me than anything else,” she says 
with a tiny shudder. “It’s one eternal traffic jam and everything seems 
mismanaged. I get tired of seeing people high-fiving each other. It’s full of 
techies; it’s just bursting with tech people. My own son is one, so I can’t 
complain.”

Proulx moved to Washington two years ago after selling her beloved Bird Cloud, 
the house she built on 640 acres of wetlands, prairie and cliffs in Wyoming. 
She wrote about the painstaking two-year process – it was completed in 2006 – 
in her eponymous memoir of the place. That home suited her love of the natural 
world and the rural and remote, the usual subjects of her writing. I ask why 
she decided to leave and she replies with a shot of sarcasm. “Because I sold it 
and the new owner didn’t particularly want me there as well.”

She pauses, then: “I don’t know. I’ve asked myself that a thousand times. 
There was a lot of driving, hours and hours of driving, to get decent groceries 
and get anything done, to see the dentist blah blah blah. I do miss it, every 
part of it.”

She is, by her own admission in Bird Cloud, 'bossy, impatient, reclusively 
shy, short-tempered and single-minded'

Married and divorced three times, Proulx lives alone; her youngest son, 
Morgan, the techie, lives in Seattle and stays over most weeks. She will 
clearly miss his visits when she goes. By her own admission inBird Cloud, 
Proulx is “bossy, impatient, reclusively shy, short-tempered and single-minded”.

She might be 80, but she’s far from ready to slip into retirement. While her 
skiing, hunting and canoeing days are behind her, she’s physically fit (apart 
from the tree allergy). Her mind still buzzes with story ideas. Her look is 
unfussy and unchanged: salt-and-pepper cropped hair, black-rimmed glasses, no 
jewellery, simple grey sweater and trousers. Her home is the same: tidy, 
tasteful and functional.

We meet to talk about her latest book, Barkskins 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/404255/>, a 700-page 
novel of high drama whose theme is deforestation. It starts with two Frenchmen 
in the late 17th century, René Sel and Charles Duquet, arriving in New France 
(now the United States and Canada), where they work as woodcutters for a feudal 
lord. Sel marries a woman from the indigenousMi’kmaq 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mi%27kmaq> people, while Duquet runs away and 
sets up a successful timber company. The book recounts the displacement and 
resettlement of multiple generations of each man, finishing in 2013. It charts 
their travels across North America, China, Europe and New Zealand and includes 
all manner of violent deaths. All this is set against the destruction of the 
world’s forests where they make their livings and which they believe to be 
infinite.

“It’s kind of an old-fashioned book,” Proulx says. “It’s long; it has a lot of 
characters; it takes a big theme. It isn’t a navel-staring, 
dysfunctional-family thing that’s so beloved of most American writers. It’s 
different, but I think people probably miss those books that were written some 
time ago – the big book that was written with care.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fannie-proulx-ive-had-a-life-i-see-how-slippery-things-can-be%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9db9d5b6f3b9d717093aa9ccdd8b68b0492ae15%2F0_110_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Annie%20Proulx%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20had%20a%20life.%20I%20see%20how%20slippery%20things%20can%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fannie-proulx-ive-had-a-life-i-see-how-slippery-things-can-be%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Annie%20Proulx%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20had%20a%20life.%20I%20see%20how%20slippery%20things%20can%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fannie-proulx-ive-had-a-life-i-see-how-slippery-things-can-be%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9db9d5b6f3b9d717093aa9ccdd8b68b0492ae15%2F0_110_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Riding high: Jake Gyllenhaal and Heath Ledger in Brokeback Mountain, Ang Lee’s 
2005 film based on Proulx’s short story. Photograph: Kimberly French/AP 
It has been a decade in the making, during which time she has read countless 
historical documents, diaries and rare books on forestry. “I was trained as a 
historian, so that’s what I love to do,” she says. (It isn’t all she’s been 
doing in her 70s: as well as writingBird Cloud, she has also edited a book on 
the Red Desert in Wyoming, published a collection of short stories and written 
the libretto for an operatic version ofBrokeback Mountain.)

“The deforestation is what Barkskins is all about,” she says. “There are two 
epigraphs in the book. One of them is the key to the book, but nobody reads 
epigraphs, which is fine by me.”

I can’t remember them either. “Er, can you expand on that?” I ask.

“No.” Silence. I swallow.

“It’s on a page at the front where the epigraphs go…” She shrugs her 
shoulders, staring at my discomfort. I am transported back to the classroom.

I find the quote later. It’s taken from a 1967 essay written by the historian 
Lynn Townsend White Jr in which he put forward the idea that Christianity was 
the root of the ecological crisis: “By destroying pagan animism, Christianity 
made it possible to exploit nature in a mood of indifference to the feelings of 
natural objects.”


Ask Proulx about something she’s not keen to talk about and there is a pause 
before she answers coolly and sparingly. I enquire about her children and she 
gives the briefest details. Her daughter, Muffy, by her first husband (whom 
Proulx dropped out of college to marry when she was just 20), stayed with her 
father when they divorced after five years. Proulx married again in the 60s and 
had three sons – Jonathan, Gillis and Morgan – before divorcing and marrying 
for a third time in 1969.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fannie-proulx-ive-had-a-life-i-see-how-slippery-things-can-be%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1588424594e4b0bba39e0364708f12714162ff29%2F0_281_2488_1493%2F2488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Annie%20Proulx%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20had%20a%20life.%20I%20see%20how%20slippery%20things%20can%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fannie-proulx-ive-had-a-life-i-see-how-slippery-things-can-be%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Annie%20Proulx%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20had%20a%20life.%20I%20see%20how%20slippery%20things%20can%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fannie-proulx-ive-had-a-life-i-see-how-slippery-things-can-be%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1588424594e4b0bba39e0364708f12714162ff29%2F0_281_2488_1493%2F2488.jpg>
 Wild at heart: Proulx as a young woman camping
 in the woods near her home. Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
She once said that she grew up in an era when you were supposed to get 
married, adding: “I don’t think I was a particularly good or diligent mother. 
It took a long time for the obvious to become obvious: I could not operate in a 
conventional family.”

These days, Proulx says, she and her children enjoy regular get-togethers. “I 
get along with all my children rather well and they like each other, which 
makes me very happy. You want them to be friends as well as relatives.”

Find the right subject and Proulx is stimulating company: animated, 
occasionally passionate and wryly amusing. We talk about climate change. She 
tells me about an initiative to restore the number of monarch butterflies by 
urging gardeners to plant milkweed. Are people doing enough, I ask. “Some 
people are, but most people couldn’t care less about it. They would give you a 
blank stare if you mentioned that monarch butterflies need milkweed to complete 
their life cycle.”

I mention the Paris climate change agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/cop-21-un-climate-change-conference-paris>
 signed by 177 countries last April. Too late, she thinks. “Some of the 
countries that are now in play in the world economy and culture don’t have an 
interest in those things. They are still happy to rip out their raw materials 
and natural resources for things like refrigerators and iPhones. They don’t 
seem to get that there isn’t any more.”

At a party you can always tell the writer, because I’m leaning against the 
wall watching everybody else have fun

Her voice rises: “Nobody can visit the big trees again; the huge forests do 
not exist. The understorey has gone, and the smaller plants and animals – the 
ecosystem has been damaged. Change is right with us, and you can get 
frightened.” I ask if the thought ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, a denier of manmade climate 
change, in the White House frightens her. “I think the country has more or less 
brought this on themselves,” she says. “I don’t have personal feelings about it 
because that’s not who I am, but I am watching.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fannie-proulx-ive-had-a-life-i-see-how-slippery-things-can-be%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d5eef448a390fdb6ba911752b32152a4d2b4684%2F0_140_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Annie%20Proulx%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20had%20a%20life.%20I%20see%20how%20slippery%20things%20can%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fannie-proulx-ive-had-a-life-i-see-how-slippery-things-can-be%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Annie%20Proulx%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99ve%20had%20a%20life.%20I%20see%20how%20slippery%20things%20can%20be%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjun%2F05%2Fannie-proulx-ive-had-a-life-i-see-how-slippery-things-can-be%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d5eef448a390fdb6ba911752b32152a4d2b4684%2F0_140_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Winds of change: at home in Vershire, Vermont, back in 1994. Photograph: Toby 
Talbot/Associated Press 
Proulx finds her strengths harder to list than her faults, but she thinks 
she’s a good observer. “I’m one of the ones at a party where you can always 
tell the writer because I’m leaning against the wall watching everybody else 
have fun.”

Her self-confessed shyness is easy to misinterpret it as crotchetiness. Look 
at her reaction to literary prizes. “I know that one should feel grateful and 
pleased and delighted, and jump up and down and scream, but I couldn’t do it.” 
As for women-only prizes, harrumph. “This has always bothered me, the division: 
as though there was something about women who write that is very different.”

For Proulx writing is all about “the making of the object. I look on it as a 
craftsman would making a table.” Her research is meticulous. She visited all 
the countries that feature inBarkskins. She’s a frequent, intrepid traveller, 
thanks to a pioneering spirit instilled as a child when her family moved many 
times – Vermont, North Carolina, Maine and Rhode Island – because of her 
French- Canadian father’s job with a textile company.

She ended up with an abundance of material and had to cut 150 pages from the 
first draft, a process she describes as “maddening. My editor, Nan Graham, was 
absolutely wonderful, but I hated her deeply while we were doing this because 
she wanted to take out some of my favourite things. A lot of the deforestation 
material went.”

I drove north in the south-bound lane, hung out with a wide variety of rough 
dudes in a wide variety of situations…

While much of the book is bleak, there are moments of dark humour. I mention 
finding an incident involving a wig amusing. She’s delighted. “Do you? Good, my 
editor wanted to cut that. You’re a Brit, that’s why.”

Proulx was a latecomer to the literary world, publishing her first novel, 
Postcards, when she was 56. She had abandoned a PhD in the mid-70s to support 
her family by scraping an income as a freelance journalist, writing about 
everything from apples to mice and canoeing, and producing “how-to” books on 
cider making and DIY. During these years, with her third marriage 
disintegrating, she lived a back-to-the-land lifestyle with her boys, moving 
around several backwoods towns in Vermont where she fished, hunted and 
gardened. She later described herself to an interviewer in the early- 90s as 
“wild” at this time, her examples including: “throwing a knife at (and thank 
God missing) someone I thought I hated; driving north in the south-bound lane; 
hanging out with a wide variety of rough dudes in a wide variety of situations”.

In 1988 her first collection of stories was published and the novels that 
followed brought her instant acclaim. She has no regrets that success came 
late. “You have time to have a life, to see change, to understand a bit how 
people work, how the world works, how society works, how things shift around, 
how slippery things can be, everything from politics to personal relationships. 
It’s a great advantage to have that stuff under your belt when you start to 
write.”


Talking with Proulx is like reading one of her books: bracing yet rewarding. 
She speaks as she writes, and lives the same way: with measured efficiency and 
flashes of mischievous humour.

As our interview comes to an end, she picks up A History of Men’s Fashion and 
flicks through the pictures. Chuckling at an artist in a garish shirt, she 
says: “I don’t remember his work, but who could forget that haircut?” I ask if 
she’s interested in fashion. “Only for the sake of characters. I like them to 
have the clothes they might have worn.”

Then it’s back to the trees. She gamely agrees to pose for photographs amid 
the red cedars. The photographer had set up his equipment before he knew of her 
allergy and she won’t hear of him moving it. “It takes a day or so before they 
affect me. The bear could get me first,” she jokes as we walk outside, before 
adding wistfully: “I love the way they look. It’s too bad they make me 
miserable.”

Barkskins by Annie Proulx is published by Fourth Estate at £18.99. To order a 
copy for £15.19, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/404255/>
 