
The Guardian’s Peter Bradshaw doesn’t like the new version of Annie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/16/annie-review-pink-sparkly-radioactive-waste?CMP=share_btn_tw>
, which opens on Friday. “A hundredweight of sparkly radioactive waste in a 
pink carton”, he calls it. He’s joining a long tradition of Annie-hate there. 
The last time a new version of Annie hit the big screens, in 1982 (a 1989 TV 
version <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0280432/> didn’t manage to garner a 
following), the Los Angeles Times phrased its displeasure as that of a friend: 
“Golly, Annie, how could they have put you in the movies and left out your 
heart?” Butthe New York Times’ critic Vincent Canby 
<http://www.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9C07E5D71038F932A15756C0A964948260> 
was meaner: “If I say that I like the film far better than the show, I also 
must concede that the show is the sort that almost brought me out in hives.” 
Even the Razzies got in on the fun: Aileen Quinn, who played the titular role, 
was nominated for one.

The film hit the pop culture jackpot anyway, making a decent amount of money 
at the box office and achieving immortality in endless re-airings on 
television. So Quvenzhané Wallis, who playsAnnie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/annie> in the present version, should take 
heart. Annie’s popularity has always been a Teflon kind of thing. That’s the 
privilege of being a sentimental icon: pre-existing affection gets you the 
benefit of the doubt.

What is it about Annie that so captivates the American public? So much is 
chance and circumstance, right-place-right-time stuff. In fact, Annie’s very 
name was an accident. When James Whitcomb Riley, a popular American poet of the 
late 19th century, wrote his poem about a “little orphan 
<http://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poem/little-orphant-annie>” he’d meant to call 
her Allie, after a girl named Alice who’d been taken in by Riley’s own family. 
A typesetter’s mistake gave us this name instead, and a lucky error it was too, 
I think. “Orphan Allie” hasn’t the same ring. Plus, the poem is written in 
“Hoosier” dialect, and makes for awkward reading now. The seeds of her pluck 
and fortitude were already there, though. Each stanza of the poem sets up a 
caution against childish misbehaviour, punctuated with “Ef you/Don’t/Watch/Out!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2Fannie-americas-orphan-rides-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F17%2F1418856609204%2Fdba9378d-d6ce-4040-9bdf-11d855571783-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Annie%3A%20America's%20orphan%20rides%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2Fannie-americas-orphan-rides-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Annie%3A%20America%27s%20orphan%20rides%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fdec%2F18%2Fannie-americas-orphan-rides-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F12%2F17%2F1418856609204%2Fdba9378d-d6ce-4040-9bdf-11d855571783-1020x612.jpeg>
 Aileen Quinn as Annie in the 1982 film. Photograph: Supplied 
Harold Gray dropped the dialect but kept the name when he began writing his 
Little Orphan Annie comic strip in 1924 <http://www.tcj.com/the-orphans-epic/>. 
It was Gray who imagined her with curly red hair and a dog named Sandy. The 
cartoonist was a practical-minded fellow from rural Illinois who admired 
Lincoln and believed in hard work. He had trained as an engineer and journalist 
before settling into cartooning. So his politics skewed conservative, and 
they’re pretty easy to detect in the fundamental plot elements of the strip. 
Annie’s savior is, after all, the wealthy industrialist Daddy Warbucks, whose 
untold riches are matched in size only by his generous nature.

And yet, in spite of his firm approval of business, Gray was a great admirer 
of Charles Dickens. He once said that Annie was Dickens with “running water and 
a telephone”. Dickens was a chronicler of the poor’s inner resources in the 
face of hardship, so Gray gave Annie a healthy dose of those too. Her pluck and 
determination sold a message of self-reliance. In fact, young as she was, Annie 
often had jobs, and even supported Daddy Warbucks herself when he fell on hard 
times. Americans, as they stared down the barrel of the Great Depression, found 
her can-do spirit uplifting.

When Franklin Delano Roosevelt came up with the New Deal, though, Gray’s 
conservatism intensified and the politics of the strip sharpened too. One 
storyline, for example, saw Daddy Warbucks attacked by a bunch of leftist, 
labour-affiliated politicians who threatened to ruin him. The storyline’s 
politics were so explicit that editorials cropped up denouncing it. One, in the 
New Republic, bore the headline “Fascism in the Funnies”. The writer complained 
that the strip was just “propaganda”.

Gray wasn’t purely an ideologue, though. Jeet Heer <http://www.jeetheer.com/>, 
who is an expert on Little Orphan Annie and Gray, told me by email that he 
wouldn’t call the strip’s politics fascist but more like right-wing populist. 
“Little Orphan Annie hated gun control, tax-and-spend Democrats, peaceniks and 
pointy-headed professors, but loved rich white men who were her benefactors,” 
Heer said. “She was Sarah Palin before there was Sarah Palin.” And Gray had the 
populist knack of never offending anyone unforgivably.

In fact, Gray occasionally took a progressive stand on social issues. Heer 
points to the 1940saddition of a black character to the strip 
<http://www.tcj.com/harold-gray-and-the-limits-of-conservative-anti-racism/>. A 
boy named George joins a wartime service club Annie’s founded. Annie assures 
him he belongs with her there: “You’ve got as much right in this outfit as I 
have,” he says. “You’re an American! We’re all loyal Americans.”

Gray was very aware of how Annie’s openness to all kinds of Americans 
benefitted the strip, too. African American readers wrote letters to Gray about 
how much they appreciated George. And the one white Southern editor who 
complained got a firm rebuke. Gray wrote that he didn’t “subscribe in any way 
to the text that the colour line should be broken down”, but that “Annie 
depends for her circulation on her ability to build and hold friendships with 
all classes.” It was the savvy response of a creator who knew his creation had 
to shift with the political tides to stay relevant.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYop62wQH498&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYop62wQH498>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DYop62wQH498&media=>
Gray died in 1968. The strip fell into the hands of others; Hollywood and 
radio had lost interest in Annie after the 1930s. Annie, in fact, might have 
faded into obscurity had the 1977 Broadway musical not come along to revive 
her. It futzed with Gray’s politics, recasting Annie as a great admirer of FDR 
and the New Deal, although it didn’t chuck Daddy Warbucks: in the musical 
they’re twin emblems of the promise of America, stripped of any real political 
content altogether.

You could read that as a reaction to the grim end of the 1970s in which the 
musical premiered – post-Watergate, mired in the oil crisis. America was in 
need of a non-partisan self-esteem boost, and everything about Annie suggested 
that the country deserved it. At its end, orphan, president and businessman 
co-exist in peaceful harmony. If the 1982 movie was blander still on that 
point, you have to remember that it arrived just as Reagan was becoming 
president. “Morning in America” was only starting.

It’s fitting, then, that this version of Annie may benefit from yet another 
bit of historical luck. We’re hardly at a high tide of American self-esteem at 
the moment. The casting of Wallis as the first African American Annie holds out 
the faint promise of progress at the end of a depressing year. And a little 
treacle – or a lot – hasn’t been a liability for her before.
 