
She has captured thousands of faces as perhaps the world’s pre-eminent 
portrait photographer, butAnnie Leibovitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2015/dec/01/photographer-annie-leibovitz-on-the-pirelli-calendar-video>
 thinks most subjects would rather be at the dentist than in front of a camera. 
“If they like having their picture taken something is wrong with them!”


Leibovitz was speaking at the opening of her new London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> show of portraits of women including 
Aung San Suu Kyi, Adele, the documentary-maker Laura Poitras, the ballerina 
Misty Copeland, and the primatologist Jane Goodall.

Goodall was one of her quickest shoots, the photographer revealed. “I only had 
eight minutes,” said Leibovitz. “She walked in and said, ‘you know, I hate 
doing this. I like going to the dentist better than this’, and I totally 
understand.

“I don’t know anybody who likes having their photograph taken. It is normal to 
not like having your picture taken because you have to deal with yourself and 
wonder who you are.”

Annie Leibovitz 'trying hard' for photo session with Angela Merkel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jan/13/annie-leibovitz-trying-hard-for-photo-session-with-angela-merkel>
She was, however, pleased by the result. “First she stuck her tongue out at me 
and then she settled in, and I didn’t realise until I got back to my studio 
that this is how she looks at a chimpanzee. This is why a chimpanzee is 
intrigued with her, falls in love with her – that face. I was captivated by 
that face.”

Leibovitz began her project portraying women in 1999 at the suggestion of her 
partner Susan Sontag, who died in 2004. When the Swiss bank UBS more recently 
approached Leibovitz to work on a possible commission, she suggested revisiting 
it. The result isWomen: New Portraits 
<https://www.ubs.com/microsites/annie-leibovitz/en/exhibition.html>, for which 
Leibovitz has photographed various women of outstanding achievement.

The one woman Leibovitz has not photographed, to her regret, is the German 
chancellor, Angela Merkel, who she says is probably the most important woman in 
the world today.

“I’m on the path, I’m asking her,” she said. “I remember when I photographed 
Queen Elizabeth; I couldn’t believe I had the opportunity and when we were 
leaving I asked her press secretary ‘why did she agree now?’. She said ‘oh you 
wrote a letter five years ago.’ There’s a real lesson in that – perseverance.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fannie-leibovitz-latest-show-explores-women-as-whole-human-beings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75ee09e62e031ab027f562017e39d8190af169d9%2F130_0_2664_4000%2F2664.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Annie%20Leibovitz%3A%20latest%20show%20explores%20women%20as%20'whole%20human%20beings'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fannie-leibovitz-latest-show-explores-women-as-whole-human-beings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Annie%20Leibovitz%3A%20latest%20show%20explores%20women%20as%20%27whole%20human%20beings%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fannie-leibovitz-latest-show-explores-women-as-whole-human-beings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75ee09e62e031ab027f562017e39d8190af169d9%2F130_0_2664_4000%2F2664.jpg>
 Annie Leibovitz’s celebrated portrait of Caitlyn Jenner features in her 
exhibition. Photograph: Annie Leibovitz/AP 
One woman who is in the show is the transgender celebrity Caitlyn Jenner, whom 
Leibovitz photographed in a white corset,a version of which also featured on a 
recent cover of Vanity Fair 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/2175385/caitlyn-jenner-vanity-fair-cover-stylist/>.

Leibovitz said it had been a beautiful experience. “Bruce is still there but 
Caitlyn emerged. On some level the project wasn’t even the photograph – it was 
really to help Caitlyn emerge. We wanted to help her, give her the best start.

“She was very quiet the first day and we looked at a lot of imagery of women – 
remember this is an acquired look. By the second day it was like being dragged 
behind a truck; she just took over, she knew where she was going. It was like 
watching someone emerge, it was beautiful.”

Other subjects include Alice Waters, a restaurateur, the Russian model Natalia 
Vodianova, the singer Taylor Swift, the actor Lupita Nyong’o and the feminist 
writer Gloria Steinem, who advised on the list. They will be joined in the near 
future by Malala Yousafzai, Serena and Venus Williams, and the performance 
artist Marina Abramović.

Steinem agreed that it was an important project: “There have not been 
representations of women that show them as whole human beings, so this is 
remedial. Yes, men can be denied their full humanity, but not as much. Each one 
of these photographs is a novel; it is so amazing, there is a complete human 
story in every photograph.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fannie-leibovitz-latest-show-explores-women-as-whole-human-beings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd69a6fe7232b4933eb79e8028442b571bc0e8366%2F0_207_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Annie%20Leibovitz%3A%20latest%20show%20explores%20women%20as%20'whole%20human%20beings'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fannie-leibovitz-latest-show-explores-women-as-whole-human-beings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Annie%20Leibovitz%3A%20latest%20show%20explores%20women%20as%20%27whole%20human%20beings%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjan%2F13%2Fannie-leibovitz-latest-show-explores-women-as-whole-human-beings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd69a6fe7232b4933eb79e8028442b571bc0e8366%2F0_207_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Annie Leibovitz: ‘I couldn’t believe I had the opportunity’ to photograph the 
Queen. Photograph: Mike Marsland/WireImage 
The show, which includes works from the original Leibovitz series and a huge 
portrait of the Queen, has opened in the atmospheric Wapping Hydraulic Power 
Station, which was until 2013 an arts space. After London, the exhibition will 
travel to Tokyo, San Francisco, Singapore, Hong Kong, Mexico City, Istanbul, 
Frankfurt, New York and Zurich.

A set of the new photographs will then enter the UBS art collection, one of 
the world’s biggest corporate contemporary art collections, which features more 
than 30,000 works.

• Women: New Portraits is a free exhibition at Wapping Hydraulic Power 
Station, east London, 16 January-7 February
 