
It is a classic Annie Leibovitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/annie-leibovitz> photograph. Indeed, 
it displays all of her trademark flourishes: a group shot of recognisable 
faces, each one striking an individual pose, the whole thing brought to life 
through a bold use of light in order to create the highly stylised, almost 
cinematic quality of the final image.

But this is not the glossy portrait of Hollywood A-listers one might expect 
her to produce. Instead, it is the new "leading ladies 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/s/britains-leading-ladies>" advertising 
campaign for M&S, featuring Doreen Lawrence and Emma Thompson among others. 
Such is the magic of Leibovitz's touch that, under her gaze, a shop 
traditionally associated with sensible knicker gussets and easy-wash nighties 
has become ineffably more glamorous.

Leibovitz's photographs are not only visually arresting but profoundly 
aspirational. During the course of her 40-year career, she has photographed 
just about everyone you could think of – President Obama, John Lennon, even the 
Queen. Her reputation is such that if you have a portrait taken by Leibovitz, 
you get a credibility makeover thrown in for free – and that goes for M&S as 
much as anyone.

When Kanye West and Kim Kardashian 
<http://www.google.co.uk/imgres?imgrefurl=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.eonline.com%2Fnews%2F524891%2Fwatch-naomi-campbell-react-to-kim-kardashian-and-kanye-west-s-vogue-cover-it-s-not-pretty&tbnid=L2dudb5PO2bFOM:&docid=m2XBU7l0ihhoWM&h=890&w=634>
, that much-satirised celebrity couple, were given their firstAmerican Vogue 
cover last month, they immediately asked for Leibovitz. The photographer was 
said to be reluctant at first, but the amount of money on offer was apparently 
too tempting to turn down. The resulting shots managed to make two of the most 
photographed people on the planet look enigmatic, glossy, romantic and 
ethereal. No matter how staged the images were or how much effort had gone into 
the studio production, Leibovitz's pictures seemed also to offer us a glimpse 
into the couple's intimacy, even, perhaps, a small sense of their vulnerability.

"She has developed a style that is literally all of its own," says Michael 
Pritchard, director-general of the Royal Photographic Society. "Her work is 
very distinctive. She's got a way of composing her photographs and working with 
her subjects and I think the fact that she's a woman is important because she 
has a particular empathy with her subjects that sustains her work."

As a result, Leibovitz is now one of the most highly paid and sought-after 
photographers in the world. Her collaboration withVanity Fair since the 1980s 
(on a yearly contract with Condé Nast rumoured to be worth somewhere between 
$2m and $5m) has produced many of that magazine's best-known covers – a heavily
pregnant Demi Moore in 1991 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=pregnant+Demi+Moore+in+1991&tbm=isch&imgil=7j9WX8z9XawoMM%253A%253Bhttps%253A%252F%252Fencrypted-tbn2.gstatic.com%252Fimages%253Fq%253Dtbn%253AANd9GcTgIG5zR0iNpdWSG6krnKcc5yuq5k1Ghtvsa2_Ksm4bauwBHws3%253B1000%253B1346%253BZ_mVmUNMQQ_xIM%253Bhttp%25253A%25252F%25252Fbasinofgravy.wordpress.com%25252F2013%25252F07%25252F04%25252Fforget-photoshop-this-is-what-mothers-bodies-really-look-like%25252F&source=iu&usg=__2yrh_nS_GnOQNeFWygX8AecN9n0%3D&sa=X&ei=5ck-U6LFNpGWhQerrYHoCg&ved=0CDAQ9QEwAA#facrc=_&imgrc=7j9WX8z9XawoMM%253A%3BZ_mVmUNMQQ_xIM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Falk3r.files.wordpress.com%252F2013%252F02%252Fvanity-fair-august-1991-pregnant-demi-moore.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fbasinofgravy.wordpress.com%252F2013%252F07%252F04%252Fforget-photoshop-this-is-what-mothers-bodies-really-look-like%252F%3B1000%3B1346>
, anude Scarlett Johansson and Keira Knightly 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/features/how-tom-ford-became-the-toast-of-hollywood-1847009.html?action=gallery&ino=5>
 draped becomingly over the designer Tom Ford in 2006 and the famed annual 
fold-out covers featuring a line-up of Hollywood talent. Graydon Carter,Vanity 
Fair's editor, says she has the ability "to make boring white men who have desk 
jobs look epic". Quentin Tarantino recalls being photographed by her in 1994 
and ending up looking "like James Dean or something. And I'm a guy who doesn't 
look like James Dean".

The critic Jonathan Jones claimed that Leibovitz was "one of the most 
aesthetically gifted photographers alive", whose2007 portrait of the Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2007/may/02/annieleibowitzoneofthemos>
, in particular, transcended the "glib, dishonest hacks like Lord Snowdon or 
Mario Testino" because of its depth, nuance and humanity.

But Leibovitz's idealised, heroic imagery also has its detractors. Her critics 
say she is too in love with the gratuitous excess and superficiality of modern 
celebrity, that her photographs are digitally manipulated and post-produced to 
such an extent that it's difficult to know where the true artistry lies. The 
Australian art critic John McDonald has noted that Leibovitz's work can be 
"strongly formulaic – an occupational hazard for a sought-after portraitist who 
has to keep coming up with one killer image after another for a magazine cover. 
This goes beyond the call of art and takes us on to the assembly line".

Leibovitz was born in Waterbury, Connecticut, in 1949, the third of six 
children. Her mother, Marilyn, was a dance instructor and her father, Samuel, a 
lieutenant colonel in the US air force. Her father's job meant Leibovitz had an 
itinerant childhood. She came to rely on her siblings because the friends she 
made were temporary: "I never even knew you saw people again… I do see a 
parallel with taking pictures – you go in for a quick study and you get out."

She went on to study painting at the San Francisco Art Institute before 
discovering a passion for photography. Her boyfriend at the time encouraged her 
to send an image of Allen Ginsberg at a peace rally to the newly foundedRolling 
Stone magazine. By 1973, Leibovitz was the magazine's chief photographer and 
her images of celebrities, such as the extraordinary dual portrait ofJohn 
Lennon and Yoko Ono 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=John+Lennon+and+Yoko+Ono+leibovitz&biw=1440&bih=779&tbm=isch&imgil=vUmlhamkl70n1M%253A%253Bhttps%253A%252F%252Fencrypted-tbn1.gstatic.com%252Fimages%253Fq%253Dtbn%253AANd9GcSSnA5E55ZIKN4WEEbx1l4Nn1r3aqXP991INUgpGvbp6z3IfKWUmA%253B600%253B600%253B1y5Rw4F9Vj9QrM%253Bhttp%25253A%25252F%25252Fwww.brighthub.com%25252Fmultimedia%25252Fphotography%25252Farticles%25252F32335.aspx&source=iu&usg=__y4jb5LosPO76PwzvUAWT8df2Gpw%3D&sa=X&ei=Ac0-U_2iHJCBhAf1uoDIBw&ved=0CDYQ9QEwBA#facrc=_&imgdii=_&imgrc=vUmlhamkl70n1M%253A%3B1y5Rw4F9Vj9QrM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fimg.bhs4.com%252F45%252F6%252F4560485c578b592bd6e3b6d0daa5ef2c7aaee7c7_large.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.brighthub.com%252Fmultimedia%252Fphotography%252Farticles%252F32335.aspx%3B600%3B600>
taken hours before Lennon was shot dead on the street, helped define the 
publication's unique look.

She went on tour with the Rolling Stones in 1975, developing a cocaine habit 
along the way that ended with her in rehab. Clean of the drugs, Leibovitz 
channelled the addict's compulsiveness into the quality of her work. Her 
set-ups became ever more elaborate. She paid little attention to budgets – 
losing cameras, abandoning rental cars, mislaying envelopes stuffed with 
thousands of dollars. When she went toVanity Fair in 1983, the shoots became 
even more bloated, each one as complex and fantastical as a film set.

"She could never quite relax because she was afraid there was an even better 
idea," recalled her former assistant, the photographer Andrew Eccles in a 2009 
piece forNew York magazine. "The anxiousness about whether a photograph was 
going to be good enough was hard to be around. It was a difficult way to live."

And yet no one could deny that it resulted in a succession of arresting images:
Whoopi Goldberg in a bath of milk 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Whoopi+Goldberg+in+a+bath+of+milk&tbm=isch&imgil=jGIhT74xeBpqBM%253A%253Bhttps%253A%252F%252Fencrypted-tbn1.gstatic.com%252Fimages%253Fq%253Dtbn%253AANd9GcR1EVdL9ETZgzyoKCff9aFt-hcratzdSKQV4TQs67Dd1efAbo58oQ%253B373%253B400%253BJUEnFaNUpq4GrM%253Bhttp%25253A%25252F%25252Ffakecomedian.com%25252Ftag%25252Fwhoopi-goldberg%25252F&source=iu&usg=__voqnJXdWNREAKtXsEfIYcSbdBl8%3D&sa=X&ei=Oc0-U9CHCoaRhQfs5ICACQ&ved=0CDIQ9QEwAQ#facrc=_&imgdii=_&imgrc=jGIhT74xeBpqBM%253A%3BJUEnFaNUpq4GrM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Ffakecomedian.com%252Fwp-content%252Fuploads%252F2011%252F01%252Fwhoopiimage.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Ffakecomedian.com%252Ftag%252Fwhoopi-goldberg%252F%3B373%3B400>
, heated to the perfect temperature by a host of assistants in 1984;Jeff Koons 
dressed as a flying monkey 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Jeff+Koons+dressed+as+a+flying+monkey&tbm=isch&imgil=OCilaw5FE9WB0M%253A%253Bhttps%253A%252F%252Fencrypted-tbn1.gstatic.com%252Fimages%253Fq%253Dtbn%253AANd9GcQOX2N82_SAK6xC0qTHJmeAdx375mH1rquY2UvDxT34PdrCqihQ%253B300%253B300%253BtC1x_dBmQCdUkM%253Bhttp%25253A%25252F%25252Fwww.polyvore.com%25252F2000s_jeff_koons_is_flying%25252Fthing%25253Fid%2525253D67053229&source=iu&usg=__T6vaNaD3bgodkFZchmNqW9lrx9w%3D&sa=X&ei=gs0-U_yJF5KUhQeLkYHgBw&ved=0CDAQ9QEwAA#facrc=_&imgdii=_&imgrc=OCilaw5FE9WB0M%253A%3BtC1x_dBmQCdUkM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.polyvore.com%252Fcgi%252Fimg-thing%253F.out%253Djpg%2526size%253Dl%2526tid%253D67053229%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.polyvore.com%252F2000s_jeff_koons_is_flying%252Fthing%253Fid%253D67053229%3B300%3B300>
 with Keira Knightley as Dorothy in a2005 Wizard of Oz-themed shoot 
<http://www.dressedandeducated.com/2012/03/keira-knightley-plays-dorothy-in-vogue.html>
; JohnnyDepp and Patti Smith as Disney pirates  
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Depp+and+Patti+Smith+as+Disney+pirates&tbm=isch&imgil=fiw3zsfHiOUHwM%253A%253Bhttps%253A%252F%252Fencrypted-tbn3.gstatic.com%252Fimages%253Fq%253Dtbn%253AANd9GcQbpUW55detsCTNoAOuc5EJNRg43bhtCU-Uv8HTi55NMFuVxmTH%253B792%253B497%253BZQoT8pf0KILIjM%253Bhttp%25253A%25252F%25252Fwww.binarymoon.co.uk%25252F2007%25252F01%25252Fdisney-ads%25252Fdisney-annie-leibovitz-johnny-depp-patti-smith%25252F&source=iu&usg=__JrRiAbOrrfoLtTBN1HNkAunAELs%3D&sa=X&ei=-M0-U93yOouAhQfcxYCQCA&ved=0CDAQ9QEwAA#facrc=_&imgrc=fiw3zsfHiOUHwM%253A%3BZQoT8pf0KILIjM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.binarymoon.co.uk%252Fwp-content%252Fuploads%252F2007%252F01%252Fdisney-annie-leibovitz-johnny-depp-patti-smith.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.binarymoon.co.uk%252F2007%252F01%252Fdisney-ads%252Fdisney-annie-leibovitz-johnny-depp-patti-smith%252F%3B792%3B497>
balancing on the rigging in front of a brooding horizon in 2011.

She possessed an innate capacity to get celebrities to do what she wanted. 
Often, this involved a metaphorical and literal disrobing. For a shoot with 
William Hurt, Leibovitz travelled to his parents' home in New Jersey. She shot 
through the night until the actor was left posing in nothing more than his 
underpants at 7am the next day. Her portrait of a15-year-old Miley Cyrus for 
Vanity Fair in 2008 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2008/04/27/miley-cyrus-topless-in-va_n_98836.html>
 attracted controversy for featuring the child star topless, her modesty 
covered by a rumpled sheet. Leibovitz was forced to defend the image as "very 
beautiful".

Along with professional success came personal happiness. Leibovitz was 
introduced to the author and intellectual Susan Sontag in the mid-80s. They 
were lovers untilSontag's death  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/dec/29/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries>
from uterine cancer in 2004. During this time, Leibovitz became a mother to 
three children in her 50s – a daughter, Sarah, reportedly by sperm donor, and 
twins born by a surrogate in 2005.

Sontag encouraged Leibovitz to make her work more raw and personal, and her 
influence was lasting. When a retrospective of Leibovitz's work was held at the 
Brooklyn Museum in 2006, one of the most powerful images was a photograph of 
Sontag's body laid out in her favourite dress in the funeral parlour.

Grieving for both her lover and her father (who died of lung cancer within 
weeks of Sontag), Leibovitz found her finances spiralling out of control. 
Despite commanding a rumoured day rate of $100,000-$250,000, her frenetic 
spending and expanding real-estate portfolio (a flat in Paris, three townhouses 
in Manhattan, a country estate in Rhinebeck) led to mounting debts. There were 
murmurs that she was trying to emulate the lifestyles of her celebrity 
subjects. When she ran out of her favourite unlined notebooks made by the 
Swedish stationer Ordning & Reda, she insisted on having them sent from 
Stockholm via courier for $800.

In 2009, Leibovitz was sued over a dispute concerning the terms of a $24m loan 
repayment. The creditors claimed she had put up her townhouses and photo 
archives as collateral, and she narrowly missed filing for bankruptcy. 
Leibovitz finally sold her Manhattan compound earlier this year for $28.5m, 
which will probably cover a majority of what she must repay.

"For me, the story about the pictures is about almost losing myself, and 
coming back," she wrote in her 2008 book,Annie Leibovitz at Work.

She has had a period of losing herself in the financial quagmire. But now, it 
seems, Leibovitz is coming back to what she does best.
 