
The opening photograph in Annie Leibovitz's latest book Pilgrimage 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224096263>
 – opposite the dedication to her three young daughters – is of the original 
manuscript of the Robert Frost poem that ends: "And miles to go before I sleep 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/171621>." Sitting in the attic studio of 
Charleston in Sussex <http://www.charleston.org.uk/>, once the bolthole of the 
Bloomsbury group, the 62-year-old photographer smiles ruefully as she reflects 
on this. She arrived in the UK this morning on the red-eye from New York and 
her return flight is just a few hours from now. "I'm extremely responsible to 
my children," she says, "but it's relentless at my age. I don't know if I was 
thinking properly when I booked it."

Leibovitz is here to speak at the Charleston festival 
<http://www.charleston.org.uk/festivals/the-charleston-festival/> and it's 
obvious she has a strong affinity with this bucolic retreat. She first came 
here in 1997 to use the house as a backdrop for a portrait of Nicole Kidman and 
then again to photograph Vanessa Redgrave. She returned in 2010, but this time 
the cluttered rooms were to be the focus of her pictures.

In fact, Pilgrimage features no human beings at all – quite a turnaround for a 
woman who has defined portrait photography in the modern age with her work for
Rolling Stone, Vogue and Vanity Fair. Other "subjects" in the book include 
Virginia Woolf's desk, Sigmund Freud's patient's couch and Abraham Lincoln's 
top hat and the blood-stained white kid gloves that were in his pocket when he 
was assassinated.

"It was great to be in rooms without people, like a meditation of sorts," she 
says. "I think of the great society portrait painter Wright of Derby who at the 
end of his life finished up painting cow pastures because he'd just had it with 
people. I do think we all head there."

Her children were one inspiration for Pilgrimage; another was the death of her 
partnerSusan Sontag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2004/dec/29/guardianobituaries.booksobituaries?INTCMP=SRCH>
 in 2004, with whom she first discussed compiling a book about the places they 
yearned to visit. The push, however, was the financial troubles that almost led 
her to declare bankruptcy in 2009. Her life became one of endless conference 
calls with lawyers and her creativity flagged. "Creativity needs to be taken 
care of," she says. "It's like a big baby that needs to be nourished. I went 
into this project to fill myself back up. But it was important to me that the 
book felt 'up' – it's not haunted, it's not dark," she continues. "It really 
was life-affirming to me."
 