
Barkskins, Annie Proulx told an interviewer 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/books/authors/exclusive-interview-brokeback-mountain-writer-annie-proulx-on-he/>
 this week, is the last novel she will publish, but not because of waning 
powers (it is 720 pages long, and was cut down from 900 or more when her editor 
felt an intervention was called for). Like JD Salinger, who cited “the 
marvellous peace of not publishing” after stopping doing so in his 40s in 1965, 
she will continue writing but as “a solitary person ... I cannot bear the 
signings, interviews, book tours and all the PR stuff. I hate it. Really, 
really hate it.”

Barkskins by Annie Proulx review – an environmental epic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/10/barkskins-annie-proulx-review-alex-clark>
Tender scepticism may be the best response to this latest authorial 
retirement, given how often such explicit or apparent exits have been followed 
by comebacks.Stephen King <https://www.theguardian.com/books/stephenking>, for 
example, declared he was “done writing books” and going out “on top of my game” 
back in 2002 –End of Watch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/07/end-of-watch-by-stephen-king-extract>
, out this month, is his 17th book since then.

Alice Munro <https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-munro> seemed to signal 
she was stopping in 2006 (“I don’t know if I have the energy to do this any 
more”), only to publish further story collections and win the Nobel prize. Anne 
Tyler looked to be heading for writing-without-publishing in the style of 
Proulx when she said in 2013: “I want to not ever finish a book again.” But A 
Spool of Blue Thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/01/spool-of-blue-thread-anne-tyler-observer-review>
 was finished, published and Man Booker-shortlisted last year, and Tyler’s
Vinegar Girl is just out. While it’s true that Philip Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philiproth> has so far remained retired, it 
has been less than four years since he revealed he was quitting, and he said 
merely that he was “finished with fiction”, not other genres. Such has been the 
spate of resignation news that the website Media Mass this week ran a spoof 
report onPaul Auster 
<http://en.mediamass.net/people/paul-auster/retirement.html> hanging up his pen 
(“‘Being an author just isn’t fun any more,’ he might have said, says a source 
who remains anonymous”)

In the UK and Ireland, too, authors have retired only to reappear. Michael 
Holroyd assured Review readers in 2010 thatA Book of Secrets was his “final” 
book, a year after his wife Margaret Drabble vowed she and fiction were through 
because she risked repeating herself; both flip-flopped in 2013, publishingOn 
Wheels and The Pure Gold Baby respectively. Jim Crace cheerily spoke of Harvest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/14/harvest-jim-crace-review> as his 
last book and embraced freedom when it was shortlisted for the Booker in the 
same year, but soon admitted he and literature were an item again: “I just 
needed a break. I thought I wanted a divorce from writing, but it turns out it 
wasn’t so.” The most spectacular volte-face on this side of the Atlantic was 
performed by Maeve Binchy who managed six more novels after saying 2000’s
Scarlet Feather was her final bow. Disastrously, she had asserted: “I’m not 
at all a Frank Sinatra person who can be lured back.”

Why do writers, normally so careful with words, get it wrong? Perhaps it has 
to do with the oddity of the notion of literary retirement, on which we and 
sometimes they impose misleading models from office life (although authors are 
not physically quitting a place or group, have no leaving dos), entertainment 
and sport (although they have no farewell performances, unlike, say football, 
rock or dance stars). Without a comparable public rite of passage providing 
closure - the only equivalent is the retirement interview such as Roth’s or 
Proulx’s, usually in print and hardly ever on stage - a tendency to misspeak is 
forgivable; and how can they know, when creatively blocked or fed up with the 
publishing process, if the Muse will irresistibly return, if an idea will tug 
their sleeve and refuse to be shrugged off?

Coverage of authors who stop is also prone to mix up the different forms of 
retirement, as if they were all as straightforwardly ageing-related and 
inevitable as the departures of singers who’ve lost their top notes and no 
longer speedy athletes. There have been retirements due to infirmity (Gabriel 
Garcia Marquez, Gunter Grass); but they can also be Salinger-like retreats from 
the public gaze but not fiction, giving up one genre only (Forster and the 
novel, Eliot and poetry), or the enforced result of rejection (Barbara Pym’s 
16-year hiatus) - all of which are reversible and don’t entail abandoning 
authorship altogether.

Still, when they make their sheepish comebacks, those who mistakenly assumed 
they were finished can point to a distinguished precedent. Shakespeare’s 
epilogue toThe Tempest (first produced in 1610 or 1611, around the time its 
author left London for Stratford) is unmistakably a farewell to the stage - and 
it was Shakespeare’s last solo play, ending with the words “set me free”. But 
he was soon drawn back to write the first of his collaborations with John 
Fletcher.
 