
Irving Penn, who died last year aged 92 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/oct/08/irving-penn-obituary>, is 
best known for his fashion and portrait photography. A retrospective of his 
starkly beautiful images of the great and the good opened last week at the 
National Portrait Gallery <http://www.npg.org.uk:8080/irvingpenn/index.htm> in 
London. Less well known but equally fascinating are Penn's portraits of 
ordinary working people recently collected in a book,Irving Penn: Small Trades.

In 1950, Penn had a studio in Paris in which he shot his famous fashion 
spreads forVogue magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2009/oct/08/irving-penn-photography-art?picture=353977973>
. He was fascinated by the tradespeople he saw daily on the Parisian streets 
and rightly saw them as the last representatives of a disappearing world. He 
invited many of them to sit for him in their workclothes and carrying the tools 
of their trade.

Like the models sent by Vogue, they first had to climb the six flights of 
stairs to the spartan room in which he then positioned them in front of an old 
theatre curtain. "Taking people away from their natural circumstances," he 
later said, "and putting them into a studio in front of a camera did not simply 
isolate them, it transformed them."

Penn continued photographing tradespeople in London later that year, and in 
New York, where he was based, the following year. The end result is a merging 
of documentary and portraiture that shares the sense of heightened intimacy 
that all of Penn's great portraits possess. These images, though, are also 
extraordinarily emblematic: the English seamstress, self-contained and 
meticulous; the London coalman, his back to the camera, stoical and stalwart. 
And, perhaps even more remarkably, like Penn's more esteemed sitters, they look 
both totally at ease and utterly posed.
 