
No one knows where the line for unacceptable behavior on the part of a New 
York City politician is drawn, but apparently there is one â€“ andAnthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner> managed to cross it.

A majority of New York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> voters 
think Anthony Weiner should drop out of the mayoral race, according to a 
citywide poll released Monday afternoon.

Fifty-three percent of respondents in the poll of likely voters said that 
Weiner should quit the race, versus 40% who said he should stay in, Quinnipiac 
found.

While the news was bad for Weiner, the poll featured an unprecedented show of 
strength from public advocate Bill de Blasio, who ranked second behind city 
council speakerChristine Quinn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/christine-quinn>. Twenty-seven percent of 
voters said Quinn would be their pick for mayor, versus 21% who selected de 
Blasio. Former city comptroller Bill Thompson notched 20% in the poll, versus 
16% for Weiner.

Support has deteriorated dramatically for Weiner in the week since the public 
learned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/26/anthony-weiner-sexting-new-york-tabloids>
 that he continued to send strangers pictures of his genitals after resigning 
from Congress in June 2011 in disgrace over the behavior. His campaign manager
quit abruptly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/28/anthony-weiner-campaign-manager-quits>
 on Sunday.

In a snap overnight poll 
<http://maristpoll.marist.edu/725-quinn-reclaims-lead-from-weiner-in-democratic-primary-should-weiner-drop-out-dems-divide/>
 conducted by Marist immediately after the new pictures came to light, 47% of 
respondents thought Weiner should stay in the race, while 43% thought he should 
drop out. That was before Weiner endured days of tough questions about his 
behavior andpublic humiliation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/26/anthony-weiner-sexting-new-york-tabloids>
 at the hands of the tabloid press.

A Quinnipiac poll released just prior to the latest flare-up in the Weiner 
scandal found the former congressman in the lead over Quinn by 26-22.

Consistently strong polling by Quinn, the frontrunner in most surveys, belies 
her potential vulnerability in a mayoral runoff, to be held if no one candidate 
gains 40% of the vote. Quinn's net favorability rating has lagged both De 
Blasio and Thompson, potential runoff opponents. A Quinnipiac poll last week 
<http://www.quinnipiac.edu/institutes-and-centers/polling-institute/new-york-city/release-detail?ReleaseID=1927>
 of a hypothetical Democratic runoff between Quinn and Thompson found Thompson 
out front 51-42.

Monday's poll has Quinn losing a hypothetical runoff against Thompson by 10 
points, 50-40.
 