
Anthony Weiner’s latest sexting scandal could hardly be worse if it were 
scripted to maximally embarrass Huma Abedin and her employer, the Clinton 
campaign. And on Monday, following a New York Post report that included a 
cringe-worthy photo of Weiner in bed beside his and Abedin’s young son, Abedin
announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-sexting-twitter-scandal>
 that she and her husband would be separating.

No sooner did the news of her decision break on Monday than the predictable 
happened: Donald Trump startedpoliticizing it for personal gain 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/30/nyregion/anthony-weiner-sexting-huma-abedin.html>
.

Did Anthony Weiner want to get caught sexting? | Jamieson Webster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/29/did-anthony-weiner-want-to-get-caught-sexting>
After condescendingly opining about how Abedin “will be far better off” 
without her husband, Trump proceeded to extend his political smearing of Abedin 
to her boss in a statement to the New York Times. “I only worry for the country 
in thatHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> 
was careless and negligent in allowing Weiner to have such close proximity to 
highly classified information,” he wrote in a statment. “Who knows what he 
learned and who he told? It’s just another example of Hillary Clinton’s bad 
judgment.”

Never mind that a reaction from Trump should be irrelevant here – that none of 
this should reflect on the Clinton campaign at all. This is not a story about 
the 2016 presidential race. But it will be made into one.


We knew this would happen, and specifically, that Trump would lead the way to 
politicizing the failings of a campaign staffer’s husband, because it’s 
something he’s done before. Exactly a year ago, he suggested that Abedin had 
leaked sensitive state department information to Weiner, whom he referred to as 
a “perv”, a “sleazebag” and generally a “bad guy” simply because the pair was 
married. Speaking at an event in suburban Boston last year, Trump suggested 
there’s a less than “5% chance that’s she’s not telling Anthony Weiner now of a 
public relations firm what the hell is coming across” her desk, asthe Guardian 
reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/28/donald-trump-clinton-huma-abedin-anthony-weiner>
 at the time.

But we also knew this would happen, because it’s not just Trump who’s guilty 
of this narrative spin, as Rush Limbaugh made clear on Monday with a 
particularly odious line conflating Abedin’s personal life with her political 
one: “Presumably she’s going to be Hillary’s chief of staff. But she has not 
been chief of her husband’s staff,”he said 
<http://crooksandliars.com/2016/08/limbaugh-blames-huma-abedin-she-has-not>.

There’s a long history and rich culture of blaming women in American politics 
for their husbands’ bad behavior. And nobody is a better poster woman for that 
particular sexist affliction than Abedin’s boss, whose personal life has been 
the target of more public vitriol than perhaps any other political figure in 
history. This despite the fact that, like Abedin, Clinton had engaged in zero 
sexual misconduct herself.

Even now, in the supposedly enlightened year of 2016, when Trump is attacked 
for being bad on women, his defenders often respond by blaming Clinton for her 
husband’s actions. Trump surrogate Heidi Harrisdid this recently 
<http://www.liberalamerica.org/2016/08/09/watch-trump-spokeswoman-defends-track-record-women-eviscerating/>
 on MSNBC’sAM Joy <http://www.msnbc.com/am-joy>. Asked about Trump’s treatment 
of women, Harris responded with an attack on Clinton: “What I think hilarious 
is Hillary Clinton is no example for any woman. This is a woman who stood next 
to a guy for decades who has embarrassed her, humiliated her, cheated on her, 
chased every skirt he could possibly chase,”Harris said, adding,  
<http://www.msnbc.com/am-joy/watch/trump-s-problems-with-women-affecting-polls-739397187711>
“She’s no example for anyone’s daughter.”

Bill Clinton’s bad behavior is not and never was his wife’s fault, but she 
will continue to be blamed as long as sexism is alive in America.

Similarly, Abedin would have been attacked for her husband’s behavior no 
matter what she did.

After the news of Abedin’s decision to leave her marriage broke, many, 
including a senior New York Times reporter on the Clinton beat, were already 
making comparisons between Abedin and Steve Bannon, the recently appointed 
chief executive officer of the Trump campaign who’s been accused of domestic 
violence. “The problem for Clinton team – after Democrats repeatedly pointed to 
Bannon personal past, going to be hard to argue Weiner is off limits,”tweeted 
the reporter 
<https://twitter.com/maggieNYT/status/770274286552682496?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>.

In fact, it’s infinitely easier to argue that Abedin’s husband’s sexual 
behavior should be off limits. For one thing, he did nothing illegal. For 
another,Anthony Weiner <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner> is 
not the CEO of Clinton’s campaign; he has no role in it whatsoever.

Whatever your feelings about his failure to redeem himself even having been 
given not just a second chance,but a third 
<http://nypost.com/2016/01/25/a-long-hard-look-into-anthony-weiners-downfall/>, 
this is a heartbreaking result for Abedin and her young son, who opened up 
their personal life once again this past year 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/what-the-movie-weiner-tells-us-about-huma-abedin/2016/06/02/142b67b0-27ee-11e6-ae4a-3cdd5fe74204_story.html>
 in the hope that a documentary about their lives post-scandal would make 
personal redemption possible for the father of their family.


Blame Weiner for all this, mock him, or feel sorry for him, but don’t blame 
Huma Abedin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/huma-abedin>. She did nothing 
wrong, and any attempts to blame her here and insinuate Hillary Clinton into 
the equation are worse than purely political: they are blatantly sexist.

A man who cheats on his wife does not reflect a shortcoming in his spouse – or 
in the woman who would hire her. If anything, the fact that these women have 
been able to withstand so much personal hardship in the face of unyielding 
political attacks is a testament to their character. We should respect them 
more for what they’ve been able to endure despite the sexually dysfunctional 
men in their lives, and despite whether they ultimately chose to stay with 
their husband, or not.
 