
Anthony Albanese <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> 
has ruled out immediately challengingBill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> for the Labor party 
leadership, saying now is not the time to change leaders when the results of 
the election are unknown.

He says Shorten will remain as leader even if Labor stays in opposition after 
the votes are counted, and he looks forward to being part of the team.

But he has left open the possibility of challenging for the leadership at some 
point in the future, saying no leader remains leader indefinitely.

Powerbrokers move to shore up Shorten against potential challenge from Albanese
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/bill-shorten-could-face-labor-leadership-challenge-from-anthony-albanese>
“This is like a footy-game that’s gone into extra time. You don’t even 
consider changing who the captain is during extra time,” he told the ABC’s 7.30 
on Monday.

“We have had an extraordinary result on Saturday. I think the Labor party’s 
been very united. It will continue to be so.”

Albanese’s decision to bow out of contention for the Labor leadership follows 
a significant application ofinstitutional pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/03/bill-shorten-could-face-labor-leadership-challenge-from-anthony-albanese>
 behind the scenes by powerbrokers close to Bill Shorten over the past couple 
of days.


In the closing week of the election campaign, key Labor figures in NSW were 
beginning to position for a leadership change in the event Labor lost the 
election.

To succeed in a ballot, Albanese would have required not only the support of 
his own left faction, but institutional support from the NSW right faction. 
There were signs the NSW right wasflirting 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/federal-election/bill-shorten-faces-labor-leadership-battle-as-reports-surface-that-sam-dastyari-backs-anthony-albanese/news-story/659159119d94d8aba0c9b3c436967208>
 with the idea of backing Albanese post election.

Efforts have been made since Saturday night to unify the right faction behind 
Shorten’s leadership given Labor’s performance in Saturday’s election, and 
given Labor still remains in contention to form a minority government once 
counting resumes again on Tuesday.


Paul Keating slams Greens as self-serving 'opportunists and Trots'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/25/paul-keating-slams-greens-as-self-serving-opportunists-and-trots>
Leadership instability was regarded as counter-productive to Shorten’s 
discussions with crossbenchers, who will take into account stability as one of 
the factors in determining who to support in any future confidence vote.

Before the backroom positioning by figures from NSW spilled over into the 
public domain, colleagues close to Shorten, including the Victorian left’s Kim 
Carr and Jenny Macklin, made public interventions in support of the Labor 
leader in the final stages of the campaign, arguing he had performed strongly 
enough to retain the party leadership, regardless of the final result.

Other colleagues have rallied for Shorten subsequent to the election result, 
including Shorten’s deputy, Tanya Plibersek, Albanese’s factional colleague in 
NSW, and a person regarded internally as another potential leadership 
alternative for Labor.

Albanese says he looks forward to working with Shorten in the next period of 
government, whether Labor is in government or in opposition.

“I have a great deal of experience of course, having been leader of the house 
in the 2010 to 2013 period, and I want to help Bill as the leader, Tony Burke 
as the manager of opposition business or the leader of the house, in how to 
deal with that if those circumstances arrive,” he said.

“I’ve always been a team player ... and always put the party first before my 
own interests, and I certainly will be continuing to do that, as I always have.”
 