
Labor’s Anthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> has ramped up his 
threat against the Liberal party, saying if the party directs its preferences 
towards his Greens opponent in the Sydney seat of Grayndler he will turn the 
issue into a national judgment on Malcolm Turnbull.

He said the Liberal party for strategic reasons had still failed to rule out a 
preference deal withJim Casey <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jim-casey>, 
the Greens’ candidate inGrayndler 
<http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/nsw/grayndler.htm>, but the delay was putting 
them on the side ofan avowed anticapitalist. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/12/thanks-daily-telegraph-i-welcome-a-debate-about-the-overthrow-of-capitalism>

He threatened to turn this into a national issue if the Liberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party> hierarchy did not 
state publicly that it would not preference Casey.

Greens leader Richard Di Natale takes election battle to Anthony Albanese
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/09/battle-for-grayndler-greens-take-on-anthony-albanese-on-his-own-turf>
“It would be extraordinary if they do, and if they do I’ll have very clear 
message which is a vote forMalcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> is a vote to 
abolish capitalism,” Albanese said on Sunday.

“This is someone who in a video posted by the Greens themselves 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=34ToPBfgrQM>, so they’re quite proud of it, 
said he’d prefer a Tony Abbott government above a Bill Shorten government 
essentially because you’d get better demonstrations,” he said.

“It’s a very old-fashioned hard-Marxist view of the world which says that if 
you just oppress people they’ll rise up against the system.

“I believe in lifting everyone up, that’s my objective, and I’ve gotta say, 
when I’ve been door-knocking in Balmain and Rozelle and Annandale, there aren’t 
many when I knock on the door who say, ‘The big issue for me is, are you going 
to abolish capitalism?’”

The pressure is mounting on Albanese to retain his seat of Grayndler, which he 
has held since 1996.

The seat is a classic Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> inner-west electorate 
comprising many students and young families.

The Greens are targeting the seat because they say the demographics are on 
their side, and if Albanese – who is a popular candidate – wasn’t running they 
believe the seat would be for the taking.

But ABC election analyst Antony Green says it is very likely Albanese will 
still win the seat, but a recent redistribution has made the challenge slightly 
harder.

Thanks Daily Telegraph, I welcome a debate about the overthrow of capitalism | 
Jim Casey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/12/thanks-daily-telegraph-i-welcome-a-debate-about-the-overthrow-of-capitalism>
“A Green victory in 2016 will require forcing the Labor vote down from the 
46.5% estimated first-preference vote in 2013, will require the Greens to 
outpoll the Liberal candidate, and then to receive a majority of Liberal 
preferences,”Green has written on his election blog 
<http://blogs.abc.net.au/antonygreen/2016/05/liberal-preferences-and-green-prospects-at-the-2016-election.html#more>
.

“Without Liberal preferences, the Greens would need to outpoll Labor on first 
preferences to win.”

Casey has come under fire from Labor and Liberal politicians, and sections of 
the media, for comments he made at the Greens Reboot Future conference in 2014, 
held at the University of Technology Sydney.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fanthony-albanese-warns-liberal-party-not-to-preference-the-greens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ecd4385b189ced6478146b35f53bdd14488ddc2%2F0_0_4096_2732%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anthony%20Albanese%20warns%20Liberal%20party%20not%20to%20preference%20the%20Greens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fanthony-albanese-warns-liberal-party-not-to-preference-the-greens%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anthony%20Albanese%20warns%20Liberal%20party%20not%20to%20preference%20the%20Greens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F29%2Fanthony-albanese-warns-liberal-party-not-to-preference-the-greens%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ecd4385b189ced6478146b35f53bdd14488ddc2%2F0_0_4096_2732%2F4096.jpg>
 The Greens candidate for the seat of Grayndler, Jim Casey. Photograph: Paul 
Miller/EPA 
As a representative of the Fire Brigade Employees’ Union, Casey said at the 
time he would like to seeTony Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott> returned as prime 
minister, with a labour movement that was growing, with an anti-war movement 
that was disrupting things in the streets, and with a strong women’s movement, 
Indigenous movement and climate change movement that was starting to disrupt 
the production of coal.

Guardian Live election special event with Lenore Taylor and Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-live-australia/2016/may/10/guardian-live-election-special>
“I’d prefer to see Abbott as the prime minister in that environment than Bill 
Shorten as prime minister without it,” he said.

The Victorian Liberal president Michael Kroger indicated in March that the 
Liberals may be prepared to enter a “loose arrangement” with the Greens in some 
circumstances, because they are “not the nutters they used to be 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/theyre-not-the-nutters-they-used-to-be-liberal-party-open-to-greens-arrangement-20160310-gnfy0q.html>
”.

But Kroger’s comments have angered some conservatives in the Liberal party, 
and some senior figures in the Greens, neither of which want to do any deal 
with the other.

Greens strategist admit that the only way Casey could win in Grayndler is with 
Liberal preferences.
 