
A great number of the New Yorkers who will or will not vote for Anthony 
Weiner, and, as well, many of the journalists and politicians so nonplused by 
his behavior,are online porn consumers 
<http://theweek.com/article/index/204156/the-internet-porn-epidemic-by-the-numbers>
, too.

This has always been true about public and private morality. What you yourself 
do in private, you can, nevertheless, happily condemn a public figure for 
doing. It's a cover, collective disapproval. It's standard hypocrisy.

All the more now. The internet, that revolution in auto eroticism, is built on 
mass prurience. Every modern person has a porn fascination if not compulsion. 
You'd have to have no curiosity to be otherwise. That's part of the reaction 
here: there but for the grace of God go I. We're projecting our own shame on 
Weiner.

Voters were apparently quite willing to forget about Weiner's first round  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/08/anthony-weiner-eliot-spitzer-new-york>
of digital excitement; the issue returns becausewe are freshly mortified 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/23/anthony-weiner-huma-abedin>, 
forced from agreeable denial.

Then there's the pundit's version: it's not what he did, but that he lied to 
the voters about doing it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/24/anthony-weiner-pressure-latest-revelations>
. It's not the deed, it's the cover-up. And yet, of course he lied! There 
wasn't really an option. What could he stay? "I can't stop. It's what gets me 
off. It's what gets me up in the morning." Like most people with a porn habit, 
he's leading something of a double life. He's in the closet.

The issue ought to be more precisely framed, not as about ickyness or 
dishonesty, but, rather about what, on the slippery slope of sexuality, 
constitutes a transgression nowadays. And about the level of transgression we 
are willing to tolerate in our elected officials (after all, the governor ofNew 
York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> lives with a woman not his 
wife, something that would have been political anathema not too long ago). 
That'd be an arresting debate.

Weiner's transgression is obviously a most curious kind in that there was no 
physical contact. In effect, he had sexual fantasies and masturbated, like, 
presumably, most of his colleagues. Inconveniently, he left a record of those 
fantasies. And, alas, everybody is a cheese ball in their sexual fantasies. 
(Weiner might seem less ignominious if he'd had a real affair.)

The minor dispute over Weiner's refusal to characterize his behavior as an 
addiction, which actually might have played better in this context than free 
will, perhaps comes down to the nature of masturbation: is it a compulsion or a 
normal reflex (whether aided by porn or virtual surrogates)? Anyway, it's a 
hard public discussion. Obviously, you look differently at someone who's been 
caught wanking.

Losers do it. Well, everybody does it. But you're not a loser until people 
know you do it. So now it's a character issue.

But what if we weren't talking about Anthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner>, not naturally loveable in 
any circumstance. What if we were talking about a great leader who might save 
us from economic ruin, or ennoble the human cause? What if Nelson Mandela were 
caught wanking? Is it different when you do it in a chat room, or with an 
anonymous social media fantasy partner (the complication is that anonymous 
people, like Weiner's self-dramatizing Facebook surrogate, might have 
aspirations beyond anonymity)? Is that more of a Pee Wee Herman type situation? 
Does the entire nature of masturbation change if it is no longer secret?

Okay, nobody really wants to look under these rocks. That's one aspect of why 
so many people seemed willing to have let sleeping dogs lie and lifted Weiner 
in the polls. Until he did it again.

Up to the same old tricks. He didn't stop. He likes doing it! He's spitting in 
the public eye. He's a risk taker. He has reckless impulses. It's his judgment. 
It's his ego. Powerful men, even when they are doing something that poor 
bastards do too, are over the top. He's a narcissist.

New York Magazine's Jennifer Senior 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2013/07/huma-and-the-perils-of-marrying-a-narcissist.html>
 last week diagnosed Weiner's narcissism on the basis of a) him being a 
politician and b) being a politician who is not ashamed enough of his 
embarrassment to stop being a politician.

"It seems pretty clear," said New York, "that the same traits that drove 
Anthony Weiner back into politics prematurely are exactly what made him 
promiscuous with young women online: He's short on impulse control and long on 
self-regard".

Does it? Or might not he be retreating to the hoi polloi of the internet to 
escape his ambition? Or both. He's ambitious and cocksure (no pun, really), and 
yet desperate for some private (okay, erotic) respite, too. Politicians along 
with actors obviously have a preternatural need for attention, but, at the same 
time, they lead a public life of the greatest insincerity that is 
insupportable. You can't perform 100% of the time. Or you had better not.

Curiously, we seem to have accepted that actors can do whatever gets them off 
– their private lives are their own, or at least not a social sin, or at least 
they don't lose their jobs – where once we did not, where once deviations from 
the straight and narrow ruined careers.

Now we take the private lives of politicians as personally as we used to take 
the virtue of actors. (When actors had it toughest, say around the era of the 
Kennedy presidency, politicians could get away with anything.) There is another 
more modern element too, the widening gulf in politics between men and women. 
This is not just between conservative men and more liberal women, but, on some 
level, a more general gender divide and resentment.

Many women profess that they are less appalled by what Anthony Weiner and 
Eliot Spitzer did than by what they did to their wives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/emma-brockes-blog/2013/jul/25/weiner-scandal-huma-abedin-spotlight>
, forcing them to become bit players in the farce of male heterosexuality. 
(Although, there is a further analysis that finds that the public ultimately 
forgives the husbands but continues to think less of the wives.)

Anyway, wanking. It is among the long list of last taboos. We may scale the 
hurdle of electing a lesbian mayor, but the wanker hurdle seems still too high.
 