
Disgraced former US congressman Anthony Weiner, whose career nosedived after 
he wascaught sending sexually explicit texts and images 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/07/anthony-weiner-twitter-pictures-new-york>
 to young women while he was still married, has allegedly spent several months 
this year in an online, highly explicit relationship with a 15-year-old girl, 
according to a new report.


The ex-politician and failed New York mayoral candidate asked her to undress 
for him and engage in rape fantasies among a plethora of erotic exchanges that 
began in January 2016, the Daily Mailreported 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3790824/Anthony-Weiner-carried-months-long-online-sexual-relationship-troubled-15-year-old-girl-telling-hard-asking-dress-school-girl-outfits-pressing-engage-rape-fantasies.html#ixzz4Ku5mkVQq>
.

Weiner is still married to Huma Abedin, Democratic presidential nominee 
Hillary Clinton’s longtime aide and campaign vice-chairman. Abedinannounced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-sexting-twitter-scandal>
 in August that she was separating from her husband after Weiner wasrevealed in 
another report 
<http://nypost.com/2016/08/28/anthony-weiner-sexted-busty-brunette-while-his-son-was-in-bed-with-him/>
 to have sent another woman a provocative picture of himself in his underwear, 
with his young son next to him.

Huma Abedin separates from Anthony Weiner after latest sexting scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-sexting-twitter-scandal>
It was but the most recent in a series of scandals involving Weiner.

The couple are apparently still sharing a home in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> and were photographed by the 
Daily Mail leaving separately on Wednesday morning, with Abedin carrying a bag 
bearing the Clinton campaign logo and apparently heading to Florida with the 
candidate, while Weiner was “going for a walk”.

Weiner allegedly communicated with the girl, who appears to live in a state 
other than New York, using Twitter, Skype, Facebook and other digital platforms 
to exchange videos, texts, photographs and have voice conversations.

The girl – who was not named in the report in order to protect her identity as 
a minor – reportedly approached the publication and, along with her father, who 
is also not named, gave detailed interviews and shared messages, images and 
screen grabs of communications exchanged with Weiner.

She said she struck up the initial contact with Weiner but discontinued it 
after the August revelation of picturesin the New York Post 
<http://nypost.com/2016/08/28/anthony-weiner-sexted-busty-brunette-while-his-son-was-in-bed-with-him/>
, which he is said to have sent to a 40-year-old woman.

Anthony Weiner <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner> is 51. The 
law of consent in most states is between 16 and 18, although in many states 
teens younger than 16 can have consensual sexual contact with each other 
provided the age gap is not more than four years.

By all accounts Weiner and the 15-year-old did not meet or have any physical 
contact. He allegedly sent her explicitly sexual messages and asked her to 
undress and masturbate over video chat. When an exchange escalated and he 
allegedly tried to engage her in talk of a rape fantasy, she objected and he 
dropped the subject, according to the Daily Mail’s report.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fanthony-weiner-sexually-explicit-messages-teen-daily-mail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c0c45942499bd2316d40665a6c6f33a22eaa249%2F75_0_1603_962%2F1603.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anthony%20Weiner%20sent%20sexually%20explicit%20messages%20to%2015-year-old%2C%20report%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fanthony-weiner-sexually-explicit-messages-teen-daily-mail%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anthony%20Weiner%20sent%20sexually%20explicit%20messages%20to%2015-year-old%2C%20report%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fanthony-weiner-sexually-explicit-messages-teen-daily-mail%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c0c45942499bd2316d40665a6c6f33a22eaa249%2F75_0_1603_962%2F1603.jpg>
 Anthony Weiner. Photograph: Everett/REX/Shutterstock 
Weiner reportedly admitted to the Daily Mail that he had engaged in 
flirtatious exchanges with the girl but did not comment further on any of the 
specific allegations. He maintained that some of the details may be a hoax.

In some screenshots accompanying the report, Weiner’s picture and name can be 
seen on screen. In a statement to the Daily Mail, Weiner said, in part: “I have 
repeatedly demonstrated terrible judgement about the people I have communicated 
with online and the things I have sent. I am filled with regret and heartbroken 
for those I have hurt.”

He sent a similar 
<http://www.foxnews.com/us/2016/09/21/new-low-disgraced-dem-anthony-weiner-sorry-after-texts-to-15-year-old-revealed.html>
 statement to Fox News and also apologized for his behavior, while repeating 
that he may be the subject of a hoax.

According to Wednesday’s report, Weiner and the 15-year-old used apps such as 
Kik and Confide where much of the material exchanged or the identity of the 
sender is automatically deleted.

But the girl reportedly took some screenshots of certain images and words.

“A situation such as this could involve an array of crimes, depending on what 
is done and what a minor is asked for,” said John Wilkinson, an attorney 
adviser and former prosecutor with Aequitas, a consultancy and research 
organization that advises on prosecuting violence against women.

Any investigation into Weiner could involve child sex abuse images or child 
endangerment statutes. There are also federal laws prohibiting the sexual 
exploitation of children and other statutes involving the transfer of obscene 
materials to a minor. Wilkinson also explained that even if an adult claims a 
teenager initiated contact and they did not realize their young age, that is 
not accepted as a defense in court.

If the two people are in different states, or even if they are in the same 
state but use digital services such as Skype, which often have their servers 
located in another state, then a situation involving a 51-year-old and a 
15-year-old could be investigated under federal as well as state criminal laws.

Azi Paybarah, a senior reporter at Politico, posted 
<https://twitter.com/Azi/status/778671013039144960> on Twitter on Wednesday 
afternoon that New York Governor Andrew Cuomo had been asked about the latest 
scandal and Cuomo said that if the latest report was true it was “sick” and 
potentially “criminal”.

After the August scandal, Weiner first denied and then admitted 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/02/nyregion/anthony-weiner-confirms-child-welfare-agency-is->
 that he was being investigated by New York’s child services authorities.
 