
Darren Fletcher is confident Antonio Valencia will still have a big future at 
Manchester United <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>. 
Valencia was in hospital this morning having an operation to reset his ankle 
after he suffered an horrific injury during last night's Champions League draw 
with Rangers at Old Trafford.

Sir Alex Ferguson has already admitted he does not expect Valencia to be 
available for the remainder of the season and likened the injury to that which 
Alan Smith suffered in similarly freakish circumstances against Liverpool in 
2006. Smith has arguably not been the same player since but despite the fact 
Valencia's injury was so bad that Sky did not show a replay the incident 
itself, Fletcher is holding out more hope for the Ecuador midfielder.

"It looked really bad," he said. "Hopefully the scans show it is not as bad as 
we fear. After arriving from Wigan he had a great first season and was looking 
to push on this year. That is why the injury is a real blow. He has only just 
got back from the injury he suffered at the end of last season too.

"He is a strong character and a good lad. He has real determination and works 
hard. He will be back, I am sure. He will have a long future at Manchester 
United."

From a more short-term perspective the injury Ferguson with a problem so soon 
after the transfer window closed. With games beginning to pile up, starting 
with Sunday's encounter with Liverpool, United are left with only three 
orthodox wingers, one of whom is the largely untested Gabriel Obertan and 
another, Ryan Giggs, who cannot be expected to feature in every game just two 
months short of his 37th birthday.

Park Ji-sung, Javier Hern√°ndez and even Fletcher are capable of operating in 
that area but are not natural wide men, with so much now resting on Nani if 
United are to keep pace with the Premier League title favourites Chelsea, 
having already fallen four points off the pace.

A bit of work is required in Europe too after last night's disappointing 
result, with Fletcher joining his manager in believing the 10 changes, which 
admittedly did see Ferguson introduce eight full internationals, including 
Wayne Rooney and Rio Ferdinand, played no part in the result.

"There were not too many changes," said the Scotland captain. "We have a big 
squad and everyone has a lot of ability. It is difficult for the players coming 
in because they don't have that match sharpness.

"But training is intense and everyone is good enough to play in this team. The 
manager felt things needed freshening up and the team was good enough to win 
the match. I agree."
 