
Antonio Valencia <https://www.theguardian.com/football/antonio-valencia> is 
likely to miss the rest of the season after suffering a broken leg and a 
dislocated ankle in Manchester United's goalless draw against Rangers in the 
Champions League last night.

The injury is similar to that suffered by Alan Smith when playing for United 
in an FA Cup tie at Liverpool in February 2006. Television pictures of the 
incident were so upsetting that Sky did not show replays, instead focusing on 
the reaction of Valencia's team-mates and opponents.

Players from both teams were visibly distressed, many having to look away as 
Valencia received lengthy treatment before being carried on a stretcher to a 
waiting ambulance. The Ecuadorian winger appeared to catch his studs in the 
turf, with the Rangers defender Kirk Broadfoot close to him. Photographs showed 
the winger's ankle hanging limply and at the wrong angle.

• Kevin McCarra's match report: Man Utd 0-0 Rangers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/sep/14/manchester-united-rangers-champions-league>
• Rangers defender wishes Valencia a speedy recovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/sep/15/antonio-valencia-injury-rangers>
• Daniel Taylor's player ratings from Old Trafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/sep/15/champions-league-ratings-manchester-united-rangers>
• Read Rob Smyth's minute-by-minute report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/sep/14/manchester-united-rangers-live-champions-league>

"He's gone straight to hospital and he will be operated on in the morning," 
said theManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united> manager, Sir Alex 
Ferguson. "It's a dislocation and a fracture and he's going to be out for a 
long time. It's a really bad blow for the boy. It's similar to the injury Alan 
Smith got."

Smith's rehabilitation lasted seven months, although he has said that he 
should have waited longer to return. There is a strong case to be made that 
Smith, who is now at Newcastle United, has not been the same player since his 
injury.

Citing the example of Smith, Ferguson said: "You're talking about [Valencia 
missing] the rest of the season. It was a really innocuous challenge and you 
wouldn't have expected anything but as soon as we saw their player waving, we 
knew it was a bad one."

The injury came on a frustrating night for United in which Ferguson, having 
used his programme notes to promise he would not "underestimate Rangers" and 
point out that "their history demands respect", made 10 changes from the side 
that drew 3-3 against Everton on Saturday.

A line-up in which four defenders started their first match of the season was 
put together with Sunday's game, at home to Liverpool, in mind. But Ferguson 
was defensive when it was suggested he may have left out some of his better 
players.

"I know the criticism will be of why I didn't play a stronger team but I think 
I played a very strong team," he said. "Seven or eight of those players played 
against Chelsea in the Community Shield [four started]. We have a terrific 
squad and we should have won that game but you have to give Rangers credit 
because their system of play was very hard to break down.

"I'm not going to criticise our opponents for that because they have to 
come here with a plan and it's something we have faced many times. It's up to 
us to do something about it and we didn't do that."

Walter Smith, the Rangers manager, fielded a five-man defence with four 
midfielders under orders not to stray too far forward and Kenny Miller in 
attack.

"We had to find a way to succeed and nullify the opposition," Smith said. 
"Everyone seems to be concerned about the United side but I would love Alex's 
problems, if you consider that the players he chose would get into 80% to 90% 
of Premier League teams – and Wayne Rooney would get in them all."

Ferguson conceded that his team's performance had been "a blemish" on a night 
when Rooney was restored to the team but struggled to impose himself on the 
game. The United manager also acknowledged that, on reflection, he may have 
made a mistake omitting the Bulgarian forward Dimitar Berbatov.

"I wanted to see Chicarito [Javier Hernández] in a full game, which meant 
leaving out Berba, and you would have to say that was a loss because he has 
been fantastic so far this season and his ability to create situations from 
tight positions would have made a difference.

"If we'd won everyone would have said we deserved it but we didn't create … 
great chances. All our attempts were from outside the box, through Darron 
Gibson mainly, and we didn't get our first corner until about 70 minutes. We 
weren't short of players to win a game of football. We played with intensity 
and we dominated the game but we didn't create a chance."
 