
Barclays fires chief executive Antony Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/08/barclays-fires-chief-executive-antony-jenkins>
When recently sacked Barclays chief executive Antony Jenkins was appointed 
three years ago, he was seen by some as a sensible successor to Bob Diamond, a 
man widely blamed for turning Barclays from a primarily UK retail-focused 
organisation into a global, universal bank where systematic and illegal 
manipulation of Libor and foreign exchange interest rates took root. In May 
this year, Barclays was hit with thebiggest single bank fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/20/banks-hit-by-record-57bn-fine-for-rigging-forex-markets>
 in UK history – £284.4m – for forex rigging as part of a total settlement with 
the Financial Conduct Authority and four US regulators totalling £1.5bn.

Jenkins’ origins were in the retail side of the bank and his style was 
understated in contrast with the avuncular investment banker Diamond. Last 
year, he launched a majorculture change programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/barclays-transform-programme-culture-change-window-dressing>
 in an attempt to restore trust and improve the bank’s relationships with 
customers, earning him the nickname “Saint Antony”. He stated that the“the 
universal banking model is dead” 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/ef588b42-860a-11e4-b248-00144feabdc0.html?siteedition=uk#axzz3fJLcwFbB>
, hinting that Barclays should concentrate on its retail banking sector and let 
the investment bank wind down.

That apparent change in direction may have been welcome to regulators, the 
British public and MPs on the parliamentarycommission on banking standards 
<http://www.parliament.uk/bankingstandards>. After all, it was reckless and 
illegal lending in the search for high profits in the global investment banking 
sector that helped precipitate the 2007-08 financial crisis, as well as the 
Libor and forex scandals.

But Barclays remains, at base, a profit-driven organisation. And profits, 
particularly from its investment banking branch, weren’t good enough in that 
context. The man who sacked Jenkins, incoming chairman John McFarlane, said 
that under the former’s leadership shareholder value creation had been pushed
“too far into the future” 
<http://ca.reuters.com/article/businessNews/idCAKCN0PI0I720150708?sp=true> and 
that “for some reason people felt he sent out signals that he wasn’t totally 
committed to the investment bank”.

You need never use a bank again. Here's why
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/jul/07/banking-sector-credit-unions-local-currency-money>
Sadly, Barclays is not the only large bank that seems to be moving in this 
direction. In fact, it is the fourth major European bank to change chief 
executive this year, following Deutsche Bank, Credit Suisse and Standard 
Chartered, all three because of shareholder protest over low share prices and 
high costs, with Deutsche Bank also focusing on the need to boost itsinvestment 
banking activity <http://fortune.com/2015/06/10/deutsche-bank-troubles/>. 

Meanwhile, HSBC recently pledged to leave the UK within months as its chief 
executive said Britain’s regulators hadrejected the universal banking model 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/05/hsbc-to-decide-this-year-on-moving-its-hq-from-uk>
.

This suggests attempts to reform banking culture from the inside may be a lost 
cause and that structural reform is now required. The New Economics 
Foundation’s recentfinancial systems resilience index 
<http://www.neweconomics.org/blog/entry/why-the-uk-has-the-least-resilient-economy-in-the-g7>
 found that the UK has one of the most concentrated and least diverse banking 
systems among the G7 countries, with little improvement since the financial 
crisis. This country remains dominated by huge shareholder-owned universal 
banks with virtually no competition fromstakeholder banks 
<http://www.neweconomics.org/publications/entry/stakeholder-banks>, such as 
cooperatively owned banks or mutuals.

Ours is also the largest and most interconnected banking system in the G7, 
with more exposure on both the asset and liability side of banks’ balance 
sheets to other financial corporations, domestically and abroad, relative to 
GDP. All of this makes our banking system and economy uniquely vulnerable to 
financial shocks, for which we can be almost certain there will more soon given 
the situation in the eurozone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fantony-jenkins-sacking-may-be-the-death-knell-for-banking-reform%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe56ae863dfaf9ff0ef90ec29ac81efd8d2c91da5%2F0_0_1240_872%2F1240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Antony%20Jenkins'%20sacking%20from%20Barclays%20may%20be%20the%20death%20knell%20for%20banking%20reform&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fantony-jenkins-sacking-may-be-the-death-knell-for-banking-reform%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Antony%20Jenkins%27%20sacking%20from%20Barclays%20may%20be%20the%20death%20knell%20for%20banking%20reform&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2015%2Fjul%2F09%2Fantony-jenkins-sacking-may-be-the-death-knell-for-banking-reform%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe56ae863dfaf9ff0ef90ec29ac81efd8d2c91da5%2F0_0_1240_872%2F1240.jpg>
 Banks’ foreign exposure as a percentage of GDP. Source: New Economics 
Foundation 
Turning RBS into local bank will protect us against next financial crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/25/turning-rbs-into-local-bank-will-protect-us-against-next-financial-crisis>
Britain needs fewer, not more large shareholder-owned universal banks and 
less, not more risky trading activity in investment banks. One way to achieve 
this is by breaking them up and selling the less socially useful activities – 
often in the investment banking side.

So far the only bank that has managed this to a significant degree has been 
the Royal Bank of Scotland. This was due to a government diktat as it is 
publicly owned. But even here, the chancellor’s flawed plan is to turn it back 
into a shareholder-owned monolith rather than, for example, breaking it up into
130 regional publicly owned banks. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/feb/25/turning-rbs-into-local-bank-will-protect-us-against-next-financial-crisis>


The real test may come when the Independent Commission on Banking’s 
ringfencing policies (separating retail and investment banking activities), 
expected in 2019, come into force.

Already there are signs that talks are being held by some of the larger banks 
and the Treasury towater down the reforms 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/business/Finance/article1557065.ece>. 
Together with yesterday’s news from Barclays, the message from the banks is 
becoming clear: it’s back to business as usual.
 