
The summer battle

It was a close-run thing, but Dawn of the Planet of the Apes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dawn-of-the-planet-of-the-apes-film> was 
ultimately able to resist the late challenge ofThe Inbetweeners 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-inbetweeners-2>, winning the crown as top 
title of the summer at the UK box office. With the summer season officially 
ending on 31 August, Ceasar and friends had reached a robust £31.98m, nearly 
£1m ahead of the developmentally arrested boys on their Australian odyssey.

Backers Fox will be particularly pleased, since predecessor Rise of the Planet 
of the Apes <https://www.theguardian.com/film/rise-of-the-planet-of-the-apes> 
maxed out at £20.77m, so the sequel is more than 50% ahead of that tally, and 
is still in cinemas. In contrast, the originalThe Inbetweeners Movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/aug/17/the-inbetweeners-movie-review> 
got as far as £45.03m. The sequel has fallen some way short of that incredible 
sum, although it too is still selling tickets. It's worth remarking that £31m 
is still a phenomenal amount for a relatively low-budget comedy spun off from a 
British sitcom.

The 2014 summer top 10 charts below reflect how British tastes differ from 
those of North America, whereGuardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy> has ended the season 
as the biggest-grossing film of the season (fourth place here). Our top title, 
Apes, came fifth over there.Transformers: Age of Extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/transformers-age-of-extinction> proved the 
second biggest hit of the summer with US film fans, but managed only seventh 
place here. Disney'sMaleficent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/maleficent> 
came third over there and eighth here.

Thanks to the World Cup in June, the summer season started even earlier this 
year, withThe Amazing Spider-Man 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-amazing-spider-man-2> first out of the 
gate (in mid- to late April), meaning that the period under consideration is 
rather generously defined.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcfJxwhzgvS4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcfJxwhzgvS4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FcfJxwhzgvS4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click to view <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cfJxwhzgvS4>

The dog days of summer 

With August bank holiday Monday falling the previous weekend, the 29-31 August 
slot didn't prove a particularly attractive option for distributors, as 
evidenced by a lack of commercially potent new titles. Among the new releases, 
comedyLet's Be Cops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/31/lets-be-cops-comedy-review-luke-greenfield-damon-wayans-jr>
 emerged top of the heap, with a decent £1.15m over the Friday-to-Sunday 
period, and previews taking it to £1.65m.

Late August has traditionally proved a good slot for a Hollywood comedy, and 
the past decade has witnessed the likes of Dodgeball, Knocked Up, Step 
Brothers, Grown Ups, The Watch, We're the Millers and You, Me and Dupree 
reaching the market at this time. Last year,We're the Millers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156158/we-re-the-millers> kicked off 
with £1.51m including negligible previews of £8,000, which is a bit more than 
Let's Be Cops managed.

Sin City: A Dame to Kill For <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sin-city-2> 
expanded from two cinemas to 441 venues, grossing £1.08m. Examine the small 
print, though, and the film in fact managed just £465,000 over the weekend 
period, plus previews of £613,000 earned on bank holiday Monday, Tuesday, 
Wednesday and Thursday. The originalSin City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/jun/03/1> opened in 2005 with 
£2.45m (including previews of £363,000).

Tragedy-tinged teen romance If I Stay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/if-i-stay> landed in sixth place with an OK 
£506,000 from 333 cinemas, significantly behind the pace of its US debut the 
week before ($15.7m, suggesting a UK equivalent of around £1.6m, triple the 
achieved result). It's fair to assume that the source material, Gayle Forman's 
young-adult novel, has achieved greater traction in the US.

None of these new arrivals offered much threat to top title Lucy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/lucy>, which easily hung on to the top spot 
and has generated £8m of cinema grosses in just 10 days.

The also-rans 

Landing in eighth place, catacombs horror As Above, So Below 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/as-above-so-below> grossed an anaemic 
£375,000 from 337 cinemas. But that's better than 15th-placedMillion Dollar Arm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/million-dollar-arm>, starring Jon Hamm as a 
down-on-his-luck sports agent, which managed £150,000 from 236 locations, and a 
£636 average. Disney faced the local challenge of the film's baseball theme, 
and flipping the emphasis on to cricket was hardly guaranteed to deliver big 
box-office.

The arthouse market 

For the second week in a row, the Dardennes' Two Days, One Night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/two-days-one-night> is the top arthouse 
title, with takings of £114,000, a relatively mild drop of 29% from the 
previous weekend. Following the film's release on 54 screens, distributor 
Curzon Artificial Eye opted not to pursue aggressive expansion, keeping it 
exactly the same for the second session. Of course, since the film is 
simultaneously available via the Curzon Home Cinema platform, it couldn't be 
booked into the major multiplex circuits, as the VOD release breaks the terms 
of their exclusive theatrical window. After 10 days, Two Days, One Night has 
grossed £474,000 in the UK, significantly ahead of the lifetime of the 
Dardennes' previous biggest hit, Kid with a Bike (£371,000).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FInuzW58ydyU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FInuzW58ydyU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FInuzW58ydyU%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click here to view 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=InuzW58ydyU>

None of the new arrivals offered much competition to the Dardennes. Scandi noir
The Keeper of Lost Causes <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2438644/> delivered an 
OK £69,600 from 59 cinemas, while US indie flickObvious Child 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/obvious-child> achieved a slightly richer 
average, with £42,000 from 31. Kelly Reichardt'sNight Moves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/night-moves> failed to capitalise on a 
reasonably starry cast – Jesse Eisenberg, Dakota Fanning, Peter Sarsgaard – 
opening with £25,600 from 21 sites. Reichardt's last film, Meek's Cutoff, 
kicked off with a comparable £27,600 from 17 venues.

Although in limited play, Canada-set The Grand Seduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/31/the-grand-seduction-review-limp-comedy-brendan-gleeson-don-mckellar>
 hardly qualifies as arthouse – more aspiring mainstream. Local distributor 
eOne pushed the Brendan Gleeson starrer out on 54 screens with a heavy Irish 
skew, achieving £41,300.

The event 

Secret Cinema's five-week run of Back to the Future has ended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/secret-cinema-back-to-the-future-olympic-park>
, with a final gross of £3.37m from a single venue. That's the biggest total 
ever achieved in the UK for a Secret Cinema presentation, or indeed any 
iteration of event cinema seen on these isles. Secret Cinema's founder Fabien 
Riggall speaks on the future of cinema at the Toronto film festival next week, 
so look for the brand to expand internationally in 2015.

The future

Overall box office was 18% down on the previous weekend and 11% down on the 
equivalent frame from 2013, whenOne Direction: This Is Us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/29/one-direction-this-is-us-review> 
arrived at the top of the chart. September looks set to get off to a 
characteristically modest start, with the arrival this week of Cameron 
Diaz-Jason Segel comedySex Tape <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sex-tape> (a 
mild $38m in the US), plus Nicole Kidman and Colin Firth in amnesia-themed 
thrillerBefore I Go to Sleep <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1726592/>, adapted 
from the SJ Watson bestseller. Also in the thriller genre isThe Guest 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2980592/>, featuring Downton Abbey's Dan Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/aug/30/dan-stevens-no-more-mr-nice-guy-downton-abbey>
 in a change-of-pace role, whileThe Hundred-Foot Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/08/the-hundred-foot-journey-first-look-review>
, starring Helen Mirren, targets the Best Exotic Marigold Hotel audience. 
Elmore Leonard adaptationLife of Crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/12/life-of-crime-review-toronto> and 
romcom spoofThey Came Together <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2398249/> are both 
in limited play, despite being populated by marketable cast elements including 
Jennifer Aniston and Paul Rudd.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-fQvyfn3wbE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-fQvyfn3wbE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-fQvyfn3wbE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click to view <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-fQvyfn3wbE>

Top films of summer 2014, UK

1. Dawn of the Planet of the Apes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dawn-of-the-planet-of-the-apes-film>, £31.99m

2. The Inbetweeners 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-inbetweeners-2>, 
£31.01m

3. X-Men: Days of Future Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-days-of-future-past>, £27.13m

4. Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy>, £24.50m

5. The Amazing Spider-Man 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-amazing-spider-man-2>, £24.12m

6. How to Train your Dragon 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/how-to-train-your-dragon-2>, £23.65m

7. Transformers: Age of Extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/transformers-age-of-extinction>, £19.44m

8. Maleficent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/maleficent>, £19.25m

9.  22 Jump Street <https://www.theguardian.com/film/22-jump-street>, £18.64m

10. Godzilla <https://www.theguardian.com/film/godzilla>, £17.24m

Top films of summer 2014, US

1. Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy>, $275m

2. Transformers: Age of Extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/transformers-age-of-extinction>, $244m

3. Maleficent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/maleficent>, $239m

4. X-Men: Days of Future Past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/x-men-days-of-future-past>, $233m

5. Dawn of the Planet of the Apes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dawn-of-the-planet-of-the-apes-film>, $205m

6. The Amazing Spider-Man 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-amazing-spider-man-2>, $203m

7. Godzilla <https://www.theguardian.com/film/godzilla>, $201m

8. 22 Jump Street <https://www.theguardian.com/film/22-jump-street>, £190m

9. How to Train your Dragon 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/how-to-train-your-dragon-2>, $173m

10. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles>, $162m

Top 10 films, 29-31 August

1. Lucy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lucy>, £1,972,039 from 504 sites. 
Total: £8,006,914

2. Let's Be Cops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/31/lets-be-cops-comedy-review-luke-greenfield-damon-wayans-jr>
, £1,650,912 from 442 sites (New)

3. The Inbetweeners 2 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-inbetweeners-2>, 
£1,298,163 from 499 sites. Total: £30,011,216

4. Sin City: A Dame To Kill For <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sin-city-2>, 
£1,077,370 from 441 sites. Total: £1,104,915

5. Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy>, £1,027,274 from 473 
sites. Total: £24,500,496

6. If I Stay <https://www.theguardian.com/film/if-i-stay>, £505,704 from 333 
sites (New)

7. How To Train Your Dragon 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/how-to-train-your-dragon-2>, £427,724 from 
447 sites. Total: £23,650,066

8. As Above, So Below <https://www.theguardian.com/film/as-above-so-below>, 
£398,787 from 337 sites (New)

9. Into the Storm <https://www.theguardian.com/film/into-the-storm>, £374,533 
from 426 sites. Total: £2,311,031

10. Dawn of the Planet of the Apes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dawn-of-the-planet-of-the-apes-film>, 
£361,132 from 324 sites. Total: £31,987,494

Other openers

Million Dollar Arm <https://www.theguardian.com/film/million-dollar-arm>, 
£150,050 from 236 sites

The Keeper of Lost Causes, £69,627 from 59 sites

The Guvnors, £45,696 from 32 sites

Raja Natwarlal, £42,893 from 36 sites

Obvious Child <https://www.theguardian.com/film/obvious-child>, £42,022 from 
31 sites

Double Di Trouble, £41,947 from 17 sites

The Grand Seduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/31/the-grand-seduction-review-limp-comedy-brendan-gleeson-don-mckellar>
, £41,322 from 54 sites

Night Moves <https://www.theguardian.com/film/night-moves>, £25,600 from 21 
sites

Mystery Road, £10,340 from 7 sites

The Cabinet of Dr Caligari, £6,918 from 9 sites

Irumbu Kuthirai, £5,992 from 8 sites

The Internet's Own Boy, £485 from 1 site

The Factory, £60 from 1 site

• Thanks to Rentrak
 