
Gordon Coates (Coppola's slow boat on the Nung, Film & Music, October 17) 
referred to the "holy grail" of film collecting as a "rumoured 289-minute 
version of Francis Coppola's 1979 film Apocalypse Now", adding that the film's 
producers denied the existence of this long version. In reality, it comes down 
to semantics. When the film-makers returned from their 238-day shoot, the 
editors put together a rough assembly that ran to nearly five hours, and 
contained all the scenes that had been shot. So when one heard "there is no 
five-hour version", the producers were not being evasive. It is not a version 
of a film, it is a catalogue of everything, which then had to be edited into a 
coherent narrative.

In 1999 Coppola decided to revisit the raw material to create a new version 
that would be more faithful to his original vision.Apocalypse Now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/apocalypse-now> Redux was screened at Cannes 
in May 2001 and had a theatrical release later that year.

In that long first assembly is the scene in which Kurtz is reading from Time 
magazine. It was restored, recut and included in the Redux version, along with 
several other scenes. Brando's reading of Eliot's The Hollow Men can be seen in 
its entirety as a special feature in the special two-DVD release, Apocalypse 
Now (Steelbook Edition).

Many significant scenes that were neither in the original nor the Redux 
version are in the Steelbook version. They include scenes with Willard's 
special ops predecessor Colby, and the death of the foreign correspondent 
played by Dennis Hopper. It also includes audio commentaries by the director in 
which he addresses the editing decisions he faced in the 70s and again in 
2000-01.
Kim Aubry
Co-producer of Apocalypse Now Redux
 