
Font geeks will get a chilly shiver of delight when they first crack open 
iFontMaker, which claims to be the first dedicated font-making tool foriPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad>.

It's a simple, very easy to use (assuming the user is familiar with the basic 
principles of Photoshop tools) font-designing app. As you're designing, you can 
choose from one of 10 standard background fonts to use as a guide. Click on 
each letter of the alphabet in the top menu to choose a letter to edit, and 
select from brush, pen or pencil density before using your finger to draw each 
letters or number. When you've worked through the alphabet, letters 0-9 and 
some punctuation figures - you've got a whole alphabet in your own hand.

Name your new font, and then type a sample sentence to see how the finished 
font looks. Export as a true type font, via 2ttf.com, and you're done. It's a 
delight.

Some might feel £4.99 is a bit steep for an app - but it's all relative. You 
wouldn't think twice about spending a fiver on a night out, but this is cash 
supporting a team of developers who deserve the money an the credit. Albeit 
with a 30% cut forApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>.

iFontMaker is extremely well designed and slick, and it knows the audience it 
is heading for. Not long ago, personalised font tools were clunky and 
unimaginatyive, limited to scans of your own handwriting, and few of2fft 
<http://2ttf.com/>'s rivals <http://fontself.com/> are as slick. This is heaps 
better, even if it will take a bit of effort to come up with something original 
now that font design tools are so ubiquitous. One of the nicest features is 
that once the fonts are finished, users can choose whether to make them public 
<http://2ttf.com/WbAQ43qL> - the democratisation of the font, some might say.

Send us your favourites.


Where: Apple App Store for iPad 
<http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ifontmaker/id377381670?mt=8>

Price: £4.99

Do say: Would you like serifs with that?

Don't say: Why not just use Comic Sans?
 