
Another day, another flood of emails about new apps to add to the 50,000 
already out there for the iPhone alone. So we'll be picking something 
interesting each day - foriPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone>
, iPad, Android, Facebook and more - in our new App of the Day feature.

Today, we look at an RSS aggreagator for the iPhone. Tomorrow - we're open to 
ideas. What's your favourite app discovery?

Byline <http://phantomfish.com/byline.html>

Price: Â£2.39

Store: iTunes 
<http://click.linksynergy.com/fs-bin/stat?id=9yyTS5BfMus&offerid=146261&type=3&subid=0&tmpid=1826&RD_PARM1=http%253A%252F%252Fitunes.apple.com%252FWebObjects%252FMZStore.woa%252Fwa%252FviewSoftware%253Fid%253D284946773%2526mt%253D8%2526partnerId%253D30>

What it does: RSS and atom news aggregator. Heavy-duty RSS readers are highly 
prized among news junkies like me, who need to be able to skim several hundred 
headlines a day. For the uninitated, news aggregators let you sift headlines 
from your favourite sites in one place in a uniform format that is much easier 
and much, much faster than visiting each site individually. Readers are based 
on RSS, a simplified stream of continually updated information from a site.

Features: The app lets you star and share stories with notes just as you can 
in Google Reader, and imports any folders you've set up. Flick between one roll 
of news or organise new stories by site name. View in landscape mode and also 
forward links to stories by email.
 The Byline app for iPhone 
The good bits: Subscribe to your favourite sites in Google Reader, which lets 
you manage and share links. Download Byline for your iPhone, and when you link 
it with your Google account it will present headlines and stories in an 
easy-to-browse, mobile-friendly form.

The bad bits: As ever, reliability is dependent on your connection, so if 
you're on the Tube you won't be able to update the headlines although you can 
still click through to read cached stories. Syncing can also take a while, 
especially if you have a big list of subscriptions. And you can't add 
subscriptions to new sites within Byline.

More: Once you've finely tuned your Google Reader account, it quickly becomes 
addictive and extremely useful to have a fast, reliable news service on your 
mobile. We'd like to see a Tweet this shortcut in Byline 3.0, due out soon.
 