
Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> has said for the first 
time that it is working on technology to develop self-driving cars.

The company, which has been rumoured to be interested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/14/apple-self-driving-car-project-titan-sooner-than-expected>
 in the automated car market for the past two years, confirmed its previously 
secret initiative in a statement to the US highways regulator.

“The company is investing heavily in the study of machine learning and 
automation, and is excited about the potential of automated systems in many 
areas, including transportation,” said the letter from Steve Kenner, Apple’s 
director of product integrity, to the head of the National Highway Traffic 
Safety Administration (NHTSA).

The letter offered no details of the project, instead highlighting the 
“significant societal benefits of automated vehicles”, which it described as a 
life-saving technology, potentially preventing millions of car crashes and 
thousands of fatalities each year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F28%2Fgoogle-self-driving-car-spin-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F28%2F1401294943161%2FGoogle-self-driving-car-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20Google%20take%20its%20self-driving%20car%20for%20a%20spin%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F28%2Fgoogle-self-driving-car-spin-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20Google%20take%20its%20self-driving%20car%20for%20a%20spin%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fmay%2F28%2Fgoogle-self-driving-car-spin-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F5%2F28%2F1401294943161%2FGoogle-self-driving-car-017.jpg>
Watch Google take its self-driving car for a spin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/video/2014/may/28/google-self-driving-car-spin-video>
Although fully automated cars are not expected to be in use in the UK for 
several years,trials have taken place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/11/self-driving-car-first-uk-test-milton-keynes-driverless-lutz-pathfinder>
 in Britain and the US.

The British government is keen to ensure that the country is at the forefront 
of a fast developing market thatcould be worth £900bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/13/jaguar-land-rover-autonomous-vehicles-test-uk-2020>
 by 2025, according to a KPMG study.

Earlier this year, ministers launched a consultation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/11/motorist-consultation-prepare-uk-driverless-cars-collision-liability-remote-parking>
 on changes to motor insurance rules and the highway code aimed at allowing 
self-driving cars to be on the roads by 2020.

The business secretary, Greg Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/greg-clark>, said at the time: “The 
global market for autonomous vehicles presents huge opportunities for our 
automotive and technology firms. The research that underpins the technology and 
software will have applications way beyond autonomous vehicles.”

Rumours of Apple’s interest in the car market surfaced early last year 
<http://appleinsider.com/articles/15/02/09/rumor-apple-preparing-to-give-tesla-a-run-for-its-money-with-new-automotive-project>
. Known as Project Titan, the internal initiative was reportedly staffed by 
more than 1,000 engineers and other personnel working attop secret labs in 
Sunnyvale 
<http://appleinsider.com/articles/15/03/13/project-titan-sixtyeight-sg5-inside-apples-top-secret-electric-car-project>
, California, some of whom were pulled from important consumer product teams.

The letter from Kenner <https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/12/04/apple_letter.pdf>
 was dated 22 November, but has only just emerged. It leaves open the 
possibility that Apple will go on to design and produce a car of its own, 
rather than merely provide technology to an existing manufacturer. Earlier this 
year, the company wasrumoured to be in talks  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/apple-talks-buy-mclaren-formula-one-supercar>
to take over the British car manufacturer McLaren.

“To maximise the safety benefits of automated vehicles, encourage innovation 
and promote fair competition, established manufacturers and new entrants should 
be treated equally,” Apple wrote.

Kenner argued that manufacturers should pool their data as they develop 
automated systems, to help everyone identify unusual situations or “edge cases” 
that cars may encounter on the roads.

“Companies should share de-identified scenario and dynamics data from crashes 
and near misses,” Kenner wrote. “By sharing data, the industry will build a 
more comprehensive data set than any one company could create alone.”

But the letter added: “Data sharing should not come at the cost of privacy.”

Apple urged the regulator to continue “thoughtful exploration of the ethical 
issues” of self-driving cars. “Because automated vehicles promise such a broad 
and deep human impact, companies should consider the ethical dimensions of them 
in comparably broad and deep terms,” it said.

If the age of self-driving cars is upon us, what's keeping them off the roads?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/google-x-self-driving-cars> 
The letter said these considerations include privacy, how the cars’ software 
systems make decisions and the impact on employment and public spaces.

Kenner ended the letter by saying: “Apple looks forward to collaborating with 
NHTSA and other stakeholders so that the significant societal benefits of 
automated vehicles can be realised safely, responsibly and expeditiously.”

Several large technology companies and traditional car manufacturers are 
working on automated vehicle technology. Uber has raced ahead of its 
competitors,deploying Ford Fusions in Pittsburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/14/uber-self-driving-cars-pittsburgh-ford-fusion>
, Pennsylvania, which do not require hands on the wheel, as part of the 
company’s regular taxi service.

It is also developing a driverless car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/18/uber-riders-self-driving-cars>
 in partnership with Swedish carmaker Volvo.

Electric car company Tesla is also involved, although it raised concerns 
earlier this year about the implications of driverless vehicles after one of 
its cars using autopilot mode wasinvolved in a fatal crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/11/tesla-self-driving-cars-autopilot-update>
.

In September, a Google self-driving car collided with another vehicle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/sep/26/google-self-driving-car-in-broadside-collision-after-other-car-jumps-red-light-lexus-suv>
 after the latter ran through a red light.
 