
News of Apple pulling the New York Times app from its store in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/apple-removes-new-york-times-app-in-china>
 has been met with the expected outrage on social media. One online advocacy 
organisationlabelled Apple 
<https://twitter.com/GreatFireChina/status/816978520975036416> the “world 
leader in globalising Chinese censorship”. Tom Grundy ofHong Kong Free Press 
<https://www.hongkongfp.com/>, an independent online news outlet, tweeted that 
Apple was now“eagerly assisting” in censorship 
<https://twitter.com/tomgrundy/status/816941558029119488>. And the New York 
Times’s own correspondent, Chris Buckley, asked on Twitter whetherApple owed an 
explanation <https://twitter.com/ChuBailiang/status/816829590647676928> to the 
paper’s Chinese readers.

I actually think we should hold some of our fire, or at least stop short of 
singling Apple out as the worst offender

I have experience with Chinese censorship, as both target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/08/al-jazeera-closes-beijing-bureau>
 and witness of it. As a reporter there for five years, I – along with the rest 
of the foreign press corps – often faced attempts at both the local and 
national level to interfere with and stop our coverage. And as someone who 
happened to be in China when social media and cloud-based technology started 
taking off, I also filed many stories on China’s moves to block Facebook, 
Twitter and Google. Here’s alist of major websites blocked in the country 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Websites_blocked_in_mainland_China>.

As much as I have spoken up against Chinese censorship, and as often as I 
berateMark Zuckerberg’s blatant kowtowing in order to get Facebook back into 
China <https://twitter.com/melissakchan/status/711049886758604800>, I actually 
think we should hold some of our fire, or at least stop short of singling Apple 
out as the worst offender. I say this as someone who has also covered Silicon 
Valley as a Bay Area-based correspondent.

In the United States, Apple has a strong track record as an industry leader 
against government attempts to access users’ data. It has butted heads directly 
with the Obama administration over issues of privacy and security, calling it a 
fight for civil liberties. It has taken unpopular positions, includingrefusing 
to cooperate with the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/17/inside-the-fbis-encryption-battle-with-apple>
 to help agents read the encrypted data from domestic terrorist Syed Farook’s 
iPhone. This is a technology company that has appeared to have at least tried, 
at times, to do the right thing.

Of course, Apple has not manufactured iPhones in China without scandal. From 
stories of factory workers being made ill by the chemicals 
<http://blogs.reuters.com/global/2010/03/17/did-the-manufacture-of-your-iphone-make-someone-sick/>
 used to make iPhone touch screens, toa spate of suicides at a manufacturer’s 
campuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/05/woman-nearly-died-making-ipad>
, Apple’s record is checkered. Cynics might add that Apple only shoulders 
responsibility when it also happens to improve the company’s bottom line, or 
when it’s easy. In the United States, Apple has recourse to a functioning legal 
system to launch its battles. In China,where the rule of law is weak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2015/jun/02/global-ranking-corruption-world-justice-project-aims-promote-good-governance>
, it means a much tougher environment and far fewer options when the company 
disagrees with government decisions.

The situation is complicated by the tremendous leverage the Chinese government 
has over Apple. Not only is the iPhone manufactured there, butsales of Apple 
products in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/26/apple-iphone-first-revenue-decline-13-years>
 account for a quarter of its global revenue.

Apple has not explained its latest decision and which law the New York Times 
has fallen foul to. The newspaper has a Chinese-language edition of its paper. 
In 2012,Beijing blocked both the Chinese and English-language websites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/26/new-york-times-china-wen-jiabao>
, but readers could continue reading articles if they downloaded the apps to 
their iPhones. Now, Apple has removed both English and Chinese-language apps 
from its store, making it impossible to read the New York Times unless users 
know how to employ circumvention tools.

Maybe the larger the company, the more scrutiny it should receive. In that 
spirit, Apple’s decision to pull the apps deserves full moral fury. But keep in 
mind that every single US tech company in China makes compromises in order to 
enter the market.LinkedIn restricts its content 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/04/linkedin-tiananmen-posts-china-censorship>
.Evernote <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evernote>, like Apple, stores Chinese 
account holders’ data on Chinese servers so that authorities may access the 
information.Microsoft censors 
<http://chinadigitaltimes.net/2016/11/microsofts-chinese-chatbot-encounters-sensitive-words/>
. None of this is right.

Apple removes New York Times app in China
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/apple-removes-new-york-times-app-in-china>
Few foreign companies have taken the moral stand that Google did by exiting 
China. I rememberwhen the company made that decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/jan/13/google-china-bloggers>. 
Supporters of a more open China dropped off flowers outside its Beijing 
offices, excited that it had made such a bold move.

But if anybody had hoped Google’s defection would launch an exodus, it never 
happened. Since then, Chinese censorship and attempts to control foreign 
companies have only become more odious, with no indication it will let up. 
Apple’s problem today, is another foreign company’s conundrum tomorrow. Its 
dependance on China serves as a case study for how the story will repeatedly, 
dismally play out. All this stops only when the financial incentives to do 
business in China, and withChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, 
disappear.
 