
Arnold Wesker <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/wesker>, who died on 12 April 
at the age of 83, was one of the male playwrights who remade British theatre in 
the 1950s and 60s. A contemporary of Harold Pinter and John Osborne, he helped 
to haul the stage away from the drawing room. He populated it with urgent, 
articulate, working-class voices.

Wesker's plays are fuelled by passionate argument, but are never simply plays 
of ideas

Wesker wrote more than 40 plays, but his most influential work, sustained by 
the Royal Court, drew directly on the lives of his Jewish communist parents and 
on his own experience as a young man. InThe Kitchen (1957) he used his time as 
a porter and a pastry chef to make a large-scale, multinational, fast-moving 
play. It combined documentary precision and marvellous, balletic movement. 
Kenneth Tynan thought Wesker’s great achievement was to dramatise work. InChips 
With Everything (1962), he turned to his time as a national serviceman to 
examine snobbery and the crushing of rebellion.

His great 50s trilogy set family life against a background of political 
change. Together,Chicken Soup with Barley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/apr/09/theatre>, Roots and I’m Talking 
About Jerusalem provide an extraordinarily full account of the hopes and 
defeats of the British left. They move from the Spanish civil war to the Soviet 
invasion of Hungary. They touch on feminism and the threat of the atomic bomb. 
They are fuelled by passionate argument, but are never simply plays of ideas. 
They are written with fervour, with the scepticism and the sympathy of the 
insider. “I am at one with these people,” Wesker explained. “It is only that I 
am annoyed, with them and myself.”

The later plays were less acclaimed, and less performed. He swerved from 
naturalism.The Four Seasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/audio/2007/feb/28/culture1447> was lyrical; 
Shylock a riposte to Shakespeare. Wesker fell out of fashion. Yet towards the 
end of his life came revivals. James Macdonald’s first-rate production ofRoots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/09/roots-arnold-wesker-review> 
showed a drama of truly unexpected voices. Not least because at a time when 
being angry meant being male, the play had women at its centre. I hope the 
playwright saw Jessica Raine as the magnetic, self-deceiving heroine. And 
deadpan Linda Bassett, eviscerating a runner bean as if it were a class 
traitor. Wesker once again looked essential.
 