
Tools. It's all about knowing how to use them.

There was outrage on Saturday after X Factor producers admitted 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/aug/23/x-factor-auto-tune-row>
 using Auto-Tune technology for the show'saudition stages 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DRG7N_koxF0>. 

But put that same technology on a mobile app and bam – instant brilliance! 
Entertain your friends! Horrify your neighbours! Deafen your dog!

We've found some of the best pitch-correction apps for mobile...
 Glee iPad app: allows users to link up worldwide 
Glee - Singers Wanted (No Talent Required) 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/glee-singers-wanted-no-talent/id360736774?mt=8>

Glee fans will wonder how they ever lived without the Glee iPad app, which 
invites users to sing along to tracks, auto corrects them and then broadcasts 
them to other Glee app users worldwide on a very pretty globe visualisation. 
Earn points and get feedback from other users and, for the truly brave, switch 
off the tuning and broadcast your tunes 'nude'. The app makers took the typical 
iPad strategy of making an extra buck at every step, so you'll have to pay 
extra to download most of the best songs from the series. This is Rupert 
Murdoch's vision for the future of media, by the way.

Where: Apple App Store 
<http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/glee-singers-wanted-no-talent/id360736774?mt=8> 
for iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch

Price: £0.59p

Do say: I'm so good, I don't need pitch correction

Don't say: Isn't the point that Glee clubbers can sing?

I Am T-Pain <http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/i-am-t-pain/id314652382?mt=8>

T-Pain knows that every self-respecting artist needs their own iPhone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> app, but trumped the 
competition by adding Auto-Tune technology with the app he launched last 
September with Smule. T-Pain has a bit of a thing about Auto-Tune and this app 
kicked off the trend. But this essentially is a clever, branded, niche karaoke 
machine. For T-Pain fans. It comes with five songs, and you can buy more if you 
exhaust those. "It's actually the same software that I use in the studio, so if 
anybody actually wanted to be T-Pain, then there you go," he said at launch.

Where: Apple App Store 
<http://itunes.apple.com/us/app/i-am-t-pain/id314652382?mt=8> - for iPhone and 
iPod Touch

Price: £1.79

Do say: Check me out doin' Chopped & Screwed!

Don't say: Who's T-Pain?

LaDiDa <http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/ladida/id326533688?mt=8>

You know how in the musicals they always seem to be singing, but there's no 
consistent melody? Well now you too can annoy yourself by making a soundtrack 
from your daily life, with LaDiDa. Anything you thought wasn't a tune can 
become a tune – with LaDDa! Most amusing, as these apps tend to be, after a 
hard night at the pub. Record your voice, choose from a dub, pop synth or tasty 
breaks backing and pick your tempo. Rather good fun to try singing an actual 
real song and see how LaDiDa unintentionally remixes it. Lofi, and we like it.

Where: Apple App Store <http://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/ladida/id326533688?mt=8>
 - for iPhone and iPod Touch

Price: £1.79

Do say: I can make anything into a song? 

Don't say: I'm dumping you via the medium of LaDiDa, ooo ooo ooo, la la la.

MicDroid <http://intervigil.posterous.com/pages/micdroid>

Pitch correction came late to Android – nearly a year late, in fact. MicDroid 
is pretty bare bones, but if you want to turn your phone into a mic and tune up 
the results, you can do it on an Android handset. This video review from
PocketNow.com 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tN7K_7rNLDM&feature=player_embedded> tells you 
everything you need to know.

Where: Android Market <http://intervigil.posterous.com/pages/micdroid>

Price: Free

Do say: At last – a pitch-correction app for geeks!

Don't say: Is that it?

I'm left wondering why a Cher Auto-Tune app hasn't been created, but then 
there are only so many hours in a day.

• This story was amended on 26 August 2010, to reflect the fact that Auto-Tune 
is a trademark of Antares Audio Technologies; of the pitch-correction apps 
under discussion, only the T-Pain one licenses Antares's Auto-Tune.
 