
Arcade Fire’s Will Butler has confirmed the release of his first solo album. 
The Montreal-based multi-instrumentalist calls Policy a collection of “American 
music”, and says it will be released on 16 March 2015.


As hinted earlier in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/14/arcade-fires-will-butler-working-on-solo-album>
, Butler’s solo debut will be released by Merge Records, the same label that 
represents Arcade Fire inthe United States 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/nov/14/arcade-fires-will-butler-working-on-solo-album>
. Although his bandmate Jeremy Gara played drums on the LP, Butler played 
almost everything else himself. If his older brother Win appears on Policy, it 
is only as one of the unnamed “other musicians” who “contributed woodwinds and 
backing vocals”.

On 24 November, Zane Lowe premiered Butler’s song Take My Side 
<https://soundcloud.com/mergerecords/wb-tms/> on BBC Radio 1. While the noisy 
rock’n’roll track might remind Arcade Fire fans of the band’s singles Month of 
May or Joan of Arc, it and the rest of Policy are indebted to a longer list of 
musical artists, according to a press release: it’s “in the tradition of the 
Violent Femmes, the Breeders, the Modern Lovers, Bob Dylan, Smokey Robinson, 
the Magnetic Fields, Ghostface Killah”. Not to mention John Lennon, whose work 
is apparently “American music”.

Record label Merge said Policy was recorded at Electric Lady Studio in Jimi 
Hendrix’s old living room, the same New York building where Arcade Fire mixed 
much of theirlatest record <http://electricladystudios.com/clients/arcade-fire/>
. It is also where David Bowie recordedhis cameo for the band’s album Reflektor 
<http://www.gigwise.com/news/85187/arcade-fire-compare-working-with-david-bowie-with-john-lennon%20mid-mixing%20session>
.

Although this is Butler’s solo debut, other Arcade Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcadefire> members have contributed to 
numerous side projects, including Gara’s work with singer-songwriter Michael 
Feuerstack, classical music composed by Richard Reed Parry, and violinist Sarah 
Neufeld’s recent LP, Hero Brother.
 