
Around the world, traditional subsistence practices provide a resilient source 
of ecological knowledge thatimproves humanity’s ability to respond to 
environmental crises 
<http://green.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/09/27/climate-change-takes-a-toll-on-cultures>
. In Central Asia, a herding lifestyle practiced for millennia is increasingly 
threatened by the speed and magnitude of climate change.


Although the global mean temperature is predicted to rise by 2C 
<http://climate.nasa.gov/effects/> over the coming century, this trend will 
likely be more severe in high altitude and high latitude environments. In the 
subarctic steppes of Mongolia, nearly one-third of the population makes their 
living through migratory herding of livestock – sheep, goat, horse, cattle, 
camel, and yak. For these herders, the effects of climate change have been
immediate and dramatic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/10/climate-change-mongolia-destroying-pastures-nomadic-herders-dzud>
. Mongolia has experienced summer droughts, extreme winter weather, pasture 
degradation,a shrinking water supply 
<http://newsletters.getresponse.com/archive/acms_enewsletter/Mongolia-Field-Notes-2-Caleb-Pan-From-the-Pleistocene-to-the-Present-300873903.html>
, and desertification, leading to seasonal herd die-offs. These processes have 
a cascading effect, reinforcing other issues caused by human activity and 
globalisation.

How will nomadic society respond to these obstacles? Archaeology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/archaeology> offers a long-term 
perspective on the relationship between people and the environment.


In comparison to other parts of the continent, the grasslands of Mongolia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mongolia> are dry, cold, and inhospitable. 
Precipitation is infrequent and seasonal, making pastures susceptible to 
overgrazing. Horses, which can open snow-covered winter pastures for other 
livestock and move quickly over long distances, would have helped to mitigate 
the challenges of life in the Mongolian steppe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb00d53de8f80fce3455b7ff536b8226ee7da26d4%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Archaeology%20sheds%20light%20on%20Mongolia%E2%80%99s%20uncertain%20nomadic%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Archaeology%20sheds%20light%20on%20Mongolia%E2%80%99s%20uncertain%20nomadic%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb00d53de8f80fce3455b7ff536b8226ee7da26d4%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 In many areas of Mongolia, including Gobi-Altai province where this photo was 
taken, increasing numbers of livestock must be watered at fewer wells. 
Photograph: Caleb Pan/University of Montana 
Archaeologists have long been aware of the ecological advantages to horse 
herding and riding, and used them to develop explanations for the origins of 
nomadic cultures made infamous by Genghis (Mongolian:Chinggis) and Khubilai 
Khan. One popular archaeological theory championed by Russian scholar Anatoly 
Khazonov1 argues that more sedentary herders developed horseback riding and 
seasonal migration as a way to cope with prolonged drought during the late 
second millennium BCE. If mobile herding societies first coalesced during a 
centuries-long dry spell, contemporary climate trends might not seem such a 
fatal threat to nomadic life.

However, as researchers have acquired detailed record of ancient climate 
conditions, a different pattern has started to emerge –a link between wet, 
productive grasslands and the success of nomadic empires. Because water is the 
limiting factor for life in the Eastern Steppe, rain has a direct impact on the 
number of livestock an area can support. A recent investigation of paleoclimate 
records fromthe Tarim Basin of western China 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277379115301542> revealed 
that the great Mongol empire flourished during an anomalously wet period, 
linked to hemispheric cooling. “Increased carrying capacity for livestock 
translates into increased carrying capacity for herders,” says study co-author 
Dave Putnam of the University of Maine.

Putnam and colleagues argue that cooler, wetter conditions prompted the 
southern expansion of grasslands and made long-distance military travel on 
horseback through arid regions easier – favouring the spread of pastoralism, 
and facilitating the Mongol conquests.

Putnam cautions that their work only demonstrates a correlation, and more data 
is needed to demonstrate causality. However, other recent work implies that 
this pattern is far older than the Mongol empire.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4a43d835b7a68e699d88a1ff9d9f6bc50ffdf6f%2F0_137_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Archaeology%20sheds%20light%20on%20Mongolia%E2%80%99s%20uncertain%20nomadic%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Archaeology%20sheds%20light%20on%20Mongolia%E2%80%99s%20uncertain%20nomadic%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4a43d835b7a68e699d88a1ff9d9f6bc50ffdf6f%2F0_137_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Across the Mongolian steppe, bronze age standing stones are surrounded by 
dozens of small stone mounds, each containing the remains of a sacrificed 
horse. Study of these horses shows evidence for the region’s first nomadic 
horse culture circa 1200 BCE. Photograph: Jean-Luc Houle/Western Kentucky 
University. 
The first direct evidence for widespread mobile pastoralism in Mongolia dates 
to the late bronze age, around 1200 BCE. Researcher Jean-Luc Houle at Western 
Kentucky University studied this early nomadic period, and found little 
evidence for ecological stress. Instead, he argued that these herders, who may 
have practicedthe first horseback riding in Mongolia 
<https://www.mongoliacenter.org/investigating-mongolias-nomadic-origins-through-the-study-of-ancient-horse-remains-william-taylor/>
, seemed to have a healthy diet and an economy with enough surplus animals to 
conduct conspicuous ritual sacrifices – at some sites, the number of animals 
killed reaching into the thousands. Houle’s current studies suggest that the 
Xiongnu (another early empire known for prompting construction of parts of the 
Great Wall) also rose to power during a wetter interval at the end of the first 
millennium BCE.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2eb8491744bcf4d759bd16bcb9d435afb9828907%2F0_53_1283_770%2F1283.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Archaeology%20sheds%20light%20on%20Mongolia%E2%80%99s%20uncertain%20nomadic%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Archaeology%20sheds%20light%20on%20Mongolia%E2%80%99s%20uncertain%20nomadic%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2eb8491744bcf4d759bd16bcb9d435afb9828907%2F0_53_1283_770%2F1283.jpg>
 Archaeologists excavate the skull of a 3,000-year-old domestic horse, buried 
next to a deer stone as part of a ritual sacrifice by early nomadic horsemen. 
Photograph: Julia Clark/American Center for Mongolian Studies 
So if the first mobile herding societies (and many nomadic empires thereafter) 
developed and spread under a wetter climate, what does this mean for 
contemporary nomads facing unprecedented warming and desertification?

The answer may be surprisingly complex. One man I spoke with, Jantsankhorloo, 
lives near Terelj national park not far from Mongolia’s capital Ulaanbaatar. He 
has seen many new challenges in his seven decades as a herder, many of them 
caused by human activity rather than climate. He notes that urban expansion, 
fencing, increased animal populations, and more traffic near the park have 
damaged grasslands and made subsistence more difficult. In mineral-rich areas, 
mining has also depleted local water sources. More than dry summers and 
difficult winters, he worries most about the loss of traditional knowledge 
among the younger generation. Many young people have left the countryside for 
the city, and no longer learn the skills of horsemanship and animal husbandry. 
In the coming years, the success or failure of Mongolian nomadic life may 
depend in large part on how people respond to and mitigate these anthropogenic 
problems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f39466570f73ae58fa2989a0cbef8f7fb198959%2F0_94_1403_842%2F1403.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Archaeology%20sheds%20light%20on%20Mongolia%E2%80%99s%20uncertain%20nomadic%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Archaeology%20sheds%20light%20on%20Mongolia%E2%80%99s%20uncertain%20nomadic%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Farchaeology-sheds-light-on-mongolias-uncertain-nomadic-future%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f39466570f73ae58fa2989a0cbef8f7fb198959%2F0_94_1403_842%2F1403.jpg>
 A herder on motorcycle in Bayankhongor province, Central Mongolia. Photograph: 
William Taylor 
Modern technology has also impacted herding. Many herders living in the drier, 
flatter Gobi regions have abandoned horses for Chinese motorbikes – enabling 
them to move farther distances with their animals, and cope with easily 
overgrazed pastures. Critics denounce the practice as “lazy” and un-Mongolian, 
expressing concerns about the effect it may have on the environment and 
livestock health. Even as technology helps herders cope with changing 
ecological parameters, it may also have unintended consequences.


With this whirlwind of social and technological change occurring alongside the 
changing climate, it’s unclear exactly how the future may play out for nomads 
in eastern Eurasia. Nonetheless, it seems unlikely that wet and productive 
environment that accompanied the emergence of horse culture in the region – and 
some of its greatest nomadic empires – will characterise the near future. As 
arid conditions stretch further northward, Putnam sees many herders “caught 
between a desert and a cold place” – with less biomass translating into reduced 
forage, and a narrowing window for nomadic life. As climate change endangers 
Mongolia’s herding traditions, it also threatens ecological knowledge essential 
to our collective resilience to environmental disaster.

Further reading:

Houle, Jean-Luc. 2010. Emergent complexity on the Mongolian Steppe 
<http://www.anthropology.pitt.edu/node/508>: mobility, territoriality, and the 
development of early nomadic polities. PhD dissertation, University of 
Pittsburgh.

Khazanov, Anatoly. 1984. Nomads and the Outside World 
<https://uwpress.wisc.edu/books/0330.htm>. Madison, University of Wisconsin 
Press, pp. 89-97

Putnam, A et al. 2016. Little Ice Age wetting of interior Asian deserts and 
the rise of the Mongol Empire 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283643828_Little_Ice_Age_wetting_of_interior_Asian_deserts_and_the_rise_of_the_Mongol_Empire>
.Quaternary Science Reviews 131: 33-50.
 