
The brightly coloured quilt Alice Walker made at her mother's suggestion while 
she was writing The Color Purple, and the original handwritten manuscript of 
her Pulitzer prize-winning novel, have beenput on display at a university in 
Georgia 
<http://www.emory.edu/home/news/releases/2009/04/alice-walker-archive-opens-at-emory-april-23.html>
.

Spanning a period of 65 years and featuring 200 items, the first public 
exhibition of the archives of the Georgia-born Walker also includes the 
scrapbook she began to keep aged 14, photographs, letters, memorabilia and 
drafts of her early writings. A note written by Walker on a pad of paper reads: 
"People are known by the records they keep. If it isn't in the records it will 
be said it didn't happen. That is what history is: a keeping of records."

A 1967 wedding card from her friend Langston Hughes sees the poet write: 
"Alice – loved the oranges you brought – when I was house bound with the flu 
and my errand boy was at that moment on the way out to get some. You must have 
been clairvoyant. Like a golden gift from the gods." Also included are an 
invoice for Walker's purchase of the headstone for Their Eyes Were Watching God 
author Zora Neale Hurston, "a genius of the South", sold to her for $270.66 in 
1973, and the original typescript of The Color Purple, which has scrawled 
across the front of the envelope it is contained in, and heavily underlined: 
"Original. Return to Alice". The quilt will resonate with fans of The Color 
Purple, where making a similar patchwork is a highly-charged event in the 
narrative.

Walker decided to place her archive at Emory University in Atlanta at the end 
of 2007 because, she said at the time, she felt "at ease and comfortable" 
there. "Having visited several libraries at different universities I realised 
the importance to me of a lively, diverse, committed-to-human-growth 
atmosphere, that, when I visited Emory, I found. I also realised my deep love 
of my native South, and of Georgia in particular," she said.

"I knew that though I might never live in Georgia again, my first 17 years 
growing up Georgian made a powerful imprint on my spirit and that it was the 
beauty of the rural community into which I was born that accounts for much of 
my passion, optimism and faith in the goodness of others. Emory struck me, on 
visiting it, to have light, a compassionate and thoughtful light, that made 
even the buildings seem softer and more inviting than those I encountered in 
other places."

The exhibition, A Keeping of Records: The Art and Life of Alice Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-walker>, shows "evidence of Walker's 
belief and self-awareness that she would become an important American writer", 
said curator Rudolph P Byrd. "The exhibition provides an historical and 
cultural framework for understanding Walker's emergence and evolution as writer 
and activist, and thus the manner in which she not only survived, but prevailed 
against a system whose objective was her subordination, if not annihilation," 
he said. "[It] chronicles her efforts to negotiate the relationship between 
region and imagination, between history and memory, between beauty and 
revolution, between darkness and

illumination."
 