
As a British Asian woman, I am one of a small handful of black, Asian and 
minority ethnic (BAME) people to carve out a lengthy career in the archaeology 
sector. This is a problem.

In 2013, the Chartered Institute for Archaeologists (CIfA) published its 
Profiling the Profession (pdf)report 
<http://www.landward.eu/Archaeology%20Labour%20Market%20Intelligence%20Profiling%20the%20Profession%202012-13.pdf>
, which included a section on ethnicity. We are 99% white, with a miserly 1% 
“other” ethnicities. There are about 6,000 people employed in the archaeology 
sector in the UK. Of the 837 respondents, seven described themselves as 
non-white – and one of those was me.

 These numbers are mirrored in wider arts audiences as well as people who 
access archaeology and heritage in its many forms, including museums and other 
venues. In December 2015, the chair of Arts Council England (ACE), Sir Peter 
Bazalgette, highlighted these continuing issues at ACE’sDiversity and the 
Creative Case 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/what-we-do/our-priorities-2011-15/diversity-and-creative-case/>
 event.

 But rather hopefully for archaeology, diversity is thriving in the classroom. 
A recent study by Dr Hannah Cobb of Manchester University, entitledDigging 
Diversity <https://www.escholar.manchester.ac.uk/uk-ac-man-scw:151625>, 
revealed that students in British archaeology courses were fully represented in 
terms of race, disability, gender and variety of socio-economic background.

 Essentially, archaeology classrooms are more diverse in every way than our 
dig sites and meeting rooms.

 This is an issue, because our practitioners affect every aspect of 
archaeology – from research, data collection and interpretation, to teaching, 
audience engagement, public relations and participation.

 The more those practitioners and teachers have varied backgrounds, 
perspectives and life experiences, the richer and more representative the 
information produced and experience provided will become. More people will feel 
welcome to be a part of what we do, whether as a professional, student, 
volunteer or casual participant.

 Inspiration drawn from the past underpins many (if not all) aspects of the 
creative and cultural sectors. The knock-on effect of limiting the mouthpiece 
for this to a single, white, middle class, middle-aged male voice is huge. 
That’s why encouraging diversity in the people tasked with bringing our past to 
life is so essential.

The ideal would be a place where we don’t have to try to diversify jobs or 
volunteer opportunities as a box-ticking exercise. But until then, an immediate 
commitment to opening up our profession through smarter, more modern and 
strategic efforts in communication will help.

 I’d like to see archaeological organisations get smarter about audiences. So 
let’s talk the same talk as the rest of the world:lose the jargon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jul/30/galleries-lets-ditch-the-artspeak-and-artybollocks>
, lighten up on information embargos and recognise that tailoring our messages 
to the audiences we want to engage with is an achievement, rather than the 
pernicious dumbing down we fear so greatly.

 There isn’t a king under every car park and that’s okay, because there are 
unlimited numbers of great stories to tell about all archaeology that will 
sound and feel familiar to people of any background. There’s sex, death, 
displacement, war, prejudice, power, gender, wealth, poverty, ability, love, 
success and happiness.

 We don’t need to pander to people from diverse backgrounds to get their 
attention; we just have to do a better and more strategic job of sharing what 
we have already got. Archaeological organisations must make this a key 
performance indicator equal in importance to financial return or other markers 
of success, or suffer the consequences.

 This is directly related to issues of business sustainability, because 
archaeology is about people. The unique conditions of our sector do not 
preclude us adopting the techniques and successful initiatives from adjacent 
sectors, such as the excellentStemettes <http://www.stemettes.org/> programme, 
theFamily and Childcare Trust <http://www.familyandchildcaretrust.org/> and 
Diversity in Heritage. CIfA’s new diversity and equality special interest group 
is a much-needed and welcome step in this direction.

 As highlighted in the recent culture white paper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/culture-white-paper> by the 
Department for Culture, Media & Sport, mixed business models, new ways of 
working and the use of technology to enable participation will be increasingly 
important in attracting and involving diverse professionals and audiences to 
the culture sector.
Archaeology must follow this.

 Our work at DigVentures <http://digventures.com/> has proven that these 
techniques can achieve surprising results. So have space in your business model 
for diverse communities to feed back what they find interesting and want more 
(or less) of. Accept what this tells you about your work. Finally, be part of 
the conversation, rather than just broadcasting information.

See how quickly “we” start to look different.

Raksha Dave is public archaeologist and founding member of DigVentures 
<http://digventures.com/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 