
What kind of person becomes a jihadi terrorist? Specifically, what kind of 
educated person? The overwhelming majority of graduates recruited into Islamist 
terrorism studied engineering, science and medicine. Almost none are social 
science or arts graduates, according to research. The insight could have 
important implications.

Almost half (48.5%) of jihadis recruited in the Middle East and north Africa 
had a higher education of some sort, according to a 2007 analysis by Diego 
Gambetta that is cited inImmunising the Mind 
<https://www.britishcouncil.org/organisation/policy-insight-research/insight/immunising-mind-%E2%80%93-education-and-extremism>
, a new paper published by theBritish Council <https://www.britishcouncil.org/>
; of these 44% had degrees in engineering. Among western-recruited jihadis that 
figure rose to 59%.

Migration is spreading creationism across Europe, claims academic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/nov/13/migration-creationism-evolution-michael-reiss>
A study of terrorists in Tunisia – where an electrical engineer went on a 
murderous rampage 
<http://nypost.com/2015/06/30/tunisia-beach-killer-trained-with-museum-gunmen/> 
in June – showed similar proportions. And a study of 18 British Muslims 
implicated in terrorist attacks found that eight had studied engineering or IT, 
and four more science, pharmacy and maths; only one had studied humanities.

All this is no coincidence, concludes Martin Rose, the British Council’s 
senior consultant on the Middle East and north Africa. Immunising the Mind – 
his report – gathers a wide spectrum of opinion in support of the contention 
that science education fails to inculcate critical thinking in the way that the 
debates within arts teaching do. Rose coins the notion of “an engineering 
mindset”, which makes science students easier prey for terrorist recruiters.

His report draws on a range of academic studies and a British intelligence 
dossier that describes the ideal recruit as “intelligent and curious, but 
unquestioning of authority”.

The culture of science teaching, says Rose, resolves all too easily into a 
right and wrong, correct and incorrect binary. This damages the ability of 
science and engineering students to develop the skills of critical examination. 
It is not a phenomenon confined to foreign universities, he suggests, pointing 
to reports of the growingappeal of creationism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/nov/13/migration-creationism-evolution-michael-reiss>
 for some British Muslim medical students.

Egyptian schools are breeding grounds for rebellion | Khaled Diab
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/sep/10/egyptian-schools-breeding-rebellion>
Perhaps the imbalance was simply the result of an appeal in September 2014 by 
the Islamic State leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-28116846>, for “judges, doctors, 
engineers and people with military and administrative experience” to join his 
self-styled caliphate. Certainly Isis has need of both oilfield engineers and 
bomb-makers. But the evidence is that many engineers who have joined have been 
given non-technical roles.

Perhaps it was simply a reflection of the fact that throughout the Arab world 
medicine, engineering and natural science – in that order – are the elite 
university faculties that attract the top students, because traditionally they 
lead to the most prestigious jobs.

Yet, according to Rose, some 70% of students in the Middle East and north 
Africa study social sciences. Despite the fact that the teaching is often 
poorer in those university departments, their pedagogical approach – requiring 
interpretation and discussion – appears to militate against the black and white 
certainties of a jihadi worldview. That is perhaps why, in Isis-controlled 
territory, university courses in archaeology, fine art, law, philosophy, 
political science and sports have been eliminated, along with drama and the 
reading of novels.

In one sense there is nothing new in this. In 2003 the UN human development 
report <http://www.arab-hdr.org/publications/other/ahdr/ahdr2003e.pdf> noted 
that Arab education curriculums seem toencourage submission, obedience, 
subordination and compliance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/sep/10/egyptian-schools-breeding-rebellion>
, rather than free critical thinking”.

What Rose has done is to highlight three specific traits that characterise the 
“engineering mindset”: first, it asks “why argue when there is one best 
solution?”; second, it asserts “if only people were rational, remedies would be 
simple”; and third, it appeals to those with an underlying craving for a lost 
order, which lies at the heart of bothsalafi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2010/may/10/islam-sufi-salafi-egypt-religion>
 and jihadi ideology.

Critical thinking about science and jihadism | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/dec/07/critical-thinking-about-science-and-jihadism>
But if this is true, where does it take us? Rose suggests that the British 
Council, the organisation funded by the UK to spread British cultural influence 
around the world, should involve itself in education reform, to “humanise” the 
teaching of scientific and technical subjects. A broader-based education would 
give vulnerable students the intellectual tools to develop an open-minded, 
interrogatory outlook – and to question authority, whether scientific, 
political, religious or scientific.

But they will need something that cannot come from western cultural experts. 
What the report omits to point out is that students will require input from 
others within their faith – to open up to them the richness of the Islamic 
traditions that constituted the religion before the arrival of oil-rich salafi 
fundamentalism.

• This article was amended on 4 December 2015 to clarify that the statistics 
on the educational backgrounds of jihadis are not from research carried out for 
the British Council paper Immunising the Mind but from an earlier analysis that 
it cites, and to remove an incorrect suggestion that the paper was “as yet 
unpublished”.
 