
As a provocation, it was masterfully timed. Twenty-four hours before a major 
national conference <https://www.danceuk.org> about the future of British 
dance, three leading choreographers issued a press release complaining about 
the quality of contemporary dance training in this country.

Hofesh Shechter <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hofesh-shechter>, Lloyd 
Newson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lloyd-newson> and Akram Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/akramkhan> jointly argued that when they 
hired new dancers, only a small proportion of those who’d graduated from UK 
institutions such as theLondon Contemporary Dance School <http://www.lcds.ac.uk>
 (LCDS),Trinity Laban <http://www.trinitylaban.ac.uk/study/dance> and Northern 
School of Contemporary Dance <http://www.nscd.ac.uk> (NSCD) were of the calibre 
they required.

UK-trained dancers, they said, are rarely of the same technical proficiency as 
those coming out of theParts school <http://www.parts.be/en/home> in Brussels 
or theJuilliard school 
<http://www.juilliard.edu/apply-audition/application-audition-requirements/dance-division-application-and-audition>
 in New York. “It’s disheartening when it comes to auditions to see these UK 
students with potential and enthusiasm consistently outclassed by fitter, 
stronger and more versatile counterparts from Europe, Asia and the US,” 
Shechter has said.

This isn’t the first time I’ve heard choreographers voice this concern, and 
Lloyd Newson says he has spoken to “10 other British dance companies who have 
expressed similar views”. And it’s notable that the issues raised about 
contemporary dance standards chime with the ongoing debate in the ballet world 
about the lack of homegrown dancers at the top of British companies such as the 
Royal Ballet, Birmingham Royal Ballet and English National Ballet.

These concerns deserve sensible discussion. If there are issues with training 
methods, with rigour and with the level of expectation in British institutions, 
they should be addressed. And while the directors of LCDS, Laban and NSCD have 
understandably responded with anger to the attack that Shechter, Khan and 
Newson delivered, it sounds as though they could profitably sit down with the 
choreographers and continue the conversation.

But – and this is crucial – it’s a conversation that needs to have far wider 
parameters. If we’re going to debate whether our training institutions are fit 
for purpose, we have to consider exactly what that purpose is. And we have to 
recognise that what makes LCDS, Laban and NSCD so valuable is that they see 
their remit not simply in terms of training the “best” performers in the world, 
or honing the most beautiful bodies – although I’ve seen many formidable 
dancers come out of those institutions, including Khan himself. Rather, it’s to 
offer the widest, most creative kind of dance education possible. As the 
director of LCDS, Veronica Lewis,puts it 
<http://www.theplace.org.uk/news/uk-contemporary-dance-training-london-contemporary-dance-school>
: to train students “for lifelong careers”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Fare-british-dancers-outclassed-on-the-world-stage-akram-khan-hofesh-schechter-lloyd-newson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428920892703%2F1957d94d-0c6e-4498-89fc-1eb95645cff3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Are%20British%20dancers%20really%20outclassed%20on%20the%20world%20stage%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Fare-british-dancers-outclassed-on-the-world-stage-akram-khan-hofesh-schechter-lloyd-newson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Are%20British%20dancers%20really%20outclassed%20on%20the%20world%20stage%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fdance-blog%2F2015%2Fapr%2F13%2Fare-british-dancers-outclassed-on-the-world-stage-akram-khan-hofesh-schechter-lloyd-newson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F13%2F1428920892703%2F1957d94d-0c6e-4498-89fc-1eb95645cff3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Looking to the future … Akram Khan in Sacred Monsters at Sadler’s Wells, 
London. Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
The students from these schools are expected to learn from the wide range of 
performance styles and philosophical approaches that come under the ever 
diversifying label of dance. Kenneth Tharp, chief executive of the home of LCDS,
the Place <http://www.theplace.org.uk/>, points out that: “the sector is much 
broader than the work of three choreographers … Some choreographers want 
dancers to have extraordinary technique; others require strong stage presence; 
others well-developed vocal skills.” Students are also taught choreographic 
skills, and many come to their courses with a far greater interest in creation 
than performance. Others may want to focus on becoming dance writers, teachers, 
therapists, administrators or managers. (Tharp says that all students are 
taught how to write a business plan as an “essential tool for survival in the 
professional dance world”.) So while Theo van Rompay, deputy director of Parts, 
acknowledges that it is essentially a school for those who “decide their place 
is on the stage”, and while Juilliard hand-picks its annual intake of 24 
students from an already highly trained group of applicants, the philosophy of 
the UK’s top institutions is that the dance industry is about far more than 
performance.

Even if LCDS, Laban and NSCD were to focus more rigorously on pure technical 
proficiency, it’s questionable how well this would serve the majority of their 
students’ long-term interests. There is a brutally limited number of job 
opportunities, even for the most elite dancers. Many graduating students will 
end up working for little or even no pay; many will end up leaving the 
profession after a few years because they can’t earn any kind of decent living. 
Dance – asMerce Cunningham <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/mercecunningham> 
famously said – is not a profession for “unsteady souls”. And it’s a very good 
idea for those who love the art form, and want to make a life in it, to have 
other dance-related skills to fall back on.

In any case, I wonder how useful it is to try and quantify the “best” 
institutions; the “best” dancers. Against all financial odds, the UK dance 
scene is still thriving; it is creative and adventurous, improvisatory and 
eccentric. We produce a huge number of aspiring choreographers and we attract 
many others who want to work here. There are good reasons why Khan, Newson and 
Shechter base themselves in this country; why foreign companies want to perform 
here and why the audience for dance has risen sharply during the last decade. 
And the diversity of training that our institutions offer their students is 
probably one of them. Perhaps we shouldn’t agonise over the fact that foreign 
dancers are outnumbering our own within certain high-profile companies. Perhaps 
we should be glad that we’ve created a culture in which seriously talented 
people of all provenances want to work. And as was argued at the Future 
conference last week, we need to be clever about ensuring that this culture 
survives.
 