
Organisers have called on women in Argentina to take part in a national strike 
toprotest over violence against women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/argentina-women-strike-violence-protest>
. Hundreds of thousands are expected to join the protest on Wednesday after a 
16-year-old girl was raped and tortured.

'We live in constant fear': Argentina's women on marching against violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/we-live-in-constant-fear-argentinas-women-on-marching-against-violence>
Women in the country have been called upon to stop work, study and other 
activities for an hour at 1pm. “In your office, school, hospital, law court, 
newsroom, shop, factory, or wherever you are working, stop for an hour to 
demand ‘no more machista violence’,” wrote the march organizers.

The protest – marked with the Twitter hashtag #MiércolesNegro 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Mi%C3%A9rcolesNegro?src=hash>, or Black Wednesday 
– was prompted by the abduction of Lucía Pérez, a schoolgirl who was drugged, 
raped and tortured earlier this month in the coastal city of Mar del Plata.

Every 30 hours a woman is killed in such crimes, according to statistics kept 
by La Casa del Encuentro, an NGO which helps female victims of violence.

The strike starts at 1pm (local time), with the ceasing of all work and 
private activities, followed by a march congregating on the main Plaza de Mayo 
square in Buenos Aires.

If you are protesting we’d like to hear from you. Whether you’ve stopped what 
you’re doing at home or at work, share your photos, videos and stories with us. 
We’d also like to hear from you if you’re taking part in the march in Buenos 
Aires.

You can upload your images through GuardianWitness by clicking the 
‘Contribute’ button above. You can also fill in our form below - anonymously if 
you wish. We’ll use some of your contributions in our reporting.


 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of readers’ 
content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and stories, and 
browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed 
before publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on the 
Guardian site.  