
On the afternoon of 19 October, Claudia Arias and her aunt Susana Ortiz made 
their way to the centre of Mendoza, where they joined a crowd of thousands who 
had gathered to protest against a wave of violent attacks on women inArgentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina>.

It was one of half a dozen demonstrations across the country, organised on 
social media by a loose collective of activists and journalists after the rape 
and murder of a 16-year old schoolgirl, Lucía Pérez, in the coastal city of Mar 
del Plata.

Their message was #NiUnaMenos, which literally translates as “not one less”, 
but signifies “not one more woman” lost to violence, often committed by 
victims’ husbands, partners or close friends.

Why the #NiUnaMenos marchers are demanding a better Argentina for women | 
Soledad Vallejos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/niunamenos-marchers-argentina-women-gender-violence>
Four days after Arias and Ortiz protested in Mendoza, they were stabbed to 
death at their home along with Arias’s 90-year old grandmother, Vicenta Díaz.

Police arrested Arias’s ex-partner, Daniel Zalazar, a 30-year-old taekwondo 
instructor. Prosecutors say he murdered the women after an argument over the 
paternity of Arias’s seven-month-old daughter, Mia.

Zalazar also allegedly stabbed the baby and Arias’s 11-year-old son, Lucas, 
both of whom remain in critical condition at a Mendoza hospital. Arias’s 
younger son, Bautista, managed to escape from the house and hid in the boot of 
a car with his dog, Coco, police said on Wednesday. Officers said it took the 
eight-year-old several hours to reopen the boot from the inside and then call 
the police.

“It was a massacre,” Claudia’s father, Rolo Arias, told reporters. “We went to 
protest at the #NiUnaMenos marches – and then it was our turn.”


Zalazar was held after showing up at a nearby hospital asking to be treated 
for wounds he claimed he had sustained in a holdup attempt. He is facing 
charges of murder and “gender violence”.
Map <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/10/argentina-map/> 
Seven out of the top 10 countries for female murder rates 
<http://www.insightcrime.org/news-analysis/why-does-latin-america-have-the-wo 
rld-s-highest-female-murder-rates> are in Latin America. And although Argentina 
does not head the list, almost daily reports of male violence against women 
have provoked deep soul-searching in the country.

Four years ago, congress passed a law defining domestic violence, gender-based 
killings and other categories of hate crimes against women as “femicide”. But 
activists argue that Argentina needs to change more than its legislation.

 “The reason [for these attacks] is Argentina’s macho culture,” said Fabiana 
Tuñez, director of Casa del Encuentro, a shelter for abused women in Buenos 
Aires.
Machismo runs deeps in Argentina, and manifests itself daily on any city 
street. Directing flirtatious comments – known aspiropos – at passing women is 
considered an art form by many men, although it often consists of little more 
than crude catcalls and aggressive propositioning.

Even the president, Mauricio Macri, has defended the practice. “Deep inside, 
all women like to hear apiropo, even women who say they don’t,” Macri said in a 
radio interview <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c_uVZELQ4XE> in 2014 when he 
was mayor of Buenos Aires.

“I don’t believe them. There can’t be anything nicer than being told how 
pretty you are, even if it comes along with vulgarity, like being told what a 
nice ass you have.”


Human rights campaigners argue that such behaviour is symptomatic of a culture 
that refuses to see women as worthy of respect.


“There’s always been violence against women in Argentina, but we’ve noticed 
that it’s been getting worse lately,” said Sabrina Cartabia, one of the 
organisers of last week’s protests.


Cartabia believes the increasingly violent attacks can be seen as a crude 
response to recent gains made by women in Argentinian society, such as laws 
reserving 30% of elected positions for women. There are now more female 
university students than males – and statistics show they perform better 
academically.

“The violence is a reaction that wants to put us back into a traditional role 
where we don’t fit any more,” Cartabia said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fargentinian-activists-machismo-attacks-women-niunamenos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f0de4497768863669da6b35ff9047de188dbc52%2F26_0_653_392%2F653.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Argentinian%20activists%20pin%20blame%20on%20machismo%20as%20attacks%20on%20women%20rise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fargentinian-activists-machismo-attacks-women-niunamenos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Argentinian%20activists%20pin%20blame%20on%20machismo%20as%20attacks%20on%20women%20rise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fargentinian-activists-machismo-attacks-women-niunamenos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f0de4497768863669da6b35ff9047de188dbc52%2F26_0_653_392%2F653.jpg>
 Claudio Arias, right, with her ex-partner Daniel Zalazar, who was arrested 
over her murder and the killing of her aunt Susana Ortiz. Photograph: Courtesy 
of Clarin 
News reports of the Mendoza killings stirred a terrible sense of deja vu for 
Jimena Aduriz. In 2013 her 16-year-old daughter, Angeles Rawson, was abducted 
as she returned to her apartment from a nearby gym class in the Colegiales 
neighbourhood of Buenos Aires. Her body was later found at a recycling centre, 
wrapped in a garbage bag.

Last year Rawson’s attacker, Jorge Mangeri, a caretaker, was sentenced to life 
imprisonment after one of the first convictions under the femicide legislation.

Aduriz argues that Argentinians need to reconsider the way they think about 
such crimes. “We have to make people understand that gender violence doesn’t 
start with the first blow, it starts when the man begins to control the woman, 
to mistreat her, humiliate her publicly, to tell her what to wear,” she said.

“There’s a lot of work put into reducing her self-esteem, so by the time the 
blow arrives the behaviour has been naturalised.”


Aduriz’s painful experience has taught her that victims of violence should not 
be silent. “Women suffering gender violence have to speak out, they have to 
report it, and people who are witnesses to someone suffering must not leave 
them on their own.”

'We live in constant fear': Argentina's women on marching against violence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/we-live-in-constant-fear-argentinas-women-on-marching-against-violence>
Three years after her daughter’s murder, Aduriz is still struggling with the 
loss. “You have to find some way to give the pain a new meaning with whatever 
tool you have at hand – your faith, some kind of service, or helping to educate 
people about this.”

Aduriz has channeled her pain into volunteer work at the National Council for 
Women and at the Uguet Mondaca shelter for women in the Buenos Aires suburb of 
Burzaco.

“In the media you only hear about the most extreme cases, but the reality is 
that many lives are being saved thanks to the increasing awareness,” she said. 
“I see it at the shelter, many women are now able to escape from abuse and 
mistreatment thanks to what’s now being done.”

But she admits that sometimes she feels nothing will ever heal the wound. 
“It’s a pain that doesn’t stop with putting the killer in jail,” Aduriz said. 
“I’m very religious and I know I will meet my daughter again in heaven, but 
meanwhile I have to continue my life on earth without her.”
 