
I have a problem with Aristotle. Not the Aristotle who pondered being, 
politics, or ethics, but the Aristotle who, in the wake of Greek tragedy, tried 
to nail what made those great plays so great. HisPoetics 
<http://www.philosophypages.com/ph/aris.htm> is a fragment of preserved lecture 
notes, part of a wider riposte to Plato's attack on the poets (perhaps it 
should be pinged over to Jeremy Hunt pretty damn quick). But it's less the 
real-life Greek I'm bothered about; it's what we continue to make of him.

Poetics doesn't occupy a crowded field. Writing about playwriting, as I have 
just done for my new bookThe Secret Life of Plays 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Secret-Life-Plays-Steve-Waters/dp/1848420005>, can be 
a lonely experience, if you're after wisdom from fellow writers. There are a 
handful of accounts you can trust, most recently David Edgar's indispensableHow 
Plays Work 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2009/jul/11/drama-edgar-plays-theatre>. But 
Poetics remains first and foremost. Aristotle begins neutrally enough, pledging 
to analyse "the art of poetic composition in general and its various species", 
but with item three on his agenda ("how plots should be constructed if the 
composition is to be an artistic success"), his task begins to become 
prescriptive. As he proceeds, Aristotle warms to his role as lay adviser, 
offering famous observations such as "Tragedy cannot exist without a plot but 
it can without characters" (really?), or "Among simple plots and actions the 
episodic is the worst" (possibly, but ...). At one point, he even offers tips 
about apt subjects for plays that always make the heart sink.

Such advice has proved irresistible to subsequent writers on playwriting. 
Indeed, if you want a view other than mine on Aristotle, try enthusiastic 
disciple Michael Tierno's bluntly titledAristotle's Poetics for Screenwriters: 
Storytelling Secrets from the Greatest Mind in Western Civilization 
<http://www.amazon.com/Aristotles-Poetics-Screenwriters-Storytelling-Civilization/dp/0786887400>
, which suggests Poetics might do for Hollywood what Sun Tzu's The Art of War 
does for the Pentagon. What playwright Timberlake Wertenbaker has wonderfully 
called"Aristotalitarianism" 
<http://books.google.com/books?id=fPMAmDDVR3MC&pg=PA126&lpg=PA126&dq=Aristotalitarianism&source=bl&ots=ukrBF5nHGn&sig=a9caTOlImnaeQhKTGbcsb6rYi4k&hl=en&ei=3L2pTPvYIZqK4gaVptC_DQ&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=5&ved=0CCEQ6AEwBA#v=onepage&q=Aristotalitarianism&f=false>
 is ubiquitous, from the bossy neo-classicism of Ben Jonson or Dryden or 
Corneille, with their distaste for the unruly pleasures of Shakespeare, to 
contemporary avatars in tub-thumbing toolkits such asRobert McKee's Story 
<http://www.mckeestory.com/seminars.php>, which claims: "In the 23 centuries 
since Aristotle wrote Poetics, the 'secrets' of story have been as public as 
the library down the street," which rather raises the question as to the 
necessity of his own mighty book. Wherever plot is deemed to trump all other 
aspects of playwriting, Aristotle's ghost is hovering nearby.

Yet Poetics' fatal flaw (to borrow an Aristotelian term) is that it's an 
outsider's view of writing. All too often Aristotle's inventory of conventions 
is mimicked, as if plays were no more than the sum of their parts, and the 
author a phrenologist detecting a criminal from the shape of their skull. 
Generations of playwrights and critics have rummaged through Poetics' checklist 
of elements hoping to find a readymade framework for their plays or analyses. 
It's very tempting. Technical terms, especially Greek ones, sound very 
authoritative: take somedianoia 
<http://www.blackwellreference.com/public/tocnode?id=g9781405106795_chunk_g97814051067955_ss1-95>
, add in a littlesophrosyne 
<http://www.worldwidewords.org/weirdwords/ww-sop1.htm>, sprinkle over it a 
smidgeon ofanagnorisis 
<http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/22338/anagnorisis>, work the whole 
lot into a lovelyperipeteia 
<http://www.english.hawaii.edu/criticalink/aristotle/terms/peripeteia.html>, 
and wait for the inevitablekatharsis 
<http://www.english.hawaii.edu/criticalink/aristotle/terms/catharsis.html>.

If I might add my own hubris to that list, another shortcoming of Aristotle's 
account of playwriting lies in his focus onSophocles' Oedipus Tyrannus 
<http://academic.reed.edu/humanities/hum110/oedipus.html>. It's a very good 
play, no question, but this poster-boy of formal perfection has too often 
served as a cudgel to beat into shape all sorts of equally good, but formally 
eccentric works. How would Aristotle's toolkit of the unities – of place, of 
time, of action – have served him had he considered the unruly danger of 
Euripides' The Bacchae or the trilogy of The Oresteia, let alone the madcap 
playfulness of any play by Aristophanes? But then the fact that it stakes 
everything on one exemplary text perhaps explains the seductive reductiveness 
of the Poetics.

Philosophers tend to make dogmatic critics, dismembering plays to illustrate 
their concepts, paring back the biodiversity of actual plays to create a 
monoculture of well-behaved exemplars. Nevertheless, however much we might 
crave papyrus records of Aeschylus taking part in a post-show discussion, or a 
series of unpublished essays byEuripides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/euripides> entitled "Writing in Tavernas", 
Aristotle's end-of-term report still too often sets the standard. I'm happy to 
take my hat off to the great Greek, but we need to thumb our noses at his 
disciples. Playwriting's too rich and strange for their tidy minds.
 