
Aris Thessaloniki haven't lost at home in European competition for 40 years. 
Forty years! They also beat reigningEuropa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> champions Atlético 
Madrid in the group stages. None of this is great news for a team looking to 
bounce back fromthat Wayne Rooney goal at the weekend.

"I don't think we will have a problem mentally," says Roberto Mancini. No 
problem mentally.Manchester City. "But when you have played so well away from 
home, when you think you have deserved to win but you lose, it can be very 
hard. It's important for us that we have a game so quickly and we need to go on 
a run now."

To gauge the success of City's attempt to break into a sprint o'success, we'll 
be using the Guardian's official patented Mike Summerbee-o-meter®. It's fairly 
self-explanatory, I'd say. To be honest I'll have probably forgotten about it 
after five minutes or so.

Aris Salonika, a team name I note being different to the one we've got in the 
headline: Sifakis, Vangeli, Guiaro, Lazaridis, Michel, Neto, Prittas, Faty, 
Sakata, Toja, Bobadilla.
Subs: Vellidis, Oriol, Cesarec, Kaznaferis, Mendrinos, Cesnauskis, Castillo.

Manchester City, who name a strong side, recalling Edin Dzeko, Jerome Boateng, 
Kolo Toure and Shaun-Wright Phillips: Hart, Richards, Boateng, Toure, Kolarov, 
Barry, Toure Yaya, Wright-Phillips, Tevez, Silva, Dzeko.
Subs: Given, Kompany, Zabaleta, Lescott, Vieira, Jo, Balotelli.

Referee: Alberto Undiano Mallenco (Spain)

The teams are out: It's a rare old atmosphere in a packed Kleanthis Vikelidis 
Stadium in Salonika. There's a fine ticker-tape carnival going on; we've missed 
the fireworks display, though. Aris are in yellow and black, a less neon 
Borussia Dortmund, while City are in blue and white, as you'd expect (unless 
you'd assumed Aris played in blue and white).

And we're off! City set the ball rolling. The ball's soon lost. Sakata 
skidaddles down the left and loops a cross into the centre. Bobadilla makes a 
nuisance of himself: with his back to goal eight yards out, he flicks the ball 
over his head and turns, nearly managing to make contact with the ball again 
with only Hart to beat. The keeper comes out to claim, though. Not an 
impressive start by Boateng and Kolo Toure, who were standing around, fannying 
about.

3 min: City stroke it around the back, getting used to the ball. Suddenly they 
pounce, Kolarov stroking a lovely pass down the left to release Dzeko into 
acres of space. The striker's not offside, but the referee and his linespeople 
think otherwise, and put a stop to City's attack. A poor decision.
Summerbee-o-meter: B.

7 min: No real shape to the game yet. Having said that, the home crowd have a 
really repetitive chant going on, a minimalist effort on loop. It's quite 
hypnotic, and I keep zoning out.

9 min: Tevez, Barry and Silva ping it around in triangles, in the middle, 25 
yards from goal. Silva suddenly takes a step forward and, with little backlift, 
skelps a shot towards the bottom-right corner. Sifakis, the Aris captain, is 
down quickly to parry the effort, and the ball is hacked clear.

11 min: Neto goes on a dash down the right-hand aisle, but before he can cross 
the wheels come off his trolley. Don't worry, I'm going to stop this right now.

12 min: A corner for City down the right. It's swung in deep, Tevez getting 
himself into all sorts of improbable shapes at the far post, before the ball 
goes out off his knee (which is above his head). After a quiet start, there's a 
sense that City are working their way into this.

15 min: City should be a goal up here. Kolarov wallops a low cross into the 
Aris area from the left. It hits the boot of Silva, and lands at the feet of 
Dzeko, six yards out and clear! He's not got much time to shoot, mind, with 
Sifakis bearing down on him, and he faffs a weak effort straight into the 
keeper's arms. "Have you noticed there seems to be a lot of laser pens being 
used against the City players?" reports Jerry Thomas. Well, yes, I saw 
something, Jerry, but to be honest I just concluded that maybe I should cut 
back on my drinking. So I'm glad to hear that. Oh, hold on, no, that's a very 
worrying development.

18 min: City are well on top here. Wright Phillips should break clear into the 
area after a strong run down the right, but lets the ball run under his feet, 
with Dzeko also showing in the middle. The crowd are whistling a lot, that 
repetitive number on pause for the minute.

19 min: "Well, well, well!" begins the annoyingly jaunty John Allen of Seoul. 
"Sakata Daisuke! I watched him for four years in Japan playing for Yokohama 
F-Marinos and I have to admit I never thought his name would grace the pages of 
the Guardian. A bloody annoying player to watch. He had the ability to cock up 
nearly every chance that fell his way before smacking a 25 yard screamer once 
in a, pardon the pun, blue moon. Hope he bags one just for old times sake, 
"Let's go Sakata, Sakata, yeah! Let's go Sakata, Sakata, yeah!" He's just tried 
one of his thrikers, John, after cutting inside from the left. It was hellish.

21 min: Kolarov takes a corner on the left, Dzeko sending a header miles over 
the bar to the right of goal. The man on the PA has told the home support to 
put the laser pens away.

23 min: City are enjoying the lion's share of possession here. The home 
support are still whistling away. "Salonika/Thessaloniki is like 
Florence/Firenze," writes Mark Taylor. "They call it one, we call it the other. 
Because we're lazy. Or unpretentious." Or pretentious and lazy?

25 min: The ball breaks to Silva in the Aris area, down the left-hand channel. 
Again he's flagged offside, but I'm not sure he was. At the worst, that would 
have been a corner to City; Silva might even have been able to get a shot in 
from a tight angle.Summerbee-o-meter: B.

29 min: Sifakis hasn't had much to do, but City are well on top and looking 
good for an away goal. Kolarov and Wright-Phillips take turns to apply pressure 
down either wing, but can't find Dzeko in the middle.

31 min: The City defenders haven't had much to do. Boateng, perhaps bored, 
makes a hash of a simple clearance and sends the ball straight to Toja, who has 
a dig from 25 yards. The ball travels about one tenth of the required distance 
before being blocked by the errant Boateng, sweeping up his own mess and 
presumably much happier now he's more engaged with proceedings.

34 min: The looping chant is back, like 20,000 Steve Reichs. Not a great deal 
going on in the match.

38 min: Michel wins a corner down the left for Aris. It's their first of the 
match. The ball's swept across the face of the area. Toja executes a fancy turn 
and wins a second corner down the right. Lazaridis heads weakly goalwards. Hart 
claims, then runs to the edge of the area and, in a distribution mix-up with 
Barry, handles the ball outside his own area. What a dolt. Hart kids on he's 
done nothing wrong, but that'll be a free kick, a few feet to the right of the 
D.

40 min: After a long faff, Neto curls the free kick towards the top-left 
corner of goal. It's curling outwards, and ends up sailing wide of the post. 
But that wasn't far away at all. Hart was rooted to the spot, almost as if he 
was having some sort of Rooney flashback. A very, very poor couple of minutes 
from theManchester City <https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> 
keeper, who is the best in England it says here.Summerbee-o-meter: B.

43 min: City have totally fallen away as an attacking force. Bobadilla steals 
the ball from Yaya Toure, 20 yards from goal, and looks to break towards the 
City box. He's pulled back for a non-existent handball.

HALF TIME: Aris Thessaloniki 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aristhessaloniki> 0-0 Manchester City. 
Tevez nearly releases Dzeko with a straight pass rolled down the middle of the 
pitch, but the ball skids off the turf and into the arms of Sifakis. And that's 
that for the half. "I think even Mike Summerbee might be having a Rooney 
flashback, judging by that picture," suggests Justin Kavanagh.

And we're off again! Excited? Hmm. City were looking good for most of that 
first half, before taking their foot off the gas. An away goal or two is theirs 
for the taking, if they want it. Barry sends Wright-Philips free down the right 
with a majestic sprayed pass, hopefully a statement of their intent. The winger 
wins a corner, which is wasted by Kolarov.

48 min: Bobadilla, Faty and Toja ping it around nicely along the front of the 
City box. Bobadilla nearly sets Toja free down the inside-left channel and into 
the area, but the pass is too strong and Toja can only toe-poke it out wide 
left at full strength.

51 min: Bobadilla, who has been the best Aris player by some distance, wins a 
corner down the right off Kolarov. The ball's swung into the middle, where Faty 
connects weakly with his head from eight yards. That was a real chance. City 
want to watch themselves here.

57 min: Apologies, I properly zoned out there. This is bloody awful at the 
moment.

59 min: Neto lifts a very poor free kick straight into the hands of Hart from 
the edge of the City D.

61 min: A nice move by Aris down the left, Bobadilla involved along with 
Prittas and Neto, lovely little fast triangles. Eventually Richards gets fed up 
and bowls Bobadilla over. The free kick isn't great, and easily cleared, but 
the ball's soon coming back at City, Toja cutting inside from the right and 
pelting a half-decent effort straight down Hart's throat.

63 min: Suddenly City spring into life. Barry whips a cross into the area from 
the left. Dzeko meets it with a powerful header, Sifakis palming brilliantly 
over the bar, a superlative reaction save. The corner is a waste of your time, 
my time, everyone's time. But let's hope that encourages City into playing at a 
higher tempo, because their performance since the restart hasn't been up to 
much.

66 min: Wow, what a shot from Neto, who belts a dipping swerving shot 
goalwards from wide on the right. The ball's heading into the top-left corner, 
Hart diving at full length to tip away with both hands. That's a wonderful 
shot, and an even better save. The last few minutes have been more like it.

67 min: Michel latches onto a loose ball down the left and cuts inside of 
Dzeko. He's in the area, and shapes to shoot into the top right, but Barry 
comes across to block, and the danger is gone. The home side are beginning to 
go for this.

70 min: Dzeko turns in the middle of the Aris half and moves goalwards. He's 
30 yards out, and sends a very decent effort just wide right of the posts. I'm 
not convinced Sifakis would have reached that were it on target.

72 min: Cesarec comes on for Bobadilla, who put in a fine performance. A 
striker for a striker, Aris manager Giannis Michalitsios clearly doesn't want 
to go for broke.

76 min: All a bit scrappy here.

77 min: Dzeko is booked for a trip on Faty. Wright Phillips is sacrificed for 
Balotelli, coming back from injury after a couple of months out.

78 min: Faty drops a shoulder and advances on the City area. He really should 
shoot, but decides to lay the ball out wide for Michel, who shanks a laughable 
effort miles wide left of goal.

80 min: ITV4 have lost the feed of this match. Great! It was eye-bleedingly 
abysmal entertainment.

81 min:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDuAmEezYiKc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDuAmEezYiKc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDuAmEezYiKc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDuAmEezYiKc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDuAmEezYiKc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FDuAmEezYiKc%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
close 

Hauntology > Manchester City.

84 min: Ah, hold on, we're back. Zabaleta comes on for Dzeko.

85 min: Why won't the feed go again?

86 min: Neto romps down the middle of the park and clips a ball out right to 
Cesarec, but the striker's caught offside. An earlier ball would have seen him 
clear in the City half.

87 min: Balotelli, to the right of goal, ten yards out, attempts an overhead 
kick. It flies well wide. Let's not make comparisons.

88 min: Castillo comes on for Neto. Why have Aris taken both of their best 
players off?

89 min: A corner for City down the right, won by Balotelli. Kolarov swings it 
in. Richards meets it with his head on the edge of the six-yard box, right in 
the centre, but gets no power on it and the effort wafts wide left. Poor, poor, 
poor.

90 min: There will be two added minutes of this, two minutes that will seem 
like 22, if what's gone before is any guide. Which it is.

90 min +11: Only 660 seconds to go.

FULL TIME: Aris Thessaloniki 0-0 Manchester City. And that's it. A dreadful 
game. City were on top for most of the first half, but didn't keep going. Aris 
were much the better side in the second half; their proud European home record 
stays in tact.Summerbee-o-meter: A, if City don't raise their game in the home 
leg.
 