
If Arlene Phillips is still upset by Alesha Dixon replacing her on Strictly 
Come Dancing <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing>, 
then she did her best to conceal it today at her first public appearance since 
the switch.

Appearing at The O2 arena in London to promote a new Latin musical, Sacred 
Flame, Phillips, 66, insisted she had not been affected by the rowthat is still 
engulfing Strictly following her departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/organgrinder/2009/sep/23/strictly-come-dancing-arlene-phillips>
.

Keeping up a brave face, Phillips thanked the press for its support but said 
she would not speak further about the row, instead going on to describe why she 
had decided to direct the new O2 show, which will take over the 20,000 seat 
arena on 28 December and star the Wet Wet Wet singer Marti Pellow.

But of course, that wasn't why the assembled ranks of the media were there - 
the new musical was merely an excuse to get face time with the woman who 
remains part of the biggest showbiz story in the land.

Her axing from Strictly sparked accusations of ageism against the BBC, while 
30-year-old Dixon's first tentative steps as the new judge on the opening 
episodes of the show on Friday and Saturday were immediately met witha volley 
criticism from both viewers and commentators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/sep/21/alesha-dixon-strictly-come-dancing>
.The show has also been hit by a row over its scheduling against ITV1's The X 
Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/sep/22/jana-bennett-strictly-come-dancing>
, with even politicians calling for the BBC to move it.

So, a brushoff from Phillips was not going to stop persistent - and innovative 
- questioning from the ranks of the media.

Did Phillips think Strictly's lights had gone out since she left, and would 
she return as its "Sacred Flame", asked the Daily Star's Nigel Pauley 
hopefully. Phillips smiled, but said nothing. Is the row over Strictly 
hampering her preparation for Sacred Flame? Phillips was a little more 
forthcoming: "Every day I get up and I love life just as I have done before, 
during and after. I am fine."

When asked if she now had more time for theatre after leaving Strictly, she 
added: "I have always had a full-time job. I have always worked full time. My 
day job has always been in the theatre. For years now I have done two or three 
shows a year. I have always loved theatre and I will always do it."

Later, Phillips seemed to imply that she didn't much care to watch Strictly 
now she had left, although of course she has to for her role as roving reporter 
on BBC1's The One Show and for herweekly Sun column 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/showbiz/tv/strictly_come_dancing/2646543/Arlene-Phillips-Strictly-Come-Dancings-lost-some-sparkle.html>
.

"I don't have time to watch TV," she told journalists. "The only things I 
watch are Miss Marple and Midsommer Murders. They are the only things that make 
me stop."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 