
Arlene Phillips, whose controversial axing from Strictly Come Dancing sparked 
a row about ageism at the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/17/arlene-phillips-strictly-come-dancing>
, is to return to BBC1 as a judge in a new Saturday-night talent show.

Phillips, 66, was ditched as a Strictly Come Dancing judge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/17/arlene-phillips-strictly-come-dancing>
 in favour of the former winner Alesha Dixon for the show's seventh series, 
which begins on BBC1 on Friday.

Less than two months after she was dropped, the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> today said she would return to the 
channel in So You Think You Can Dance, which has run for five series on Fox TV 
in the US.

The show also sees the return to British TV of the show's co-creator and 
executive producer, Nigel Lythgoe, who was a judge on ITV's Popstars in 2000.

Phillips was a judge on the first six series of Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing>, but was 
dropped as part of a revamp of the show in July this year.

The decision sparked a backlash among fans who believed that she had been 
dropped because of her age. Dixon, who won the fifth series of the show in 
2007, is 30.

Labour deputy leader and equalities minister Harriet Harman even became 
involved in the row, saying the BBC's decision to replace Phillips was 
"absolutely shocking" and called on the corporation to reinstate her.

The BBC denied that the appointment of Phillips as a judge on the new show was 
a reaction to the ageism claims that followed her axing from Strictly Come 
Dancing.

Sources said the So You Think You Can Dance format was already being developed 
for BBC1 with Phillips in mind when she was removed from her Strictly role, 
although this was not confirmed at the time.

A BBC spokesman said: "It was always our intention to work with Arlene on 
other projects. She will be a huge asset to So You Think You Can Dance and we 
are really pleased she is on board."

Lythgoe, dubbed "Mr Nasty" for his role on Popstars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2001/jul/16/mediatop100200179>, has had a 
40-year TV career producing the likes of Blind Date, Gladiators and the Bobby 
Davro Show.

Lythgoe, who created So You Think You Can Dance with Simon Fuller, will be 
head judge on the show which will be co-produced by the BBC and Fuller's 19
Entertainment <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/entertainment>.

Billed as the competition to find "Britain's favourite dancer", nationwide 
auditions will begin in October with the series beginning in January. Viewers 
will be able to vote for their favourite dancer at the end of each show. The 
BBC said the winner would receive a cash prize plus a "to-be-confirmed 
once-in-a-lifetime experience".

Lythgoe stepped back from his behind the scenes role on Fuller's American Idol 
in the US <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/aug/05/television.usa>, on 
which Simon Cowell is a judge, to focus on his joint ventures with Fuller and 
developing So You Think You Can Dance worldwide.

He previously helped launch Pop Idol in the UK while still at ITV, before 
going to the US to help launch American Idol with 19 Entertainment.

In a 40-year TV career, Lythgoe has worked at the BBC, choreographing more 
than 500 TV shows including Morecambe & Wise, The Muppets and Bing Crosby, as 
well as a producer/director with credits including Bruce Forsyth and the Bobby 
Davro show.

He moved to LWT in 1992, working on shows including Beadle's Daredevils, 
Michael Barrymore's My Kind Of Music, and An Audience with... .

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 