
Chip designer Arm ended a busy week on a downbeat note.

The Cambridge-based company, which supplies Apple, Samsung and Microsoft, 
reported better than expected results on Tuesday thanks to booming smartphone 
royalties. It was also boosted by the launch later in the week of Apple's iPad 
mini and the unveiling of Microsoft's Windows 8, where the company has begun 
encroaching on Intel territory. But disappointing results from Apple after the 
market closed on Thursday took the shine off, and Arm's shares fell 8.5p to 
656.5p. But they are still 65p up on the week. Credit Suisse issued a neutral 
rating on the company, but raised its target price from 538p to 645p. It said:
 We conclude that markets are currently expecting an approximate 15%-20% 
upgrade to industry volume estimates for smartphones and tablets, Arm's key end 
markets. Further upside therefore requires an even greater upgrade to industry 
units or Arm holding higher market share than 95% smartphones, 85% tablets and 
15% notebooks by 2016.

[Our] neutral rating is predicated on the conclusion that the majority of good 
news—increasing royalties from uptake of newer processor technologies and 
graphics, retaining majority market share in smartphones and tablets, and 
gaining share in notebooks—is already known and factored into forecasts. 
As for Apple, its shares fell more than 1% in early trading. Analysts at 
Killik said:
 Although the miss of consensus numbers was disappointing (although management 
guidance was beaten), a large part of it is understandable. Rumours surrounding 
the release of the iPhone 5 clearly impacted sales of other iPhones during the 
quarter and then supply issues have constrained the iPhone 5 sales in the 
quarter. The rumours of the iPad mini have also impacted sales of iPad in the 
quarter as consumers waited to see the relative attractiveness.

Following these results, we would expect consensus to come down by around 
5%-10%. Reducing consensus by 10% and adjusting for Apple's large cash holding, 
it is currently trading on 10 times calendar 2013 earnings per share. We 
continue to view this as an extremely attractive valuation for the world's 
leading consumer electronics company in the lead up to its best quarter ever. 
We remain buyers and would use any price weakness to add to positions. 
Apple was just one of a raft of US companies revealing disappointing results 
in recent days, ranging from Amazon to Caterpillar. That helped theFTSE 100 
lose 90 points over the week, although better than expected US GDP figures gave 
some comfort for the world's biggest economy, ahead of the presidential 
elections. So the leading index managed to edge up 1.66 points yesterday to 
5806.71.

Miners turned in a mixed performance with Kazakhmys down 21.5p at 714.5p but 
Rio Tinto rising 10.5p to 3110.5p. But Anglo American was the star performer, 
adding 76p to 1933.5p on news ofthe proposed departure of under pressure chief 
executive Cynthia Carroll 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2012/oct/26/anglo-american-cynthia-carroll-step-down>
.

African Barrick Gold dropped 16.5p to 465p after reporting a 72% drop in three 
month profits to $29m and downgrading its 2012 production forecast. Majority 
owner Barrick Gold of Canada is currently in talks to sell its 74% stake in the 
mining group to China National Gold Group Corporation.

Insurers weakened on worries about the outlook in a low interest environment 
and amid falling markets.Prudential lost 16p to 837p, Aviva 3.1p to 330.1p and 
Standard Life 4.2p to 284p. But Andy Hughes at Exane BNP Paribas said the 
market had underestimated Standard Life's earnings potential, and added that 
the insurer could contemplate an £800m cash return to shareholders.

Elsewhere Pearson put on 9p to £12.21 after it confirmed on Thursday it was 
considering a merger of its Penguin business with Bertelsmann's publishing arm 
Random House. Analyst Steve Liechti at Investec said:
 We view this as a possible net positive but not game changer - while we see 
some earnings per share upside via near-term merger/cost synergies in a 
pressured top line business, this does not imply cash returns to shareholders 
or re-investment in long-term growth Education assets. If a move precedes exit 
of FT Group too, this would be good news. 
But Trinity Mirror fell 9.75p to 51.25p yesterday on worries about its 
involvement in phone hacking after legal claims were filed against the Daily 
Mirror on behalf of, among others, former England football manager Sven-Goran 
Eriksson.

Weir rose 29p to £17.17 as Morgan Stanley raised its target price on the pumps 
group from £14.40 to £16.70 but kept its underweight rating:
 Expectations look much more realistic now, although certain capital 
expenditure headwinds remain. Weir's risk-reward is improved, but not yet 
attractive. 
Its shares have been buoyed recently by speculation of a possible takeover by 
the likes of US giant General Electric.

Hedge fund group Man added 1.8p to 81.85p on hopes of action to boost its 
flagging performance. Odey Asset Management, founded by fund manager Crispin 
Odey, announced on Thursday it had raised its stake inMan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mangroup> from 1.25% to 5.15%.

Finally Hibu, the oddly named owner of Yellow Pages which was formerly known 
as Yell, fell 8% to 0.33p after Standard & Poor's lowered its credit rating on 
the struggling business from CCC+ to CC with a negative outlook. On Thursday 
the debt-laden company said it was suspending payments to its lenders pending 
completion of its restructuring, and warned its shares could be worthless. One 
bright spark was news that the Office of Fair Trading had recommended that the 
Competition Commission should consider relaxing a number of restrictions on the 
company which were introduced in 2007 when it was a major power in the market.
 