
Amir Abrashi pumped his fists and screamed at the equally passionate Albanian 
support congregated behind Romania’s goal. He had only won a corner but also 
precious time in the country’s wait for its debut victory at a major 
tournament. Seconds later it arrived, and Albania’s live-wire midfielder 
dropped to his knees in tears. History in the making.

Their first win at the European Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/european-championship> secured, Albania 
must wait until the group phase is over to discover whether they will play any 
further part as one of the third-placed qualifiers. England are a possible 
opponent in the last 16 for a team with a goal difference of minus two. “I hope 
we can stay,” said coach Giovanni De Biasi. “I’m a positive person and I think 
we deserve it. We’ve shown we can play these games against top teams who have 
more quality than us.” More quality perhaps, but not more character, pride and, 
on the evidence of this victory, game intelligence.

Switzerland quell Paul Pogba storm to earn France draw and last-16 spot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/19/switzerland-france-euro-2016-match-report>
Backed by fanatical, fantastic support, Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> eliminated Romania with flashes 
of creativity and impregnable defending, leaving an indelible mark both with 
the celebrations that followed Armando Sadiku’s decisive first-half header and 
the final whistle. De Biasi was awarded Albanian citizenship after the Italian 
coach delivered their first appearance at an international tournament. He could 
run for the presidency after this. “We won with heart and with quality,” De 
Biasi added. “We were able to contain a squad with strength and quality and 
that had conceded only two goals in the qualifying phase. Technically we 
decided to wait for Romania and try to attack the spaces. We expected a strong 
start from them but were ready to counterattack. We defended very well, very 
solid and we closed the spaces.”

The contrast with Romania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/romania> coach 
Anghel Iordanescu and his deflated players was stark. Iordanescu was named 
Coach of the Century by the Romanian FA after leading the country to the 
quarter-finals of the 1994 World Cup and the last 16 four years later. His 
third time may end in bitter recrimination and was asked whether, as coach of 
the century, he was now responsible for the shame of the century. “You have 
never done anything constructive in your life,” Iordanescu told his accuser. 
“If this is the shame of the century let the Romanian press judge me and put 
the question [of whether he will continue in the job] to the president of the 
FA.”

Albania’s passage to France had turned De Biasi’s team into a symbol of 
national unity but was also assisted by the fall-out from the ‘Battle of 
Belgrade’ when Serbian supporters invaded the pitch after a drone carrying a 
‘Greater Albania’ flag flew over the stadium. Uefa punished both teams for the 
abandoned qualifier before Albania won three points on appeal to the Court of 
Arbitration for Sport.

Romania 0-1 Albania: Euro 2016 – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/19/romania-v-albania-euro-2016-live>
Having gone to such lengths to reach their first international tournament, 
there was deflation at how the Euros had unfolded against Switzerland and 
France but also a clear determination to make their mark at the third attempt. 
Occasionally it was made on Romanian ankles as the game opened at a ferocious 
pace. The Czech referee Pavel Kralovec allowed several late challenges to go 
unpunished, though he did book Migjen Basha for a flying leap into the shoulder 
of Ovidiu Hoban with only eight minutes gone. Basha was fortunate to escape a 
second yellow for clipping Lucian Sanmartean as the Romania substitute weaved 
his way towards goal in the second half.

As in their opening two defeats, Albania started carelessly with naivety in 
possession helping Romania to dominate the early exchanges. Their threat faded 
once Albania found some composure and invention on the ball. A superb move 
should have resulted in the ball finding the Romanian net when Sadiku, Ermir 
Lenjani and Amir Abrashi combined down the left before the striker released 
Andi Lila down the opposite flank with a perfect pass. Lila crossed first time 
for Lenjani who blazed over from six yards but was spared lasting ignominy by 
an offside flag.

The flowing move injected belief into the Albanian ranks. Basha miscued 
another free shot on goal from Ledian Memushaj’s corner before their 
long-awaited breakthrough arrived moments before half-time. Collecting a 
throw-in on the right, Memushaj swept a deep cross to the far post where Sadiku 
rose above a defender and goalkeeper Ciprian Tatarusanu to head over the line. 
Cue scenes of unbridled joy as the striker sank to his knees before a delirious 
Albanian bench.
Armando Sadiku 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Armando%20Sadiku&team=Albania&isSimple=true>
One of Romania’s substitutes, Florin Andone, struck the bar after an incisive 
one-touch move sent him clear of the Albania defence but that was a rare scare 
for a defence that worked tirelessly, and bravely, to stifle a limited 
attacking threat. Arlind Ajeti, outstanding in the heart of Albania’s 
back-line, caught the mood to perfection. “We have made a historical event,” he 
said.

Romania v Albania: Euro 2016 – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2016/jun/19/romania-v-albania-euro-2016-live> 