
Celebrated playwrights often seem to spend their later years in a kind of 
exile that is less common for successful novelists. Perhaps because putting on 
a play is more complicated than putting out a book – a script needs a producer, 
director, actors, stage and audience – award-winning dramatists can find 
themselves locked out of theatres that once royally courted them.

Arnold Wesker <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/wesker> endured a long 
English wilderness of the kind also experienced by peers such as John Osborne, 
Peter Nichols, David Storey and Edward Bond. New plays went unperformed in his 
own country, though they were often produced elsewhere, while recognition from 
British theatre was restricted to a long service knighthood and revivals of his 
heyday plays.

Gratifyingly, those revisits to his greatest hits proved the enduring quality 
of the work. The plays that first brought Wesker to attention at the turn of 
the 1960s categorised him as an autobiographical writer, although he benefited 
from having life experiences that either soon became unusual or were rare among 
writers: the national service conscription that informedChips with Everything 
(1962); employment as a sous chef led to The Kitchen (1957); while growing up 
in a family of communists inspiredChicken Soup With Barley (1958), the stock 
that he thickened into a reputation-making trilogy by addingRoots and I’m 
Talking About Jerusalem.

The sense given by these plays of Wesker as a leftwing, working-class Jewish 
memoirist was accurate, but was shown to be only part of the story by two 
tremendous productions in 2011. Dominic Cooke’s Royal Court revival ofChicken 
Soup With Barley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/08/chicken-soup-with-barley-review> 
made Wesker’s presentation of his personal dispute over political purity – a 
lapsed communist who clashed with his still observant mother – feel relevant to 
broader disputes in politics and culture over the extent to which ideology 
should be diluted by events. The play was also notable for the daring of its 
time structure, following a family across 20 years in around two hours, a pages 
to decades ratio that few other dramas have equalled.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Farnold-wesker-angry-young-man-mark-lawson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a2c09a787f5a28f81ca08506d5dcd7c576e08f4%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arnold%20Wesker%3A%20An%20angry%20young%20man%20who%20upset%20the%20theatrical%20establishment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Farnold-wesker-angry-young-man-mark-lawson%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arnold%20Wesker%3A%20An%20angry%20young%20man%20who%20upset%20the%20theatrical%20establishment&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Farnold-wesker-angry-young-man-mark-lawson%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a2c09a787f5a28f81ca08506d5dcd7c576e08f4%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 The Kitchen by Arnold Wesker at the National Theatre in 2011. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Later in the same year, Bijan Sheibani’s staging of The Kitchen  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/07/the-kitchen-oliver-london>at the 
National Theatre induced astonished nostalgia for a period when a dramatist 
could include 30 characters in a play, but also impressed with its slick 
choreography of that vast cast through multiple plot lines. The way that Wesker 
played theatrically with time inChicken Soup With Barley and space in The 
Kitchen demonstrated that, although his plays were often based on socially 
realistic material, he was also inventive and even experimental in his 
storytelling and stagecraft.

One reason for Wesker’s long period of neglect in British theatre was a 
tendency to fall out with theatres and critics. The cancellation ofThe 
Journalists, a work of reportage about a newspaper written for the RSC in 1972, 
following what Wesker regarded as political censorship by the cast, made the 
playwright serious enemies in both Equity and the National Union of 
Journalists, a most unfortunate combination for a playwright. Four years later, 
whenThe Merchant, a thoughtful reworking of Shakespeare’s Shylock, was expected 
to be such a success on Broadway that Wesker was advised to take advice from 
super-tax accountants, its star, Zero Mostel, died suddenly during previews, 
ending the run.

Another advantage of novels is that they can’t be closed down due to the death 
of someone in them, and that may be one reason why Wesker turned to prose 
fiction during his theatrical hiatus. But, unlike many dramatists who go out of 
fashion, he had the consolation of revivals that confirmed his worth, and his 
trilogy andThe Kitchen will surely be seen again.
 