
Arnold Wesker <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/wesker>, arguably the 
angriest of the Angry Young Men that shaped British theatre in the late 1950s, 
is to be the subject of a retrospective season at a London fringe theatre 
marking his 80th birthday.

The King's Head <http://www.kingsheadtheatre.com/main.html>, a small-scale pub 
theatre in Islington, will stage new productions of his 1997 play about false 
memory syndrome, Denial, which was first seen at the Bristol Old Vic in 2000, 
and of Caritas, an opera featuring Wesker's libretto based on his own two-act 
play of the same name. Both productions will open in May.

Wesker said: "It is gratifying when anybody wants to do something of one's 
work, and I'm flattered that productions of little-known works will be staged 
in London to mark my 80th birthday."

Next year, the theatre will also mount the so-far unproduced screenplay that 
combined three of his plays – Chicken Soup with Barley, Roots and I'm Talking 
About Jerusalem – into a single script. The plays all follow the same north 
London Jewish family, the Kahns, through various stages of their lives, and the 
trilogy arguably remains Wesker's most famous work. It ledKenneth Tynan 
<http://arts.theguardian.com/critic/feature/0,,567652,00.html>, then theatre 
critic for the Observer, to dub Wesker "one of the few western dramatists who 
can write about political idealists without mockery or condescension".

Last year, the Royal Court revived its first part, Chicken Soup with Barley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/08/chicken-soup-with-barley-review>
, to great acclaim, more than half a century after the play's London premiere 
at the same venue. Last year, the National staged another early play, The 
Kitchen, also to positive reviews, decisively ending what was seen by some as a 
long period of neglect.

In his introduction to the trilogy, Wesker described it as "a fourth script 
rather than an adaptation of the three plays. A rethinking of my past." The 
Wesker Trilogy: Revisited will be adapted for the stage by Rachel Grunwald and 
Adam Spreadbury-Maher, who is artistic director of the King's HeadTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>.

The playwright continued: "I don't know what people will think about the way 
three well-known plays have been edited , and I'm intrigued to find out … 
Perhaps the King's Head Theatre production will finally lead to that film being 
made."

Wesker <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/22/arnold-wesker-interview> 
was born in 1932 in Stepney in London's East End. While his work is often 
regarded as social-realist in tone and style, that description only really 
applies to his first five plays;later plays have tackled a wider range of 
topics in a variety of different styles 
<http://literature.britishcouncil.org/arnold-wesker>.

Despite what some have seen as his alienation from the British theatrical 
establishment, Wesker has never given up writing.He told the Observer last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/22/arnold-wesker-interview>: "I 
know the worth of the plays, and there has always been something going on, 
somewhere. That helped."
 