
British playwright Arnold Wesker dies, aged 83
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/12/arnold-wesker-british-playwright-dies-aged-83>
Arnold Wesker was part of a generation of dramatists, including John Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/24/john-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre>
,Harold Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/harold-pinter-obituary-playwright-politics>
 andJohn Arden <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/30/john-arden>, who 
helped change the face of British theatre. InThe Kitchen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/07/the-kitchen-oliver-london>, he 
pioneered the idea of dramatising the world of work. In what came to be known 
as the Wesker Trilogy (Chicken Soup With Barley, Roots and I’m Talking About 
Jerusalem) he linked a family’s fortunes to world events. And in Chips with 
Everything he offered one of the shrewdest analyses ever written of the British 
establishment’s capacity to absorb and neutralise protest.

Even if many of Wesker’s most durable plays were first seen between 1958 and 
1962, he continued writing for the theatre with unshakable tenacity and 
self-belief. One of his strengths was his ability to capitalise on his own 
experience. Having once worked in a Paris restaurant, he drew on his memories 
in The Kitchen to capture both the repetitive nature of daily toil and the 
almost balletic frenzy of the peak-hour mealtimes. It is also difficult not see 
elements of Wesker in Ronnie Kahn, the articulate young socialist who appears in
Chicken Soup with Barley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/08/chicken-soup-with-barley-review> 
and who is disillusioned by the Soviet invasion of Hungary in 1956.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Farnold-wesker-radical-bard-of-working-britain-class-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc64cd87679ddafc8e93da840cd0a424000b48adf%2F0_0_3131_3874%2F3131.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arnold%20Wesker%3A%20the%20radical%20bard%20of%20working%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Farnold-wesker-radical-bard-of-working-britain-class-plays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arnold%20Wesker%3A%20the%20radical%20bard%20of%20working%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Farnold-wesker-radical-bard-of-working-britain-class-plays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc64cd87679ddafc8e93da840cd0a424000b48adf%2F0_0_3131_3874%2F3131.jpg>
 Cecil Beaton photographs Wesker in 1963, for Vogue. Photograph: Cecil 
Beaton/Getty Images 
But what moves one about the play is the mother’s final rebuke to her son when 
she tells him: “Ronnie, if you don’t care you’ll die.”

Wesker was a realist who never lost his sense of human aspiration. It is 
precisely that which makesRoots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/jan/26/theatre>, first seen in 1959, 
his most frequently revived play. Wesker, who throughout his career wrote 
exceptionally well for women, created an iconic heroine in the figure of Beatie 
Bryant. Turning up at her Norfolk family’s rural home, she parrots her absent 
boyfriend’s ideas about art and life with hectoring enthusiasm. But the great 
moment comes when, on realising she has been dumped, she speaks with her own 
unaided voice. Whether played by Joan Plowright, in the first production, or 
Jessica Raine ina recent Donmar revival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/09/roots-arnold-wesker-review>, 
Beatie’s self-discovery always brings a lump to the throat.

If Wesker’s early plays had personal origins, they also had profound political 
and social resonance. Chips with Everything was based on Wesker’s experience of
National Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/aug/20/national-service-consctiption-britain-richard-vinen-review>
 and shows a group of raw RAF conscripts being encouraged to rebel by an 
officer’s son, Pip, who defies his background. What makes the play so chilling 
is the sight of Pip’s gradual enlistment into the officer class he has 
betrayed: it is a classic case of what Marcuse called “repressive tolerance”. 
But what makes the play so theatrically exciting is the spectacle of an 
uncoordinated group of airmen being turned into a well-drilled unit at the 
climactic passing out parade.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fjun%2F10%2Farnold-wesker-chicken-soup-with-barley&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arnold%20Wesker%3A%20'It%20does%20feel%20as%20though%20the%20wilderness%20may%20be%20receding'%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fjun%2F10%2Farnold-wesker-chicken-soup-with-barley>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arnold%20Wesker%3A%20%27It%20does%20feel%20as%20though%20the%20wilderness%20may%20be%20receding%27%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2011%2Fjun%2F10%2Farnold-wesker-chicken-soup-with-barley&media=>
Arnold Wesker talks to the Guardian about his life and work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/video/2011/jun/10/arnold-wesker-chicken-soup-with-barley>
Wesker’s later plays rarely repeated the success of his early ones but many of 
them deserve attention. Their Very Own and Golden City (1965) is a fascinating 
account of a utopian architectural scheme bedevilled by realpolitik: ironically 
the visionary architects dream of a reinvigorated movement to be called “New 
Labour.”

The Journalists (1971) offers a kaleidoscopic collage about a Sunday newspaper 
and argues that journalism reflects our Lilliputian society’s desire to cut 
everyone down to size. The Merchant (later retitled Shylock, 1976) was Wesker’s 
highly original response to Shakespeare’s The Merchant of Venice and showed 
Shylock and Antonio as friends united in their contempt for antisemitic 
Venetian law.

Arnold Wesker: 'I've never understood my reputation for grumpiness' | interview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/may/22/arnold-wesker-interview> 
Wesker wrote many other plays, including three excellent monologues called 
Annie Wobbler, specifically created for Nichola McAuliffe, but often found his 
work gaining more favour abroad than in Britain. But, although he was prepared 
to challenge critics and had a reputation for contentiousness, I always found 
him a charming and easy companion when I had the luck to meet him round a lunch 
table. He also had his champions amongst a younger generation, and none more so 
than Stephen Daldry during his tenure at the Royal Court. As Daldry says: “With 
his passing and that ofBill Gaskill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/04/william-gaskill-appreciation-obituary-royal-court-artistic-director-theatre>
 recently, we are beginning to lose the voices of a generation that shaped 
theatre as we understand it today. The working-class Jewish idiom that Arnold 
gave expression to was unique, heartfelt and radical.”

Those strike me as wise words about a dramatist who, even in charting the 
failure of social and political dreams, never lost his faith in humanity’s 
enduring potential.
 