
Arnold Wesker: the radical bard of working Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/13/arnold-wesker-radical-bard-of-working-britain-class-plays>
The first thing to say about Arnold Wesker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/apr/12/arnold-wesker-british-playwright-dies-aged-83>
 is that his great early plays really were great. His Royal Court colleague 
John Osborne certainly gave voice to the frustrated and furious young people of 
the 1950s, an anger that Wesker shared (though he didn’t much like the “angry 
young man” tag). But, as the child of a Jewish communist family in the East 
End, he set that anger within the context of his family’s personal and 
political history, from the radicalism of the 1930s through the horrors of the 
second world war to the disillusionment of the 50s.

If you want to know about the inflexibilities of the British class system and 
how young men like Wesker sought to break free of them, you go to The Kitchen, 
his national service play Chips with Everything, and the trilogy of plays about 
two working-class families (one of them his own) in the middle years of the 
20th century.


Arnold Wesker: kitchen-sink dramatist – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/gallery/2016/apr/13/arnold-wesker-life-and-work-in-pictures>
 Wesker was lucky that he was able – at a crucial moment in postwar history – 
to apply his life to his times. His plays spoke to audiences who shared his 
history. Plays like The Kitchen, Chicken Soup with Barley and Roots (all of 
which have had excellent revivals in the last five years, atthe National 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/sep/07/the-kitchen-oliver-london>, the 
Royal Court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/08/chicken-soup-with-barley-review> 
andthe Donmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/09/roots-arnold-wesker-review>) 
still resonate, perhaps partly because his own ambivalence about his characters 
(including those based on himself) is so clear and painful.

 Wesker affected bemusement at being thought a curmudgeon. Unlike some other 
playwrights with that reputation, he was personally delightful, not least to 
playwrights of succeeding generations, particularly over food. I got to know 
him and his wife Dusty (the original of the central character of Roots) when he 
was working in a Birmingham less populated with good restaurants than it is now 
(though Arnold was well able to sniff them out).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Farnold-wesker-playwright-david-edgar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8bd64b87e567846604ab1d8c7b9303ac9e846ac%2F0_76_3856_4481%2F3856.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arnold%20Wesker%20applied%20his%20life%20to%20his%20times%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20showed%20us%20greatness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Farnold-wesker-playwright-david-edgar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arnold%20Wesker%20applied%20his%20life%20to%20his%20times%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0and%20showed%20us%20greatness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Farnold-wesker-playwright-david-edgar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8bd64b87e567846604ab1d8c7b9303ac9e846ac%2F0_76_3856_4481%2F3856.jpg>
 Not such an angry young man … Wesker pictured painting his house. Photograph: 
ANL/Rex/Shutterstock 
I was also with him on a number of British Council tours to eastern Europe, 
about which he was knowledgable and – of course – often pained. In Budapest, we 
dined in the restaurant where plans for the 1956 uprising were finalised. Most 
poignant of all was to see him in the Jewish museum in Prague, in front of a 
drawing rescued from an extermination camp, and realising that the child who 
drew it shared his date of birth.

His later plays became more personal but also less directly autobiographical, 
and did not receive the recognition he felt they deserved. He was justly 
angered by the RSC’s pulling their production of his play The Journalists, and 
distressed by the fact that his pro-Shylock reworking of The Merchant of Venice 
(which failed on Broadway after the death of its star, Zero Mostel, on the 
pre-New York tour) never achieved a London production – though it was given a 
fine British premiere at Birmingham Rep, where Wesker also directed his series 
of monologues,Annie Wobbler <http://www.arnoldwesker.com/plays.asp?workID=30>, 
for the remarkable Nichola McAuliffe. Like Osborne, his later work included two 
painfully honest memoirs. It’s certainly true that British theatre could have 
made better use of him.
 