
Arqiva is hunting for an investment partner for its online TV venture SeeSaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/seesaw>, with options including a complete 
sale of the operation thought to be under consideration.

The company, which handles TV and radio transmitters for most UK broadcasters 
and is a partner in the BBC-backed YouView video-on-demand venture, launched 
SeeSaw in February last year.

Last October Arqiva <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> completed a 
strategic review of SeeSaw, which employs about 30 staff, and is set to begin 
the hunt for an investment partner.

Arqiva, which is expected to appoint an adviser in due course, said all 
investment options were being looked at "in order to support SeeSaw's long-term 
success". It is thought that the options being considered run the gamut from 
selling a stake through to potentially an entire sale of the operation.

"We've been looking at SeeSaw as part of a wider strategic review and, 
following the success in launching a pioneering new service to both consumers 
and advertisers, we now believe the service needs further investment to reach 
its full potential," said Nick Thompson, managing director of Arqiva's 
broadcast and media business unit. "We need to enable a step-change in the 
development of the service in what is a very fast-moving environment."

Earlier this month Arqiva hired John Cresswell, the former interim chief 
executive of ITV,as its new chief executive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/11/john-cresswell-arqiva?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

Arqiva plans to look at all investment options for the business in order to 
support SeeSaw's long-term success.

SeeSaw was launched using the assets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/24/arqiva-project-kangaroo?INTCMP=SRCH>
 of ITV, Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide's defunct VoD venture Project Kangaroo, 
which Arqiva acquired for about £8m.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 