
Arqiva <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> has appointed John Keeling, 
a former senior executive at UKTV, to head programming and marketing at its 
proposed online TV venture.

Keeling will take the title of platform controller for the Arqiva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/23/arqiva-project-kangaroo> 
service, which will launch in the coming months. He will be responsible for 
overseeing all programming and marketing functions, including development of 
the as-yet-unannounced brand, and for hiring staff.

He held the role of chief operating officer at Virgin Media and BBC Worldwide 
joint venture UKTV, which operates pay-TV channels including Gold, from 2001 to 
2007. Keeling was involved in the launch of MTV Europe in 1987 and also spent 
six years at BSkyB in the 1990s.

Keeling's appointment by Arqiva follows that of Pierre-Jean Sebert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/31/sebert-join-arqiva>, the former 
managing director of British Eurosport, as the chief executive of the operation.

"I am delighted to have persuaded John Keeling to join this business," said 
Sebert. "He has a unique track record in launching and managing multichannel 
television brands in the UK and understands the British audience as well as 
anyone in the business."

Broadcast transmission company Arqiva acquired the remnants of Project 
Kangaroo, the online TV joint venture between ITV, Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide, 
in July for about £8m. The company also acquired the rights to the name See 
Saw, but it is not known if this will be used as the brand for its own 
broadband TV service.

It has been reported that Arqiva has secured content deals for programming 
with Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide, although the company is yet to confirm this 
or outline the nature of the content it will offer.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 