
Arqiva <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> is understood to have hired 
Pierre-Jean Sebert, former managing director of British Eurosport, as chief 
executive of its proposed online TV venture.

The broadcast transmission company paid about £8m earlier this month to buy 
the assets of Project Kangaroo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/24/arqiva-project-kangaroo>, the 
defunct video-on-demand venture developed by ITV, Channel Four and BBC 
Worldwide, and has plans over the coming months to launch its own online TV 
aggregation service in conjunction with broadcasters.

Arqiva will face competition from Microsoft, which yesterday announced it was 
launching a pilot online TV service, initially showing programmes from BBC 
Worldwide and All3Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/30/microsoft-launches-uk-online-tv-player>
.

Sebert has most recently spent several years working for Reel Enterprises, the 
rights negotiation and multimedia channel development company founded by former 
Reuters, Granada and GMTV executive David Kogan.

He left British Eurosport in September 2005 after four years and was then 
drafted in by UKTV;according to a report at the time 
<http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/news/multi-platform/news/uktv-sport-brief-for-sebert/1032876.article>
, he was to work on projects including a possible sports channel.

Arqiva is understood to have also been in talks with Project Kangaroo's senior 
management about whether they will move to the new venture.

Project Kangaroo's chief financial officer, Christine Mulling, and its chief 
executive, Rod Henwood, are thought to have decided against this.

It is not known what has been decided by the commercial director, Cosmo Lush, 
the chief technical officer, Lee Morgenroth, or the product director, Richard 
Dines.

Arqiva had not responded to a request for a comment on the appointment of 
Sebert at the time of publication.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 