
Arqiva is understood to have paid in the region of £8m to buy the assets of 
Project Kangaroo <https://www.theguardian.com/media/kangaroo>, the defunct 
video-on-demand venture developed by ITV, Channel Four and BBC Worldwide.

The broadcast transmission company has also acquired Project Kangaroo assets 
such as the brand name See Saw, which it has the option to use for itsown 
proposed video-on-demand service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/23/arqiva-project-kangaroo> that 
will launch in the coming months.

It is understood that Arqiva <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> has 
also held conversations with Project Kangaroo's senior management about whether 
they will move to the new venture.

The remaining management includes chief financial officer Christine Mullin, 
commercial director Cosmo Lush, chief executive Rod Henwood, chief technical 
officer Lee Morgenroth and product director Richard Dines.

Arqiva expects to complete the acquisition of Kangaroo's hardware and software 
technology, and related intellectual property, within a few weeks.

The transmission company and Orange had been the only serious contenders to 
buy Project Kangaroo's assets. According to two sources with knowledge of the 
sale process, Arqiva and Orange offered in the vicinity of £9m to £10m.

It is understood that Orange offered slightly more than Arqiva, but in May it 
emerged that the mobile phone company had pulled out of talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/19/project-kangaroo-orange>.

The source close to the negotiations said that a number of issues had emerged 
with a sale to Orange, including potential wider European regulatory issues 
surrounding Kangaroo –which was blocked by UK regulators in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/feb/04/project-kangaroo-blocked-by-competition-commission>
 – and a number of other unspecified issues upon which a deal hinged. Orange 
had planned to use the technology in France. The source added that the final 
price was in the "ballpark" of £8m.

Project Kangaroo has cost its partners as much as £30m. Last week BBC 
Worldwide, the corporation's commercial arm, revealed that Kangaroohad cost it 
£9.1m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/14/bbc-worldwide-profits-slump>, 
while ITV estimated that its costs relating to the project would ultimately be 
£12m. Channel 4's financial exposure has not been revealed but it is thought 
that the partners, which each controlled an equal share of the venture, 
incurred roughly the same level of costs.

Last month the Office of Fair Trading accepted undertakings from Kangaroo's 
partners relating to what broadband TV ventures may, or may not, be permissible 
between them over the next five years.

The broadcasters agreed that they will not acquire control of any others' 
video-on-demand activities. Directors or managers will also be prohibited from 
taking any directorship or managerial position that would give them control of 
their former partners' video-on-demand services.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 