
Arqiva, the broadcast transmission company, has confirmed it is to buy the 
technology behind the defunct broadband TV ventureProject Kangaroo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/kangaroo> to launch a video-on-demand 
service of its own.

The company is now looking to do deals with broadcasters and other content 
providers to supply the video material that will be offered online to consumers.

Arqiva <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> said the new video-on-demand 
service would appear in the coming months and feature "both free-to-air and pay 
content propositions". It is not yet clear whether it would introduce a 
subscription or pay-per-view model or both.

"The platform will aim to host top-end quality content from leading 
broadcasters and independent content providers to provide a broad range of user 
experiences to its audiences," Arqiva said.

Arqiva added that it would complete the acquisition of Kangaroo's "hardware 
and software technology, and related intellectual property" within a few weeks.

Kangaroo's founding partners BBC Worldwide, ITV and Channel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> had to abandon the project 
following more than a year of development after it was blocked by the 
Competition Commission in February.

The move will put Arqiva, which owns the UK terrestrial TV and radio 
transmitter network but is neither a broadcaster nor a content producer, in a 
consumer-facing relationship for the first time.

Arqiva is unlikely to keep the Kangaroo brand or use its own corporate name 
for the new venture.

The company owns two of the six Freeview multiplexes, via which bundles of 
digital terrestrial TV channels are broadcast, and has been seen as a potential 
bidder for a third, the SDN business that has been put up for sale byITV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/itv>.

Arqiva became the sole owner of the national digital radio multiplex Digital 
One yesterday, taking over the majority stake that was owned by Global Radio, 
the owner of Classic FM and Capital Radio.

The Winchester-based company owns the UK's 1,100 TV and radio masts and also 
offers services to satellite groups and mobile operators.

"We believe that online video-on-demand is an exciting and complementary 
development, and a natural extension to our traditional broadcast business," 
said Steve Holebrook, the managing director for terrestrial broadcast at Arqiva.

Arqiva put no price on today's acquisition but it is likely to be a fraction 
of the £30m-plus that Project Kangaroo cost its partners.

Last week BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Worldwide revealed that 
Kangaroo had cost it £9.1m, while ITV estimated that its costs relating to the 
project would ultimately be £12m.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 