
Arrival review: heartfelt alien-contact movie communicates spectacular ideas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/01/arrival-review-amy-adams-denis-villeneuve-alien-contact>
Whether it’s a John Carpenter classic or Jonny Greenwood’s experimental 
modernism, the film soundtrack is becoming ever more popular as a standalone 
listen. Contemporary Icelandic composer Jóhann Jóhannsson reckons that’s 
because “people are hungry for new sounds, and for the experience of listening 
to unfamiliar music that you don’t hear on commercials and in every TV show”. 
He should know. Jóhannsson has written boldly impressionistic scores for 
numerous high-profile films, includingStephen Hawking biopic The Theory Of 
Everything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/07/theory-of-everything-review-hawking-eddie-redmayne>
, darkly emotional revenge piecePrisoners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/26/prisoners-review> and drug-cartel 
thriller Sicario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/08/sicario-review-emily-blunt-at-the-sharp-end-in-war-on-drugs>
, where he used a 65-piece orchestra to convey ominous intensity; and he’s 
earned two Oscar nominations in the process. The common thread in his work is 
his treatment of the score as an integral element of the overall sound design, 
rather than an independent composition imposed on it. Jóhannsson’s latest work 
is the soundtrack to smart sci-fi thriller Arrival, starring Amy Adams. Here, 
he offers his top tips for writing a winning movie score…

Feed off the script

“Arrival is my third film with Denis [Villeneuve, director] – we’re working on 
our fourth now [Blade Runner 2049 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/18/ridley-scott-opening-scene-blade-runner-sequel-harrison-ford-ryan-gosling>
] – and we’ve developed a trust and knowledge of each other’s tastes and 
sensibilities. Denis always involves me in the pre-production stage: I read the 
script and we talk about the mood and the role that the music needs to play. 
With Arrival, we didn’t talk much about the music and this was deliberate on 
his part; he basically gave me carte blanche to experiment.”

Sicario review – Emily Blunt at the sharp end in war on drugs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/08/sicario-review-emily-blunt-at-the-sharp-end-in-war-on-drugs>
Go with your gut

“I knew that I wanted to use voices as one of the prime instruments in the 
score of a film that is primarily about language and communication. But I 
wanted to use the voice in a different way, so I worked with an ensemble called
Theatre Of Voices <http://theatreofvoices.com/>. They’re masters of both early 
music and contemporary music, so have a very good command of exotic vocal 
techniques. I worked with Robert Aiki Aubrey Lowe; he is not academically 
trained, but his voice is an amazing, powerful and flexible instrument.”

Expand your horizons

“In terms of voices, I was very influenced by Stockhausen’s Stimmung 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ty9G0asmZ_k>, a piece for six voices and 
microphones. But I was also listening a lot to spectral composers like Gérard 
Grisey and Horatiu Rădulescu.”

Enjoy the silence

“In mainstream cinema, there’s usually too much music. In Arrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/arrival>, the use of space and silence is 
extremely important. When music is needed, it’s really there and it serves a 
purpose.”

Don’t force it

“I try to approach a project with a blank slate and just let things emerge. I 
start very early in the process because it takes a lot of time to work in this 
way. It takes time to find a mood and feel that has some character and 
individuality, and is not weird for weirdness’s sake.”

Arrival (OST) is out now; Jóhann Jóhannsson plays the Barbican Hall, EC2, 9 
December <https://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=20029>
 