
Cross Country rail passengers have been promised more seats and faster 
journeys afterArriva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> 
retained the contract to run the franchise until October 2019.


The operator has been set “tough” targets for punctuality and reliability on 
Cross Country services, which run from Aberdeen to Penzance, Bournemouth to 
Manchester and Stansted to Birmingham, among other routes.

The Department for Transport (DfT) said 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/better-journeys-for-passengers-on-the-cross-country-network>
 there would be an additional 39,000 seats per year at peak times along the 
Edinburgh to Plymouth route through Leeds, Birmingham and Bristol by December 
2017.

Journey times from Birmingham to Manchester are to be cut by nine minutes on 
weekdays and 12 minutes at weekends.

Quiz: who owns Britain's rail companies?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/02/quiz-who-owns-britains-rail-companies>
The government is investing £20m in upgrading Cross Country trains and said 
passengers will get free Wi-Fi by April 2018.

Arriva, which is owned by Germany’s Deutsche Bahn, also operates Chiltern 
Railways and Grand Central services, as well as trains in Wales.

The rail minister, Paul Maynard, said: “We are making the biggest investment 
in the railways since the Victorian era and today is a key milestone in giving 
passengers better journeys right across the Cross Country network.

“The franchise, which spans parts of England, Scotland and Wales, serves 
commuters and long-distance passengers, and these benefits from Arriva Cross 
Country will deliver extra and smoother journeys for customers using these 
services.”

The DfT said Arriva Cross Country will pay the government a premium of £163m 
to operate the franchise. Arriva has also pledged to develop a mobile app, 
remove a £10 fee for changing advance tickets and run extra trains to Morpeth, 
Northumberland.

The Arriva Cross Country managing director, Andy Cooper, said: “We are 
delighted to have the opportunity to deliver even more for our customers over 
the next three years through this new agreement.

“Satisfaction is the theme for the range of investments we will be making, 
with better, faster journeys with more seats and free Wi-Fi. We will also be 
looking to our customers for feedback.”

• This article was amended on 29 September 2016 to clarify that the additional 
39,000 seats are per year.
 