
Fleets of better, faster trains, thousands of extra seats and improved rail 
services across the north of England have been promised as the winners of two 
major rail franchises were announced.

Smart ticketing will be introduced and free Wi-Fi will be rolled out by the 
end of the decade. German firm Arriva takes over the Northern franchise from 
April 2016 until 2025 – beating Dutch-owned rival Abellio – with a pledge to 
phase out the widely condemned Pacer trains that serve regional routes by 2018.
FirstGroup <https://www.theguardian.com/business/firstgroup> will retain the 
TransPennine Express until 2023, although without its current partner, Keolis, 
from next April.

The train operators will work closely with the region’s newly established 
transport body, Rail North, as the government pledges more devolution alongside 
a transformation of the rail network, despite delays to promised 
electrification work.

The transport secretary, Patrick McLoughlin, said: “As a one nation government 
we are committed to closing the economic gap between north and south. This 
deal, and the joint management of the franchises, will bring the northern 
powerhouse to life.

“Arriva Rail North Limited and First Trans Pennine Express Limited went far 
beyond our requirements with exciting, ambitious plans that will make a real 
difference to customers, and – coupled with our commitment to push ahead with 
electrifying the vital Transpennine route – will help the region realise its 
full economic potential, ensuring it has a modern 21st century transport 
system. This is fantastic news for the north.”

Rail upgrades have become a totemic issue for the government and the 
chancellor, George Osborne, in particular, after he put a proposed high-speed 
network in the north at the heart of his vision for a “northern powerhouse”. 
But the pledges were undermined by theshelving of promised electrification 
schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/25/network-rail-chief-to-step-down-as-385bn-upgrades-are-delayed>
, which have been officially restarted – if delayed –after a review published 
<https://www.networkrail.co.uk/Hendy-review/> alongside the autumn statement.

The decision to enforce the removal of Pacer trains was taken in an explicit 
ministerial direction by McLoughlin in February, overruling advice from civil 
servants that it would represent poor value for public money, saying that 
“uncomfortable and low quality” vehicles werehaving a negative impact on rail’s 
reputation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/407780/dft-sos-to-permanent-secretary.pdf>
.

Arriva <https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> will increase 
capacity by 40% across its northern network, including a higher-quality 
Northern Connect service on longer-distance routes. It will also significantly 
boost Sunday services in the north.

Chris Burchell, the managing director of Arriva’s UK Trains division, said: 
“We will be investing more than £1bn to deliver a step-change in quality for 
customers and dramatically improving services, stations, information and 
ticketing. Our aim is to be the communities’ local railway and to leave a 
positive lasting legacy for the north of England.”

Winning the TransPennine franchise outright will be an important boost for 
First Group, whose fortunes have faltered in recent years, not least since 
having the lucrative west coastfranchise slip away in the 2012 bidding fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/oct/15/virgin-continue-west-coast-rail>.

First will bring in 220 new carriages, equivalent to 44 trains, and worth more 
than £400m, providing 125mph services across the network, as well as 
introducing new and additional services for Scotland, including a direct 
Liverpool to Glasgow service from December 2018.

 It has also promised discounted advance fares for 16- to 18-year-olds and 
jobseekers.

Tim O’Toole, the chief executive of FirstGroup, said: “Our plans include 
investment in new and refurbished trains on every part of the network, with 
millions more seats available, free Wi-Fi and simpler smart and mobile 
ticketing, allowing us to build on the success we have had over the past 11 
years, in which we have more than doubled passenger journeys on the network.”

First will pay £303m in premiums to the government over the course of the 
franchise. Arriva will receive a total subsidy of £1.79bn, a reduction on the 
current deal with Abellio.
 