
Oh, Arsenal. So good, so quick, so dominant; so frail, so brittle, so limp. At 
times in this rather surrealChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> Group D match Arsenal 
resembled not so much a lopsided work-in-progress as a mismatched pantomime 
horse of a team. From 3-0 up after 60 minutes to 3-3 on 90 – spooked by an 
offside goal – this was a horrible defensive performance at the end, made all 
the more painful by the cloudless hour that preceded it.

The good news for Arsène Wenger is that the attack appears to be fixed. The 
bad news: well, all the other things that were broken – undermanned defence, 
lack of basic spleen and spine and muscle (and brain) when it comes to keeping 
the opposition at bay – appear to be just about clinging on behind.

This was a strange night all round, one that seems to raise all sorts of 
questions about the basic point of all this. Despite their horrible half-hour 
here,Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> are still very 
likely to qualify once again as one of Europe’s top-16 teams, a fine 
achievement in isolation. There is, though, no suggestion that they are any 
better equipped to progress beyond that stage. It all seems at times a slightly 
pointless exercise, a business of simply existing lucratively within the final 
stages of Europe’s premier competition without ever threatening to press for 
more. Most bafflingly, the obvious areas of weakness – lack of defensive 
personnel, lack of at least one high-class defensive midfielder – are hardly 
insurmountable.

First, though, that attack. With a little fortune and a happy shuffling of the 
injury pack Wenger has effectively re-geared the front end of his team, which, 
in the opening hour, looked in vibrant good health. Speed, or rather a lack of 
speed, has been an issue recently and whatever the problems elsewhere decisive 
steps have been taken to rectify that omission.

There has already been a degree of salivating over the prospect of a 
thrillingly pacy front three complementing the fine-point passing of Mesut 
Özil. Here, though, with Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain switching from right to left 
and Alexis Sánchez buzzing behind Danny Welbeck, one thing was clear from the 
start: this is Sánchez’s attack right now, a front four who revolve around his 
relentless, high pressure take on thetrequartista role, so different in texture 
and tempo to the Özil-centred machine of early season.

It was a deceptively slow start at the Emirates, but the aubergine shirts of 
Anderlecht <https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> broke well in the 
opening minutes, providing an ominous glimpse of what would arrive in a second 
half. The first rev of the Arsenal throttle came after a quarter of an hour 
when Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain found a little space in the purple crush only for 
Arsenal to suddenly come over all Arsenal, pinging the ball around the area 
until Aaron Ramsey’s shot was deflected over.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Farsenal-punished-anderlecht-arsene-wenger-champions-league-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415187960022%2FDanny-Welbeck-of-Arsenal--017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%20punished%20against%20Anderlecht%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Farsenal-punished-anderlecht-arsene-wenger-champions-league-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%20punished%20against%20Anderlecht%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Farsenal-punished-anderlecht-arsene-wenger-champions-league-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415187960022%2FDanny-Welbeck-of-Arsenal--017.jpg>
 The Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger says he is very disappointed with his team’s 
3-3 draw 
If Oxlade-Chamberlain has a concussive, rugby league player’s kind of speed, 
all barrel-chested pace and explosive lateral movements, Sánchez is a blur of 
quick feet, often taking three steps in the time it takes a defender to adjust 
his feet. This he did in Arsenal’s best moment of the opening quarter, taking a 
pass from Ramsey, feinting to shoot on the head of a pin and then skimming a 
post.

And moments later Arsenal went ahead. Sánchez picked up Ramsey’s pass 40 yards 
from goal and played a lovely pass to Welbeck gliding in behind Chancel Mbemba, 
who barged him to the ground. Mikel Arteta dinked home the penalty. Moments 
later Sánchez’s running – and supreme ball-striking technique – created the 
second. First he was pulled down on the edge of the box.

A disappointing free-kick hit the wall, but Sánchez’s follow-up was sublime, 
snapping his feet into place like a shiny little ballroom dancer and spanking 
the ball on the volley low and into the corner. Then, with an hour gone, 
Oxlade-Chamberlain sprang forward and slotted a superb third goal as he cut in 
from the left wing.

At which point, exit Arsenal’s attack. Enter, tripping up over their own feet, 
Arsenal’s defence as Anderlecht began to probe, gaining confidence as they 
found little resistance in that familiar flapping saloon-door of a central 
midfield. Arsenal simply crumpled as Anthony Vanden Borre scored twice, the 
second from the penalty spot, and the Serbian substitute Aleksandr Mitrovic got 
the third with a fine header. It was that kind of night. Perhaps it will be 
that kind of season until a genuine base for that expensively reinforced attack 
can be found.

Wenger said he felt Arsenal defended poorly and that his team were under 
pressure even at 3-0 up. He was right, too: the most alarming thing about that 
last half-hour was that nothing in it really came as a surprise. Arsenal have 
collapsed against good teams in the past. They collapsed against a good team 
here. They will do so again in the future. The front end may look in thrumming 
good health but the faults behind remain, and Wenger was not alone in being 
able to see the collapse coming.
 