
Aaron Ramsey <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aaron-ramsey> has warned 
Tottenham Hotspur that Arsenal boast all the momentum and confidence going into 
Sunday’s north London derby, despite their opponents’ unbeaten start to the 
league campaign.

The Wales international made his first start since the opening weekend of the 
season in Sofia on Tuesday as Arsenal secured their place in the knockout stage 
of the Champions League with two matches still to playby defeating Ludogorets 
Razgrad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/arsenal-ludogorets-razgrad-champions-league-match-report>
.

Arsène Wenger’s teamhave lost only once in all competitions since mid-March, a 
sequence incorporating 25 matches, and would move six points clear of Spurs if 
they prevail at the Emirates Stadium this weekend.

“This team has been together for a while now, with a couple more additions 
[over the summer],” said Ramsey, who on Wednesday wasincluded in the Wales squad
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/02/aaron-ramsey-wales-squad-serbia-world-cup-qualifier>
 for next week’s World Cup qualifier against Serbia. “We’ve brought in some 
quality and, while it takes a bit of time sometimes for players to adapt, the 
new players have settled in really well. and hit the ground running. We know 
what we’re all about. We’ve been on a good run for a long time: at the back end 
of last season we finished really strongly, and we’ve carried that on this 
season.

Arsenal fightback from two down at Ludogorets eases them into last 16
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/01/arsenal-ludogorets-razgrad-champions-league-match-report>
“The team is full of confidence at the moment, and it was important to keep 
the momentum going against Ludogorets. We’ve been on a great run lately so, to 
keep that ticking over, it puts us in a good position going into the derby 
game. Tottenham have been a tough challenge in the last couple of seasons, 
they’re unbeaten in the league so far this season, but we know what to expect. 
It’s up to us to break them down. We’re at home and we’re full of confidence we 
can come away with a win.”

Arsenal have lost only once in their last eight matches against their bitter 
rivals, and have not succumbedat home since 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/nov/20/arsenal-tottenham-hotspur-premier-league>
, with Ramsey pointing to the psychological significance of his side clambering 
above Spursat the last in the run-in last season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/15/arsenal-aston-villa-premier-league-match-report>
. Tottenham have never finished above a side coached by Wenger.

“Of course it mattered,” said Ramsey when asked about that late burst of form 
in the spring which, combined with Tottenham hitting the wall, sawArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> leapfrog Mauricio Pochettino’s 
side into second place. “It’s been many years [21] since they finished above 
us, so we didn’t want that to happen last season. It was important to finish 
above them and hopefully we can keep that going this season as well. You’d have 
to ask them if they think we have a mental hold over them, though.”

Ramsey was understandably rusty in Sofia having sat out over two months with 
hamstring trouble and may find himself back among the substitutes if Theo 
Walcott has recovered from a tight hamstring to feature in the derby. Arsenal’s 
other absentees against Ludogorets – Héctor Bellerín, Santi Cazorla and Nacho 
Monreal – are also hopeful of featuring, though Ramsey is eager to play a part 
if required.

“It was great for me to play [against Ludogorets],” he added. “I’ve been out 
for a couple of months and it was great to be back out there starting again, 
and to get 70-odd minutes. That will put me in good shape going into the 
weekend, and hopefully I can stay fit now. Of course I’m fit to start – I’m 
ready now.”
 