
Arsenal do not do comfort against Anderlecht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht>. After the drama of the first 
meeting a fortnight ago when they nicked a 2-1 win with two goals in the last 
two minutes, it had looked like being an altogether smoother ride for Arsène 
Wenger and his players.

Inspired by the man-of-the-moment, Alexis Sánchez, they had surged into a 
three-goal lead and that appeared to be that. But if there had been a looseness 
to Arsenal at the start, they collapsed in faintly ludicrous fashion, which 
will surely mean they will not be able to advance to theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> last-16 as Group D 
winners.

When the metaphorical dust had settled, it was possible to see that the damage 
in practical terms was not too severe.Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> remain set to progress from the 
group as runners-up and, had they won here, it would still have taken an 
almighty turnaround to pip Borussia Dortmund to the top spot. Arsenal’s proud 
record should remain intact. They are close to a 15th consecutive qualification 
from the group phase.

But there were broader questions about how they could have squandered the 
victory and they touched plenty of nerves for Wenger. To the eternal angst of 
everyone connected to the club, they raked over painful, old ground. How could 
Arsenal have failed to close out the win? Largely because they cannot defend 
properly against decent teams.

Even Wenger admitted the performance in defensive terms had been “very, very 
poor” but he had to take the responsibility for his tactics. With the scoreline 
at 3-2, for example, and the nerves jangling, he brought on two attack-minded 
players – Tomas Rosicky and Lukas Podolski – in the 83rd minute. It was hardly 
a move to batten down the hatches. Then again, Arsenal have no experienced 
defensive cover. Their only defender on the bench was the 19-year-old 
right-back, Héctor Bellerín.

Arsenal were extremely open all evening and it did not take the loss of the 
defensive midfielder, Mikel Arteta, to a hamstring injury at 3-1 to precipitate 
the crash. Wenger’s team simply continued to play the way they always play and 
Anderlecht, who grew inexorably in confidence, took advantage of the cracks.

Besnik Hasi brought on Andy Kawaya as a second striker and there was a note of 
disbelief to the Anderlecht manager’s post-match words when he talked of the 
spaces his team were permitted. “Maybe Arsenal thought that they were on top 
and they could get more goals and they could have fun in front of the public,” 
he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Farsenal-punished-anderlecht-arsene-wenger-champions-league-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415187960022%2FDanny-Welbeck-of-Arsenal--017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%20punished%20against%20Anderlecht%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Farsenal-punished-anderlecht-arsene-wenger-champions-league-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%20punished%20against%20Anderlecht%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Farsenal-punished-anderlecht-arsene-wenger-champions-league-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415187960022%2FDanny-Welbeck-of-Arsenal--017.jpg>
 Arsenal manager Arsène Wenger says he is very disappointed with his team’s 3-3 
draw 
There were individual errors at the back from Nacho Monreal and Per 
Mertesacker – the former lost the Anderlecht substitute, Aleksandar Mitrovic, 
before pulling him down to concede the penalty for Anthony Vanden Borre’s 
second goal while the latter lost Mitrovic on the equaliser. But they were not 
the only ones to blame. Once again there were question marks over a lack of 
leadership in the team when the tide turns. Wenger admitted Arsenal had 
underestimated Anderlecht, which felt ridiculous given the fright that they had 
given them in Brussels.

The visitors had been the more threatening team in the opening 20 minutes 
here, when they broke on several occasions and Arsenal looked both sloppy and a 
little vulnerable. Dennis Praet went close with a deflected effort while Sacha 
Kljestan created a chance for himself with a bold sprint around Kieran Gibbs. 
Wojciech Szczesny blocked the shot.

Arsenal took control after what Hasi called the gift of the game’s first 
penalty. Aaron Ramsey found Sánchez and he asked Danny Welbeck to chase a ball 
that he put in behind Chancel Mbemba. Welbeck did just that, muscling in on 
Mbemba’s shoulder. Mbemba then fell on top of Welbeck and Arteta chipped home 
the ensuing stone-wall penalty.

Sánchez had earlier skimmed the outside of the post after buying himself a 
yard inside the area and flicking on the after-burners. Arsenal’s second was 
all his own work. He blasted forward and, when he was fouled by Anthony Vanden 
Borre, he picked himself up to take the free-kick. The initial effort was poor, 
hit straight into the wall, but Sánchez took out his anger on the rebound, 
lashing it through the wall on the volley and past Silvio Proto.

The game ought to have been over when Sánchez robbed Kljestan and Alex 
Oxlade-Chamberlain burst clear to finish in convincing fashion. But Anderlecht 
got the break that their positivity deserved when Kawaya crossed and Vanden 
Borre tapped home, albeit from an offside position.

Anderlecht strove to make the most of their fortune. The travelling fans 
roared their encouragement and Mitrovic cause problems. He spun away from 
Monreal and the makeshift Arsenal centre-half responded with a makeshift 
challenge, pulling him down to concede the penalty. Vanden Borre grabbed the 
ball from Youri Tielemans and scored.

The closing stages were increasingly fraught. Hasi did not stop believing and 
his tactical tweaks were underpinned by a measure of boldness. Then it 
happened. Andy Najar crossed from the right and Mitrovic muscled past 
Mertesacker to plant a firm, downward header past Szczesny. Arsenal knew how 
Anderlecht had felt in Brussels.
 