
Aaron Ramsey has added his voice to calls for video technology to aid with 
crucial decisions after having a goal incorrectly chalked off for offside 
during Arsenal’s0-0 draw against Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/24/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 at the Emirates.

Arsenal thank Petr Cech and Liverpool a linesman in goalless chaos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/24/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
During the first half the midfielder was in line with the Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> defence when Santi Cazorla 
played the ball through, but despite finishing smartly inside Simon Mignolet’s 
near post, he turned to see the assistant referee Simon Bennett with his flag 
raised.

Ramsey said: “I thought I held my run a bit, I thought I was onside but I 
obviously took a glance over to make sure and saw the flag was up. The replays 
suggest I was onside – it should have stood – but obviously the linesman 
thought it was offside.

“At the end of the day we should have been 1-0 up. To look at a video for 20 
seconds would have maybe changed the outcome of the game. I think we could take 
a leaf out of rugby – they do it really well. You see it on the screens, they 
go off for 20 seconds and they get the decision right in the end.

“We tried to push for the goal but it didn’t quite happen. A few times they 
went on the counterattack and you need all your players to perform on a night 
like that.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Farsenal-liverpool-arsene-wenger-premier-league-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440492965622%2FKP_402802_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arsenal%20wrongly%20denied%20match-winning%20goal%20against%20Liverpool%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Farsenal-liverpool-arsene-wenger-premier-league-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arsenal%20wrongly%20denied%20match-winning%20goal%20against%20Liverpool%2C%20says%20Ars%C3%A8ne%20Wenger%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F25%2Farsenal-liverpool-arsene-wenger-premier-league-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F25%2F1440492965622%2FKP_402802_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Arsenal wrongly denied match-winning goal against Liverpool, says Arsène 
Wenger. 
The goalless draw means Arsenal currently lie ninth in the Premier League 
table after three games, five behind the leaders Manchester City. They have now 
taken just four points from a possible nine in their opening fixtures having 
lostat home to West Ham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/09/arsenal-west-ham-premier-league-match-report>
 on the opening day, and recovering to win awayat Crystal Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/aug/16/crystal-palace-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
.

Ramsey added: “Many things can happen in this league. So many times you’ve 
seen the bigger teams struggle in a couple of games and everyone is back into 
it.

“It is always disappointing to start with a loss but I think we’ve responded 
well. It’s important not to lose the big games and to get something out of it 
if we can’t win the game, which we have managed to do. Hopefully now we can 
beat Newcastle, go away with our national teams and come back and go on a bit 
of a run.”

Petr Cech made several crucial interventions against Liverpool, in particular 
a fine reflex save from Christian Benteke when the striker was just six yards 
out. Ramsey said: “Our goalkeeper pulled off some good saves. We were pushing 
for the goal and a couple of times left ourselves open. We want to win all our 
games and it’s important that our keeper stays focused – and he was outstanding.
 