
The relief was writ large on the features of the goalscorer, Aaron Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aaron-ramsey>, but it was even larger 
across those of Arsène Wenger. When Ramsey’s injury-time clincher hit the net, 
the Arsenal manager pumped his fists before springing into a little jump and 
trotting around when he landed.

“I was very nervous today,” Wenger said, and it had shown. He protested 
furiously at the award of theSunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> free-kick just before 
half-time which led to the Olivier Giroud own-goal equaliser, even though 
Laurent Koscielny’s tackle on Duncan Watmore had been grisly. Koscielny was 
booked. “I’ve been told I was wrong on that one,” Wenger said, sheepishly.

Aaron Ramsey’s return central to Arsène Wenger worries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/27/aaron-ramsey-arsene-wenger-arsenal>
Wenger was worried about Sunderland’s threat on set pieces but he had other 
concerns – chiefly, finding a new balance, having “lost the core of the team in 
midfield”.Santi Cazorla and Francis Coquelin are long-term injury casualties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/02/santi-cazorla-out-three-months-arsenal-knee-injury>
. Wenger’s body language betrayed his anxiety throughout and it was a strange 
sort of atmosphere at the Emirates Stadium. Both Arsenal and the home crowd 
lacked intensity.

“Maybe Arsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> were a little 
bit edgy because they had not won in three league matches,” Sam Allardyce said. 
“They were jittery and we had the opportunity to punish them but because we 
didn’t punish them, as always at this level of football, you pay the price.”

Sunderland had the chances. “And they were not half-chances, they were golden 
chances,” their manager said. There were a handful of them, with Fabio Borini 
blowing the first on four minutes, when one-on-one with Petr Cech, and Patrick 
van Aanholt the final one, in the 89th minute, blazing over from the substitute 
Jack Rodwell’s pass.

Arsenal got the job done 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/05/arsenal-sunderland-premier-league-match-report>
. It was not a performance or occasion that will linger long in the memory – 
save for the embellishments of Mesut Özil, the assist-meister – but the 
positive reading says that title-chasing teams must pick up unremarkable wins. 
More immediately, it was a tonic before Wednesday night’s do-or-die Champions 
League away tie against Olympiakos.

“For our confidence, it was vital,” Wenger said. “If we hadn’t won, everyone 
would question the players we were missing and the fact we had not won for four 
league games. For our serene side, it is better to prepare for the Olympiakos 
game knowing that we have won.”

Wenger did not seek to downplay what is at stake in Athens. His team have 
qualified for the second phase of the Champions League in each of the previous 
15 seasons but if they do not beat Olympiakos by two goals, or by one goal 
while scoring at least three themselves, they will fall short.

“Our record means a lot to me,” Wenger said. “I want to win and I want to 
qualify. The one positive thing is that we know exactly what we have to do. We 
were a bit insecure against Sunderland because we had not won last week [at 
Norwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/29/norwich-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
]. It will be a different game, psychologically, against Olympiakos. We just 
have to go for it.”

Ramsey will be key, not least in terms of how he strikes the balance in his 
own game between protecting the back four and looking for goals. Given the 
central midfield role he craves because of Cazorla’s injury, Ramsey was 
highlighted for praise by Ian Wright on Match of the Day but, in truth, his 
display was mixed.

There was the lovely assist for the goal by Giroud at the right end, plus his 
own late finish, but there were a couple of misses and some heavy touches and 
loose passes. It was only Ramsey’s second start since a five week lay-off with 
hamstring trouble and fitness-wise he remains, in his own words, “a bit short”.

“It’s a bit easier at home because we have the majority of the ball, and 
[Mathieu] Flamini normally stays behind, so we have that bit of licence,” 
Ramsey added. “But against Olympiakos, I will have to be a bit more 
professional in the way we manage the game.”

Allardyce felt it was the “best performance” of his seven-game reign and 
Sunderland will stay up if they continue to play like this – defensively sound 
and smart in their approach work. The only problem was the profligacy.

“You can’t coach finishers,” Allardyce said. “All those coaches who say they 
coach finishers are lying. It’s instinctive. Our natural finisher is Jermain 
Defoe. Perhaps, if he hadn’t been injured today, he would have got two or 
three. He will be back next weekend.”

Man of the Match

Mesut Özil (Arsenal)
 