
Aaron Ramsey senses Arsenal’s convincing victory over Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/04/arsenal-manchester-united-premier-league-match-report>
 has given them the belief they can go on and win the Premier League title, and 
the midfielder also expressed confidence his form in front of goal will improve 
now he has scored his first of the season.

The Welshman had gone 20 appearances for club and country without scoring, a 
run going back toArsenal’s 3-1 victory over Hull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/04/hull-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
 at the start of May and it was starting to play on his mind, but he ended that 
drought with the opening goal in Wales’comfortable 2-0 victory over Andorra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/oct/13/wales-andorra-euro-2016-qualifier>
 on Tuesday in the final European Championship qualifier.

It was Ramsey’s 10th goal for his country, on a night when Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> celebrated reaching their first 
major tournament since 1958, and the 24-year-old hopes it will pave the way for 
a few more at club level as he seeks to recapture the threat he posed at the 
start of the season before last.

Aaron Ramsey: ‘I was just a baby when I came to Arsenal. I’m a man now’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jul/24/aaron-ramsey-arsenal-wales-interview>
“I have been wanting to reach that mark for a few games and to finally achieve 
that, to get into double figures, is a great personal achievement but hopefully 
there are more to come,” Ramsey said. “I’ve been wanting it now for a few games 
forArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> as well. I have 
struggled a bit at the beginning of the season with goals, it has been pretty 
frustrating on that front, but hopefully now that will settle me down and I can 
carry on throughout the season.”

After being part of a Wales team who have created history, Ramsey is hopeful 
this season could turn into a special one for him. As well as looking forward 
to the finals in France, Ramsey pointed to the fact Arsenal are second in the 
table and said he is “very optimistic” they can enjoy success, in particular on 
the back of the 3-0 win against United when Louis van Gaal’s side were blown 
away in a stunning opening 20 minutes.

Ramsey said: “We owed them from a few years ago and the way we started the 
game was fantastic, and hopefully we can continue that now and carry on to beat 
the bigger teams and carry on our form against the other teams.”

Arsenal are at Watford on Saturday before hosting Bayern Munich on Tuesday in 
the Champions League in a game where there is no margin for error after losing 
their opening two group matches, againstDinamo Zagreb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/16/dinamo-zagreb-arsenal-champions-league-match-report>
 andOlympiakos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/29/arsenal-olympiakos-champions-league-match-report>
. “It is a must-win game,” Ramsey said. “We have to take the game to them and 
hopefully achieve that.”

With a smile on his face, Ramsey admitted it will make a refreshing change to 
return to the Arsenal dressing room as an international who will be going to a 
major tournament, rather than waving everyone off next summer. “I will be 
learning a few [phrases] from the French boys to take with me to France to get 
me by,” said the former Cardiff trainee.

“There will be a bit of banter between us. And who knows what can happen over 
there. I will go back and be proud and with my head held high – we are going to 
France. It is going to be a great occasion when we finally go there. We have 
been wanting this for so long as a nation and to finally achieve that and make 
history – I am so proud of that.”

It has been quite a journey for Wales and Ramsey has experienced his own highs 
and lows along the way. Gary Speedmade him the youngest Wales captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/mar/25/aaron-ramsey-wales-captain>, 
aged 20 years and 90 days, but Chris Colemantook the armband off him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/oct/05/aaron-ramsey-loses-wales-captaincy>
 19 months later, after a 6-1 defeat in Serbia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2012/sep/11/wales-serbia-world-cup-qualifier-report>
, and appointed Ashley Williams instead. Coleman said earlier this week it was 
a decision that “could have gone horribly wrong” and went on to say that “a 
lesser man than Aaron might have spat his dummy out and not performed”.

While Ramsey said it never crossed his mind to behave in that way, he added he 
hopes to get the captaincy back. “There was no point in throwing my toys. As 
soon as he made his decision, he made his decision, and I had to accept he is 
the manager. I just had to get my head down and work hard, and you know maybe I 
will get it back one day. I will be proud to do that.”
 