
Autumn bloom for May's secret love

Brian May's interest in astronomy is, by now, almost as widely recognised as 
his career as guitarist inQueen <http://www.queenonline.com/>. Less well known, 
though, is May's obsession with early photography. The rock star is a 
particular fan and a collector of the work of TR Williams, who pioneered the 
art in the 1850s. May regards Williams as "the master" of thedaguerreotype 
<http://www.rleggat.com/photohistory/history/daguerro.htm>. A society 
photographer, he had a portrait studio in London, but it is his pictures of 
village life that really intrigued May.

Working with the photo historian Elena Vidal, May has now painstakingly put 
together a book,A Village Lost and Found 
<http://www.franceslincoln.com/Book/6833/0/A%20Village%20Lost%20and%20Found>, 
about Williams's mysterious picture series Scenes in Our Village. The series is 
made up of rare stereoscopic images, best looked at through a special viewer. 
Each have a verse inscribed on the back and were thought to show rural 
Berkshire life – but no one knew exactly where they were taken. After 30 years 
of on/off detective work,May is convinced he has solved the riddle.  
<http://www.brianmay.com/whatsnew.html>Williams's photos, he reveals, were 
taken in Hinton Waldrist, which is now in Oxfordshire, but was then in 
Berkshire. The guitarist's first trip to check out the location out was "a Holy 
Grail moment", he says. "I found myself standing looking in wonder at the very 
church which had haunted me for so many years." May has since discovered that 
Williams was married in the church.

The book, published by Frances Lincoln, is out next month (22 October) in 
hardback and comes witha stereoscopic viewer designed by May 
<http://www.prw.com/subscriber/newscat2.html?cat=1&channel=340&id=1253006747>.

Holy duel

As Susan Boyle squares up to Robbie Williams 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2009/sep/20/robbie-williams-susan-boyle-christmas>
 in the battle for pre-eminence in the Christmas album chart, two even less 
likely adversaries are also to take on the festive music market.The Priests 
<http://www.thepriests.com/us/forum/viewthread/53242/>, a trio of parish 
priests from Northern Ireland, will be in a respectful face-off with Pope 
Benedict XVI, who isbringing out an album, Alma Mater, with Universal's Geffen 
Records 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/jul/30/pope-record-release-alma-mater>. 

His holiness will be singing a Marian prayer and speaking Lauretan litanies in 
different languages, accompanied by eight original pieces of modern classical 
music. The Priests,brothers Eugene and Martin O'Hagan and their schoolfriend 
David Delargy 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t7HoZGjle88&feature=player_embedded#t=15>, will 
be following up last year's successful debut album with Sony Music, which sold 
close to two million.

Harmony, their second coming, is due out in November, just like the Pope's 
album. Universal are hoping to get cameras into the Vatican for their launch, 
while the Priests, photographed last time by David Bailey, have been shot by 
Snowdon for the new cover.

Kevin turns on the tap

On Thursday Kevin Spacey, artistic director of the Old Vic Theatre, bounded up 
on to his own stage in jeans and smart jacket to hand out some big cheques to 
the six young winners of a scheme he is backing to launch new arts projects. 
The money comes fromIdeasTap <http://www.ideastap.com/Login.aspx> Ideas Fund, 
bankrolled by the millionaire Peter de Haan, and is aimed at launching and 
showcasing creative talent. The star of stage and screen appeared genuinely 
excited about the winning schemes and even announced an extra £2,000 "Kevin 
Spacey prize" for Alan Ramsay, who is working with refugees in the poorest 
areas of Newcastle to help them express themselves through animation.

"What is unique about this is that funding should go directly to young and 
talented individuals rather than to third-party organisations," said Spacey.
Follow the scheme on Twitter if you fancy. <http://twitter.com/ideastap>
 Money, cash, hoes ... Wire statue of a gardener by Derek Kinsett in the 
grounds of Newstead Abbey Photograph: Public Domain 
Man on Wire

Not all modern British sculpture sets out to shock. An intriguing set of 
unpretentious statues of gardeners, fashioned in wire by the sculptorDerek 
Kinzett <http://www.wire-magic.co.uk/g_derekkinzett.html>, went up in the 
grounds of Newstead Abbey today, markingNottingham's seasonal celebration of 
flowers and craft skills <http://www.mynottingham.gov.uk/seasonalcelebration> 
in the abbey grounds this weekend.

A plinth among men

Antony Gormley's One & Other <http://www.oneandother.co.uk/> fourth plinth 
project in Trafalgar Square is now nearing completion. We are 80 days through 
the 100 days of hourly plinth stints.
Chit chat among those, like me 
<http://www.oneandother.co.uk/participants/Vanessa_T>, who did their best with 
their own randomly allotted 60 minutes of notoriety, is that all plinthers who 
have taken part should turn up in the square for a party to celebrate the final 
moments of Gormley's eccentric and ecletic experiment.
 