
Fog of Waugh 

There is more than one infamous, fake Bruno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/17/bruno-review-sacha-baron-cohen>. 
Sacha Baron Cohen, someone got there first and in similar style. In the summer 
of 1929, 80 years ago, a smart invitation dropped on the desks of London's art 
critics and columnists. Sent from a well-to-do Westminster address, it let 
recipients know of a rare chance to view "Pictures and Sculptures by Bruno 
Hat". Many turned up and were impressed, not least Margot Asquith and Lytton 
Strachey. But the show was a handsome hoax put up by the posh Bright Young 
Things of that generation, including brewery heir Bryan Guinness, Tom Driberg 
and Evelyn Waugh, who had written a spoof introduction to a catalogue for the 
show. The part of Bruno Hat himself, who sat in a corner behind a false 
moustache mumbling in mittel-European throughout, was played by Tom Mitford, 
brother of the aristocratic set of sisters.

This Thursday night (July 9) in Leeds the public gets the chance to see one of 
the key pictures from this notorious fake exhibition in a show called British 
Surrealism in Context, put together with many works loaned by the leading 
surrealist collector, Jeffrey Sherwin.

The full text of Evelyn Waugh's spoof catalogue introduction is on display too 
for the first time. "I traced the only copy to an obscure archive," Sherwin 
tells me.

The hurriedly concocted art was mainly modernist pastiches of Braque and 
Picasso. The Adoration of the Magi, for example, depicts three stick men 
shapes, one of them with three heads, paying homage to before a cardboard 
cutout Mary. The picture, on show inLeeds Art Gallery 
<http://www.leeds.gov.uk./artgallery>, was widely reproduced in newspaper 
reports of the day.

In space no one can hear you ...

By now most have noticed it's the 40th anniversary of the moon landings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/apollo-11-moon-landing>. After a 
succession television documentaries, books andessays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/jun/21/apollo-fallen-dream>, it is 
about as unavoidable as that glowing white ball in the night sky, whatever that 
is. But the event is to be marked in a genuinely new way next month. The North 
London director and choreographer Andrew Dawson, fondly admired for his hit 
West End mime interpretation of Gerry Anderson's Thunderbirds and recently 
acclaimed for his work on the John Adams' opera,Doctor Atomic 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uYiokai3FW4>, will re-enact the landings in 
mime at The Kennedy Center in Washington DC. His physical theatre piece,Space 
Panorama <http://www.andrewdawson.info/space_panorama.html>, created in 1989, 
is to be performed as a special tribute.

"I am there to perform a small piece of theatre with a really big story," 
Dawson explains. "I am going to present the entire Apollo 11 landing on the 
moon with my hands using a table for a stage."

Using a narrator and Shostakovich's 10th Symphony as a score, Dawson will 
recreate the Apollo mission twice at the Center's Terrace Theater on Saturday, 
July 18 
<http://www.kennedy-center.org/calendar/?fuseaction=showEvent&event=RJXEB>.

Culture, egg and chips

Little Chef is not a place you would think of going to view art. Or even a 
place you would think of going for a plate of food. But management at the chain 
of restaurants urges you think again (and not just becauseHeston Blumenthal 
masterminded the menu at the Popham branch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2008/nov/28/heston-blumenthal-little-chef-menu>
). The oil paintings of artistEdward Chell <http://www.edwardchell.com> are to 
be displayed in four Little Chef restaurants in Kent as part of the county's 
Open Exhibition this summer.

Chell's new work was inspired by a long, slow, summer drive down the M2: "The 
abundance of wildflowers with butterflies weaving between them and crickets 
whirring above the idling engines took me back to childhood memories of country 
lanes; a lost idyll," he explains.

"For me these present a fascinating paradox - the motorway network presents a 
nightmarish vision of the asphalting of our green and pleasant land, but these 
roadside habitats also amount to an unofficial national nature reserve.

"I want people to see them on their way to and from their cars and catch a 
glimpse, a fleeting vision of these places they might never have noticed, but 
which surround them on their motorway journeys."

Three of Chell's paintings from the series will be shown at the Turner 
Contemporary Project Space <http://www.turnercontemporary.org> in Margate, but 
Edward felt Little Chef would also be a fitting setting for his art.

The Little Chef exhibition â€“ inside restaurants in Dunkirk, near Canterbury; 
Whitstable East, Faversham and Detling, near Maidstone - coincides with the 
exhibition in Margate which runs until 6 September. Let me know if you think 
this is forward thinking or a mere gimmick.

Plinth off

Monday morning sees the first "plinthian" take up their position for an hour 
on Trafalgar Square's emptyfourth plinth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/fourth-plinth>. As a lucky lottery 
winner of Antony Gormley's One and Other project myself, I must face the same 
prospect eight days later. So far the run up to the launch has had at least one 
unintended consequence. Staff at the fancy dress shop and theatricalcostumiers 
Angels <http://www.fancydress.com>, on Shaftesbury Avenue, which I visited this 
week to suss out a potential wardrobe for my debut, told me they have been 
overwhelmed with calls from future plinthians requesting the hire of disguises 
and outfits. The most common request: a pigeon costume. Happily, this knocks 
this possibility, still popular with my colleagues, clean off the plinth once 
and for all. Still time to make a suggestion of your own.
 