
Boris: the cult

TV drama takes its first stab at Boris Johnson in More 4's When Boris Met Dave 
on Wednesday 7 October. The mayor of London may haveappeared as himself in 
Eastenders <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lj50YId7YQ4> last night, but an 
actor is to give a much more amusing approximation of the man in the playlets 
scattered throughout this new documentary.

The story has been put together with the help of Johnson's Oxford contemporary 
Toby Young, who also appears on screen doing a mysterious Gorbachev 
impersonation due to a large red scab on the top of his pate. The proceedings 
kick off with the sort of assertion that's building the reputations of both 
Cameron and Boris as political goliaths of the international scene before 
either of them have yet wielded much power nationally. These are, we are told, 
"the two most successful politicians of their generation". What about the 
current foreign secretary, David Milliband, who was at university with them? 
Or, going back a little, the late Benazir Bhutto, one of Johnson's predecessors 
on the debating floor of the Oxford Union? Didn't she lead quite a big country?

Art that got away

Just like sport, art is "done" by many people who don't think of themselves as 
artists. So what happens to their work? An exhibition that starts on 14 
October, to coincide with the Frieze art fair, will attempt to showcase art by 
those outside the mainstream who make things with a therapeutic motivation or 
because they are part of a folk tradition. The contention of the show,The 
Museum of Everything <http://www.museumofeverything.com/> (not to be confused 
with John Lloyd's Radio 4 entertainment show), is that such "secret" art is 
plundered by professionals and yet rarely seen by the public. Find this 
assorted work laid out in a quiet street in north London behind an unimposing 
black door. Work in the free exhibition has been selected by Jarvis Cocker and 
Nick Cave, among others, who explain their choices.

Pappano's pomp

This evening sees the Gramophone awards ceremony 
<http://www.gramophone.co.uk/award/classic-fm-gramophone-awards-artist-year-2009>
 celebrating the best of classical music and saluting, in particular, the 
talent of Essex-born Antonio Pappano. Aside from premiering his new production 
ofTristan and Isolde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/oct/01/tristan-und-isolde-review> at 
the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden, the maestro has had soaring success 
with his musical directorship of the Accademia Nazionale di Santa Cecilia, 
Italy's best known symphonic orchestra. Their recording ofMadame Butterfly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/mar/13/puccini-madama-butterfly>, made 
with Angela Gheorghiu in Rome's Auditorium Parco della Musica, is singled out 
for special praise. EMI had vowed not to record more opera, but changed its 
mind for this one. The orchestra, languishing in the lower orders last year, is 
now ranked by Classic FM magazine as one of the top 10 outfits in the world. 
The awards results will go up live on the Gramophone website and are published 
in the magazine on Saturday.

Hip-Hop Hurray

Veteran music pundit Paul Gambaccini told me last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/sep/20/robbie-williams-susan-boyle-christmas>
 that rock was dead, and that even hip-hop was in trouble. Speech Debelle might 
beg to differ after her win on Mercury prize night, but if being the subject of 
a major exhibition confirms the end of an era then Gambaccini was right. Urbis 
in Manchester launches its new showHome Grown: The Story of UK Hip-Hop 
<http://www.urbis.org.uk/page.asp?id=3340> on 15 October. The displays chart 
the emergence of the sound in this country with photos from the personal 
collections of stars such asDJ Milo of the Wild Bunch 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uQ2j2OV-6aM> and there is film footage from 
Malcolm McLaren's archive. Flyers, posters and clothing all recreate the moment 
when this street movement moved from the sidewalks of the US to our own rainy 
pavements.

Light-footed fun

While we are on the street ... a strange new game-cum-art event is to be 
unleashed on the world, or at least the north-east of England later this month.
Great Street Games 
<http://www.greatnorthrunculture.org/programme/programme-detail.aspx?projectId=60>
 is a virtual electronic open-air sport that has been designed so that 
participants in three places, Sunderland, Middlesbrough and Newcastle, can 
compete against each other. The game, which coincides withthe Great North Run 
<http://www.greatrun.org/>, uses projected light and thermal imaging technology 
to create a court in each location where movement triggers light effects. A 
ball of brightness can be manipulated by players for the 90-second duration of 
a game. The town or city with the most points will win.
 