
Bruiser turns poet

The young Alexander de Cadenet had a moment in the sun 18 years ago when he 
appeared on the youth telly show, The Word, as a prime example of Britain's 
finest public school product. Then nicknamed Bruiser, he was armed with bullish 
charm, a racing driver father and an It Girl sister Amanda (one of The Word's 
hosts), and quickly, if briefly, became a notable public figure. Scroll down a 
few years and hereappeared as an avant garde artist  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/1999/nov/14/vanessathorpe.theobserver>exhibiting a
series of X-rayed celebrity skulls 
<http://www.decadenetworld.com/skulpor19.html> in 1999. Ten years on and de 
Cadenet has now, equally unexpectedly, published a volume of poetry which he 
hopes will establish him as a different kind of talent again. Called The Muse, 
the work is self-published on the sitelulu.com <http://www.lulu.com/> and is a 
collection of 16 poemsillustrated by a selection of his photos 
<http://www.decadenetworld.com/index.html>. "Like a Matrioshka doll, each poem 
reveals another layer to the identity of the poet's Russian muse," the poet 
says.

Parsonage Power

The Brontë sisters <http://www.bronte.org.uk/>' turbo-charged assault on Jane 
Austen's established reign as the inspiration for 90% of all costume television 
and film drama continues. Not only was there an intense Peter Bowker production 
of Emily's Wuthering Heights screened on ITV last month,a film of their lives 
is to come <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0361416/> and, following on from the 
BBC Radio 4 reading of Charlotte's Villette, there is also a new novel out: 
Jude Morgan's The Taste of Sorrow, based on the life of the three sisters. The 
coming week will see the first in a series ofhigh-profile events at Haworth 
Parsonage <http://www.haworth-village.org.uk/brontes/parsonage/parsonage.asp>, 
where the trio lived, worked and then died young.Sam Taylor-Wood is exhibiting 
landscape photographs there 
<http://www.digyorkshire.com/EventListing.aspx?Event=45191> until November and 
next Saturday (19 September) that contemporary chronicler of hard times up 
north, Barbara Taylor Bradford, arrives to talk about her work and theirs at 
the Old Schoolroom in Haworth. The internationally bestselling novelist has 
returned as part of tour celebrating 30 years since the publication of her 
novel A Woman of Substance and the release of a new book, Breaking the Rules. 
Other Brontë events to come include readings by Sarah Waters and Tracy 
Chevalier.

Pink Floyd search

Have you got a copy of a missing early music video of "the Floyd"? In 1967 
film-maker and writer Stacy Marking, the mother of the feted director Havana 
Marking whose documentaryAfghan Star <http://www.afghanstardocumentary.com/> 
stormed the Sundance film festival this year, shot some 16mm film of the band 
titled Pink Floyd vs IT. The only copy of the silent footage, which Marking 
admits was much influenced by the work of Dick Lester on the Beatles' films 
Hard Day's Night and Help!, was thought to have gone up in flames in a fire in 
her studio in 1973. But the Markings have just heard that the film was 
described in a 1968 copy of the underground paper International Times after it 
played at a film festival in Manilla.

"It really involved a lot of them running about in single file, sometimes in 
silhouette, and the Floyd as good guys taking on some unseen monster/enemy, 
being chased or fighting back," remembers Marking. "This was one of the very 
first films to be tied to a record release. I suppose we thought it would be 
projected at clubs. The four wore black or at least very dark clothes, and we 
painted a whole street white. Most of it was filmed in an alley behind 
Tottenham Court Road where there was a long wall on one side, and I think a 
derelict site on the other. I wanted it painted white to exaggerate the 
contrast, so we all – including the Floyd members I think, anyway one or two of 
them, plus their agent Peter Jenner, Spike Hawkins and me - came along the day 
before with huge cans of white paint and we whitewashed the whole alley, 
pavement as well. When challenged by passersby we said it was part of the Keep 
Britain Clean campaign. Of course, with the subsequent tragedy of Syd Barrett, 
the film would have become a wonderful record of him in full flower and it 
terribly grieves me that that is gone." Get in touch if you have seen it.
 Falling Man by John Syndey Carter, displayed in Harold Martin Botanic Garden 
at Leicester University Photograph: unknown/Courtesy of University of Leicester 
Beauty and the beast

Two sculptures went up today in different parts of Britain inspired and 
inspiring wildly opposite moods. On Ullswater in the Lake District, a serene 
vision of silk and lace parasols tied together into 12-foot-tall round shapes 
has been floated atop the water. The installation, Fleur de Sel, can be seen 
from either side of the lake and by passengers on the regular steam boat 
service. The piece was originally created for the Venice Biennale last month by 
Cumbrian artists,Steve Messam <http://www.stevemessam.co.uk/> and Hannah 
Stewart, where it was the largest single installation.

A very different atmosphere indeed is conjured elsewhere today by sculptor 
John Sydney Carter <http://www.johnsydneycarter.com/main.html>, as his Falling 
Man 9/11, a work designed to commemorate the attacks eight years ago in New 
York, goes on display in the Harold Martin Botanic Garden at Leicester 
University. The forged steel man appears fused with the fabric of the 
collapsing building.

Carter explains: "I watched the television on that terrible day and witnessed 
people throwing themselves from the burning World Trade Tower. At the time all 
I could think of was the shock and horror of seeing those final moments as 
people fell to the ground to escape the flames.

"The image of falling people and the tower collapsing merged into one so that 
the figures became fragments of the building. Art is important and can 
translate feelings and visual images taken from the human subconscious and make 
them special."

The lovable Sam

No sooner are we approaching the end of a long bout of Darwin-mania brought on 
by the anniversary of his birth 200 years ago, than a thick cloud of Dr Johnson 
memorabilia descends upon us. To mark 300 years since the great lexicographer's 
birthhis home town of Lichfield <http://www.samueljohnsonbirthplace.org.uk/> is 
hosting a weekend of special events (from 18 September) with street performers, 
music and a spectacular free light show. Experts on the good Doctor will also 
converge on Oxford this Monday (13 September) to celebrate the tercentenary 
with an academic conference on his life and work. Held at Johnson's former 
college, Pembroke, it promises fresh revelations and the launch of a new 
biography from one of the speakers, Professor David Nokes of King's College 
London.

One of the college's original buildings will also be officially renamed the 
Samuel Johnson Building. It once served as the Master's Lodgings and is the 
place where Johnson spent happy hours with then Master, William Adams, during 
his short undergraduate career of only 13 months.
 