
Ray Davies, former lead singer of The Kinks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kinks>, is dismissing the idea he is 
London's leading romantic lyricist, though he tells me of the creative energy 
he feels after working with a choir from the part of the city where his career 
began.

Ahead of a run of summer concert performances with the Crouch End Festival 
Chorus <http://www.cefc.org.uk/>, Davies, who was 64 this month, says the 
varied characters of members of the choir remind him of the Londoners who 
inspired his early hits.

"The choir are the perfect people to sing many of my older Kinks songs, 
particularly Waterloo Sunset. It is as if my songs were written for them. They 
are drawn from many sectors of the community and have varied occupations. 
Before I wrote songs, I used to draw many characters similar to those in the 
choir. A great source of inspiration," he says.

His new album with the choir, The Choral Collection 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Kinks-Choral-Collection-Ray-Davies/dp/B001W6Q4BU>, 
covers Kinks' numbers now established as unofficial anthems to urban life. 
Davies, though, is wary of being regarded as the musical voice of London.

"There have been so many great London artist-writers, I am not sure I can be 
compared, least of all to William Blake, that is why I wanted one of his images 
on the front cover of this album. I never intended to be a London writer, but 
because I grew up in North London, it has inspired me all my life and I just 
had to write about what I saw around me. London is truly a magical and special 
city and there is always something new to write about."

As a young man he attended Hornsey Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> College and then started up Konk 
Studio with his band, then known as The Ray Davies Quartet. Many of their first 
gigs took place at the nearby Hornsey Town Hall. Tomorrow (Sat, June 27) he 
plays in the grander grounds of Kenwood House, also in north London.

Mendelssohn - the hitch

A BBC4 documentary Mendelssohn, The Nazis and Me 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00l7rg2>, going out tonight, explains why 
composer Felix Mendelssohn, who died 200 years ago, proved such a problem for 
the Nazis. Although the musical prodigy was baptised at the age of seven and 
later married the daughter of a Huguenot pastor, his Jewish ancestry resurfaced 
under The Third Reich.

While the regime allowed his music to be played at segregated Jewish cultural 
evenings, German piano teachers were banned from teaching his work and concert 
hall windows were sealed if it was performed so that the sound would not 
pollute the Aryan atmosphere outside. The real sticking point, though, turned 
out to be the popular Wedding March from his overture and incidental music for 
Midsummer Night's Dream. The march was a huge international hit, and 44 German 
composers tried to come up with a piece that would supplant it. Unsuccessfully.

Penguin picks up

The music of The Penguin Cafe Orchestra <http://www.penguincafe.com/>, beloved 
by students of the 1980s, and the basis of a stylish Royal Opera ballet too, 
will be heard live again at music festivals this summer following two packed 
gigs at the ICA a few days ago (both jammed with celebrities - Richard E Grant, 
for one - and many assorted musos).

Arthur Jeffes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/jun/12/penguin-cafe-orchestra-jeffes>, 
musician son of Simon Jeffes, the orchestra's founder who died suddenly in 
1997, has brought together a group of young musicians to create Music from the 
Penguin Cafe to play the music of his father along with some of his own 
compositions. The original orchestra is best known for the tune 'Telephone and 
Rubber Band', composed around the sound of an engaged and ringing telephone, or 
'Music for a Found Harmonium', used in the film Napoleon Dynamite. The new 
group plays Glastonbury's Acoustic Stage on Sunday andWOMAD <http://womad.org/> 
later in the summer.

Strong to the finish

The image of Popeye will be centre stage this summer. Not only is the American 
artistJeff Koons' Popeye Series 
<http://www.serpentinegallery.org/2008/06/jeff_koons_popeye_series2_july.html> 
taking over theSerpentine Gallery <http://www.serpentinegallery.org/> in London 
from July 2 to September 13, the original cartoon image of the well-developed 
sailorman is now out of copyright. E C Segar, the artist who created the 
spinach-loving character in 1929 (along with his love interest Olive Oyl and 
nemesis Bluto) died in 1938 and in the EU copyright holds for 70 years. In 
America the character is protected until 2024.

A London-based screen printing company 
<http://www.thecomicartwebsite.com/comicart.php?PHPSESSID=29165d7bd45e8763f9b39be9601500e1>
 is testing the water here with the first ever prints of the character. The new 
images include the first cartoon panels in which Popeye appeared. They show him 
being hired by Castor Oyl - Olive's brother - to sail to the Caribbean. Popeye 
arrives fully formed, complete with pipe, tattoos and sarcasm.

Bonusplinth

Earlier this month I revealed to the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jun/14/antony-gormley-plinth-trafalgar-square>
 that I had been lucky in Antony Gormley's ballot for a place on the empty 
fourth plinth in Trafalgar Square next month.

Since then most of the reader suggestions posted on the web as to what I 
should do up there for my hour of glory have been fairly supportive approaches 
from other "plinthers" telling me what they plan to do. One will be declaiming 
ancient poetry, one releasing balloons for charity and another is still 
grappling with a fear of heights. My own idea centre, at the moment, on the 
significance of the date: July 14th. What would you do with an hour on the 
podium?
 