
The Beaverbrook legacy

It hasn't been reported here, but an appeal panel in Canada ruled last week 
that 85 paintings donated by the late press baron, Lord Beaverbrook, can now 
stay inside agallery <http://www.beaverbrookartgallery.org/> in his native 
province of New Brunswick.

Since 2004 the Beaverbrook Foundation <http://www.beaverbrookfoundation.org/> 
in Britain has argued the impressive collection - which includes JMW Turner's 
£13m Fountain of Indolence and Lucian Freud's Hotel Bedroom, now worth an 
estimated £10m, were only ever sent out to Canada on loan. The UK Foundation 
was particularly keen to reclaim the two most famous paintings and offered 
£2.8m in compensation. The new appeal ruling has underlined a decision handed 
down in 2007 by a retired Supreme Court of Canada justice who conducted binding 
arbitration hearings, and so the foundation has finally issued a statement 
saying it accepts the verdict. Lord Beaverbrook made the donations five years 
before his death in 1964 and during the recent legal dispute, archive copies of 
the magnate's own paper, the Daily Express, were produced to show that 
Beaverbrook originally proclaimed the artworks a "gift from Lord Beaverbrook to 
the people of New Brunswick". Around £2.7m in costs for the original hearing 
will now have to be paid by the Foundation, controlled by the present-day 
Beaverbrook family. Further appeal costs are yet to be agreed.

A Hollywood take on Hendon

The New York Times critic said that the work of Mark Lewis 
<http://www.marklewisstudio.com/>, a London-based video artist from Canada, 
"aims to capture the omnipotent grandeur of Hollywood conventions", so it was 
with some surprise I noticed Lewis's new piece has the glamorous titleHendon FC 
<http://www.marklewisstudio.com/films2/Hendon_F_C.htm>. The five-and-a-half 
minute film, which receives its public world premiere at Brighton's Cinecity 
2009 in November, is a mesmeric look at the weed-infested and apparently 
desolate vestiges of Hendon's football club ground. As Lewis's footage goes on, 
the activities of the Romany families who now live on the abandoned terraces 
are slowly revealed. It's strangely compelling and melancholy.

Not big. Not nice

A small artistic movement known as necrorealism has always been controversial. 
It bubbled up in the Soviet Union in the early 1980s when, as the regime 
started to crack up, an underground group of artists in Leningrad, preoccupied 
with death, pathology and forensic science, repeatedly recreated a series of 
violent deaths using a crash test dummy and frequently filming their 
performances. Next month some of the movement's more accomplished workcomes to 
London's Orel Art UK gallery <http://www.orelart.com/rep2/index.php?lang=en> in 
the first show of its kind in Britain. Letter from the Island will bring 
together the disconcerting work of Serp, Evgeny Yufit and Vladimir Kustov.

Under that volcano

While we are on death, next Friday (25 September) the Bluecoat  
<http://www.thebluecoat.org.uk/>in Liverpool will be warming up, or chilling 
down, for the annual Mexican Day of the Dead on 1 November by remembering the 
work of the cult novelist Malcolm Lowry, whose most famous book,Under the 
Volcano <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/aug/08/ten-best-volcanoes>, is 
set on the day of the festival just before the outbreak of the second world 
war. Lowry was from Liverpool, but was no Beatle. This may well be why the 
Bluecoat has been drawn to the idea of shedding more light on such a murky 
literary talent. Their exhibition will celebrate the writer and his 
alcohol-sodden life with paintings and prints from South America and 
Merseyside. A newly commissioned film will also chart Lowry's time in New York, 
while another film installation looks at his journey to the foothills of the 
Mexican volcano that inspired his best known work.

Knit wits

Centenary celebrations are quite hard to make stand out from the crowd, but the
Poetry Society <http://www.poetrysociety.org.uk/> is having a bash this year. 
While a fairly conventional party at the London's Southbank Centre will mark
National Poetry Day <http://www.nationalpoetryday.co.uk/> on 8 October with 
performances from the poet laureate Carol Ann Duffy and John Hegley, the 
society will rather more unexpectedly also be unveiling, or perhaps unrolling,
the world's first giant knitted poem 
<http://www.poetrysociety.org.uk/content/knit/>. A thousand knitters have 
crafted the individual letters that are currently being linked together into 
40ft of woolly words.

• This article was amended on 22 September 2009. The original said that the 
initial ruling in the Beaverbrook art dispute was made by the Supreme Court of 
Canada. It also implied that costs had been awarded against the present Lord 
Beaverbrook as an individual. This has been corrected.
 