
A veiled truth

A play that questions dangerous assumptions about young Muslims is to launch 
the career of a young playwright this month. On 22 October the writer Atiha Sen 
Gupta,hailed this month by Kevin Spacey <http://www.life.com/image/91115650> as 
a new voice for the theatre, will see her first play,What Fatima Did 
<http://www.hampsteadtheatre.com/prod-productions_details.asp?PID=128>, staged 
at the Hampstead Theatre. Sen Gupta, who has also written for the television 
series Skins, is only 21 years old.

Her play, with a cast of seven, tells the story of Fatima Merchant, a 
strong-minded schoolgirl who unexpectedly decides to wear the veil on the eve 
of her 18th birthday.

"We need to be careful about assuming we know where Muslim girls are all 
coming from and what they want to say," Sen Gupta explained to me. She says she 
has set much of the play in the classroom of a school much like the 
comprehensive she attended in north London.

Sen Gupta, not a Muslim herself, wanted to write about changing attitudes in 
Britain since 11 September 2001. Her family has Indian and Sri Lankan roots and 
she noticed people treating her oddly. "Like many Asians, I felt the 
difference. People started calling me 'paki'. Suddenly if you looked Muslim, 
then you were Muslim. Some people started to wear the hijab, but it wasn't 
about covering up at all, it was about showing they were proud to be Muslim," 
says Sen Gupta.

Hey presto, a show

Stealing a march on Sen Gupta in showbusiness is Joe Shellard, a 17-year-old 
schoolboy magician 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7UwL1QB38xI&feature=player_embedded#> from 
Buckinghamshire who is mounting a one-night-only production of a new comedy,
Light of the Blue Moon <http://www.lightofthebluemoon.com/>, at the Albany 
Theatre <http://www.thealbany.org.uk/whatson_theatre_detail.php?ID=247> in 
Greenwich on 30 October. The show, which is billed as rich with illusion, is 
his first theatrical production and the award-winning Shellard is selling 
tickets byperforming magic at restaurant tables 
<http://www.lightofthebluemoon.com> throughout the capital. He says that 
"putting on a show whilst keeping up the day job" (at school) is the hardest 
bit of being, what is thought to be, the youngest person ever to produce a show 
for a London theatre.

The Cruickshank exemption

If too many people turn up to see the new art show Inhabitants, put on by two 
Royal College of Art graduates,Marenka Gabeler and Sarah Douglas 
<http://douglasgabelerinhabitants.wordpress.com>, they won't get in - for a 
while at least. The exhibition is being staged from October 16 inside the home 
of the architectural historian and television presenter Dan Cruickshank. The 
show, an installation of paintings, drawings and objects, is timed to coincide 
withZoo Art Fair <http://www.zooartenterprises.com/>, also staged near 
Cruickshank's Huguenot house in Spitalfields. This year the art fair takes 
place in an area known asthe liberty of Norton Folgate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/may/11/architecture.communities>
, an area steeped in history. Cruickshank himself also has a book coming out 
next month about the city's grubby past,The Secret History of Georgian London: 
How the wages of sin shaped the capital 
<http://www.randomhouse.ca/catalog/display.pperl?isbn=9781847945372>.

Star set on Oscar trajectory

Afghan Star <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/128969/afghan-star>, the 
film about a talent show in a conflict zone, goes on to greater glory, forcing 
audiences to think again about daily life in Kabul and beyond. The documentary, 
by British film-makerHavana Marking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/aug/23/havana-marking-afghanistan-election>
, earneddirecting and audience awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/11/film-culture-sundance-festival> 
at the Sundance film festival this year and has just won the Prix Italia in the 
general interest category. But the real headline this week is that it is to be 
the United Kingdom's official selection for the Foreign Language Film prize at 
the Academy awards.

Farewell, sweet plinth

The clock is finally ticking down the last few days of Antony Gormley's One & 
Other fourth plinth project. By 14 October, assorted types and stereotypes,me 
included 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2009/jul/21/fourth-plinth>, 
will have fretted and strutted through their hour on a surprising small 
platform above Trafalgar Square for 100 days. While the world slept, ate its 
breakfast and dozed in front of the television, there has been someone up there 
continually since 6 July. The valedictory evaluations of this odd succession of 
living statuesbegin now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/oct/09/fourth-plinth-one-and-other-gormley>
.
 