
Led and buried?

Organisers of the Ledbury Poetry Festival <http://www.poetry-festival.com/> in 
Herefordshire, which concludes tonight,promoted this year's bash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jun/27/event-preview-ledbury-poetry-festival>
 by carrying out a sort of survey conducted among its contributing poets and 
writers with eachselecting their least favourite word 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/jul/07/words-wince-hated-poets>
. Graham Bennett chose "cohesive" and Philip Wells chose "pulchritude", while 
Rhian Edwards picked the voguish youth compound "chillax".

But by the end of the festival all those involved are probably in agreement 
that "visa" is the most pernicious bit of vocabulary around. Leading guests at 
the festival, such as the Indonesian poet Dorothea Rosa Herliany, were 
prevented from attending because of the immigration requirements imposed by the 
new points-based system that hasstopped several other artists coming to Britain 
this year <http://www.manifestoclub.com/visitingartists>, including the Iranian 
director Abbas Kiarostami who was due to direct Mozart's Cosi Fan Tutte for the 
ENO at the Coliseum, and the virtuoso Russian pianist Grigory Sokolov,who was 
to have played at the Southbank Centre in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/feb/22/immigration-arts-gormley>.

Ledbury's Festival Director Chloe Garner said today: "I'm devastated, this is 
hugely embarrassing for the festival. These new regulations make it almost 
impossible to for us to programme international poets. I feel ashamed that the 
UK is effectively becoming a fortress."

Edwyn starts again

One of Scotland's cult heroes celebrates a welcome homecoming gig tonight. 
Edinburgh-bornEdwyn Collins, <http://www.edwyncollins.com/> the idiosyncratic 
former frontman of Orange Juice, will be back on stage again, performing atT in 
the Park <http://www.tinthepark.com/content/>, the Kinross-shire music festival.

Collins, who is performing in King Tut's Wah Wah Tent, alongside the Pet Shop 
Boys and the Manic Street Preachers, had influential hits in the 1980s, such as 
Rip it Up, but is probably best loved for his romantic solo track, A Girl Like 
You.

One Sunday four years ago, he collapsed in his London home with a brain 
haemorrhage. Five days later, doctors diagnosed another. Collins then spent six 
months in hospital and was scarcely able to speak or walk when he left, and yet 
tonight he has said he is looking forward to embarrassing his 19-year-old son 
from the festival stage. Hear him later in the summer atLatitude 
<http://www.latitudefestival.co.uk/home/> and Port Eliot 
<http://www.porteliotfestival.com/>.

One Banana More

Another welcome return this summer for those of a certain age is imminent. The 
release this September of the DVD release of theBanana Splits Adventure Hour 
<http://www.bananasplits.com/> children's programme is breathlessly awaited by 
at least me. A surreal magazine show that revolved around four furry animals, 
the suspiciously human-sized bubblegum rocksters, Fleegle, Bingo, Drooper and 
Snorky. (Names that are marginally easier to remember than the Seven Dwarves.)

Like Sesame Street, or the Harlem Globetrotters and Jackson Five animations, 
this show did much to introduce young viewers of that era to the byways of 
American culture. A swash-buckling segment featured the Three Musketeers and 
there was a taste of the Middle East too, with the colourful tales of the 
Arabian Knights. Interesting to see how images of mysterious robed potentates 
and things hidden in caves has shaped the imagination of the generation now in 
power.

Zowie Bowie's Moon unit

When David Bowie memorably fell to earth, little did he suspect his son would 
one day be making a journey the other way. The boy who was infamously born 
Zowie Bowie and is now known as Duncan Jones, hanging on to his father's 
real-life surname, has directed a debut feature film, a sci-fi outing called 
Moon, that is being hailed as an assured piece of work in America. With knowing 
references to Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey and to other space saga's such as 
Solaris, theWashington Times approves 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2009/jul/10/movie-review-moon/>: "Mr Jones 
proves .... that one can take the best of the past and put one's own stamp on 
it to create a very thoughtful work of art," its critic writes.

Jones himself has joked that one day his work will overshadow his father's 
achievements, saying: "One day people will say 'Oh yeah, Duncan Jones .. do you 
remember who his dad was?"

Statue of Limitations

Watching the 24-hour online coverage of Antony Gormley's band of plinthers 
<http://www.oneandother.co.uk/>, one of which I am about to become, it is clear 
some of my early plans will be compromised by the limitations of thefourth 
plinth <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/fourth-plinth>. You can't 
really take much up there because you have to go up in a little crane thing and 
it is not easy to communicate with those beneath you because of the large 
safety net that surrounds you. I am due to assume the position at 3pm on 
Tuesday, which is Bastille Day. The artist Grayson Perry has suggested that I 
take up a tricolor flag and try to recreate the famous revolutionary painting
Liberty Leading the People 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Liberty_Leading_the_People> by Eugene Delacroix. 
This could be tricky on my own. Yet if I do not rise to the challenge, I will 
probably not make it into film directorMike Figgis' documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/08/mike-figgis-makes-fourth-plinth-documentary>
 about the project.
 