
Shelter gets its own protection 

The shelter which kept the sea breezes away from TS Eliot while he penned 
passages of The Waste Land has received listed status from English Heritage. 
The structure on Nayland Rock promenade, on the edge of the sandy bay at 
Margate, Kent, has been given Grade II listed status by English Heritage this 
week.As reported in July, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/12/ts-eliot-margate-shrine> 
literary notables including Alan Bennett, the playwright, Andrew Motion, the 
former poet laureate, and Eliot's widow Valerie have all actively supported the 
campaign.

Eliot, whose recent appearance at the top of a poll as the nation's favourite 
poet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/oct/08/ts-eliot-nations-favourite-poet>
probably owes a lot to the popular potency of Andrew Lloyd Webber's music for 
Cats, spent three weeks in Margate recuperating after a mental breakdown in 
1921. He wrote to a friend about his regular visits to the shelter, while the 
poem reads: "On Margate Sands/ I can connect/ Nothing with nothing/ The broken 
fingernails of dirty hands/ My people humble people who expect/ Nothing."

Penguins cross the Mersey

More than 200 penguins <http://www.gopenguins.co.uk/site/> will flock on to 
the streets of Liverpool in the next few weeks. The 5ft fibreglass flightless 
birds will be installed in colonies across the city as part of an art event 
that's designed by organisers Wild in Art as a sequel to the successfulGo 
Superlambananas <http://www.gosuperlambananas.co.uk> component of last year's 
Capital of Culture programme. So far, more than 100 artists have been 
commissioned to invent new looks for the birds, with many schools about to be 
involved too.

Saddle up for the trail

From 20 October, Sadler's Wells <http://www.sadlerswells.com/>, the leading 
dance house in London, has, like a cinema, been trailing its forthcoming 
attractions on a large screen at its West End sister venue, thePeacock Theatre 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/page/visitor-peacock-theatre>. The idea of copying 
the movies' habit of showcasing future presentations to a captive audience is 
intended to give both faithful patrons and newcomers more confidence about 
booking ahead. The trailers showing so far include a promo for the family 
Christmas hit The Snowman and for Matthew Bourne's equally successful Swan 
Lake, which runs at Sadler's Wells. Not shows which have lacked publicity, but 
it will be interesting to see if sales for the lesser-known international 
production,Jump <http://www.sadlerswells.com/show/Jump-08>, are boosted by the 
experiment.

Setting the Goold standard

The two big theatrical premiere's last week, David Hare's The Power of Yes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/oct/07/power-of-yes-billington-review> 
at the National Theatre and the English National Opera's newRupert Goold 
production of Puccini's Turandot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2009/oct/12/turandot-rupert-goold>
 weredissected by the critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/oct/15/what-to-say-about-turandot> 
withequal relish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/oct/13/the-power-of-yes-reviews>. 
Hare's work probably came off best, although it was certainly not as 
adventurous as the Goold project. While Hare breathes some life into the 
economic crisis with a series of journalistic dialogues, Goold bravely sets 
Puccini's classic in a gaudy and gory Chinese restaurant. What both shows do 
share, though, is the modernist ruse of getting the writer up there on stage, 
or in the text, to interact with the protagonists. Anthony Calf plays Hare at 
the National while a mute Scott Handy plays "the writer" in Turandot.

Reel progress

The news, formally announced today amid governmental fanfare, that the South 
Bank will finally get itslonged-for, five screen Film Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/oct/15/gordon-brown-film-centre-funding>
, a replacement of sorts for the fabulous old Museum of the Moving Image, has 
caused great joy inside the British Film Institute and the UK Film Council, two 
organisations which are on the point ofagreeing a sensible merger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/20/bfi-uk-film-council-merger>. The 
BFI is an incredible repository of cinematic heritage and anything that brings 
itsarchives and collections of film memorabilia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jun/21/bfi-film-preservation-archive> 
closer to the public is a great idea.
 