
Another fine Messel

When the Oscar-nominated theatre designer Oliver Messel 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oliver_Messel> went to live in Barbados in 1965, 
he arranged with his pals Princess Margaret and Lord Snowden, married at the 
time, that a selection of his designs would go on show in the Old Chapel at 
Kensington Palace. After the influential designer's death the royal collection 
was stored in the V&A, who bought it from Snowdon and began to catalogue the 
pieces. Now I hear that, from September, Messel fans and all those curious 
about this celebrated talent, can visit a new exhibition of his lavish work at 
theRosehill Theatre <http://www.rosehilltheatre.co.uk/> in Cumbria. The show, 
marking the 50th anniversary of the theatre in Whitehaven, will be the largest 
of Messel's designs since 1983 and many items will be on view for the first 
time. "It not only offers a rare insight into Messel's working practices but 
also covers his career beyond the theatre, in film, interior design and 
architecture," says Keith Lodwick, V&A curator Theatre and Performance.

The theatre was chosen because in 1959 Messel designed its "rose red silk-line 
jewel box" of an interior on invitation from Rosehill's creator, Sir Nicholas 
Sekers. If you can't get to Cumbria then the Oliver Messel Suite in London's 
Dorchester Hotel will give you the opulent flavour of the man and, if you can 
wait a bit longer, the V&A is launching its Messel collection online soon.

Space to sound off

David Byrne gave one of the best concerts of the year so far  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5QlRsh5zNBk>at the Royal Festival Hall in 
April, but in a fortnight the former Talking Heads frontman is to go one 
bigger, if not one better, by actually "playing a venue" in a very literal 
sense. On August 7 the musician and general avant gardeist will be here to 
premiere his interactive sound installation,Playing the Building 
<http://www.roundhouse.org.uk/whats-on/productions/playing-the-building--3268>, 
at the Roundhouse in North London.

The circular, domed concert space will be converted into a giant musical 
instrument and members of the public will be invited to play. Crazy, 
Grammy-winning Dave will set an old pump organ will at the centre of the 
building attached to a series of cables and wires. The metal beams, pillars and 
pipes of Grade II listed Roundhouse will then"vibrate, resonate and oscillate". 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/may/12/david-byrne-london-roundhouse].>

"Typical parts of buildings can be used to produce interesting sounds. 
Everyone is familiar with the fact that if you rap on a metal column, for 
example, you will hear a ping or a clang, but I wondered if the pipes could be 
turned into giant flutes, and if a machine could make girders vibrate and 
produce tones," Byrne says.

His idea was presented last year to great acclaim at New York's Battery 
Maritime Building and before that at FÃ¤rgfabriken in Stockholm in 2005.

Bragg-time

Speaking to me last week in the run up to his BBC One films 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b00lvlbb/Imagine_Summer_2009_Art_in_Troubled_Times_A_New_Deal_for_Art/>
 about the state of culture in a time of economic crisis,Art in Troubled Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/19/bbc-archives-arts-recources-film-radio>
, Alan Yentob commented in passing on the demise of the Imagine arts strand's 
longer standing rival, ITV1'sThe South Bank Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/06/itv-the-south-bank-show-melvyn-bragg>
, and on the television future of its veteran host Melvyn Bragg. He was very 
sad, he said, about the programme going, but said that Bragg will be fine. He 
pointed out that Lord Bragg already works for BBC Radio 4, presenting In Our 
Time, and said he is already talking to Janice Hadlow, controller of BBC2, 
about other projects, although not necessarily to do with the arts. 
Interestingly, when Jay Hunt, controller of BBC1, was asked at a recent Soho 
lunch if Bragg would be coming to her channel, she rolled her eyes and said: 
"But who would tell Alan?"

A game old boy

Those frightened by the memory of former Thatcher hardman Norman Tebbit, fears 
perhaps underlined bySpitting Image's 
<http://images.google.com/imgres?imgurl=http://news.bbc.co.uk/olmedia/820000/images/_823945_spitting_image_tp300.jpg&imgrefurl=http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/823945.stm&usg=__aPW87DY2jcjPOZ3jVgJAk7tV0xs=&h=120&w=300&sz=15&hl=en&start=16&um=1&tbnid=CaQDWk00lVTTnM:&tbnh=46&tbnw=116&prev=/images%3Fq%3DNorman%2BTebbit%2Band%2BSpitting%2BImage%26hl%3Den%26client%3Dsafari%26rls%3Den-us%26sa%3DN%26um%3D1>
 portrayal of him as a biker withS&M tendencies 
<http://3.bp.blogspot.com/_t2Ry7I5DNuQ/Sfr2l__7JMI/AAAAAAAAD-E/xbBCkhRB1t0/s320/Norman+Tebbit+Spitting+Image.jpg>
, would be shocked to know that guests at his London home may well have found a 
carcass hanging from the shower curtain rail if they were called upon to visit 
the bathroom. The former cabinet member's explanation, though still a touch 
macabre, may help. It can be found on a page headed, Roast Haunch of Venison, 
in a new cook book from the former minister, titled The Game Cook: Recipes 
inspired by a conversation in my butcher's shop. "When I was a minister in 
Margaret Thatcher's Government, ministers were, from time to time, offered a 
haunch from the deer culled in the Royal Parks, an offer I could not bring 
myself to refuse even though the only place to hang it in our London home was 
the bathroom." The former MP for Chingford will be appearing today at The Game 
Fair at Belvoir Castle near Thatcher's old constituency of Grantham in 
Leicestershire.

Figgis on the horn

Not content with filming the fourth plinth in Trafalgar Square for the Sky 
Arts documentary, Mike Figgis, director of Leaving Las Vegas, went on the 
plinth as himself, although somewhat incognito, at 10am on Wednesday 22. He 
appeared as a stand-in for a 'no-show' and spent his hour playing the trumpet 
and reading out his favourite jokes, as well as doing some filming. The 
director is a friend of Antony Gormley and had joined the list of those who 
agreed to step in for volunteers who did not appear on time. So,unlike me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jul/19/thorpe-plinth-gormley-trafalgar>
, Figgis did not have to enter the online draw. Nor did he go up in awig and a 
dress like me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jul/15/fourth-plinth-one-and-other>
. There is still time for others to enter theAugust draw 
<https://www.oneandother.co.uk/competitors/new> for places on the plinth in 
September and October.
 