
Top drawer talent

Cartoonists and artists such as Posy Simmonds  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/gallery/2009/mar/31/posy-simmonds-cartoons>
andSteve Bell <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stevebell>, who have etched 
their names into history through the pages of the Guardian, are joing forces 
withQuentin Blake <http://www.quentinblake.com/>, Gerald Scarfe 
<http://www.geraldscarfe.com/> and Paula Rego 
<http://www.saatchi-gallery.co.uk/artists/paula_rego_about.htm> to mark an 
unconventional birthday this September for theCampaign for Drawing 
<http://www.campaignfordrawing.org>. 

Despite the fact they were launched in 2000, this September an exhibition and 
auction entitled Now we are 10 are to raise funds for the campaign, set up by 
the Guild of St George which was founded byJohn Ruskin 
<http://www.visitcumbria.com/ruskin.htm> and promotes his belief that drawing 
is a key to understanding and knowledge.

Leading works exhibited at the Idea Generation Gallery are to go under the 
hammer on September 17 and among them will be 12 banners created during the 
campaign's first nine years at the annual October event Big Draw. The 
Guardian's team of expert "drawers" contributed to the 2008 Battle of the 
Cartoonists and this year on September 12th they will be pitted once more 
against other newspaper cartoonists.

Taking the lake to the seaside

A simpler kind of 10th birthday this time. Keswick's Theatre by the Lake 
<http://www.theatrebythelake.co.uk/>, with claims to fame both as the venue 
with the best location in Britain and as the only producing theatre to be set 
up by lottery money (costing £6.25m, since you asked), is to mark 10 years of 
curtain-ups by taking two recent shows to the Stephen Joseph Theatre in 
Scarborough; David Harrower's acclaimedBlackbird 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/apr/02/theatre> and the play For All 
Time <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/aug/04/for-all-time-review> by 
Cumbrian-based writer, Rick Thomas, commissioned to write for the anniversary 
season.

Friends of the theatre have also raised £20,000 which will pay for Lisa Evans, 
who recently adapted Melvyn Bragg'sThe Maid of Buttermere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/mar/26/review-maid-of-buttermere> for 
the stage there, to work at the Cumbrian theatre as associated writer.

Evans is now researching a play based on the war years in Keswick and wants to 
hear from residents with memories of the war.Download her questionaire here. 
<http://www.theatrebythelake.com>

Another famous Victory 

When a professional salvage team came across the wreck of a once great 
fighting vessel in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/feb/01/hms-victory-wreck> the 
name of the artist Peter Monamy was briefly in the headlines. His painting of 
HMS Victory before it sunk with the loss of all hands in 1744 was the best 
known representation of the historic ship. This was not, of course, Nelson's 
flagship Victory, which is still safely anchored in dry dock in Portsmouth, but 
its ill-fated predecessor. Now an exhibition running at the St Barbe Museum and 
Art Gallery in Lymington,The Call of the Sea 
<http://www.stbarbe-museum.org.uk/exhibitions/Call-of-the-Sea>, celebrates the 
work of Monamy (1681-1749), who went from the humble role of sign painter to 
the status of one of the best known artists in the capital and was key to 
developing Britain's proud tradition of maritime art.

Desperately seeking romance

It's a costume drama perhaps closer to Blackadder than was initially billed, 
but BBC2'sDesperate Romantics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/a-date-with-desperate-romantics> 
does have some funny performances and a lampooning love of art history to 
recommend it, as well as a lot of young women of easel virtue.The latest episode
 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b00mb15m/Desperate_Romantics_Episode_5/> 
introduced us to the young Sir Edward Coley Burne-Jones(1833 - 1898), or Ned 
from Birmingham, and to his fellow student, William Morris. Their tutor was the 
congenitally naughty Gabriel Dante Rossetti and he heavily influences their 
view of art.

The Birmingham Museum and Art Gallery <http://www.bmag.org> has the largest 
collection of Burne-Jones in the world and also helped the BBC with images of 
several of the works for the TV series, including Valentine rescuing Sylvia 
from Proteus and Finding of the Saviour in the Temple by William Holman Hunt, 
Millias' The Blind Girl and the famous pencil drawing of Elizabeth Siddal: 
Study for Ophelia. Fans of the art and/or the TV show can see the art at the 
galler in the first British display of Burne-Jones' Perseus Series since they 
were bought by the Staatsgalerie in Stuttgart in 1971. In 1877 Burne Jones 
showed eight oil paintings in the series, including The Beguiling of Merlin, at 
the Grosvenor Gallery. He was taken up as a star of the new Aesthetic Movement.

Enron to go on and on

The much-applauded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jul/23/enron-review-by-michael-billington>
 new playEnron <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RAMh-F1O5Ag>, by young writer 
Lucy Prebble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jul/05/lucy-prebble-playwright-interview-enron>
, is gaining momentum for the tour that follows its Chichester run. The story 
of the bankrupting of the American energy company is being produced as part of 
Rupert Goold's Headlong Theatre season and is already being tentatively lined 
up, so I hear from backstage talk, for a run on Broadway after an outing in the 
West End.
 