
Some melodious plot

Keats believed "nothing ever becomes real till it is experienced". If that's 
true, then the chance to sit in the poet's own back garden should be seized by 
all next week. The reopening of Keats House in Hampstead's Keats Grove (what a 
coincidence) will be marked on 24 July with a picnic performance ofKeats in 
Hampstead <http://www.keatsinhampstead.com>. The play was first staged there to 
acclaim a few years ago, before the house was renovated. The modest show 
celebrates the poet's love for Fanny Brawne, who shared the house with him and 
others in the spring of 1819, and draws on his candid letters to Brawne and his 
resonant poetry. Playwright James Veitch tells me that you can sit beneath the 
very plum tree under which Keats didthe most famous bit of literary birdwatching
 <http://www.bartelby.org/126/40.html> of all time. After the show, guests can 
move inside to inspect the poet's refurbished home. Performances run until 9 
August.

Veitch is ahead of the poetic curve here, because Keats House museum 
<http://www.cityoflondon.gov.uk/Corporation/LGNL_Services/Leisure_and_culture/Museums_and_galleries/Keats_House/>
 is braced for the impact this autumn of Jane Campion's lush filmBright Star 
<http://www.brightstarthemovie.com/default.aspx>, with Ben Whishaw as Keats and 
Abbie Cornish as Brawne. The film, which had itspremiere in Cannes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/may/15/jane-campion-bright-star-cannes-film-festival-review>
, proves that "a thing of beauty" can sometimes be not quite enough, but it 
does feature a memorable performance from Paul Schneider as Keats's jealous pal 
and amanuensis Charles Brown, the man who set down his own recollection of the 
incident with the bird: "In the spring of 1819 a nightingale had built her nest 
near my house. One morning Keats took his chair from the breakfast table to the 
grass plot under a plum tree where he sat for two to three hours. When he came 
into the house, I perceived he had some scraps of paper in his hand and these 
he was quietly thrusting behind some books."

Hot lessons in love

Those hoping to hone their love-letter-writing skills to Keatsian standards 
can pick up tips from Viola Fort'sUntitled Books <http://www.untitledbooks.com/>
 at thePort Eliot festival 
<http://www.porteliotfestival.com/performers/untitled-books/> next weekend. 
Fort's website, which was set up a year ago, is a literary service and an 
online bookshop with editorial content from new and established writers. It's 
running a Literary Lonely Hearts Club for three days at the Cornish festival; 
the programme of readings and events is designed, in part, to bring potential 
lovers together. "No longer will smitten festivalgoers have to spend the next 
12 months wondering what might have been, and hoping that the object of their 
desire will be at next year's festival," promises Fort, undaunted by the 
suggestion that she is playing with fire.

Barack gets down to brass tacks

President Obama is now being used to sell everything from green politics to 
pizza, but the Hypnotic Brass Ensemble from Chicago have more reason to employ 
the gimmick than most. "I cannot get enough of these guys; they soothe the 
soul," Obama reportedly exclaimed recently. This Sunday, the nine-piece funk 
and jazz collective will be headliningThe Big Bish Bash 
<http://www.bishopauckland.org/event.asp?eventId=820>, the grandstand finale of 
Brass: Durham International festival in County Durham. The band started as a 
street ensemble before recording their first album five years ago. The horn 
section features eight sons of the inventiveKelan Phil Cohran 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phil_Cohran>. (Here he is playing his patented 
Frankiphone, or Space Harp 
<http://video.google.com/videosearch?client=safari&rls=en-us&q=Phil +Cohran&oe=>
.)

The plays what they wrote

Hot on the heels of the news that Eric Morecambe is to be celebrated in a 
one-man show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jun/28/eric-morecambe-edinburgh-play> 
at this year's Edinburgh festival comesfresh intelligence 
<http://www.broadcastnow.co.uk/news/commissioning/occupation-writer-pens-bbc1-morecambe-and-wise-biopic/5003646.article>
 of a planned BBC biopic about the double-act who once defined popular 
television entertainment. Transferring its successful comedy biopic formula 
from BBC4 to BBC1, the corporation has asked Peter Bowker, best known for 
Occupation and Blackpool, to write a 90-minute drama on the early years of 
Morecambe and Wise. Bowker regards the duo as "true British legends" and will 
not, it seems, be digging for dirt. "The comedy style at the time was very much 
about making gags to the audience, but Morecambe and Wise realised quite early 
on that they could be funny by talking to each other as well," he says. "I've 
written quite a lot of extremely dark scripts lately so it was incredibly 
refreshing to be writing some comedy for a change."

The plinth and the pauper 

I am adjusting to life as a commoner again after my short stint as a monarch, 
standing on top of an empty plinth in Trafalgar Square. It has been quite a 
comedown. Like 600 or so others by the end of this month,I was part 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2009/jul/15/fourth-plinth-one-and-other>
 of Antony Gormley's 100-day art project,One and Other 
<http://www.oneandother.co.uk/>. Thanks to all those who suggested ideas for my 
moment at the top, and who Twittered encouragement during my hour. Because it 
was Bastille Day and tea time, I dressed up as Marie Antoinette and gave out 
cakes. And, to spice it up, I also held revolutionary slogans from down the 
ages with an Observer billboard borrowed from my local newsagent.

Researching Marie Antoinette, I found the Observer's original report of her 
execution in front of the crowds in 1793: "After the head was displayed by the 
Executioner, three young women were observed dipping their handkerchiefs in the 
streaming blood of the deceased Queen." It seems I got off lightly.
 