
Still packing a Punch

This satirical drawing shows John Bull, the traditional symbol of Britain, 
being pulled by the nose into an Afghan pass. The intended lesson is clear: 
don't get into something when you can't see your way out. It's highly topical 
and yet was drawn by the leading Victorian cartoonist Sir John Tenniel for 
Punch magazine in 1878. It's on display until 30 October atLowell Libson Ltd 
<http://www.lowell-libson.com> in London as one of the highlights of An Autumn 
Selection of English Watercolours and Drawings.

"History always repeats itself," said Libson, a specialist in British work. 
"Even when Victorian imperialsim was at its height, people were worried about 
Britain being sucked into fighting in Afghanistan."

Tenniel's cartoon, Afghanistan - where are we now?, shows the then 
Conservative prime minister Benjamin Disraeli leading a reluctant Bull, which 
bears the face of Lord Stanley, the secretary of state for foreign affairs who 
opposed the British involvement in what was to become known as the "Second 
Afghan War".

A bit more teen spirit

Phil Redmond, the television writer and impresario behind the BBC's Grange 
Hill and Channel 4's Brookside,spoke out about the lack of programming for 
young teenagers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/sep/13/phil-redmond-television-children-teenagers>
 in this year's Royal Television Society lecture. He was worried that those 
commissioning new shows were fearful of tackling contentious issues and so were 
falling back on their duty. The internet, Redmond suggested, was now picking up 
the slack. Well, we are currently in the middle of an eight-week run of The 
Well, a drama created by the controversial children's writer Melvyn Burgess for 
network television and online viewing. It was launched simultaneously on BBC2 
andonline <http://www.bbc.co.uk/switch/thewell/>. What's more, a teen comedy 
about university freshers was also commissioned last month for a seven part 
series on BBC3 and BBC Switch, the corporation's new crossover platform. This 
show,Off the Hook 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b00mq3h3/Off_The_Hook_Episode_1/>, 
originally piloted as Fresh on BBC Switch. It is set on campus at Bankside 
University where a mismatched group get their first taste of independent life 
and the producers say it is the first comedy series to go from the internet on 
to network TV.

Notes and sketches

The head of Columbia Records, Mike Smith <http://mike-columbia.vox.com/>, has 
been to a few gigs in his time. He started out as a talent scout for MCA Music 
in 1988 and then, joining EMI in 1992, carried on scouting, signing Supergrass, 
the White Stripes, the Libertines and Gorillaz, among many others, before 
moving to Columbia. But he is also an undercover artist, who has sketched away 
through all of this formative experience and now hasan exhibition of fine art 
prints to prove it 
<http://www.richardgoodallgallery.com/blog/2009/07/mike-smith-exhibition-october-at-richard-goodall-gallery-high-street/>
, featuring Bob Dylan, Blur, Faithless, Elbow, Doves and Kasabian. Visit 
Artists and Repertoire at the Richard Goodall Gallery, Manchester. "I hope it 
may be coming down to London soon, if we find the right venue," Smith tells me.

Don't leave Old Durham Town just yet

Artichoke <http://www.artichoke.uk.com/>, the charity that brings you arts 
events that defy categorisation, such asThe Sultan's Elephant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/may/06/theatre1> and Antony Gormley's 
One and Other, is now to stageLumiere <http://www.artichoke.uk.com/lumiere.htm> 
at Durham, in partnership with Sky Arts. From 12 to 15 November the sinister 
Norman city will be illuminated with the work of artists from all over the 
world. The project is designed to make the city come alive with unexpected 
lighting effects and arresting noises andyou can tweet along 
<http://twitter.com/DurhamLumiere>.

Can you flirt and walk at the same time?

The National Portrait Gallery is famous for many things: from royal portraits 
dating back to the 15th century and to Sam Taylor-Wood and Julian Opie's 
studies of contemporary celebrities, to the restaurant with the view at the 
top. But it is now also the centre of a thriving"flirting and walking" 
<http://www.allureseminars.com/> subculture. This group meets in the foyer of 
the NPG off Trafalgar Square on Friday nights and offers its members the chance 
to arm themselves with cutting edge flirting techniques before they go on a 
90-minute tour of London packed with "hitherto unrecognised" information on the 
flirting potential of central London's art galleries and bookstores. There is, 
apparently, practical tuition and theoretical guidance from Cultural 
Anthropologist and Flirting Expert, Jean Smith. The tour, the organisers say, 
aims to prove it's possible to meet people outside pubs and clubs.
 