
Released from Dartmoor

The sinister Dartmoor and its prison feature in two odd artworks late this 
summer. Alongside artists Damien Hirst and Stella Vine, who have both pledged 
work for the third annualSpectrum Art auction <http://www.spectrumart.co.uk/>, 
Paul McGowan <http://www.paul-mcgowan.com/latest/> and a team of collaborators 
will be donating a grim centrepiece for the event, a fundraiser for people with 
autism and Asperger's syndrome.

The triptych began as a graffitied Victorian cell door inside the prison. The 
metal-plated door is covered with bleak and obscene messages and has inspired 
McGowan's triptych of panels. The artist, who hails from Emin's Margate, joined 
the Parachute Regiment after school before studying art, but even he is shaken 
by the work he has made.

"It's too disturbing," says McGowan. "And in the end, I didn't want it 
anywhere near my family. But for me it's become such a potent symbol of 
everything that's wrong with a culture that's losing its dignity and 
self-respect."

After the Spectrum Art auction, on 31 October at the Headland Hotel in 
Newquay, Cornwall, The Divinity of Monsters triptych, along with the original 
prison door, will be on display at the Eden Project as part of the Blockhead 
exhibition, examining the idea of incarceration.

The moor will appear again in a new piece by Richard Cork to go on display in 
early October atSpike Island <http://www.spikeisland.org.uk>, a huge gallery in 
Bristol. Cork's piece, A Day's Walk Across Dartmoor Following The Drift of the 
Clouds, will be shown next to the work of fellow Turner prize winner,Simon 
Starling 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/2005/dec/07/art.turnerprize2005>.

If you go down to the woods

While Richard Cork is bringing the outside world into the gallery, as the 
summer attempts to give a last kick in the air, other artists are determinedly 
outward bound. In the Lake District theForestry Commission 
<http://www.forestry.gov.uk/northwestengland> are suspending 20 giant 
photographs from the trees in Grizedale Forest from Tuesday next week. The 
Forest is the new host of the commission's first national touring art show, put 
together by artistMike Smallcombe <http://mikesmallcombe.com/>. His prints are 
on waterproof canvas, in case summer gives up completely, and are strung up on 
a pulley system. Smallcombe's images are a mythical approach to rural life, 
telling imagined stories.

Genetic breakdown

For a closer examination of the relationship between the natural world and art,
Kew Gardens 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2009/may/04/kew-gardens-queen-visit>
 is the place to go. An exhibition of botanical paintings from the Shirley 
Sherwood Collection, innovatively laid out in the latest evolutionary sequence 
revealed by DNA analysis. The show features 130 paintings from around the world 
and displays 50 orders of plants in 118 families. A specially commissioned 
painting of the Wollemi Pine, one of the oldest and rarest species, by Beverly 
Allan is a highlight. The tree was thought extinct until it was rediscovered in 
a gorge in Australia in 1994.

(All that detail about the show, without once mentioning Darwin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/science/charles-darwin>, who, naturally enough this 
year, inspired the show.)

The root of ginger

The genesis of one Edinburgh show in particular bears some analysis too. 
Gingers! The Musical 
<http://www.pleasance.co.uk/edinburgh/listings/musical_theatre/george_4>, aside 
from being yet another production with a title in that very popular 
formulation, has its origins in the photographic showRoot Ginger 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/gallery/2009/jan/24/ginger-redhead-exhibition-pictures>
. This springJenny Wicks' <http://www.jennywicksphotography.co.uk/> photos 
inspired the cast of RedheadandProud to write an Edinburgh show that premieres 
at George Square's George 4 venue.

Plinth guerilla

Although Antony Gormley is not overly keen on participants in his One and 
Other project in Trafalgar Square 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/artanddesign/fourth-plinth>making overtly political 
points during their hour on the fourth plinth, the anarcho-comedian Mark Thomas 
has orchestrated a balaclava-clad assault upon it in the name of getting MPs to 
face up to their abuse of the expenses system.My own Bastille Day plinth 
excursion <http://www.oneandother.co.uk/participants/day?day=2009-07-13> had 
mild political pretensions but Thomas, of course, has gone much further. In 
partnership with plinther Anna Carlson, a tree from Labour MPMargaret Moran 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/politics/margaret-moran>'s garden was liberated and 
taken up on to the plinth last week. If the member for Luton South failed to 
resign (over an allowance claimed for a second home neither near her 
constituency, nor the Commons) during Carlson's hour, the tree was to be 
chopped. Find out what happened below.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTwpoCSPRebE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTwpoCSPRebE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FTwpoCSPRebE%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=> 