
A "few strands" of the late Arthur C Clarke's hair are due to travel on Nasa's 
"first ever solar sail mission into deep space".

The craft will be named the Sunjammer, after the story written by Clarke in 
1964 about a race in space using solar sails. "The enormous disc of sail 
strained at its rigging, already filled with the wind that blew between the 
worlds," wrote the novelist almost 50 years ago. "The immense sail was taut, 
its mirror surface sparkling and glittering gloriously in the Sun … Something 
so huge, yet so frail, was hard for the mind to grasp. And it was harder still 
to realise that this fragile mirror could tow him free of Earth merely by the 
power of the sunlight it would trap."
 Impression of the Sunjammer in flight 
The voyage, scheduled to launch at the end of 2014, is being organised by 
Celestis <http://www.celestis.com/sunjammer.asp>, which runs "memorial 
spaceflights" offering families the chance to send cremated remains into space 
(joining Clarke on board the Sunjammer would cost upwards of £8,000). 
Development of the solar sail has been led by Nasa, along with aerospace 
companies including Celestis's parent companySpace Services Holdings 
<http://www.memorialspaceflights.com/popUps/charlesChafer.htm>.

Charles Chafer, chief executive of Space Services Holdings, said he first met 
Clarke in 1982 at the UN conference in Vienna on outer space. "I was/am a 
lifelong fan and attribute much of my interest in space to the movie 2001: A
Space <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Odyssey," said Chafer. "In 
2000, when we were first planning a solar sail mission to deep space we 
approached him about donating a hair sample containing his DNA for launch. A 
partner at the time journeyed to Sri Lanka to his home where he obtained the 
sample."

In a note accompanying the sample, said Chafer, Clarke wrote: "Here are a few 
strands, I would give you more but I don't have any to spare." The author died 
in 2008 at the age of 90, leaving behind more than 100 books ranging from 2001: 
A Space Odyssey toRendezvous with Rama 
<http://www.hitfix.com/motion-captured/morgan-freeman-discusses-why-he-keeps-trying-to-get-rendezvous-with-rama-made>
.

Clarke's deep space voyage next year follows the last journey of Hunter S 
Thompson, whose ashes were fired from a rocket across his Colorado farm. The 
late Iain Banks has also expressed a wish for some of his ashesto be fired from 
a rocket over the Forth 
<http://www.scotsman.com/edinburgh-evening-news/latest-news/iain-banks-ashes-to-be-fired-in-rocket-over-forth-1-2960912>
. So Clarke is not the first author to go beyond the bounds of Earth – 
although, with the Sunjammer set to journey three million kilometres towards 
the sun, he is likely to travel the furthest.
 