
Arthur Koestler <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthur-koestler> was a man 
of prodigious appetites. These he applied to everything he did, whether 
seducing women, writing about politics, or advocating crackpot scientific 
theories. He once described himself as the "Casanova of causes" and it's true 
that he embraced a staggering array of beliefs and crusades, ranging from the 
impressively enlightened (campaigning for euthanasia and against the death 
penalty) to the downright potty (believing, say, in the benefits of levitation).

Born in Hungary in 1905 to fitfully prosperous Jewish parents, Koestler was 
educated in Budapest and Vienna. Aged 20, he became a passionate Zionist and a 
few years later embraced communism, working undercover as an agent throughout 
the 1930s. He travelled frenetically and lived at one time or another in 13 
countries. Captured by Franco's forces while reporting the Spanish civil war in 
1937, he narrowly avoided being executed.

When the second world war broke out he was living in France. It was something 
of a miracle that he avoided Hitler's clutches, and he eventually escaped to 
Britain in 1940, where he established himself as an intellectual celebrity. He 
rubbed shoulders with everyone from George Orwell and Cyril Connolly to 
Jean-Paul Sartre and Timothy Leary, and he had a remarkably active sex life â€“ 
his several hundred conquests included Simone de Beauvoir.

Koestler didn't just lead an interesting life. He was also a hugely important 
writer. As with everything else about him, there was a certain inconsistency to 
his literary efforts. His oeuvre features works of communist propaganda as well 
as a couple of sex manuals. But at his best he was a masterful, clear-eyed 
chronicler of the world, someone who combined astonishing learning with a knack 
for simple, accessible exposition. What are probably his two best-known pieces 
of writing, his 1940 novelDarkness at Noon and his contribution to Richard 
Crossman's 1949 essay collection,The God That Failed, were both inspired by his 
painful renunciation of communism. These works, which remain wonderfully fresh 
today, were vitally important in helping persuade Europe's left-leaning 
intelligentsia of the iniquities of the Soviet system. Yet it is in many ways 
unfair that Koestler's name has become so indelibly associated with them, 
because it has led to others of his books - in particular his brilliant memoir 
of his time in a French internment camp,Scum of the Earth - being neglected.

Koestler has long been regarded as an intellectual titan, but it's also true 
that his reputation has sunk considerably. There are several reasons for this, 
some to do with changing fashions, others to do with Koestler himself. Today he 
cuts an oddly remote figure, someone who devoted his life to fighting battles 
whose importance it is hard for us to fathom. In our apolitical age, his 
ideological promiscuity looks more like posturing than what it really was, a 
desperate hankering after the truth.

At the same time, Koestler's reputation has been badly damaged by his own 
character flaws. There is the controversy surrounding his willingness to let 
his wife commit suicide with him, even though she was much younger than him and 
in good health. And there are the allegations that have surfaced concerning his 
mistreatment of women. Koestler was known to be a sexual bully; De Beauvoir 
described him as liking rough sex. But in a 1998 biography, David Cesarani 
added fuel to the fire by alleging that in the 1940s Koestler had raped Jill 
Craigie, wife of the Labour politician Michael Foot. Although some doubts 
remain about the allegation, the general consensus is that even if it wasn't 
true, it wouldn't have been entirely out of character.

Nothing, of course, can ever excuse sexual violence. But there's another, more 
complex question: to what extent do Koestler's wrongdoings detract from his 
other, genuinely impressive achievements? While acknowledging his appalling 
failings as a man, we also, surely, should not entirely blind ourselves 
completely to the many hugely interesting and important things that he did.
 