
There was something not just contradictory, but almost implausible about 
Arthur Penn <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/29/arthur-penn-obituary>
. In person, he was maybe the most amiable and engaging film director I have 
ever met. Agreed, the competition in that brotherhood is not intense. All too 
many movie directors are insufferable after half an hour. Arthur Penn was a 
gentleman, and a gentle man, kind, modest and naturally curious about other 
people. Indeed, he shared the joke and the mystery if one asked: how can a man 
so reasonable and charitable have such an astonishing, passionate awareness of 
violence? He smiled, and said he didn't know. I believed him, although I think 
he was troubled by the question.

When I say "violence" I don't just mean the prolonged orgasmic shoot-out at 
the end of Bonnie and Clyde, or the way that groundbreaking film had audiences 
laughing and cheering as slaughter occurred. I don't even mean the swift, 
breathtaking moment inThe Missouri Breaks 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N48pqpyyeHA> when Marlon Brando has his throat 
cut. Or even the fearsome massacre of the Native Americans inLittle Big Man 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LJRs2TnP9H8>. No, I mean The Miracle Worker. 
You may ask, isn't thatthe Helen Keller story 
<http://www.rnib.org.uk/aboutus/aboutsightloss/famous/Pages/helenkeller.aspx>, 
isn't that one of our classic stories of a benign teacher saving a 
disadvantaged child, isn't that a picture that makes you feel good? Isn't it 
about a miracle? All true, but the thing we call education turns on a savage 
struggle between the wild child, Helen, and her remorseless teacher,Annie 
Sullivan <http://www.lkwdpl.org/wihohio/sull-ann.htm>. The great battle in that 
film, where Annie gets Helen to fold her napkin 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EHwoRFe70jk>, deserves to be regarded as the 
most violent scene Penn ever filmed. You feel the absolute commitment of Anne 
Bancroft and Patty Duke, and you wouldn't be surprised to hear they needed to 
go to the hospital after the scene was filmed.

Of course, Bonnie and Clyde was Penn's "important" picture and a turning point 
in American movie history. It owed a lot to the script by David Newman and 
Robert Benton, and a great deal more to Warren Beatty who produced it and 
played Clyde and who hired Penn to direct. But no one but Penn could have so 
fused the 1930s and the 60s, and no one else could have made its search for sex 
and identity so dependent on violence.Bonnie and Clyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bonnie-and-clyde> is a very strange, 
delicately balanced picture, and it belonged finally to Arthur Penn.

He died on Tuesday, the day after his 88th birthday, and on the Wednesday 
morning a famous American newspaper called me for a quote. I talked to the 
person writing the obituary and I caught a hint that she was somehow surprised 
at being asked to do the obituary â€“ and to make it long. "Is he that 
important," she asked. So I inquired as to how many of Penn's films she had 
seen. Well, none, she said. That is what we have come to.

I can only say that he was a great director and an endearing man. Yes, he went 
off the boil in the last decades of his career. He never made a decent film 
after The Missouri Breaks. But even for those of you who knew and treasured 
Bonnie and Clyde and The Miracle Worker, let me urge you to catch up withMickey 
One 
<http://www.sonypictures.com/homevideo/columbiaclassics/the-films/film.php?catalogid=13227&sphesku_index=0&upc=043396355064>
 andNight Moves <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ojlsNs91Dfw>.

Yes, Arthur Penn <https://www.theguardian.com/film/arthur-penn> was important, 
especially if you'd seen the movies. And if you saw Bonnie and Clyde at the 
right time of your life, you were changed forever.
 