
Titty might be turning into Tatty 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/bbc-changes-name-of-swallows-and-amazons-character-from-titty-to-tatty-10344322.html>
 in the BBC’s forthcoming adaptation of Swallows and Amazons, but the publisher 
of Arthur Ransome’s classic children’s story has vowed that despite the 
apparent sensitivity of modern ears, it will never interfere with his original 
text.

The BBC is in the process of filming the latest adaptation of Ransome’s story, 
which follows the adventures of the Walker children – John, Susan, Titty and 
Roger – as they camp on an island in the middle of a lake one summer. The Radio 
Times revealed on Wednesday that the part of Titty, the second-youngest Walker 
sibling who fills the role of able seaman on board the Swallow, would be played 
byTeddie-Rose Malleson-Allen 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2015-06-24/gwendoline-christie-jessica-hynes-and-rafe-spall-start-filming-swallows-and-amazons-film>
, the half-sister of Lily Allen. It also surprised fans with the news that the 
character would be called Tatty.

I loved playing Titty in Swallows and Amazons. It’s what fans still call me | 
Letters from Sophie Neville
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/26/i-loved-playing-titty-in-swallows-and-amazons-its-what-fans-still-call-me>
This is not the first time the character’s name has been modified to avoid 
smirks: in a 1963 film adaptation,she became Kitty 
<http://explore.bfi.org.uk/4ce2b695cd584>. And book publishers have made 
similar adjustments to children’s books in recent years: Fanny in Enid Blyton’s 
The Faraway Tree is now Frannie, and cousin Dick is now cousin Rick, while 
Nobby in Five Go Off in a Caravan is now Ned.

But Charlotte Knight, who publishes the book at Vintage Classics, said this 
morning that she “wouldn’t consider changing Titty’s name because that is what
Arthur Ransome <https://www.theguardian.com/global/arthur-ransome> called her”, 
and “at Vintage Children’s Classics we always avoid interfering with the 
original text”.

“Titty is such a lovable character that once you get to know her, you really 
can’t imagine her being called anything else,” she said. “The enduring success 
of the Swallows and Amazons series is certainly to do with the sense of freedom 
and adventure they offer children, but it is also down to the brilliance and 
charm of Ransome’s characters: Titty and all the other Swallows and Amazons.”

Ransome based the character on one of the children he took sailing in the 
summer of 1928. One of them, Mavis Altounyan,was known as Titty 
<http://www.allthingsransome.net/literary/mavisgu.htm>, because she loved the 
story of Titty Mouse and Tatty Mouse.
 