
12 December 1986 – Arthur Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/miller> 
and his wife Inge Morath live in Roxbury, Connecticut, in a rural area 
populated by many people in the arts. I had been visiting Martha Clarke, the 
director and choreographer, who lives nearby in Sherman, Connecticut. She is a 
friend of mine and also of the Millers. On a brisk winter morning, the Millers 
met me at a dance studio where Martha was in rehearsal with a new theatre 
piece. I followed the Millers back to their home, a large, sprawling house on 
top of a knoll. Several years ago, there was a fire on the property and parts 
of the house had to be rebuilt. In the house are sculptures by Alexander Calder 
(and a Calder portrait of Miller) and drawings by Saul Steinberg, both friends 
of the Millers; Morath’s photographs, and various tables and cabinets built by 
Miller, who prides himself on the craftmanship of his carpentry. There was a 
chill in the air and Miller made a fire in the fireplace.


Mel Gussow: Do you ever think about what your legacy would be?


Arthur Miller: [Quickly] Some good parts for actors.


MG: Some good parts for actors?


AM: This is not said speciously. I look at the plays that I’ve done, that is 
those plays that continue to have their life, and if you look hard enough 
you’re going to find that they’ve got pretty good parts for actors. Now there 
are exceptions. But actors and directors have got to decide to do these plays. 
They’re not deciding because the play has quote great moral importance. Even
literaryimportance. They’re deciding because they’ve got a hell of an idea of 
how to do this part. Look at a play that never ceases to be done. With the long 
nose. What is that about? Does anybody really believe in that romance any more? 
But there’s a fantastic role there for a romantic type actor. When does he get 
a chance to do that? So one after another rises to his maturity and says, “I’m 
going to play that guy”. Similarly with Shakespeare, it would be interesting to 
find out which of the plays is done most, in terms of numbers of performances. 
I don’t know, but I would be inclined to think it would be the ones with the 
big interesting central parts.


I think Willy Loman is going to be around a long time because that’s a 
challenge. You can do it in a number of different ways. And it takes a big 
actor to do it. An actor of lesser capacity is going to fail. That production 
of View from the Bridge with Michael Gambon [which opened in February 1987 at 
the National Theatre]. Now, why is he doing it? It has to be that he looked at 
that and said, “Now I can do that the way no one else has done that”. If 
periodically people keep doing that, that means those plays will last.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Farthur-miller-conversations-with-miller-mel-gussow-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444149565943%2Fe454ec9e-6e2c-4573-bbc8-bb68f183b83b-2060x1846.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arthur%20Miller%3A%20'My%20legacy%3F%20Some%20good%20parts%20for%20actors'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Farthur-miller-conversations-with-miller-mel-gussow-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arthur%20Miller%3A%20%27My%20legacy%3F%20Some%20good%20parts%20for%20actors%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Farthur-miller-conversations-with-miller-mel-gussow-legacy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444149565943%2Fe454ec9e-6e2c-4573-bbc8-bb68f183b83b-2060x1846.jpeg>
 ‘You can do it in a number of different ways’ … Michael Gambon as Eddie 
Carbone and Susan Sylvester as Catherine in A View from the Bridge at the 
National Theatre, London, 1987. Photograph: Thompson Theatre Collection/Arena 
Pal 
MG: Do you want your epitaph to be: “He gave good parts to actors”?


AM: I wouldn’t mind! There are lesser things you can do with your life. I 
would hope that there would be more seen in them, that they are an image of 
some kind of the human circumstance. But I think that offering good parts goes 
with it. There are probably a lot of good parts in very inferior work, which 
don’t get done. I think there’s a limit to the truth of that statement, but I 
think you have to have that in order for the thing to live. And why not? After 
all, it’s an art where the actor is expressing himself as well as the author 
and the director.


MG: What that statement doesn’t do is distinguish you from other playwrights. 
Tennessee [Williams] could have said the same thing, and in fact it’s true. 
Obviously actresses will always want to play Blanche.


AM: There is another element, of course. I’m too modest to say what it is. My 
plays are dealing with essential dilemmas of what it means to be human. I would 
hope they are, anyway.


MG: There are cycles. You’re evidently going through a revival. Wherever you 
turn, you see yourself. There has to be a reason for that – not just good parts 
for actors.


AM: I wondered about that the other day and I wondered whether a point had 
come where these plays had detached themselves from their time. They’re now 
freewheeling.


MG: They’re out there in space somewhere?


AM: Yeah, they’re out there in space now. They’re what we call [laughs] 
artworks. I’ll never forget sitting in a theatre when Olivier directed The 
Crucible in the 60s. Inge and I were sitting there. Positively marvellous 
production. At the Old Vic, I guess it was. A woman in front of us turned to 
her companion at the intermission and said, “Didn’t this have something to do 
with what’s-his-name, that senator?” I thought, it’s like being born again. The 
point would come when nobody would remember McCarthy’s name. It’s like seeing 
Essex and Elizabeth in a play and saying, “Now what was that story again?” 
You’ve got to remember that this was Essex and Elizabeth in their time. That 
was the big shocker! That was the most important statement being made in 
England, and who the hell remembers it?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Farthur-miller-conversations-with-miller-mel-gussow-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444150175618%2Fee36c3e5-2767-4835-89ef-e610feb6011d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arthur%20Miller%3A%20'My%20legacy%3F%20Some%20good%20parts%20for%20actors'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Farthur-miller-conversations-with-miller-mel-gussow-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arthur%20Miller%3A%20%27My%20legacy%3F%20Some%20good%20parts%20for%20actors%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Farthur-miller-conversations-with-miller-mel-gussow-legacy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444150175618%2Fee36c3e5-2767-4835-89ef-e610feb6011d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Harriet Walter as Linda Loman and Antony Sher as Willy Loman in Death of a 
Salesman, Royal Shakespeare Theatre, Stratford-Upon-Avon, April 2015. 
Photograph: Tristram Kenton/for the Guardian 
***


MG: How long have you been in the theatre?


AM: Really I started writing plays in the 30s, but I didn’t get produced until 
the 40s. I’ve been obsessed with it all that time. That’s a long time to be 
obsessed with the same thing, but I can see why. You throw yourself at the 
mercy of actors.


MG: And also directors.


AM: And directors. And the weather.


MG: And then the critics.


AM: Critics are the least of it. I’ve never really been surprised by critics.


MG: What’s kept you going for so many years?


AM: An unanswered question. I don’t know. You get a vision of a form, which is 
almost like a building or a structure like a tree, and you are compelled to 
complete that form, to literally make it. Like that table in there, that 
dining-room table that I built. It’s not unlike it. You can envisage an object. 
If you have the technique or the talent, if you can think of it, you can make 
it.


MG: With a carpenter, at a certain point his tables get better and better. He 
knows more about what he is doing. In a sense, you started out with Death of a 
Salesman.


AM: It was about my 10th play.


MG: It was your third on Broadway and your second Broadway success. Success 
came early. Where’s the thrill once you’ve done it, once you’ve made a terrific 
table so early in your life?


AM: You’ve got different aims.


MG: Different woods?


AM: Same wood, different aims, to create a different truth. You can’t deal the 
same with a situation as in The Crucible or The Price or The American Clock or 
The Archbishop’s Ceiling or the way you deal with Death of a Salesman. I have 
to have a different tone of voice for a different subject. And one to me is as 
valid as the other.


MG: Aren’t you always competing with yourself?


AM: I’m not, in my own mind. I’m doing a different kind of work. The aim is 
different, the design is different, the sound is different. It’s an amazing new 
adventure. The idea of repeating the same thing would be suicide, although 
there have been some wonderful artists who have done just that. They’ve written 
the same thing again and again.


MG: Who are you thinking of?


AM: Look at Bach: I defy anybody but a real specialist to tell some of those 
things apart. That’s a powerful form – and he’s always filling it with high 
emotion. He invented so much of that form, and once it’s invented, it’s 
sufficient.


MG: Do you feel that about writers, too?


AM: There are others. Cheever, I think, was repeating a lot of stuff, but 
beautifully. You get stylists like Hemingway, with understatement. The same 
emotions are coming off the same page.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Farthur-miller-conversations-with-miller-mel-gussow-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444150258263%2Faaedc66a-72d0-46a8-9b61-71d337877dc2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arthur%20Miller%3A%20'My%20legacy%3F%20Some%20good%20parts%20for%20actors'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Farthur-miller-conversations-with-miller-mel-gussow-legacy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arthur%20Miller%3A%20%27My%20legacy%3F%20Some%20good%20parts%20for%20actors%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Farthur-miller-conversations-with-miller-mel-gussow-legacy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F6%2F1444150258263%2Faaedc66a-72d0-46a8-9b61-71d337877dc2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mark Strong in Ivo van Hove’s version of A View from the Bridge, which 
transfers to New York in October 2015. Photograph: Jan Versweyveld 
MG: Do you hear your voice through all the plays?


AM: Dimmer or louder, yeah. I think there’s one thing to be said about them: 
they’re unmistakably mine [Laughs]. For good or ill. And I’m happy about that. 
In other words, I didn’t work under such a cover of anonymity that my spirit is 
not in them. That’s one of the reasons I’ve written so few of them. I really 
have to be moved to do it. Just to sit down and fill up the pages – I wish 
sometimes I could do that. I’m convinced some very good work has been done that 
way. I think some of the Elizabethans did that, more than once. And they stole 
from one another.


MG: That isn’t how you work?


AM: We have different ideas. You know John Golden, who started producing at 
the turn of the century? I met him, in 1945 maybe. I had written [the novel] 
Focus, and he called me one day and asked if I would be interested in writing 
for the stage. He had an office on top of his theatre, the John GoldenTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>. He had a barber’s chair in an 
anteroom, where every morning a barber would come and shave him. On one wall, 
as big as this, there must be 500 plays. It says “John Golden’s Plays”. I saw 
this and I said, “I didn’t know you were a playwright”. He said, “The plays I 
produced.” I took one down and there it said, “John Golden’s Plays, Turn to the 
Right,” which was one of his big hits, and I look in vain for the author. He 
said, “You see what we do, we buy the play from the writer, and then we fool 
around with it. I do a little writing myself. And the director makes some 
changes and the actors throw in a few things here and there. We give the author 
$500. You fellas have a much harder job. Everything has to be new.” He says in 
those days – he’s talking primarily about pre-1920, “For example, if I had a 
show in which a woman put a candle in a window so that her long-lost son would 
see it and find his way home, there must have been 50 plays with a candle 
waiting for the son to come home.” I said, well what did the audience make of 
this and he says, “They liked it! It was familiar. They knew what the story was 
going to be.”


After finishing our conversation, we walked through the snow to his studio, a 
solid-looking, plain structure, hand-made by the playwright-carpenter. Inside, 
it was unadorned and filled with files, books and papers, a desk and a 
computer. Clearly it is a workroom in which he feels comfortable. On the wall 
were several paintings by his daughter Rebecca and a sign, given to him by 
Dustin Hoffman. It read “Boston. Providence. Route 1,” a reference to Willy 
Loman’s journey as a salesman. On the desk were four notebooks, filled with 
notes and scenes from his play in progress,The Ride Down Mt Morgan. All his 
plays sinceDeath of a Salesman had been written here. After showing me around, 
he opened the door to the terrace adjoining the studio and stepped outside. 
Facing the snow-filled vista, he seemed to luxuriate in the view and the brisk 
country air. He took a deep breath. Then, bringing everything down to basics, 
he said: “This is where I piss.”

 * This is an extract from the paperback edition of Conversations with Miller 
<https://www.nickhernbooks.co.uk/Book/1806/Conversations-with-Miller-Centenary-Edition.html>
 by Mel Gussow, published on 15 October by Nick Hern Books.












 