
Artist Alison Jackson <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/alison-jackson>
 has said that she chose to self-publish spoof photographs of Donald Trump as 
part of a protest against the potentially chilling effect a “litigious” 
president could have on artistic freedom.

The celebrity lookalike specialist said she was warned by her lawyers against 
publishing the images, some of which feature a Trump lookalike in compromising 
situations, and that no book publisher was prepared to release a collection of 
the Trump images.

Vanity Fair and the Mail Online have published some of the images. However, no 
publisher has shown some of the most politically sensitive pictures she has 
produced, including one in which a Trump character is depicted with members of 
the Ku Klux Klan and another where he is shown holding a rifle.


“It is a little frightening. Nobody wants to end up in litigation with the 
president. But I find it outrageous that artists should be under threat from a 
president in the US,” Jackson said.

 “I wanted to publish photos that I wanted to shoot but it’s very difficult to 
get other publishers to publish a work if they feel any type of threat or if 
they are worried in any shape or form. I don’t even think it’s a question of 
taste … It’s legal.”

Jackson self-published her book, Private, which was released at the end of 
October. Previously Penguin has published coffee table editions of her work 
featuring apparently intimate spoof pictures of the Royal family, Tony Blair 
and the Clintons as well as celebrities from the Beckhams to Kanye West.

According to newspaper analysis 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/politics/elections/2016/06/01/donald-trump-lawsuits-legal-battles/84995854/>
 during the election, Trump and his businesses had been involved in at least 
3,500 legal actions over the past three decades. Since his election, Trump has 
spoken warmly of British libel laws. His wife,Melania, is currently suing the 
Daily Mail and a blogger for $150m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/melania-trump-daily-mail-lawsuit>
(£119m) over allegations about her modelling career.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fartist-alison-jackson-self-publishes-spoof-trump-photos-despite-fear-of-being-sued%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde4c5d75f28faac52a975584214e05fe82422d81%2F0_46_3301_1981%2F3301.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Artist%20publishes%20spoof%20photos%20despite%20fear%20of%20being%20sued%20by%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fartist-alison-jackson-self-publishes-spoof-trump-photos-despite-fear-of-being-sued%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Artist%20publishes%20spoof%20photos%20despite%20fear%20of%20being%20sued%20by%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fartist-alison-jackson-self-publishes-spoof-trump-photos-despite-fear-of-being-sued%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde4c5d75f28faac52a975584214e05fe82422d81%2F0_46_3301_1981%2F3301.jpg>
 The picture of ‘Trump’ holding a rifle - one of the more politically sensitive 
pictures. Photograph: Alison Jackson 
Earlier this year, artist Illma Gore received thousands of death threats after 
her images of a naked Trump with a small penis went viral. The LA-based artist 
asked a London-based gallery to manage the sale of the painting but was
threatened with legal action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/17/nude-donald-trump-painting-illma-gore-lawsuits>
 from an anonymous filing under the Digital Millennium Copyright Act in the US 
if she sold the painting.

Jackson was outraged by the case, comparing Gore to Ai Weiwei, the Chinese 
dissident artist arrested atBeijing airport 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beijing_airport> in 2011 and held for 81 days 
without charge. “Of course I’m worried about being sued,” said Jackson. “It is 
horrifying to find out that you could be sued by a president,” she said. “But 
that is better that not being able to work.”

Some of Jackson’s images of Trump are explicit – one depicts the US 
president-elect having sex with Miss Mexico in the Oval Office. “If we start 
compromising artistic freedom, that’s not a happy place,” said Jackson. 
“Whether it’s artists or cartoonists or satirists, there has to be free and 
radical thinking. Without that we get into the realms of dictatorship.”



The British artist said she has never faced legal threats before. “This is a 
whole new arena,” she said, pointing out that increased scrutiny was part of 
being in the public domain. “Isn’t it unprecedented to think that a president 
would take legal action?”

As part of her preparations, Jackson staged a fake presidential cavalcade in 
New York with the fake Trump and scantily clad “first ladies” ahead of his 
election. The exercise quickly created a scene, she added.

Jackson said: “The ‘Trump’ in NY was extraordinary and I nearly didn’t do it 
at all as everyone was so frightened of what might happen.” Despite being 
stopped several times by the police, members of the public formed “flash mobs”, 
which meant that the police “ended up escorting us to the Trump Tower.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fartist-alison-jackson-self-publishes-spoof-trump-photos-despite-fear-of-being-sued%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94181d63610af6a09ba4cd1085e2eb72f8149ff1%2F0_320_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Artist%20publishes%20spoof%20photos%20despite%20fear%20of%20being%20sued%20by%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fartist-alison-jackson-self-publishes-spoof-trump-photos-despite-fear-of-being-sued%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Artist%20publishes%20spoof%20photos%20despite%20fear%20of%20being%20sued%20by%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fartist-alison-jackson-self-publishes-spoof-trump-photos-despite-fear-of-being-sued%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94181d63610af6a09ba4cd1085e2eb72f8149ff1%2F0_320_4800_2880%2F4800.jpg>
 ‘Donald Trump’ in the Oval Office. Photograph: Alison Jackson 
All kinds of artistic endeavour, from the cast of the Hamilton musical to 
Saturday Night Live 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/04/arts/television/saturday-night-live-and-trump-spar-once-again.html%20took%20to%20Twitter>
 have also come under fire from Trump directly. Most recently the Saturday 
Night Livesketch 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/04/arts/television/saturday-night-live-and-trump-spar-once-again.html%20took%20to%20Twitter>
 starring Alec Baldwin which imagined the president elect constantly tweeting 
unknown teenagers and possible bigots while in the middle of a security 
briefing provoked Trump who tweeted:
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Just tried watching Saturday Night Live - unwatchable! Totally biased, not 
funny and the Baldwin impersonation just can't get any worse. Sad
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/805278955150471168> December 4, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/805278955150471168> 
Forced to consider the threat of legal action by her lawyers, who have never 
given such warnings before, Jackson said she had to fight against 
self-censorship. “It makes you frightened, it makes you put the brakes on and 
that is very worrying.”

She admits that she will probably “think very carefully” about future work. “I 
don’t want to be sued and I really don’t want to be sued by the next US 
president.”
 