
Hi Joe and Jonny, can you tell me a bit about The Unit London?

The Unit London <http://theunitldn.com/> is an independent art gallery 
showcasing cutting-edge art from across the globe. It’s not a gallery in the 
traditional sense; The Unit London is a brand that believes everyone should be 
able to experience and enjoy exciting art from all around the world. As artists 
ourselves, we founded the gallery on the fundamental principle of talent and 
ability. In an industry so often governed by commercial viability, back stories 
and nepotism, we proudly stand by our commitment to only showcase work that we 
genuinely believe in and nothing else.

Why choose the name, The Unit London?

When we sat down a year ago with the idea to launch the gallery, we talked 
about it as a brand. We weren’t going to be Kennedy & Burt; we’ve never been 
interested in buying and dealing art. Instead we wanted to translate our 
passion into a brand that had a strong identity with which people could engage 
and connect. Building something that could make a change in the industry was, 
and is, the driving force behind what we do. We want it to demonstrate a 
culture of celebration, enjoyment and inclusivity.

The Unit London is a collective that brings together artists, collectors, 
first-timers and enthusiasts in a way that is indiscriminate and authentic. The 
“U” in our name is emblematic of our ethos of putting people at the heart of 
our gallery experience.

What’s wrong with the current gallery model then?

The problem for us was that the typical gallery still operates in an 
environment of exclusivity and elitism. The majority of galleries out there 
aren’t about incredible art; they’re about serving a market, ticking a box and 
doing what makes their investors happy. We’re fiercely independent and 
completely committed to our ambition of making sure the talented artists we 
show have a platform to be seen by the world.

We visit galleries all the time and still feel like we’re treading on 
eggshells. We walk out of feeling energised by the fact that what we’re doing 
is so different. So much work is overvalued and underwhelming – a lot of what 
we see out there just doesn’t excite or inspire us.

You’re both 24; is it unusual for gallery owners to be so young?

We hear that a lot: people often confuse us for gallery assistants and then 
seem shocked when they discover we’re the directors! Generally the art world is 
run by an older generation and younger gallerists often have family ties to the 
industry. We have no formal experience or education in art business so in that 
sense we are quite anomalous, but it gives us a fresh perspective, which is 
crucial. We’ve gone out and done things our own way without subscribing to any 
formula of how things should be done.

What defines this new generation of gallerists?

One thing we always hear from our artists, clients and fans of the gallery is 
that they love the passion we have for the business. Traditionally, artists 
enter galleries and their presence is static but we try to promote and showcase 
our artists in fresh ways, pursuing relatively unexplored channels like film 
and video marketing in a fashion not dissimilar to that in which the music and 
entertainment industry operates.

We have a duty to engage with new audiences and open the doors for the 
collectors of tomorrow. The advantage we have is that we know how they behave 
and what makes them tick.

Are you seeing younger collectors as well?

We have a whole spectrum of clients, from first-time buyers to seasoned 
collectors who buy from the big establishments. As a startup we had to build 
our client base organically from the ground up and as we’ve evolved over the 
past year we’ve begun to earn the trust of the serious collectors.

There’s a real appetite for buying contemporary art at the moment and younger 
people want to “get” what it’s all about. Perhaps in this digital age 
everything feels a bit numb and people want to feel cultured again, but more 
importantly they want to feel included, to be a part of something, which is 
what we offer. We recently had a teenage art student from Kuwait come to visit 
the gallery and purchase her first piece. She had a real appreciation for art 
having discovered us via Instagram. It’s testament to our use of social media 
and the connections it helps us build with a new generation of people.

You’ve said previously that you gambled with your launch marketing strategy – 
how so?

The use of video content and social media was something of a gamble because 
it’s new for the art world, but we saw that as a unique opportunity to unlock 
new territories in which to position and promote the gallery and our artists. 
We knew that if we created something with a clear identity, that stood for 
something tangible, we had a good chance.


Any tips or lessons from the digital marketing side of things?

Don’t overcomplicate it. Think carefully about who you are talking to and the 
context in which you deliver your message. Social media is an incredible 
marketing platform, but if the content isn’t relevant, convenient or 
interesting it will not be effective. The big mistake we see people make is 
that they create digital content for the sake of it without considering the 
context in which it’s going to be consumed or what its objective is going to be.

Also think about the basics: understand your audience and your goals, and keep 
your digital “personality” consistent and on-brand.

Social media marketing tips

• Facebook for venues and organisations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/feb/14/art-facebook-social-network-culture>
• Tumblr tips for arts organisations and museums 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jan/16/tumblr-tips-arts-social-media>
• How to use Instagram and Pinterest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/dec/11/how-to-instagram-pinterest-arts>
• Twitter tips and tricks for your arts organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/nov/28/twitter-tips-tricks-arts-dos-donts>

How do you view the gallery scene in London at the moment?

The advent of digital platforms has meant the functional purpose of the 
gallery space has become less important. 71% of collectorsbought a piece online 
in 2013 
<http://www.hiscoxgroup.com/~/media/Files/H/Hiscox/content-pdf/11433-Online-art-trade-report-v8.pdf>
 (pdf) and nearly a quarter of them spent over £20,000. That trend will 
continue to hold significance in the buying market and as a result galleries 
will have to reevaluate the role they play and what they can offer to clients 
and the wider public. Of course, theinternet is borderless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/dec/17/internet-fragmentation-eugene-kaspersky>
 and that’s opened up huge new markets to galleries.

More like this

• Create’s Hadrian Garrard on bringing art to everyday places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/sep/02/hadrian-garrard-create-east-london>
• Lighthouse Brighton’s new artistic director on the dark side of the web 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/05/juha-zelfde-lighthouse-brighton-arts>
• Edel Assanti on why the gallery is where the risks are taken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/nov/05/edel-assanti-gallery-art-risk>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 