
Hi Paul, what can you tell me about Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> Hippodrome?

Birmingham Hippodrome <http://www.birminghamhippodrome.com/> is a large scale 
receiving theatre that has been going for 115 years since its opening in 1899. 
It has nearly 1,900 seats and plays host to the top West End musicals, dance 
and opera.

We’re the home of Birmingham Royal Ballet, which plays for around nine weeks a 
year on our main stage. We’re also the English home of Welsh National Opera, 
which presents its entire repertoire here. Our resident partnersDanceXchange 
<http://www.dancexchange.org.uk/> take the lead in programming the Patrick 
Centre and since 2008 we’ve worked together to present the biennial
International Dance Festival Birmingham <http://www.idfb.co.uk/>, which takes 
place across the city.

The theatre is highly successful, with over 625,000 paid attendances last 
year: the highest since records began. Our mission is to provide the best 
possible theatre experience, which means not only what’s on stage but also the 
experience that audiences have when they arrive in the theatre foyers, bars and 
restaurants, as well as the experience that visiting companies have backstage. 
We want both audiences and touring companies to remember their time here – and 
to come back.

Birmingham Hippodrome is a registered charity: what are the implications of 
this on the work you do as director of creative programmes?

It means that the work I’m responsible for – creating special commissions, 
animating the building beyond the main stage and creating an exciting learning 
and community programme – is dependent on the financial success of the theatre. 
As well as maintaining reserves to realise the long-term ambitions of the 
charity, the theatre reinvests a significant amount of the surpluses it earns, 
alongside the proceeds of the fundraising it undertakes, intoHippodrome Plus 
<http://www.birminghamhippodrome.com/default.asp?id=462&sC=page35>, the name 
we’ve given to our programme for everything that happens beyond the main stage.

The work can only happen if the main stage programme is successful, which 
(fortunately) it is. Being in charge of our own catering, conferences and 
hospitality is beneficial both in terms of customer service and financial 
opportunity.

How do you keep the Hippodrome Plus programme fresh, creative and entertaining 
each year?

We start with the audience: who we want to reach this year, how people 
responded to programmes last time and the kinds of engagement we created. We 
also want to have some fun; the artistic personality of the theatre is about 
music, dance and entertainment. It’s important we embody that spirit.

Part of what we do, especially with schools and young people, is shaped by the 
main stage programme, which varies enormously year to year. This year we’ve had 
a large number of international dance shows. For example, in May we staged 
Matthew Bourne’sLord of the Flies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/17/matthew-bourne-dance-lord-of-the-flies>
, featuring 22 locally-recruited boys performing alongside the professional 
cast. It was an intense and rewarding experience for them and for the 
enthusiastic audiences who came to see young local performers surpass 
expectation.

The other inspiration is the range of different contexts and landscapes in 
which we create work. Next month we’re presenting world-class video art in 
collaboration withIkon Gallery <http://ikon-gallery.org/> in a range of spaces 
around the theatre, including car parks, a National Trust property and in our 
own foyers, while the visit of Wagner’s Ring Cycle from St Petersburg’s 
Mariinsky Opera gives us the chance to create a game to be played onthe streets 
of Birmingham 
<http://www.birminghamhippodrome.com/WhatsOn_focus.asp?showId=1817> (check out 
the mermaid in the fish market!). With such a varied canvas, it would be 
difficult not to be fresh and creative; artists always have interesting ideas 
for unlikely spaces.

You worked on the Cultural Olympiad: what were the big lessons from that which 
you’ve carried over into this role?

Audiences <https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/audiences>
 see arts activities differently when they’re linked to a major public 
celebration or moment. In 2012 we saw a much wider range of people attend 
events that they wouldn’t have considered without the link to the Games and the 
chance to be part of a nationwide conversation. The audiences who took part in 
2012 were also younger, more culturally diverse and from a broader social 
background than is the arts norm, fired up by a chance to be part of something 
bigger.

London 2012 also helped bridge the “credibility gap” with agencies and 
partners outside the arts. The partnerships we made with sports people, local 
authorities, retail, transport and universities have persisted. The trust and 
knowledge about what the arts sector can do – not just economically, though 
that does help – is there and it isn’t going away. We spent a lot of time at 
the end of 2012 documenting the impact of the Cultural Olympiad: socially, 
economically and in terms of audience makeup. People haven’t forgotten.

You’re working with Ikon on November’s About Town 
<http://www.birminghamhippodrome.com/whatson_focus.asp?showid=1865>, a video 
art exhibition. With this year’s Turner Prize featuring three video artists, 
are we seeing an increased appetite for this kind of work?

We alighted on video work for our autumn visual arts installation programme 
long before the Turner Prize shortlist was announced, but I was struck by the 
coincidence. As we’re not primarily a visual arts organisation, we wanted to 
present a contemporary visual arts programme of world standing, but we also 
wanted it to be accessible and engaging for all our audiences.

The video programme that the Ikon is curating for us exemplifies that desire 
to show work that audiences feel confident enough to approach, even if it’s in 
a draughty car park. They’ll be taken on a journey of discovery with video work 
by Gillian Wearing, Beat Streuli, Ivan Morison and Yang Zhenzhong among others. 
Some of the works are quite long and will demand time and focus, but people 
like that; they want to immerse themselves in work that rewards their 
investment. Video work seems to offer that.

Tell me about the Birmingham arts scene: is it in good health?

There’s a real vibrancy in the arts scene in Birmingham right now, despite the 
economic gloom, and that’s largely because the work organisations are creating 
is new and exciting. The digital work coming out of organisations likeSampad 
<http://www.sampad.org.uk/>, the sheer volume and range of the musical offer 
fromTown Hall Symphony Hall <http://www.thsh.co.uk/>, but also outfits such as 
Capsule <http://www.capsule.org.uk/> lend a sense of surprise and energy. The 
arrival of Roxana Silbert at theRep <http://www.birmingham-rep.co.uk/> has also 
reinforced its reputation for being a powerhouse of theatre-making of all types 
and scales.

What’s most exciting about all of this is the way in which the arts 
organisations are adjusting what they do and how they work to reflect the fact 
that Birmingham is the youngest city in Europe and the most culturally diverse 
outside London. There’s a sense in which Birmingham can be a lab for trying out 
all kinds of ideas before everyone else. Of course, there’s a risk to that; new 
things don’t always work first time, but the sense of experimentation and risk 
is thrilling.

Paul Kaynes is director of creative programmes at Birmingham Hippodrome 
<http://www.birminghamhippodrome.com/>, which you can follow on Twitter 
@brumhippodrome <https://twitter.com/BrumHippodrome>

More like this

• Stopgap Dance Company’s Lucy Bennett on diversity in dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/apr/08/stopgap-dance-company-disabled-artists>
• RAMM’s Camilla Hampshire on Exeter’s cultural scene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/mar/25/camilla-hampshire-ramm-museum-exeter>
• The Stables’ Monica Ferguson on overcoming MK’s punchline status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/mar/04/monica-ferguson-stables-milton-keynes-festival>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 