
Hi Lisa, what can you tell me about the engaging science department?

Engaging science is part of the culture and society division of the Wellcome 
Trust <http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/>, a global charitable foundation working to 
improve human and animal health. We fund projects and initiatives that enable 
people of all ages and from all walks of life to enjoy, understand, challenge 
and shape biomedical science and the humanities.

Over the next year, we will award around £15m in grants to organisations and 
individuals running such projects. We will also work in collaboration with them 
to share learning, improve practice and stimulate new ideas. There are 18 of us 
in the department, plus a roster of freelancers and project staff. We are from 
a variety of professional backgrounds: scientists, artists, teachers, doctors, 
project managers and museum professionals.

What do you look for in an engaging science application and why might one not 
be successful?

We’re looking for great ideas, driven by great teams or individuals. It always 
helps when an applicant clearly and powerfully articulates why they want to do 
a project and for whom, rather than simply describing what it is they will do. 
All engaging science grants require the applicants to have a scientific 
collaboration or collaborator in place, which is something we’ve seen getting 
stronger and more sophisticated over the past five years.

This is a very busy field with a lot of projects happening simultaneously. We 
hate to see projects reinvent the wheel by not referencing or building upon the 
work of others.

How do you pick projects that are both scientifically engaging and strong on 
the artistic side of things?

We don’t fund art to enhance engagement; the art is the engagement. Our Arts 
Awards 
<http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/Funding/Public-engagement/Funding-schemes/Arts-Awards/index.htm>
 seek to support projects with a strong artistic vision and a genuine 
collaboration between the artist and researchers or clinicians. Checking out an 
artist’s back catalogue and observing them in conversation with their 
collaborators is also very informative.

In a recent interview for a Large Arts Award (larger projects, above £30,000) 
Vicky Isley fromboredomresearch <http://www.boredomresearch.net/> and Dr Paddy 
Brock from the University of Glasgow demonstrated such a nuanced and 
sophisticated understanding of one another’s work, and such a keenness to know 
more that the panel were won over. They were brought together by Abigail 
Addison atAnimate Projects <http://www.animateprojects.org/> and if we could 
bottle and sell their matchmaking methods, we’d be on to a winner.

We look for projects where there is a mutual exploration of different but 
equally creative disciplines. The Wellcome Trust is an independent organisation 
that can act boldly and take greater risks than many others. Sometimes it 
really is the wildcards that pay off.

What’s the power in bringing science, culture and the arts together? 

It’s about purposeful entertainment, creative collaborations and fresh insight 
on both science and art. The oblique nature of an artwork can sometimes 
illuminate a deeply sensitive and difficult scientific topic. In the summer, I 
was lucky enough to seeKilling Roger 
<http://www.sparkleanddark.com/#!killing-roger-gallery/c1ijj>, a piece we 
funded by theatre and puppetry companySparkle and Dark 
<http://www.sparkleanddark.com/>. This intimate and intense exploration of the 
relationship between two men at opposite ends of their lives was one of the 
most powerful and memorable pieces of theatre I’ve seen – puppetry at its best.

Which projects have worked particularly well and why?

One of my favourite projects is the Mary Rose <http://www.maryrose.org/> at 
Portsmouth Historic Dockyard. Our funding for the display of human remains and 
the story of the barber surgeon, which included full body and head 
reconstructions of key members of the crew, was delivered to such a high 
standard and told a story that otherwise may have been overlooked. It also 
engaged an audience that probably were not expecting to encounter any science 
content. I also loveElectricity 
<http://www.stonecity.co.uk/productions/overview/electricity>, a feature film 
due for national cinematic release in December – it’s a beautiful, moving, 
visceral portrayal of a young woman’s epilepsy and her relationship with 
doctors and medication.

You previously worked as events manager at Wellcome Collection – what are your 
top tips for putting on an arts event?

Strive for high definition in every element of the event, from its purpose and 
target audience, to its opening, styling and production.

Also, be like a swan: calm and collected to your audience and collaborators, 
even if you are paddling frantically to keep it all moving.

What tech innovations have you seen in recent projects that we’re going to be 
seeing more of?

We’re excited about a number of artists using technology to deliver 
increasingly intimate and personal experiences. For example, Kiln Ensemble’sA 
Journey Around My Skull 
<http://kilnensemble.org/currently-touring/a-journey-round-my-skull-lady-gogo-goch/>
 used live binaural sound to give every member of a large audience a one-on-one 
experience of brain surgery, which turned their painstaking research and 
collaboration into something poetic, intense and intimate.

Lisa Jamieson is head of engaging science at the Wellcome Trust 
<http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/>, which you can follow on Twitter @wellcometrust 
<https://twitter.com/wellcometrust>

More like this

• How science and culture mix the best medicine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jan/20/art-health-science-culture-medicine>
• How the Science Museum brought the hunt for Higgs boson to life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/nov/06/science-museum-higgs-boson-cern>
• Ten global R&D projects changing arts and culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jun/20/global-research-development-projects-arts-culture>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 