
Hi Juha, what can you tell me about Lighthouse?

Lighthouse <http://www.lighthouse.org.uk/> is a digital culture agency in 
Brighton. We research, develop and present contemporary creation, which 
includes present day art and design, music, film and visual art. Our programme 
consists of exhibitions, film development, commissioning new works, 
collaboration, and organising a lot of lectures, events and workshops. We've 
just announced our annual conference,Improving Reality 
<http://www.lighthouse.org.uk/programme/improving-reality-2014-visibility-is-a-trap>
, which will bring all these strands together.

We're interested in the art that deals with the present. A lot of that is 
related to technology but it's also about current affairs, moral issues and 
global politics. We're trying to drive those things home in a personal, poetic 
and visceral way.

What are your first impressions of Brighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/brighton>?

Brighton's lovely. It feels like a really interesting combination of San 
Francisco creative technology, Nordic-European laidback friendliness, with a 
bit of that London centre-of-the-universe coolness thrown in. It's a city but 
it feels like a village, almost as if someone took a neighbourhood out of the 
capital and placed it on the coast, and it developed into something more 
relaxed and laidback.

Your career has seen you experiment with a lot of the latest social and 
digital platforms – has technology always been a creative inspiration for you?

Definitely. It's something that never really occurred to me; almost like as a 
child, you learn to speak a language and you're not really aware of it. We're 
all a generation of the web but I've been able to use and adopt it very early 
on in my work because I had to; I didn't have a budget for my music work and 
events so I used the web as a platform for social networking, before social 
networks were there.

I used Napster <http://www.napster.co.uk/start>, internet relay chat, Discogs 
<http://www.discogs.com/>, early Last.fm <http://www.last.fm/>, even Friendster 
andMyspace <https://myspace.com/> to find new audiences, share, discover and 
research new music. Everything that was there online I used or adopted.

Soulseek <http://www.soulseekqt.net/news/>, an early peer-to-peer network, was 
a brilliant tool; it taught me so much about music and music history. The 
people on that site were amazing; it was like hanging out in an indie record 
shop with a bunch of amateur DJs and record collectors. It was all about the 
love and the affection; we were exploring the web together and promised to do 
good with it. I learned and discovered so much.

I surfed the currents of new developments along from then and fast forward to 
now, we're in a connected world where apps, networks and platforms are 
everywhere. I've matured with it as well. I began by using technology for the 
benefit of the arts but then I started seeing the web was not just a good 
thing; it was a dystopian, controlled space that's commercial and out there for 
control and all the bad things.

Is it the job of arts organisations like Lighthouse to tackle the big 
questions?

Artists show us a possible strand or perspective of the world. If the work is 
powerful, you become it for a moment: you enter that space for those minutes 
and you feel its argument. When you walk out and have a coffee afterwards, you 
might be lost again and you'll think: actually I'm not sure about that.

I'm most interested in that space of uncertainty, of potential and critical 
engagement in what could be a solution. At Lighthouse, we're like the artistic 
or visual equivalent of an investigative journalist: we try to look at the 
world in various ways and figure out what things mean and how we might be able 
to amplify, solve or ask questions of them.

There's a quote I like by the theoretical physicist, Richard Feynman: 
"curiosity demands that we ask questions." Being curious is great but as a 
publicly-funded arts institution, we have a responsibility to the public, so we 
ask the questions.

Another famous physicist, Neil Degrasse Tyson <https://twitter.com/neiltyson> 
is on Twitter and everyone keeps asking him: what did you think of the latest 
science-fiction film? He always replies: I'm not here to give opinions; I'm 
here to show perspective. In a way that's what art is about; it's about sharing 
perspective. Everyone is equipped to form their own opinions but I don't think 
it's our job to have one or form an agenda. That's for movements and 
politicians and people. We look at all sides (the good and the bad) but it's 
nice to be open.

If Lighthouse's approach is more like that of an investigative journalist, 
what does that make its artistic director?

Museums and arts organisations are becoming more like media, and media is 
becoming more like museums. I mean that in a positive way because organisations 
like the Guardian or the New York Times have vast archives that could tell us 
so much about the world today. If only we could curate that. Curation is just 
another word for being curious and critical, and then sharing that with 
someone. There's obviously a sensibility and a way of approaching it.

One of the most popular strands in the contemporary art world is a very sturdy 
academic, conceptual and philosophical approach to what the arts are for, what 
they represent and present. Which is incredible and amazing, but having such a 
broad curiosity, I've gone from DIY curator and exhibition maker through to 
artistic director.

So why am I not like those academics? I don't have the art history background. 
It's more like being a journalist; you have the academics, who do the deep 
thinking and the long term research, which is very slow and sturdy, and then 
you have the people like us, who are as critical but have an obligation to be 
faster and speak in a different language.

Juha van't Zelfde is artistic director of Lighthouse Brighton 
<http://www.lighthouse.org.uk/> – follow him on Twitter @juhavantzelfde 
<https://twitter.com/juhavantzelfde> and Lighthouse @LighthouseArts 
<https://twitter.com/LighthouseArts>

More Arts head interviews

• Brendon Wilkins, projects director, DigVentures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/mar/18/brendon-wilkins-digventures-archaeology-drones>
• Jenni Lomax, director, Camden Arts Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jan/21/jenni-lomax-camden-arts-centre>
• Amit Sood, director, Google Cultural Institute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/dec/03/amit-sood-google-cultural-institute-art-project>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 