
Hi Alice, what can you tell me about Hauser & Wirth Somerset?

Hauser & Wirth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/dec/16/hauser-wirth-art-gallery-somerset>
 is an international gallery that originated in Zurich and has grown to include 
galleries in London and New York. I'm the director ofHauser & Wirth Somerset 
<http://www.hauserwirthsomerset.com/>, which came about because Iwan and 
Manuela Wirth, who own the gallery, live here and have a very close connection 
with the community. We found this incredible farm dating from 1776 on the 
outskirts of Bruton and it just seemed like an amazing opportunity to develop a 
gallery in a unique environment and add something different to the community.

A farmhouse in Somerset is an unusual location for a gallery…

Well it's not just a farmhouse; it's actually a whole set of buildings, about 
ten in total, that were empty for over thirty years and in huge disrepair, so 
part of the process has been to restore and conserve them for future 
generations.

How neglected the site was has presented challenges, like the several species 
of bat living in the roof. But when it's all finished this summer, we'll 
provide five gallery spaces, a bookshop, bar and restaurant, an education 
space, guest house, library and outdoor spaces including a meadow designed by 
landscape designerPiet Oudolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/apr/07/piet-oudolf-garden-designer>
 [of New York City High Line fame].

What kind of business model will the gallery operate? 

It's really a combination of all the things the Wirths are passionate about. 
We're bringing art, architecture, community, education and landscape together 
and will hopefully create something very special and unique. We want different 
audiences to engage in different ways – some might come for the garden, the 
restaurant or the exhibitions, but will hopefully discover other things while 
they're here.

In terms of the business model, we'll be open to visitors for free six days a 
week and the education program is heavily subsidised. There will be the 
restaurant and guest house that can be hired out, and works will be for sale.Art
 <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> collectors travel around the 
world so, as well as the space being for the local community, we're confident 
we'll attract a national and international art loving audience.

How have the local community reacted to plans for the gallery?

We've worked really hard with the community over the past few years, with 
presentations, events and talks in the town. We've met with local teachers to 
develop the education programme and connected with organisations like the
Holburne Museum <http://www.holburne.org/> in Bath. We've had a really positive 
reaction.

You offer artist residencies, what's the key to making them work?

We've been very clear that we don't want the residencies to be too prescribed; 
every artist has different needs. We've had two already and they were quite 
different.Pipilotti Rist <http://www.pipilottirist.net/> came from Switzerland 
with her son who went to the local primary school in Bruton and they very much 
became part of the community.

Then we had Guillermo Kuitca 
<http://www.hauserwirth.com/artists/18/guillermo-kuitca/biography/> who stayed 
at the farm for five weeks back in the summer of 2013 with a very specific 
purpose to paint the dining room in the farm house as an installation piece. 
When he left he said he had more energy working here than he had for years. 
It's the kind of opportunity that has a different outcome and purpose for each 
artist and that's what makes the gallery interesting.

What have you learned from Iwan and Manuela? 

Iwan and Manuela have a very clear vision for this gallery and that's helped 
me enormously to make it all happen. The main thing I've learned from them is 
their passion for people and how much they value being part of a community; 
that's very much integrated into this gallery model.

You broke into the industry with a work experience placement – what's your top 
career tip for young people looking to break into the sector?

Get as much experience as you can, as soon as you can. Put on your own 
exhibitions with local artists, volunteer at your local gallery and start to 
learn how these places operate. When it comes to finding a permanent role, it 
all comes down to experience.

Alice Workman is director of Hauser & Wirth Somerset 
<http://www.hauserwirthsomerset.com/>, which opens to the public on 15 July 2014

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 