
As the £7m Digital R&D Fund for the Arts <http://artsdigitalrnd.org.uk/> runs 
its course after three years encouraging arts companies, technology partners 
and academics to pool skills and experiment with digital technology in arts and 
culture, what tips can the arts world take away?

Here, some of the 52 organisations that benefited from the fund – run by Arts 
Council England, the Arts and Humanities Research Council and the charity Nesta 
– share their top tips for refining ideas and ensuring successful working 
relationships:

Get to know your project’s technical development

Sarah Coward, development director, the National Holocaust Centre 
<http://www.nationalholocaustcentre.net/>
The museum’s Interact 
<http://artsdigitalrnd.org.uk/projects/national-holocaust-centre/> project used 
3D filming techniques and natural language processing to capture the stories of 
Holocaust survivors, so visitors can pose questions and get answers far into 
the future.

Working with people from completely different industries required us to learn 
quickly and keep our minds open to new ways of thinking. Learning the language 
of each other’s industry was essential and we needed to invest time in this so 
that we could really communicate properly about the project and its aims.

My top tip would be: put in the effort to understand as much as possible about 
the technical development of your project and always ask questions. Don’t put 
it in an R&D “black box” with your technical team and assume it will appear 
fully formed. If you don’t understand the detail, you can’t champion it to 
others or make sure it’s going in the right direction.

Always think: audience

Annie Ukleja, general manager, Miracle Theatre 
<http://www.miracletheatre.co.uk/>
The touring company, based in Cornwall, explored 
<http://artsdigitalrnd.org.uk/projects/miracle-theatre-company/> whether 
digital technology can be used to capture, recreate and distribute small-scale 
productions, while retaining their live nature. 

Always think about the audience and their experience and understanding of what 
you’re offering them. If you’re asking them to participate in any kind of R&D 
work, make sure they know they’re taking part in an experiment. Make them feel 
involved and communicate clearly, or you could risk damaging your hard-won and 
trusted relationship with them.

Double your development time

Colette Bailey, artistic director and chief executive, Metal 
<http://www.metalculture.com/>
The NetPark project commissioned <http://artsdigitalrnd.org.uk/projects/metal/>
 artworks that visitors to Chalkwell Park could access via mobile Wi-Fi to 
explore their surroundings. The project’s other aim was to provide a toolkit 
for locative media in public spaces.

Work out your initial timescale for how long you think development might 
reasonably take – then add almost the same amount of time again. Building in 
sufficient time to think about, understand and properly interpret your findings 
is vital. From experience, it’s always easy to underestimate this.

Just start

Andrew Burke, chief executive, London Sinfonietta 
<http://www.londonsinfonietta.org.uk/>
The London Sinfonietta developed an iOS app 
<http://artsdigitalrnd.org.uk/projects/london-sinfonietta/> based on the music 
of Steve Reich to research new ways for engaging wider audiences in the music 
of a contemporary composer and develop musical skills through participatory, 
interactive experiences.

My top tip? Build a good team around you and make an effort to keep everyone 
working together on a clear brief. We invested a lot of time meeting in person. 
Even face to face, it turned out people had different interpretations of how 
the app would work, or what the priorities were.

We even had a subtly different vocabulary. We thought we all meant the same 
thing, but we didn’t (this came from everyone’s different professional 
backgrounds and skills). Meetings in person solved this and helped us through 
the frustrating times to get the project done.

My other personal tip is just to begin. I did that one Sunday afternoon and 
sketched out the idea. That led to a year of application writing, a year of 
fundraising and another making it. There’s never a perfect moment, nor enough 
time, to get these projects going, but they gather momentum when they are 
started. They can change the organisation in a good way.

Preparation is everything

Adrian Davies, design and display team leader, Nottingham City Museums and 
Galleries <http://www.nottinghamcity.gov.uk/nottinghammuseums>
Nottingham castle developed a mobile augmented reality (AR) app 
<http://artsdigitalrnd.org.uk/projects/nottingham-city-museums-galleries/> that 
will allow visitors actively to create their own narrative experience around 
Nottingham’s 1831 National Reform Bill riots.

Five steps to engage and energise arts company staff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2016/apr/08/staff-engagement-arts-culture-companies-brand-strategy>
The team must trust one another and be open from the outset. Be prepared to 
take a few leaps of faith into the unknown (hopefully informed leaps), but 
depending on your organisation, make sure managers are clear about why you are 
doing this, even if they don’t understand the issues.

What else? Be prepared for all your language (jargon), thinking and work 
processes (sometimes quirky systems) to be challenged.

Be prepared to do lots of things you’ve not done before and prepare yourself 
mentally for being out of your depth. You may need to develop a different kind 
of support system of people who really understand R&D and have the relevant 
expertise to move you forward. Most of all, be strong and courageous.

Read a series of evaluation reports about the Digital R&D Fund for the Arts 
and learn more about the Digital Arts and Culture Accelerator here 
<http://artsdigitalrnd.org.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 