
Hi Hadrian, could you tell me a bit about Create <http://createlondon.org/>?

We commission and produce projects in the public realm that span art, 
architecture, design and a lot more in between. Broadly I’d describe our work 
as social practice – we look for ways that artists can contribute more 
meaningfully to the lives of people in cities. Unlike a gallery or theatre we 
have no fixed public space, preferring to work in the places people encounter 
every day.

We work mainly in east London, which is home to more artists and art 
organisations than anywhere in Europe, but it’s also one of the most 
economically deprived parts of the country. The big irony is that if you live 
in parts of eastLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> you’re less 
likely to visit an art gallery, library or a theatre than if you lived anywhere 
else in the UK.

What are the challenges of putting on work in some of the less art-friendly 
spaces?

We’re getting good at persuading people to support artists in taking risks. In 
2012 we convinced the Savoy Hotel to let artist Ruth Ewan and 200 teenagers 
stage a unique event in the Lancaster Ballroom. I still can’t quite believe 
they let us do that. They were very nice about it too and made everyone a 
lovely cup of tea.

That said, working with “non-art” people can be hard. A lot of people in the 
art world are allergic to working outside the framework of an immediately 
understanding and supporting working environment. But working in the public 
realm just means you have to bring along planning officers, health and safety 
teams and local politicians. In fact, these relationships and tensions can add 
something powerful to a project. After all, these people know their local 
communities inside out and we rely more and more on this local knowledge. The 
added scrutiny can be useful.

What’s the power of bringing the arts to these unused and forgotten spaces?

Getting out of galleries and into spaces where people live their lives is 
fundamental to our work. Many communities in cities are just not connecting 
with the art world. People are often unaware and, frankly, not interested that 
there are artists creating amazing work and asking big, important questions 
about the world.

This may be because artists are working in inaccessible spaces and contexts 
that are unappealing. If you get out there and spend time (sometimes years) as 
part of a community, you can start sharing ideas and approaches that change 
people’s lives, which is so much more rewarding than running a community or 
outreach programme out of the back door of an art gallery.

The main criticism of this kind of work is that it’s a quick gimmicky win 
without any real long-term impact – how do you ensure the work you do continues 
after everyone goes home?

When you’re working in the public realm you have to do everything you can to 
consider the impact you’re making on a place and, conversely, the place’s 
impact on the work. On the one hand, if you’re committed to an area and 
community then a temporary project can find a way of having a long-term effect. 
However, we’re now finding ourselves more interested in projects that can last 
for a number of years and so we’ve moved away from our original 
festival/biennial model.

Communities are often built around the projects we do and we’ve learned that 
you can’t just pack up after a few weeks, take some nice pictures, say “thanks 
very much” and off you go. We’re now getting involved in setting up new 
companies and enterprises that are sustainable and can create new jobs for an 
area too.

Most of your work is focused in the East End, home to some economically 
deprived areas – is art really the solution?

This is a really relevant question. I would totally agree that traditional 
public art in deprived areas is often inappropriate but the artists we work 
with are delivering projects with real practical benefits. We’re trying to 
encourage artists – some who are completely dedicated to social practice and 
others who have never worked with communities before – to think about how their 
work and skills can be of genuine benefit to their neighbours in east London.

Of course, communities in this part of London need more support across the 
board, but there are 13,000 artists in the area and we want to find out how the 
presence of such a big creative community can be more beneficial to people in 
the area, beyond just the economic growth banner.

We run a programme called Create Jobs 
<http://createlondon.org/about-us/create-jobs/>, which is starting to make a 
real difference in getting local young people jobs and work experience in the 
creative and art sector. We’re trying to tackle persistent class and cultural 
barriers young people in east London face so they directly benefit from the 
opportunities of the sector in the capital. All our projects create jobs for 
local, young people and we’re proud of that.

Is gentrification a genuine threat to UK artists?

We used to have a lot of conversations about affordable studio space but I 
think it’s more serious now for young artists. Those in London who haven’t got 
wealthy parents can’t find anywhere affordable to live, let alone a studio from 
which to work. The cost of accommodation in London is completely dysfunctional 
and it’s turning the city into an impossible place for young artists and arts 
professionals to be. I know a lot of artists who have moved to Kent or Essex 
and others who have given up altogether on being within reach of the capital.

If young artists and people from diverse and non-privileged communities can’t 
afford to live here anymore then London will not continue to be the creative 
capital of the world it claims to be. The danger is that in 10 years we’ll look 
at London and wonder why it’s turned into a giant version of Paris or 
Manhattan: an unproductive, Disneyfied version of a city with artists and 
workers all pushed to the outskirts; not the brilliant, messy, international 
and creative place it (almost) still is.

Perhaps we need to look to other UK cities. Glasgow and Liverpool are starting 
to look like serious contenders to the capital: both have affordable spaces, 
real support for artists and people like Sarah McCrory ofGlasgow International 
<http://glasgowinternational.org/> and Sally Tallant of the Liverpool Biennial 
<http://www.biennial.com/> are helping to make some pretty amazing things 
happen.

Hadrian Garrard is director of Create <http://createlondon.org/>, which you 
can follow on Twitter@Create_London <https://twitter.com/CREATE_London>

More like this

• Home Live Arts’ Mimi Banks on turning audiences into events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/12/mimi-banks-home-live-art-interview>
• Interview with Jenni Lomax, director of Camden Arts Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jan/21/jenni-lomax-camden-arts-centre>
• Monica Ferguson on overcoming Milton Keynes’ punchline status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/mar/04/monica-ferguson-stables-milton-keynes-festival>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 