
The federal arts minister, Mitch Fifield, has said the government will 
exercise better consultation with the industry, hinted at “significant changes” 
to the contentious new arts excellence program and called small-to-medium 
organisations “the beating heart” of Australian arts.

Fifield said during a Friday roundtable event with more than 70 delegates in 
Sydney that he was reviewing a Senate inquiry withmore than 1,200 submissions 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Legal_and_Constitutional_Affairs/Arts_Funding/Submissions>
 into the impact on the arts of the 2014 and 2015 federal budgets. The inquiry 
ended on Thursday and will be tabled on 26 November.

Many in the industry responded with anger when the former arts minister George 
Brandis <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis> suddenly 
announced the establishment of the national program for excellence in the arts 
(NPEA) as part of the 2015 budget. Fifield said no government proposal 
involving significant industry changes should happen “out of the blue, without 
any context”.
Claire Edwardes (@ClairePerc) 
#freethearts <https://twitter.com/hashtag/freethearts?src=hash> Senator Mitch 
Fifield presents to industry leaders - no wall up - feeling positive about the 
futurepic.twitter.com/efpJ9vRDLE <https://t.co/efpJ9vRDLE>
 <https://twitter.com/ClairePerc/status/662430090463068160> November 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ClairePerc/status/662430090463068160> 
The behind-closed-doors nature of the budget made it a poor forum for 
announcing such changes, he said, and should not be done without industry 
consultation. “First talk to the stakeholders, talk to the sector and share 
what’s on your mind to see if there’s a better way of doing something.”

The minister shared his mobile phone number with the delegates and encouraged 
them to contact him.

Under Brandis’s plan, a budget of $104.7m was to be taken from the country’s 
top arts funding body, the Australia Council, to create the NPEA. Critics 
voiced concerns after Brandis announced in July that NPEA grants were to be
administered directly by the arts ministry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/02/george-brandis->, fearing a 
shift away from the arm’s-length funding model of the Australia Council.


Fifield said he would announce his decision regarding the NPEA in two weeks 
and said that while the program was always intended to have a period for 
consultation and feedback, there would “probably be more significant changes 
than had initially been anticipated”.

In its original form, it was not envisaged the NPEA would provide grants to 
individual artists. Fifield said he was currently “wrestling” with this aspect 
of the program. “Do I open up the national program to individuals or do you 
make sure there is just one channel for individuals and that’s through 
Australia Council, and that’s appropriately funded?”
Glen McGillivray (@GlenMcGillivray) 
#freethearts <https://twitter.com/hashtag/freethearts?src=hash> Minister 
Fifield v. impressive. Honest commitment to consultation. Background in 
Disability a big advantge.
 <https://twitter.com/GlenMcGillivray/status/662430283921133568> November 6, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/GlenMcGillivray/status/662430283921133568> 
Much of his success in his new portfolio would be determined on the 
willingness of those in the room to become his “teacher”, he said. “I’m both a 
steward of the arts, and in a sense a student of the arts. You don’t want to be 
too proud and think there isn’t a heap you can learn.”

The former disability minister addressed an article in the Australian 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/arts/i-had-no-time-for-arts-says-new-minister-mitch-fifield/story-e6frg8n6-1227553024555>
 that claimed he had not attended any arts events in the past year. Fifield 
said he told the journalist he had attended “great performances” by disability 
dancers e.motion21, exhibitions by the families of polio survivors and the 
artwork of those living in aged care facilities – but this had not been deemed 
worthy of mention.

“I just want to make clear, and I’m sure I don’t have to convince you, the 
arts is broad and it should be inclusive. And I will continue to take a very 
strong interest in the work of people who might face challenges beyond their 
control.”

Fifield said he saw small-to-medium arts organisations as “the beating heart” 
of the Australian arts industry, “where the creativity and experiments and the 
risks take place”.

He said he would “put partisanship aside” because “people have a very low 
threshold for petty partisanship, point scoring. They just want you to get on 
with the business.”

Chris Bendall, chief executive of Critical Stages, a campaigning body for 
independent theatre,tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/cdbendall/status/662433442458501120> after that the 
session was conducted in a “constructive, collaborative and positive manner”, 
but Zane Trow, a creative arts manager from Queensland, warned against 
celebrating too soon.
Zane Trow (@ZaneTrow) 
I'd like to be wrong, but unlikely to me the far right of the coalition will 
allow any money already cut, back into the Aus Co.#freethearts 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/freethearts?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/ZaneTrow/status/662449145362288640> November 6, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ZaneTrow/status/662449145362288640> 
Shadow arts minister Mark Dreyfus, Labor senator Jacinta Collins and Greens MP 
Adam Bandt also met representatives from the arts community on Friday.

 * This article was amended on 7 November, 2015 to say there were more than 70 
delegates at the roundtable 

 