
Shonagh Manson, director, Jerwood Charitable Foundation 
<http://jerwoodcharitablefoundation.org/>

You are fundraising all the time
Even if you’re not a fundraiser by role. This is true not only every time you 
represent your cause or organisation to people, but every time anyone interacts 
inany way with you and your organisation. Everything creates an impression. 
Cultivate everyone you meet.

We all know fundraising is about building relationships. It’s about 
understanding who you’re talking with and about communicating compellingly, 
which means getting to know and being genuinely interested in people and 
organisations. That’s important because people move role, change companies, 
gain additional responsibilities – the world is always in flux. You never know 
when you will need to rely on a relationship or impression built in the past, 
or when you’re going to have something to offer to someone you wouldn’t have 
expected.

Jane Marriott, deputy director, The Hepworth Wakefield 
<http://www.hepworthwakefield.org/>

Perfect your pitch
I had no intention of becoming a fundraiser, but my passion for the arts, a 
background in marketing and the constant thrill of meeting people made me the 
ideal candidate.

Fundraising is about inspiring a potential supporter, timing your “ask” 
perfectly and telling a compelling story about your organisation. It’s about 
being open and responsive to the motivations and passions of donors.

To inspire, study your prospects, understand what they like and build 
relationships with them, but also the key people in your organisation who will 
help you secure that gift. Watch Nancy Duarte’spresentation 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/nancy_duarte_the_secret_structure_of_great_talks> on 
the secret structure of great talks and tell your own story.

When you are ready to go in and pitch, be responsive. A wonderful Royal 
Academy trustee once advised me to always go with another person; one of you 
can speak, while the other listens, is observant, watches body language and 
adapts accordingly.

Many future arts leaders will need to be dedicated to fundraising in order to 
ensure these organisations flourish.

Lucy Perman, executive director, Clean Break <http://www.cleanbreak.org.uk/>

Everyone loves a good story
As a fundraiser, being able to tell your organisation’s story is key. How does 
your company stand out, what’s unique about its heritage and how can you draw 
people in to enjoy and want to be part of your story?

Telling your story through the arts is an effective way of engaging 
supporters. Enabling them to meet characters from your story (workshop 
participants, artists and partners) means that a range of voices are talking 
about the work from a personal perspective and how it’s impacted on their 
lives. Back all of this up with your case for support, which will set out what 
you do, the difference you make, with facts, figures and clear information 
about how people can get involved.

Remember that everyone is a fundraiser. Make sure that your whole team can 
tell the story – volunteers, trustees, partners, community, staff and other 
funders. You never know who they might meet, at a party, on a train, in a lift! 
Every chance encounter is an opportunity to spread your message.

Aaron Wright, programme coordinator, Live Art Development Agency 
<http://www.thisisliveart.co.uk/>

Consider art and ethics
Consider how your fundraising strategies might be informed by your artistic 
programme. Does the way you’re fundraising match the ethos of your 
organisation? Think creatively and consider involving artists in your 
fundraising efforts.

Also, fundraise ethically. There are many grey areas when it comes to the 
ethics of fundraising, but where is your red line? Do research into from where 
donors have got their wealth. From whom are you prepared to accept money? 
Organisations such asPlatform <http://platformlondon.org/blog/> can help you 
with these questions.

Our own Take The Money And Run? 
<http://platformlondon.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/tmr1.pdf> publication is 
essential reading for anyone in arts fundraising. Many organisations have 
signed up to the Fossil Fuel Freecampaign <http://fossilfundsfree.org/> 
publicly pledging to not accept money from related companies.
What else? Don’t waste time with cold calling. If you’re applying to trusts 
and foundations, make sure you’ve spoken to them first. Competition is tough, 
with as few as one in 10 applications being funded, even after making it 
through to the second-stage application, which many trusts use.

Finally, don’t underestimate the potential of partnership building to raise 
funds. Pool money with similar organisations to enable bigger projects.

Shonagh, Jane, Lucy and Aaron spoke at the recent Weston Jerwood Creative 
Bursaries Scheme 
<http://jerwoodcharitablefoundation.org/weston-jerwood-creative-bursaries> 
training day

The Hepworth Wakefield and Clean Break are host organisations of the scheme, 
which is run by theJerwood Charitable Foundation 
<http://jerwoodcharitablefoundation.org/>

Aaron Wright was a bursary recipient of the pilot scheme in 2011-2

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 