
Hi Dick, what can you tell me about Watershed? Does it have an overall mission 
or aim?

We are constantly refining our role to stay relevant and useful. Currently, 
Watershed's <http://www.watershed.co.uk/> mission is to place cultural 
engagement, imagination and ingenuity at the heart of our lives, believing that 
the route to better futures is open, disruptive and co-produced.

Many praise the way Bristol <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bristol> has 
embraced tech, its willingness to experiment and so on – what is it about the 
city that has allowed it be so open and disruptive?

I think you have it in your question – collectively we have seized the 
opportunity presented by digital disruption and created a movement of genuine 
fusion. There is real respect here for difference and invention; a culture 
where people want to help, even if they don't get what it is that you're trying 
to do; a sharing of ambition and engagement between artist and audience.

A report by Yellow Railroad in 2010 summed it up well 
<http://www.thefreethinker.co.uk/site/wp-content/uploads/2010/11/final-report-consultation-version.pdf>
: "The single strongest, overriding characteristic that unites and influences 
all aspects of Bristol's personality is the spirit of innovation, creativity 
and unorthodoxy"

What role does Watershed play in connecting the organisations and creatives of 
Bristol?

We were lucky to be in the right place at the right time at the end of the 
20th century. It was a combination of working with computer science at Bristol 
University on experimental next generation fibre connectivity in 1999, and the 
city rediscovering the asset that was slumbering in its historic but formerly 
derelict floating harbour, which was re-invented as a cultural asset for the 
millennium. Suddenly Watershed was at the heart of both the emerging new 
digital world and the physical city as the waterside was opened up for public 
use.

We grabbed the moment and invited everyone in, not to be part of a network but 
to be active, connected, authentic, productive, sharing and relevant to our 
city. We configure the resource to push the experiment and keep renewing the 
talent pool to drive diversity of engagement and interest.

I think the key factors have been seeing ourselves as enablers and not being 
too worried about who gets the credit; the focus is on doing stuff, doing it 
quickly and being honest about what has and hasn't worked. Permission to step 
out of your comfort zone is key, and hopefully we do our fair share of that 
with a large dose of encouragement and support. Our latest invitation is
Playable City <http://www.watershed.co.uk/playablecity/>

Where is Bristol lacking when it comes to its arts, culture and creativity?

While there is no doubt that we've been ahead of the pack in seizing the 
digital opportunity, I think we have been fairly slow in energizing the asset 
of diversity. For much of the latter part of the 20th century, Bristol felt 
more like a collection of independent villages than a city. This created the 
conditions for some fantastic collisions and fusion of cultures – theexplosion 
of the Bristol Sound <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Culture_of_Bristol#Music> 
being a major example – but it has also held us back in creating open pathways 
for everyone to explore their potential. Too many of our neighbourhoods are not 
connected to the energy and can-do unorthodoxy that is propelling the city of 
Bristol into the 21st century.

How much impact does the mayor of Bristol, George Ferguson, play in the city's 
creative development?

The whole concept of elected mayor is very new in Bristol, so it's much too 
early to be objective. There is no doubt in my mind that part of London's 
success on the world stage is down to creating an elected mayor.

Love them or hate them, Ken Livingstone and Boris Johnson have given London 
personality and I think George is of the same mould. It's about the city and 
its ambition, getting some key stuff pushed through even if there is 
opposition, and at the same time raising the international profile so that we 
are open for business, both cultural and commercial. Championing Bristol as
European Green Capital 2015 
<http://bristolgreencapital.org/european-green-capital-award/> is one example 
that has huge local and global potential.

What the Pervasive Media Studio 
<http://www.watershed.co.uk/pmstudio/welcome-pervasive-media-studio> are doing 
I think is really impressive, bringing together academics, the arts and tech – 
could the sector be doing more like this?

I can't understand why we are so unique; its not particularly difficult. Just 
be curious, work collaboratively, don't let rules slow you down, back the 
talent and – oh – take a bunch of risks knowing the minute you think that you 
know what you're doing it's time to move on. It's not always the best way to 
build relationships with your funders, but hey, it's not boring!

Part of our success has been working with our city and the particular mix of 
assets that are present, fromAardman Animations <http://www.aardman.com/> to HP 
Labs <http://www.hpl.hp.com/bristol/> via the BBC and strong cultural, creative 
and digital clusters – it's the right mix for the 21st century and Bristol has 
an edge on others with its lifestyle and activism.

Watershed are working on the upcoming No Boundaries <http://nb2014.org/> event 
– what's the thinking behind this year's focus, doing not funding?

I also notice the name is similar to Watershed's mission: that you "place no 
boundaries on our desire to connect with artists and audiences in the wider 
world" – coincidence or deliberate?

Not deliberate as the title came out of several discussions with a changing 
group and increasing agony, however it can't be coincidence and just says to me 
that we mean what we say. However, this gives a clue to our approach; if you 
start with how much money is available for a project then you have already 
limited yourself. I'm more interested in exploring the ambition: what are we 
trying to do? For whom? Who with?

Start with the doing, then configure the resources you need to deliver. That's 
what I hope No Boundaries is going to be about. The world seems to be all over 
the place at the moment – the arts need to be the haven in the storm, helping 
people find new ways to explore and understand the pressures and complexities 
of life; to build community and shared confidence in a better world. The money 
is so small anyway (less than one-thousandth of government spend) it bears no 
relationship to the value of the arts for all of us.

Dick Penny is the managing director of Watershed <http://www.watershed.co.uk/> 
in Bristol – its second international Playable City Award isnow open for 
submissions <http://www.watershed.co.uk/playablecity>

No Boundaries <http://nb2014.org/> takes place on 25 and 26 February in 
Bristol and York

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 