
Pop

Courtney Love's memoir
The question is not so much "what will be in Courtney Love's book?" as "what 
could possibly be in Courtney Love's book that she hasn't already 
spoken/ranted/raved about?" Still, her self-titled autobiography has been 
described as "too crazy not to be true" and should provide her definitive take 
on her time with Hole and her doomed relationship withKurt Cobain 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kurt_Cobain>. It will also, hopefully, spill 
previously unspilled beans on her relationships withBilly Corgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/sep/14/billy-corgan-smashing-pumpkins-tea-shop>
 andSteve Coogan <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Coogan>. Oh, and according 
to an interview she did with Rolling Stone, it was inspired by Russell Brand's 
My Booky Wook. The mind boggles.TJ

Everything to do with Kanye West
Kanye has hinted that a seventh studio album of his should see the light in 
2014. But even without the prospect of this"minimalist eight-track" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/dec/06/kanye-west-yeezus-new-album> 
affair, be sure that Kanye's quotes, wild displays and jaw-dropping 
motorbike-humping videos will make him the most talked about pop star of the 
year. Again.TJ

Metallica and Iron Maiden team up for Sonisphere
The two heavy-metal giants <http://sonisphere.co.uk/> have never played at the 
same festival in the UK until now, so expect Knebworth Park to be suffering 
from severe tinnitus by the time July has finished.TJ

Film

12 Years a Slave
Steve McQueen's Oscar-bound drama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/18/12-years-a-slave-london-critics-circle-awards>
 about Solomon Northup (Chiwetel Ejiofor 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chiwetel_Ejiofor>), a free black man kidnapped 
and sold into slavery in pre-civil war America, is remarkable, if not for its 
classy performances (Michael Fassbender's volatile plantation owner is 
chillingly good), then for the fact that it's based on a true story. McQueen 
uses Solomon's personal anguish to cut to the heart of a superpower's 
relationship with the slave trade.Henry Barnes 10 January.

The Wolf of Wall Street
Martin Scorsese's bleak Wall Street comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/aug/19/oscar-predictions-2014-wolf-of-wall-street>
 arrives after the reckoning, but is set before the crash. Based loosely on the 
book by former traderJordan Belfort 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jordan_Belfort>, The Wolf of Wall Street stars 
Leonardo DiCaprio as an amoral money man snorting his way through multiple 
millions as the stock climbs higher and the party gets louder. There's no nod 
to the recession, no attempt to find meaning in excess. Just more money, more 
drugs, more fun. Morality is for wimps.HB 17 January.

Nymphomaniac
Sex. Four hours of the stuff, with a brief interval for the audience. Lars von 
Trier <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lars_von_Trier> – him of the genital 
mutilation (Antichrist) and the extended disability joke (The Idiots) – knows 
how to push our buttons. Charlotte Gainsbourg and Stacy Martin share panting 
duties as Jo, a sex addict detailing her conquests to an older male confidante. 
Von Trier premiered the film, which contains scenes of penetrative sex, bondage 
and fellatio, on Christmas Day. Happy holidays!HB 21 February. 

Transcendence
Christopher Nolan proved that brainiac sci-fi could do well at the box office 
withInception <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inception>. Now his 
cinematographer, Wally Pfister, puts his mind to directing with a similarly 
cerebral thriller. Johnny Depp plays an artificial intelligence researcher who 
is willing to sacrifice himself to create a sentient machine. Rebecca Hall and 
Paul Bettany play fellow researchers, trying to pull him back from the brink.HB 
25 April.

Gone Girl
Gillian Flynn's bestseller  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/may/20/gillian-flynn-gone-girl-review>
gets a big-screen adaptation. Ben Affleck plays a struggling journalist 
implicated in the disappearance of his wife (Rosamund Pike), who went missing 
on the day of their fifth anniversary. Set in the heart of recession-hit small 
town America, Gone Girl is a gritty suspense story. It'll need someone 
experienced in delivering grim-minded thrillers to direct. Step forward Mr 
David Fincher.HB 3 October.

Veronica Mars
Kickstarter's great success story. The film version of Veronica Mars, a cult 
US TV show in which Kristen Bell's high-school super-sleuth solves crimes in 
her downtime, was floundering in development. Then creator Rob Thomas turned to 
the90,000 fans on the internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/mar/14/veronica-mars-fans-fund-movie-kickstarter>
 that were ready to chip in and see the film made. Cue a shift in our 
understanding of film financing and a wave of other film-makers (Spike Lee, 
Zach Braff, James Franco) begging funds off Joe Public.HB 

A Million Ways to Die in the West
Family Guy creator/swing crooner/feminist-baiting Oscar host 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/may/21/seth-macfarlane-definitely-not-2014-oscars>
 Seth MacFarlane steps out from behind the camera with this comedy western. 
MacFarlane plays a yellow-bellied sheep farmer whose lack of courage costs him 
his gal (Amanda Seyfried). Only a rambunctious adventure across the old west, a 
duel with an infamous outlaw (Liam Neeson) and many, many dick jokes can help 
our hero get back on the horse.HB 6 June.

Dance

Akram Khan
Akram Khan <http://www.akramkhancompany.net/> has joined forces with some 
extraordinary dance artists during his career, fromSylvie Guillem 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sylvie_Guillem> to Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui 
<http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sidi_Larbi_Cherkaoui>. This autumn's project 
should deliver sparks as Khan creates and performs a duet with flamenco 
iconoclastIsrael Galvan <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Israel_Galv%C3%A1n>. 
Judith Mackrell Sadler's Wells, London EC1 (0844 412 4300)

TV

Inside KFC 
We've already been inside Greggs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/may/18/greggs-tv-show-sarah-dempster>
,Claridge's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/dec/03/review-inside-claridges-the-fear>
,Liberty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/dec/03/liberty-of-london-tv-review>
 andIceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/oct/22/iceland-foods-tv-review>, 
and now we'll get to see inside the mighty KFC. An upcoming three-part BBC1 
documentary promises "unprecedented access" to the company, from boardroom to 
the lowly restaurant chef. It'll be worth watching for no other reason than 
to see if the truth of KFC is closer to the adverts (tender-eyed men stroking 
organic chicken wings) or most people's experiences (cross-eyed hen night 
revellers staggering up to the counter at 3am, bellowing "BARGAIN BUCKET").
Stuart HeritageBBC1 

The Jump (Channel 4)
The BBC has Celebrity MasterChef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2013/sep/07/celebrity-masterchef-winner-2013>
, where famous people cook things. ITV hasSplash! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/feb/05/splash-returns-second-series>
, where famous people jump into some water. And now Channel 4 hasThe Jump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/11/steve-redgrave-amy-childs-sinitta-eddie-eagle-channel-4-jump>
, where famous people strap planks of wood on to their feet and shoot off an 
icy ramp at 40mph. If you've ever wanted to see what Anthea Turner looks like 
writhing around in agony with two broken legs, or what Nicky Clarke looks like 
strapped to a gurney, this might just be the show for you.SH Channel 4
 Snow joke … counting down to the Sochi 2014 Winter Olympics. Photograph: 
Natalia Kolesnikova/AFP/Getty Images 
Sochi Winter Olympics 
The Winter Olympics never tend to catch the public's imagination to the extent 
of its summer counterpart. The 2014 games look set to go the same way, thanks 
to the outcry and drip-by-dripboycott over Russia's human rights violations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/08/german-president-boycotts-sochi-winter-olympics>
. However, Olympic fever is still strong here, so it might only take one 
British medallist to get everyone tuning in again.SH BBC

The Trial 
Recent high-profile controversies about the ethics and outcomes of drug trials 
have meant the use of humans for pharmaceutical testing has become a recurrent 
subject in popular culture: including Lucy Prebble's National Theatre playThe 
Effect <http://www.nationaltheatre.org.uk/shows/the-effect> and an episode of 
the Channel 4 drama seriesFresh Meat 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/fresh-meat>. This potentially fascinating 
documentary follows the participants in a 2013 trial at Frenchay hospital in 
Bristol, aimed at finding a new treatment for Parkinson's disease.Mark Lawson 
BBC2

Theatre

The Mistress Contract
Based on a real-life story, TV and film writer Abi Morgan's return to the stage
 <http://www.royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/the-mistress-contract> has a 
tantalising premise: the long-running relationship between a man, 93, and his 
mistress, 88. He provides her with bed and board, she with "all sexual acts as 
requested, with suspension of historical, emotional, psychological disclaimers".
Andrew Dickson Royal Court, London SW1 (020-7565 5000), 30 January to 22 March.

This May Hurt A Bit
As Danny Boyle <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Danny_Boyle>'s 2012 Olympic 
opening ceremony proved, the NHS is part of the British psyche – which is 
probably why it hurts when things go wrong. The latest fromOut of Joint 
<http://www.outofjoint.co.uk/> explores one family's journey through the 
digestive tract of the NHS. Will they be spat out?LG Theatre Royal, Bury St 
Edmunds (01284 769505), 6 to 15 March. Then touring.

Pests
As she proved with 2011's Mogadishu, a tough-minded study of Britain's 
educational system, ex-teacher and playwright Vivienne Franzmann is never 
afraid to say the unsayable.Here 
<http://www.royalexchange.co.uk/event.aspx?id=786> she takes on the failings of 
the care system, mental health and addiction.LG Royal Exchange, Manchester, 
(0161-833 9833), 12 to 22 March, then touring.

Union
Breaking up is hard to do – and if you've been together since 1707, it's easy 
to forget what brought you together in the first place. In the year of the
Scottish referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/nov/21/scottish-referendum-thatcher-factor-cabinet>
, playwright Tim Barrow reminds us of the story behind theAct of Union 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acts_of_Union_1707> and the larger-than-life 
historical characters involved.Lyn Gardner Lyceum, Edinburgh (0131-248 4848), 
20 March to 12 April.

Privacy
With Edward Snowden <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edward_Snowden>'s NSA/GCHQ 
revelationsmaking headlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/16/edward-snowden-ruling-nsa-surveillance>
 throughout 2013,the Donmar 
<http://www.donmarwarehouse.com/whats-on/donmar-warehouse/2014/privacy> is keen 
to prove it's on top of the news.Josie Rourke 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Josie_Rourke> (who recently scored with 
Shakespeare's Coriolanus) directs; young playwrightJames Graham 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/James_Graham_%28playwright%29> (best known for 
his surprise parliamentary hit, This House) writes.AD Donmar, London WC2 (0844 
871 7624), 10 April to 31 May.

Architecture

Battle of the towers of London
With plans for novelty towers shaped like a can of ham, a knife and a 
rolled-up napkin set to join the Gherkin in the City of London, the table is 
almost laid for a surreal dinner party in the sky. This year, two of its 
biggest guests will finally join the party, with the completion of the
Cheesegrater 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/oct/25/london-office-projects-cheesegrater>
, by Richard Rogers, and Rafael Viñoly's Walkie-Scorchie "fryscraper". With the 
latter undergoing an expensive retrofit to try to banish the lethal "death 
ray", will it be safe to walk along Eastcheap this summer?Oliver Wainwright
 Shimmering apparition … Glasgow School of Art. 

Glasgow School of Art by Steven Holl
Looming over Charles Rennie Mackintosh's original Glasgow School of Art 
<http://www.gsa.ac.uk/> building, American architect Steven Holl 
<http://www.stevenholl.com/>'s new extension to the college has been designed 
as a shimmering apparition of greenish glass in contrast to the heavy masonry 
structure across the road. A spiralling sequence of studios will climb up 
through the building, arranged around "driven voids" to bring light down deep 
into the floors below. The different departments will all be connected by a 
continuous zig-zagging route designed, says the architect, to encourage 
"creative abrasion".OW

A House for Essex
The final project of mischievous architecture practice FAT, which recently 
announced its breakup, this surreal hybrid between a Thai wat and an Essex barn 
will be one of their strangest projects yet. Conceived as a scaled-up 
gingerbread house, it will be decked out with ceramic mouldings and tapestries 
by Grayson Perry, along with a line of his sculptures on the top of the roof. 
It will be the latest building in Alain de Botton's programme of Living
Architecture <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture> holiday 
rentals – and promises to be the kookiest of the lot.OW

Classical 

Master of the Queen's Music
Peter Maxwell Davies's self-imposed 10-year limit on his stint as Master 
of the Queen's Music ends in March, a few months before his 80th birthday. 
There's no stand-out candidate to succeed him, for it's hard to imagine most of 
the other leading British composers of today writing the ceremonial music 
required. Mark-Anthony Turnage might be one possible candidate, though; others 
could be Judith Weir, Michael Berkeley or Jonathan Dove. Before that 
appointment, though, the LSO has a major Maxwell Davies premiere, when Antonio 
Pappano conducts what Davies says will be his last symphony, the Tenth. 
Andrew Clements Barbican, London EC2 (020-7638 8891), 1 February.

Thebans
In an age when too many composers are encouraged to compose their first operas 
at far too young an age, Julian Anderson has taken his time before embarking on 
one. Thebans, with a libretto by playwright Frank McGuinness, based upon 
Sophocles' Oedipus and Antigone plays, has been gestating for some years since 
ENO first offered Anderson a commission. It's directed by Pierre Audi, 
intendant of the Netherlands Opera and once a familiar figure in London 
contemporary music, here making his ENO debut.AC Coliseum, London WC2 (020-7845 
9300), 3 May to 3 June.

Art

Sensing Spaces
Architecture is not just about walls and doors and iconic skylines. It is 
about what's inside a shape – the volumes that a building contains and how the 
human body moves through them. From labyrinths to pods, from vast open halls to 
underground swimming pools, architecture can craft powerful spatial experiences.
This exhibition <http://www.royalacademy.org.uk/exhibitions/sensingspaces/> 
uses multimedia installations to make the most avant-garde spaces of 
21st-century architecture come alive.Jonathan Jones Royal Academy, London W1 
(020-7300 8000), 25 January to 6 April.

Art as Therapy
Author Alain de Botton <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alaindebotton> 
believes museums should change lives.This exhibition 
<https://www.rijksmuseum.nl/en/whats-on/news/rijksmuseum-exhibition-agenda-2013-2015>
 applies that ideal – the theme of his book Art as Therapy – to the great 
collections of the Rijksmuseum. Can Rembrandt's Nightwatch help you deal with a 
fear of the dark? Does Vermeer's Milkmaid suffer from obsessive compulsive 
disorder? The exhibition no doubt asks far more profound questions than these 
as it aims to show how artistic masterpieces can heal the pain of modern life.JJ
Rijksmuseum, Amsterdam (0031 20 6747 000), 25 April to 7 September.

Digital Revolution
Digital culture is the future that's already here. But is it art? That old 
chestnut of a question is likely to be raised in new forms bythis survey 
<http://www.barbican.org.uk/bie/upcoming-digital-revolution> of how the digital 
revolution is changing everything from music (will.i.am is a participant) to 
cinema and interactive art (represented by Rafael Lozano-Hemmer among others). 
Perhaps the most fascinating field for debate is gaming, which is both 
addictive and genuinely creative in the complex imaginary worlds it reveals. If 
digital life is art, is the artist an individual or a crowd? JJ Barbican, 
London EC1 (020-7638 8891), 3 July to 14 September.

• This article was amended on 6 January 2014. An earlier version said Union, 
which opens at the Lyceum in Edinburgh in March, was written by Mark Thomson. 
He is the director; the playwright is Tim Barrow.
 