
Hi Mimi, what can you tell me about Home Live Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art>?

Home Live Art <http://www.homeliveart.com/> is an arts organisation that 
started life in the early 00s as one of the first few London venues wholly 
dedicated to presenting the work of artists engaged in live art practice. We 
started by supporting artists making radical, small-scale work in response to 
an inhabited family home in south London. There isn't a square foot of that 
house that wasn't used over the 70 performances we hosted there; artists made 
use of the basement utility room, the stairways, the bath and the parents' 
double bed.

Since the decision to leave the house behind for larger spaces with more 
diverse audiences our growth has been swift. We now work on large-scale, 
site-specific events in partnership with renowned cultural leaders such as the 
NationalTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> and the Barbican. 
We produce and deliver work that's inventive, distinct and attracts a broad 
audience.

What's the appeal of the participatory work you do?

What we found so exciting about our early work in the house was the importance 
of the relationship between artist, audience and the space. The intensity of 
this was in part generated by the close physical proximity of a "house-sized" 
room, but there was also the context of this homely environment that seemed to 
completely strip the work of any preconceived boundaries between artist space 
and audience space.

This notion provided the seed of pretty much everything we're about now: 
chasing the magic that happens when an audience is truly engaged, connected and 
integral to a piece of work.

Where do you think the new opportunities are for staging work?

We've worked with artists in some great spaces: on bus tours, pub crawls, in 
bathrooms, toilets, dressing rooms, parks, gardens and derelict building sites. 
This year we collaborated withShuffle Festival <http://www.shufflefestival.com/>
 to make use of the magnificent Tower Hamlets Cemetery Park.

You're a team with more than 15 years of experience in creative production – 
what are the big lessons you've learned in that time?

Preparing the ground for a participatory project takes a huge investment of 
time so don't underestimate the man hours. It takes as much time and effort to 
find participants, develop their trust and understanding of the project and 
then maintain good working relationships as it does to produce the project 
itself.

Relationships are also key so don't be complacent. We put a lot of thought 
into looking after the people we work with: artists, collaborators, 
participants and audiences. We make sure they're supported, we ask for their 
feedback and feed them well! If people feel valued they'll go that extra mile 
and be enthusiastic about coming back to work with you again.

Finally, risk is where it's at. As producers we make creative ideas happen in 
real life. It's a process that involves problem solving to the point where you 
need to anticipate every problem that might need solving before it 
materialises. The temptation is to plan to the maximum, where it's all 
completely nailed down. There is sometimes pressure from commissioning partners 
to know exactly what is on the tin, but incredible things take place when there 
is trust in an artist's process and flexibility to allow a participatory piece 
to evolve as it actually takes place.

What do you make of the rise of experiential work where people want to 
interact and participate?

Today's arts programmes are rich with experiential work. I'm really excited by 
the wealth of ideas, artists and companies that are exploring the myriad ways 
to bend boundaries and break conventions. Doubly exciting is the fact that 
audiences are actively seeking out performance experiences. As an avid consumer 
of this work myself it sometimes feels less appealing to go back to a passive 
theatre context when you've experienced the thrill of being immersed in, among 
and somehow an integral part of the direction of a piece.

At the end of the day it's all about being engaged and mentally transported, 
which still happens to me from the anonymous comfort of an auditorium chair if 
I'm in front of very high quality work.

How do you ensure that things like the experience or the place don't get in 
the way of creating high quality work?

I've seen a few pieces where you just know the "gimmick" came first and the 
work came second. I've experienced as many disappointing, uncomfortable and 
patronising experiential pieces as I have inspiring and unique ones.

You can spot it a mile off if the participatory aspect is tokenistic. The 
successful execution of this type of work is a risky tightrope walk between 
looking after and challenging those participating. As an audience member or 
participant it's so important to feel safe before you can completely let go 
into something. It's not always an easy thing to get right.

Mimi Banks is co-founder and director of Home Live Art 
<http://www.homeliveart.com/>, which you can follow on Twitter @homeliveart  
<https://twitter.com/homeliveart>

More Arts head interviews

• Lighthouse Brighton on exploring the dark side of the web 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/05/juha-zelfde-lighthouse-brighton-arts>
• Up Projects on creating London's Floating Cinema 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/aug/13/floating-cinema-london-up-projects>
• Unicorn theatre on paying attention to parents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/nov/26/purni-morell-unicorn-theatre-interview>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 