
Hi Tyrone, what can you tell me about Genesis Cinema?

Genesis Cinema <http://www.genesiscinema.co.uk/> is an independent, family 
owned and run cinema in Whitechapel, east London. Unbeknownst to me when I 
bought the derelict building over 16 years ago, my mum and dad did all their 
courting here in the 60s. We screen mainstream, independent and short film; 
showcase new artists in our gallery; host poets, comedians and scriptwriters on 
stage at our cocktail bar; put on a number of events and festivals, and drink a 
lot of espresso from our Grindhouse Café downstairs.

We aim to be a cultural hub for east London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> in a discrete, non-threatening way. We 
do this by creating a space where people can just come and hang out, maybe for 
a coffee or cocktail, and find themselves exposed to something they might have 
been reluctant to engage with, like a poetry slam, then realising that it’s 
actually pretty cool. If it’s not their cup of tea, that’s okay, but at least 
they now have a valued opinion of it. That’s how people should experience art.

How do you encourage diverse audiences through the door at Genesis?

I would love to say we have an advanced research algorithm that helps us, but 
it’s more a case of not discouraging a diverse audience. We’re in east London, 
which probably has one of, if not the most, diverse populations in the UK, both 
culturally and economically, so we work very hard not to put any barriers in 
the way of audiences.

We show what we consider to be the best product possible, whether it be 
commercial mainstream, indie or world cinema. We have a number of price points 
for the different environments in which we show the films, for example, our 
sofa-filled Studio 5, which can accommodate up to 40 people. The biggest and 
most regular compliment we get is that our staff are so friendly and helpful, 
which is one of the most important things in gaining the diverse audience we 
have.

The key is: the film programme, the price and a smile!

Are you excited by the future of the cinema experience?

We’ve just installed (immersive cinema lighting system) Philips Lightvibes 
<http://www.lighting.philips.com/main/subsites/special_lighting/lightvibes/>, 
making us the first commercial cinema in the world to be able to exhibit with 
this technology. It’s a system that uses LED panels to create ambient light in 
the auditorium, reflecting the mood of the scene playing on screen.

Initially this is going to be used for live events that we’ll show via 
satellite, such as concerts and opera and so on, but Philips is already talking 
to the studios about making feature films incorporating the technology. I was 
sceptical at first because I’m a real film purist, but it’s very cool the way 
the guys integrate it with what you’re watching on screen. Expect to see more 
of it, but remember the little East End indie that took the plunge first.

Is British film in good health?

It is and there are a number of factors. We have incredible talent in this 
country and in terms of engineering, we have always been respected worldwide. 
Over the past decade, it has become more respectable to follow a career in 
film. In fact, 10 years ago, people would say a film career was an oxymoron. 
The skill set in engineering is extremely similar to the one required in 
film-making and the amount of former engineers in this industry (myself 
included) is incredible. I guess we’re all creative people who are now being 
“allowed” into one of the great creative industries and as traditional 
engineering jobs have diminished, there has been a positive brain drain into 
film.

The British Film Commission <http://www.britishfilmcommission.org.uk/> (Film 
London <http://filmlondon.org.uk/> and its associates) is also working closely 
with Justine Simons, head of culture for the Mayor of London, and has made the 
capital an extremely attractive place to make films. This has translated to the 
rest of the country, which has resulted in a huge increase in UK production and 
therefore home award successes as well as increased jobs and income for the 
sector.

This doesn’t mean we can rest on our laurels; it just means we are in good 
shape to build upon further because what is seen as the more traditional film 
career – writing, directing, producing, acting – is getting tougher and tougher 
for UK talent.

What other challenges do you see facing the British film industry in the next 
10 years?

We need to be sharpening our business skills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/mar/03/british-film-industry-bfi-career-comment>
, but we must recognise that we need to keep pushing the boundaries not only 
with film technology but with scripts and film techniques too. That’s where our 
strength has always been as a tiny nation: we continually punch above our 
weight when we’re inventive.

What do you think about live-streaming shows and re-screening old performances 
into cinemas?

It’s a really good thing both for us and the audience. It gives me a real buzz 
to know that we can give access to Royal Opera House productions or Danny 
Boyle’s Frankenstein to an audience in an environment in which they will feel 
comfortable. It’s not just about physical comfort; it’s about coming to a place 
that they’ve been visiting for years, so they already fit in.

Tyrone Walker-Hebborn is director of Genesis Cinema 
<http://www.genesiscinema.co.uk/> and co-founder of the East End Film Festival 
<http://www.eastendfilmfestival.com/>

More like this

• Create’s Hadrian Garrard on gentrification in east London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/sep/02/hadrian-garrard-create-east-london>
• Film careers tips from Sheff Doc/Fest’s Charlie Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/jun/10/sheffield-doc-fest-charlie-phillips>
• Why British film is not thriving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/mar/03/british-film-industry-bfi-career-comment>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 