
Hi Tim, what can you tell me about the Royal Academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/royal-academy-of-arts> and your role 
there asdirector of artistic programmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/05/royal-academy-tim-marlow-exhibitions>
?

I oversee exhibitions, collections, library, learning and architecture. You 
could say I'm responsible for the creative vision of one of the world's most 
original institutions: a place that was founded by artists and is run by 
artists; that has the best gallery spaces in Europe; that is built – literally 
as well as metaphorically – around an art school and which has the idea of 
human creativity running through its veins.

You've previously said the Royal Academy is "slightly misunderstood, slightly 
underrated and slightly anti-establishment" – what do you mean by that?

Most people think the Royal Academy is publicly funded. It isn't; few seem to 
know it exists as an artistic academy with theRA Schools 
<http://www.royalacademy.org.uk/the-ra-schools> at its heart: 57 students with 
fully-paid fees since it was founded. Most critically, artists run the place 
and constantly elect new members. You have artists of all generations, 
practices and attitudes.

Consequently, there's an in-built creative tension and by definition, if 
certain academicians are seen to embody the establishment, there are plenty who 
patently do not. As a result, there is much less orthodoxy than one would find 
in major, more curatorially-dominated institutions.

What were the big lessons you learned during your time as director of 
exhibitions atWhite Cube <http://whitecube.com/>?

The pleasure, privilege and complexity of working with many of the world's 
most important artists, and the idea that if you want to make something happen 
there's almost always a way.

Art critics are not exactly having their best years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/29/independent-titles-cut-back-arts-coverage>
 – what do we risk by losing these writers and thinkers?

There's a danger that we reduce all culture to the level of infotainment, and 
that the arts only get covered through preview and profile. Considered 
criticism from people who have knowledge, and occasional prejudices, is a 
crucial part of a healthy, combative, confident culture

What are your views on Tony Hall's promise to increase the BBC's arts coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/mar/25/bbc-arts-coverage-extra-3m>?

Too early to tell but clearly a greater variety of voices and views are needed 
as is resisting the idea of getting celebrities to front arts programmes in the 
name of accessibility; it's deluded and patronising. But the signs are 
promising and theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> has always 
produced good arts programmes, not least on radio where daily arts coverage 
remains world-class.

You've spoken before about the gallery/artist relationship – what makes it 
work, and equally, what it is that can make that relationship so weak and 
brittle?

This would require an essay, but in essence: flexibility and trust – the idea 
of aligning the interests of both sides tends to be easier if it's not 
contractually bound. The best galleries are artist-led not client-driven. 
Without the best artists, primary market galleries are impotent, but without 
great spaces and ambitious galleries, many great contemporary artists would get 
bogged down in the management of their own careers rather than in the 
realisation of their creative vision

You've worked in journalism, education, publishing, broadcast, galleries and 
startups – ever wanted to focus on one thing?

I always focus on one thing, it just changes all the time! Occasionally the 
desire to immerse yourself completely in one project seems appealing but the 
crossover between the areas you mention is energising and often symbiotic. It's 
never dull, that's for sure.

Any advice for our readers who have similar portfolio careers?

There's a certain paradox here, because I'd suggest being receptive to as much 
as possible but also encourage people to try and develop areas of expertise and 
always follow what they fundamentally believe in. It's easier to spot bluffers 
than some seem to imagine. Anyway, that having been said, the next stage is to 
drink bucket-loads of coffee and take whatever opportunities come your way.

Are you optimistic about the future of British art?

Yes. Cultural momentum is the key and it's there. Of course there are threats 
but Britain is more comfortable with visual culture than at anytime in its 
history I'd say.

Tim Marlow is director of artistic programmes at the Royal Academy 
<https://www.royalacademy.org.uk/> and curator of fine art at this year's Noise 
Festival <http://noisefestival.com/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 