
Cycling to work gives me a burst of energy before settling down in the office. 
Checking my diary and appointments, catching up with emails and prioritising 
tasks is my usual starting point, along with a strong coffee. My desk has a 
window that looks into the Young Oasis creche and as the morning progresses 
there’s a constant sound of babies and children laughing, crying, chatting, 
singing. It is the heart of the organisation and a reminder of the importance 
of the work that we all do here.


Advocating for a child’s needs is central to the work that we do, it requires 
persistence as well as sensitivity
Jo Parker 
The Young Oasis Centre is part of Brighton Oasis Project 
<http://www.oasisproject.org.uk/> and supports infants, children and young 
people from birth to the age of 25 who are affected by familial drug or alcohol 
misuse. These are some of the most vulnerable children and young people in our 
city. A multi-disciplinary team offers a range of services; the creche enables 
the parent or parents to access drug or alcohol treatment services, there is a 
therapy service, a programme of outdoor art-oriented and creative projects as 
well as a specialist young women’s alcohol worker.


Before my years of training to qualify as an integrative arts psychotherapist, 
I studied fine art and have always been interested in how we express ourselves 
and function in relation to the world and each other. In my current role I am 
both manager to the Young Oasis team and a practising psychotherapist, 
balancing the challenges of leadership with clinical work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F13%2Farts-psychotherapy-vulnerable-children-young-oasis-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423738611317%2F41e63747-4709-4c00-ab83-97aabb1baec8-765x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arts%20psychotherapy%3A%20I%20am%20helping%20to%20give%20vulnerable%20children%20a%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F13%2Farts-psychotherapy-vulnerable-children-young-oasis-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arts%20psychotherapy%3A%20I%20am%20helping%20to%20give%20vulnerable%20children%20a%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F13%2Farts-psychotherapy-vulnerable-children-young-oasis-brighton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423738611317%2F41e63747-4709-4c00-ab83-97aabb1baec8-765x1020.jpeg>
 ‘By my desk there’s an Olympic medal made of clay. This was given to me by a 
child living in kinship care.’ Photograph: Jo Parker 
My daily diet includes scheduled meetings, report writing, supervisory tasks, 
the necessary frustrations of funding reapplication, but most importantly case 
work and therapy sessions with children and young people. On top of that there 
are many variables: phone calls and communications from social workers, 
parents, carers, teachers, workers, inquiries as well as emergencies and 
crucial child protection issues to be dealt with.


Lunch serves as a necessary refresh before clinical work; if the weather is 
terrible then I may dive next door to the family centre where the food is 
amazing, or alternatively I head the Soup Department, a van in the woodyard 
down the road.


There is strong sense of commitment from the team working together with these 
families. Advocating for a child’s needs is central to the work that we do, it 
requires persistence as well as sensitivity. For example, it may be that a 
child has been excluded from school because of their behaviour. Helping others 
understand the context of their lives is a way of accessing further support. We 
work hard to build relationships with the families, carers and professionals 
that are in a child’s life.


Being with the children and young people is an inspiration. By my desk there’s 
an Olympic medal made of clay. This was given to me by a child living in 
‘kinship care’, who kept running away from school, barefoot. They would often 
be found in the creche next door where they felt safe.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> are incredibly resourceful at 
getting their needs met, and this is often misunderstood. All arrive with a 
different story, some of them have never been really listened to.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F13%2Farts-psychotherapy-vulnerable-children-young-oasis-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423741238829%2Fa7fba988-fde4-4dc2-bb29-ee5e11f0433b-765x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arts%20psychotherapy%3A%20I%20am%20helping%20to%20give%20vulnerable%20children%20a%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F13%2Farts-psychotherapy-vulnerable-children-young-oasis-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arts%20psychotherapy%3A%20I%20am%20helping%20to%20give%20vulnerable%20children%20a%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F13%2Farts-psychotherapy-vulnerable-children-young-oasis-brighton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423741238829%2Fa7fba988-fde4-4dc2-bb29-ee5e11f0433b-765x1020.jpeg>
 ‘The use of traditional, as well as less typical, art materials underpins all 
activity at the project.’ Photograph: Jo Parker 
Children <https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/children> turn up 
feeling like they are the problem but often there are themes of neglect, 
domestic violence, stigmatisation, grief and trauma. Last year approximately 
60% of our clients were living in care, generally they come from all kinds of 
backgrounds, not just areas associated with poverty.


Every team member is impacted by the work we do. Regular clinical supervision 
is essential for me and my colleagues. The use of traditional, as well as less 
typical, art materials underpins all activity at the project. In the therapy 
rooms there are paints, clay, a sand tray, objects, puppets, dressing-up 
clothes and musical instruments. This toolbox allows children to express what 
they are feeling. It is not about being an artist, it is about communication. 
An image, assembly or set of actions can speak volumes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F13%2Farts-psychotherapy-vulnerable-children-young-oasis-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423738746373%2Ff61bc78e-3467-4627-a27c-47b9d90eb999-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arts%20psychotherapy%3A%20I%20am%20helping%20to%20give%20vulnerable%20children%20a%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F13%2Farts-psychotherapy-vulnerable-children-young-oasis-brighton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arts%20psychotherapy%3A%20I%20am%20helping%20to%20give%20vulnerable%20children%20a%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F13%2Farts-psychotherapy-vulnerable-children-young-oasis-brighton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F12%2F1423738746373%2Ff61bc78e-3467-4627-a27c-47b9d90eb999-1020x612.jpeg>
 ‘It is not about being an artist, it is about communication. An image, 
assembly or set of actions can speak volumes.’ Photograph: Jo Parker 
Within the therapeutic space any work produced is confidential. The Outdoor 
Art Groups serve a different purpose and bodies of work are produced which we 
exhibit. We protect children’s identity but give them a voice.


The final rituals before leaving work are completing case notes, clearing the 
therapy rooms, locking all filing cabinets and turning off the computer.


Once I had an “Oi, Miss!” from a client who spotted me, gesticulating to his 
friends, “That’s my therapist!” but these are rare occurrences.

Essential to my health are my family, partner, friends and a life outside of 
work. Regular yoga is more than a luxury for me and walking into the wild is 
also necessary. My own creative practice remains important – contemporary art 
is my core interest – and I also enjoy theatre, performance and cinema.


If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, email socialcare@theguardian.com.

Why not join our social care community? Becoming a member of the Guardian 
Social Care Network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and best 
practice in the sector, as well as exclusive offers. You can sign up – for free 
–online here <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/>.
 