
Hi Geoff, can you tell me a bit about the Leicester Comedy Festival 
<http://www.comedy-festival.co.uk/>? Does it have an aim?

Other than being a comedy festival, our aim is having as much stuff happen as 
possible in February, that will appeal to as many people as possible. When we 
started the festival, there were a few comedy festivals in the UK – not many, 
but they were very standup orientated. What we've tried to do is make the 
festival as eclectic and different as possible, so we have standup, but we also 
have films and exhibitions and dance performances. One of the original aims of 
the festival, which I've always hung on to, is that we want as many people as 
possible to know about it.

You put on over 600 shows across the festival, which sounds like a logistical 
nightmare – how do you ensure it all runs smoothly?

It works a bit like Edinburgh festival in the sense that we don't centrally 
promote everything ourselves. If we did it would drive us all insane, so we 
work very closely with our venues and promoters, who put on a lot of the shows 
– they take a lot of the logistical challenges away from us.

What we focus on doing is trying to sustain the excitement around the 
festival, as well as engage with people, which helps make an impact on the city 
and reinforce that there's an event happening. It's handy because it means we 
can focus on the "festiveness" of whole thing.

You mention "festiveness" – how do you keep the festival so energetic and 
exciting?

We do it by putting on special and one-off events. Festivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/festivals> need to be disruptive; a 
festival that happens over three nights in one venue is not disruptive or 
different. We've always worked hard towards that, so whether it's our 
photographic exhibition, the big outdoor firework show in the middle of town on 
the opening night, or whether it's late night parties or launch events – 
whatever it might be, it's really important that disruption is there, and that 
people realise something is happening.

This might sound cheesy but up until very recently the festival was called the 
Leicester Comedy Festival [now sponsored by Dave]. Those three words were of 
equal importance. So of course it's important the festival is about the comedy, 
but also that it's relevant toLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leicester> and that it's festive. Lots of 
events forget the word "festival" in their title – they focus on putting on 
some great shows perhaps, but they're not particularly festive.

I like that you experiment a lot and try new things at the festival – how do 
you handle risk?

We've not done it for a number of years, but in the early days I would sit on 
the door of a comedy show working out how much money was lost because we'd put 
it on at 1am on a Wednesday morning. No one would come. I do distinctly 
remember sitting there and thinking: that was a mistake. But saying that, I'm 
still really glad we did those shows, and I always say to people: we'll take 
those risks and be experimental, and some of those things will work and some of 
them won't. But that's part of the point of doing a festival: tying things out.

How has comedy on television impacted how you run the festival?

In the early years, what was really difficult was finding audiences for 
comedians who hadn't been on television. There was very much a culture that if 
you'd been on Channel 4 or BBC 2 then people would come, and that was difficult 
for us to promote a festival and to put on acts who I thought were brilliant, 
but who didn't have that profile.

That has completely changed and now there's a considerable audience of people 
who think: you know what, we haven't seen any of these comedians, but we'll pay 
£5 to go along – and they'll enjoy it. That's brilliant because it means we can 
take more risks; we can be more certain for acts that they'll have an audience.

You also head up Big Difference Company 
<http://www.bigdifferencecompany.co.uk/>, which raises awareness of social, 
health and environmental issues through comedy – what makes laughter a good 
medium for this?

If you can make people laugh, it's a different way to communicate messages. At 
the moment there's a lot of pressure on health professionals to think 
differently and deliver messages in a different way. If you can invite someone 
a comedy show and it happens to educate them at the same time, that's really 
positive.

When I was growing up, the whole HIV thing came about – the iceberg leaflet 
was put through everybody's letter box and they were all terrified about it. 
But I remember all of that, largely because of late-night shows on TV with 
comedians doing things with condoms and cucumbers. They delivered the same 
health message in a different way, and as a teenager I found that really 
accessible.

Geoff Rowe is director of the Leicester Comedy Festival 
<http://www.comedy-festival.co.uk/>, which begins on 7 February – follow the 
festival on Twitter@DavesLeicsFest <https://twitter.com/DavesLeicsFest> and 
Geoff@geoff_rowe <https://twitter.com/geoff_rowe>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 