
Hi Wendy, can you tell me a bit about Southbank Centre’s 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/> dance provision?

We want to share our passion for dance by presenting and commissioning the 
work of artists and companies that excite, inspire and provoke. We also look 
for work that speaks to the themes of our festivals. Across the year, the 
programme at Southbank is driven by a series of thematic festivals that provide 
a framework for investigating the world of contemporary dance from particular 
perspectives.

How are you engaging new dance audiences at Southbank Centre?

Learning and participation is hugely important to us and there are always 
opportunities to become engaged with dance more deeply than by simply watching 
a performance. This is a great way for people to step into the world of dance. 
ForUnlimited <http://unlimited.southbankcentre.co.uk/> – our upcoming festival 
celebrating the artistic vision and originality of artists with disabilities – 
people can take part in a workshop led by integrated dance companyStopgap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/apr/08/stopgap-dance-company-disabled-artists>
, where disabled and non-disabled people with no dance skills can learn 
together.

We’re also presenting the return of Groove on Down the Road 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/groove-on-down-the-road-83590>, 
ZooNation’s hip-hop dance show inspired by The Wizard of Oz. The performers are 
from ZooNation’s youth company, all aged between nine and 19. The show is 
bringing in family audiences, many of whom are seeing a dance show for the 
first time.

What’s your programming process?

The only way you can really understand the landscape of what’s happening in 
contemporary dance is by seeing a lot of work. To make a festival like 
Unlimited, I endeavour to see as much work as possible created by disabled 
artists and I also get to know the artists so I can understand their particular 
point of view, their creative goals and career ambitions.

Finding work is the beginning of the process. When I see a show I analyse my 
own response but I also ask a series of questions about why I would present a 
work, who would want to see it and what our marketing and PR team might say to 
sell it. In the end, the decisions you make are always driven by questions of 
context, budget and marketing.

Dance received almost a 10% funding rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2014/jul/01/dance-larts-council-funding-rise-khan-vardimon-bourne-birmingham-leeds>
 in the recent national portfolio organisation (NPO) round – why do you think 
Arts Council England (ACE) upped its investment?

There are so many people and organisations in the UK passionately committed to 
dance – from the brilliant artists creating the work we see to community 
programmes likeBig Dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/may/15/people-creative-social-big-dance-pledge>
 that bring people together. Dance plays such an important role in our culture 
and community, and the NPO funding increase is acknowledgement of that fact.

What’s the key then to making sure that investment stays strong in the 
long-term?

Creating and touring work requires serious financial commitment so the idea of 
organisations pooling resources is a smart one. The important thing is that the 
work is seen and that opportunities and audiences continue to grow. Wouldn’t it 
be great if the corporate world could see the immense value in this and begin 
to support dance the way it supports sport?

How far do you think disability arts have come since the London 2012 
Paralympics?

The Unlimited programme <http://weareunlimited.org.uk/> and the opening and 
closing ceremonies of the Paralympics proved, as Lyn Gardnerrecently 
acknowledged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/jul/29/disability-arts-cuts-access-to-work-theatre>
 on her blog, that disability arts are an integral part of the arts ecology and 
society itself. ACE, Creative Scotland and theSpirit of 2012 Trust 
<http://www.spiritof2012trust.org.uk/> have acknowledged this by committing 
ongoing funding to enable the Unlimited programme to continue to commission, 
develop and show ambitious and high-quality work both nationally and 
internationally.

The disappointing thing is that as these funding agencies recognise the merit 
and value of disability arts, many artists with disabilities are finding it 
difficult to get the support they need to make work because of government cuts 
to theAccess to Work scheme <https://www.gov.uk/access-to-work/overview>. There 
is a paradox there that needs to be addressed.

What needs to change?

Without the support of the Access to Work scheme, creating work can be a 
massive challenge for artists with disabilities. Deaf artists who require sign 
interpreters for communication or artists who need carers to be with them are 
simply not able to work without support. We are not talking about benefits; 
they are essential.

As presenters we must also consider the needs of audience members with 
disabilities. A huge part of our budget and planning for Unlimited is committed 
to ensure that as many performances as possible are BSL interpreted, captioned 
and audio described. These are essential provisions. They are costly but venues 
must commit to making work accessible to everyone.

What do you make of what’s going on at the moment with the Australian arts and 
culture sector?

It’s devastating to have a government that does not respect and support the 
role of the arts.The biggest arts cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/13/budget-will-take-87m-from-arts-including-cuts-to-screen-australia>
 in the recent budget were to theAustralia Council for the Arts 
<http://www.australiacouncil.gov.au/> and Screen Australia 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/>.

Take cinema: for a small country, Australia has punched well above its weight 
and our films speak to a broad international audience. But it’s the leadership 
that makes a difference. Culture thrived in Australia under Gough Whitlam and 
later Paul Keating. These were enlightened individuals.

Wendy Martin is head of dance and performance at Southbank Centre 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/>, which you can follow on Twitter 
@southbankcentre <https://twitter.com/southbankcentre>

More like this

• Stopgap Dance Company’s Lucy Bennett on diversity in dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/apr/08/stopgap-dance-company-disabled-artists>
• Probe’s Antonia Grove on gender issues in dance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/dec/17/arts-head-antonia-grove-probe-dance>
• Interview with Chantal Guevara, director of Cloud Dance festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/oct/16/chantal-guevara-cloud-dance-festival>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 