
What can you tell me about Middlesbrough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/middlesbrough> Institute of Modern Art 
(Mima)?

Mima was set up in 2007. It has been going for seven years under the remit of 
showing great art for everyone, similar to Arts Council England’s remit. It’s 
an institution that aims to put on high-level shows that attract international 
attention, combining that with a strong learning and education programme for 
the region.

Why push the gallery towards a “mass usership model”? 

In my previous role at Grizedale Arts <http://www.grizedale.org/>, I was 
always trying to find other ways for art to work. There are quite substantial 
issues around the value placed on culture and the visual arts, particularly 
since the economic crash. Also within our lifetime, people have found art in 
their ordinary lives; they don’t necessarily feel the need to go to museums and 
galleries anymore. Now the associations of fine art are with the richer members 
of society and thearts market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/mar/19/international-art-market-2013-facts-figures>
.

I’ve been revisiting the earlier ideas of art, before the market was invented 
in the 19th century. (Leading Victorian art critic)John Ruskin 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Ruskin> and (American philosopher) John Dewey
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Dewey> both campaigned for the idea of art 
working in ordinary life. They saw art not for art’s sake, but as a tool for 
education and for enhancing the world around us. They wanted to make art useful.

What I’m proposing for Mima is to make the “useful” museum, or the useful 
institution, and to make it accessible to everyone. What’s quite exciting about 
somewhere like Middlesbrough is that it’s not London and there’s no reason why 
it should try to be like London. It’s nice to think of running a completely 
different program, aimed at serving the community and its constituents by 
operating civilly – really acting as part of the region’s social fabric.

How will you bring Ruskin’s ideology that art should shape society to Mima?

Mima is one of a number of big art institutions in the UK, but I think there’s 
an opportunity here to be experimental and to really take a bit of a leadership 
role rather than just doing exhibitions we think the art world will appreciate. 
You need to look ahead and say: what’s the future of art? What is its role in 
society? How can we use an institute like Mima to demonstrate those values and 
aims? We need people to start to value art so they no longer say; “we’d rather 
have a hospital than an art gallery.” You want to get to the point where people 
realise they need an art galleryand a hospital. Suddenly the two are not 
mutually exclusive because society values art and sees what it does.

Your approach to residencies at Grizedale Arts was well respected, with Laure 
Prouvost <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/laure-prouvost> creating her 
Turner Prize-winning Wantee there – what can you tell me about the approach?

The norm with artists’ residencies, and particularly rural residencies, is to 
give artists the freedom to do whatever they want. At Grizedale, we 
specifically didn’t give them that freedom. Instead, we would get them to do 
useful things within the community there. For example,Liam Gillick 
<http://www.grizedale.org/artists/liam.gillick> recently designed a library for 
the village, An Endless Supply created the Honest Shop and (Kinks star) Ray 
Davieswrote a school play 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-14769102>.

Everything was designed to have a function and to be of benefit to the 
community because in recent years, that social engagement within art has still 
allowed the artist to have the last word. In a way, a lot of community 
projects, even with lots of people involved, are ultimately about making work 
that advances an artist’s career. Something we need to bring back into the 
equation is the responsibility artists have. They should work collectively 
within society to be more useful. The turnaround has been quite astonishing, 
now people really value the projects that we’ve done in a way that they 
probably wouldn’t value projects that look like contemporary art.

What other lessons did you learn in your time at Grizedale Arts?

Don’t try to do what other people are doing. The art world can be a very 
conservative place, where people are constantly looking around to critics, 
curators and their peers to try to do what will be accepted because a lot of 
value in the market is based on consensus.

At Grizedale, you’re so distanced from the centre of the art world; you can do 
a lot of things you normally wouldn’t get away with, so it actually makes it a 
very experimental place to be. I think what the artists really value is that 
they haven’t got the London art world looking at them. They can really let go, 
do things they wouldn’t normally do and can be pushed to work in ways they 
wouldn’t normally work. That creates a really interesting, different way of 
doing art, which then has a real impact in the art world. You have more impact 
in art terms by not playing the system, totally.

Can we expect to see any technological developments in your time at Mima?


Yes, I would hope so! One of the things I’m very interested in is a much 
broader understanding of art. In a way, tech is the new craft. If you look at 
the way people use art in their lives now, it’s very much based on technology. 
My children play computer games,go on YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/oct/14/youtube-arts-tips-experts-webchat>
 and make films and animations. They use technology in a way that people used 
to use pencil, watercolours, paper and sticky tape.

One of the difficulties that art institutions face is this shift in how people 
use creativity in their lives. Through Mima, we definitely need to think about 
how we accommodate that technology. One of things I really want to try and push 
forward is for people to see the institution as a place of making, not just a 
place of looking.

I’m very keen to bring in maker and hackerspace technologies 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hackerspace>, and to use technology to make 
products for the shop, retail and education. Children could learn how to do 
computer-aided design, use 3D printers, make products and basically be creative 
with technology. That’s really important. Also what’s quite nice about 
Middlesbrough is that technology is one of the big growth areas in education 
and in industry. It would be great to work with all of that as well and to see 
it as art. I want to see all this stuff under one umbrella of creativity.

Alistair Hudson is director of the Middlesbrough Institute of Modern Art 
<http://www.visitmima.com/>, which you can follow on Twitter @mimamodernart 
<https://twitter.com/mimamodernart>

More like this

• North-east England art in focus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/may/08/north-east-england-art-baltic-mima>
• Interview with the co-founders of The Unit London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/sep/16/the-unit-london-gallery-art-interview>
• Create’s Hadrian Garrard on art in the community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/sep/02/hadrian-garrard-create-east-london>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 