
Hi Monica, what can you tell me about The Stables?

The Stables <http://www.stables.org/> is one of the UK's leading music 
organisations. It was founded by Sir John Dankworth and Dame Cleo Laine over 40 
years ago as a charity with a mission to engage the widest range of people with 
music in all its diversity. We present over 370 gigs each year and over 250 
projects that encourage learning about and participation in music.

Some say we need new models for touring music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jan/30/bands-fans-touring-live-music>
 – what do you think?

I think there are real challenges for both musicians and promoters, but there 
have always been obstacles to overcome. If anything, the definition of what 
success means has become a bit distorted; it's defined more and more by an 
ability to fill an arena for 12 dates rather than fill smaller spaces for a 
sustained touring period.

A lucky few can do this (most for a short period of time) but to sustain a 
long career you either need an incredibly lucky break or be prepared to work 
hard both on and off stage, including working with promoters to engage and 
develop audiences.

So what does that mean for the next generation of musicians?

Some sections of the music industry seem better equipped than others to 
develop young musicians. Look at the folk sector and you see quite a thriving 
young scene where great talent usually finds a way of getting heard, and is 
frequently supported and championed by established artists. But when ambition 
is geared around finding overnight success with a large recording deal, I think 
you have to be lucky to find it and sustain it.

We see too many artists who, even having had that break, find themselves cast 
adrift after a year or two and without the skills or experience to do their own 
networking, tour bookings and PR – they simply can't sustain their audiences or 
careers. As a charity we feel an enormous responsibility to both developing 
artists and developing audiences, but it's not easy to balance the financial 
risk.

You're also the brains behind IF: Milton Keynes International Festival 
<http://www.ifmiltonkeynes.org/home.html> – why put on a festival there, 
specifically?

Milton Keynes is the fastest growing town in Europe and although it has yet to 
be awarded official city status, its population growth will place it in the top 
ten UK cities by 2031. In 2009, Arts Council England (ACE) identified that the 
town's cultural infrastructure wasn't keeping apace with its development and 
asked The Stables andMilton Keynes Gallery <http://www.mkgallery.org/> if we 
could contribute ideas towards changing that picture.

The first festival was a bit of an experiment but it was deemed to be a great 
success and people pleaded with us to do it again. We worked with ACE andMilton 
Keynes <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/milton-keynes> Council to secure the 
resources to build it into a biennial event and here we are on the cusp of 
delivering the third edition.

There's a cruel joke that goes: what's the difference between a yoghurt and 
Milton Keynes? Yoghurt has culture. How much is a festival like this about 
profile and pride?

In just two editions of the festival, we've made people think twice about 
what's possible here. We've even ignited an ambition for Milton Keynes to bid 
for European capital of culture in 2023. People might sneer at that but you 
have to look at what the town has achieved in the past few years. It defied the 
odds to be included as a host city in England's FIFA World Cup bid and in 2015 
will be a host city for the Rugby World Cup. The appetite to bid for these big 
events has been hugely important in helping us to realise the festival and now 
it doesn't seem that great a leap of the imagination to capital of culture.

Those who live and work in Milton Keynes are fiercely proud of it and the 
festival is playing its part in fostering that sense of pride. 80% of people 
who attended in 2012 believe it's adding to their sense of pride in the city and
98% reported <http://www.ifmiltonkeynes.org/amazing-festival-facts.html> that 
it was having a positive impact on their perception of Milton Keynes. There's 
more to this place than the easy jibes would have you believe.

You're a strong believer in the power of lists – how important are they to an 
arts manager?

I love lists! I have so much information to juggle I just couldn't do without 
them. In fact, I have lists of lists now and use an electronic list manager 
which syncs across all my gadgets. I find when I'm worried about something or 
struggling to find a way through it helps to make a list and when you start 
crossing things out you have dealt with – everything seems just a little bit 
better.

Monica Ferguson is chief executive and artistic director of The Stables 
<http://www.stables.org/> – follow the venue on Twitter @StablesMK 
<https://twitter.com/StablesMK>

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 