
Hi Dawn, what can you tell me about Eclipse Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre>?

Eclipse Theatre Company <http://eclipsetheatre.org.uk/> has a mission to 
influence and instigate change that leads to a more diverse and equitable 
theatrical landscape. We deliver on this mission by producing an annual 
regional mid-scale tour of a high quality production, the starting point always 
being a story from the black experience. We also aim to raise the profile of 
black artists in the regions.

What did you make of Lyn Gardner's recent blog, where she wrote that theatre is
by default middle-class, white and male 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/mar/03/theatre-middle-class-white-male-diversify>
?

The thing that has always struck me about British theatre is how much it 
functions like an institution, and a very British one. It tends to be 
hierarchical, there is a coded language, there is usually a white, middle-class 
male at the top – in this case an artistic director – and then lots and lots of 
people working very hard to make sure that one person is happy and never upset. 
The net result is that maximum effort seems to be going into staying the same. 
This status quo is then reflected on our stages.

How far have we come since the 1980s, when colour-blind casting started to be 
introduced?

A director that I don't know emailed me recently to ask about two actors with 
whom he was considering working. This isn't unusual; directors spot directors 
they know on an actor's CV and ring to ask questions all the time. It was 
strange because I had never worked with either actor, so why was he asking me 
if I wasn't on their CVs? The only conclusion I could come to was that both the 
actors were black and as a black director I was bound to know them. Wow, 2014.

Whenever we address the issue of diversity, we always focus on casting. For me 
this issue isn't just about casting but who gets to actuallydo the casting: 
directors, artistic directors, producers, associates and so on. Insist on 
diversity at that level and you will improve theatre overnight.

For me, however, the crucial moment of change will be achieved through new 
audiences. Most theatre staff begin their relationship with the artform as an 
audience member – it therefore follows that if theatres fail to attract a 
diverse audience then it will continue to fail to attract a diverse workforce 
in their production, finance, communication, administration and artistic 
departments. We will be having the same conversation in the next 30 years.

Some see a widening divide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2014/feb/04/arts-funding-paines-plough-redistribution>
 between the haves and the have nots in small-scale touring – is the economy 
flawed?

Eclipse Theatre is only funded to deliver one annual middle-scale tour, but 
whenever I've assembled a small-scale tour, I've been shocked by the economics: 
being asked to do only one or two nights, with no guarantees, which all adds up 
to no real income at all.

It can only work with a subsidy, one performer and no set. The economics of 
touring small-scale simply doesn't work and this is very dangerous for areas of 
low engagement. The only thing I can think of would be the festival model – 
lots of performances in one space over a number of days – but I have yet to do 
the maths, so I could be very wrong.

What couldn't you do your job as artistic director without?

• Funding: that one speaks for itself
• My family: who are not remotely impressed with what I do and why; I need 
that grounding
• Good trainers: I have to cover a lot of ground travelling the country, 
pacing while on the phone and in rehearsals
• The internet: news, debates, events, social media research and healthy 
recipes – I'm lost without all these

Dawn Walton is artistic director of Eclipse Theatre 
<http://eclipsetheatre.org.uk/> 

Sizwe Banzi is Dead 
<http://eclipsetheatre.org.uk/featured/2014-national-tour-sizwe-banzi-is-dead/> 
is at the Young Vic until 15 March and tours from May

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. To get more articles like this 
direct to your inbox, sign up free to become amember of the Culture 
Professionals Network <https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/>.
 