
Can you tell more about your role as inventor-in-residence?

My role at the Science Museum <http://www.sciencemuseum.org.uk/> is to create 
products that draw on the museum’s collection as well as some of the more 
intriguing scientific phenomena on show. The hope is that these products spark 
an interest in science, design and engineering. I design products that sell in 
the museum shop and create objects to help publicise events or exhibitions. The 
museum is very good at presenting science in an engaging and accessible way, 
and I’m trying to design products that do the same.

What inventions inspired by the museum have you launched so far?

I’ve created almost two-dozen products, some directly inspired by objects in 
the museum – others in response to a brief. My latest product, theOpen Up Lamp 
<http://www.markchampkins.com/products/open-up-lamp/>, demonstrates (and 
explains) the action of bimetallic strips under heat. It’s a lampshade that 
opens up like a flower when the light bulb turns on and then closes when the 
bulb is off. The science behind it is explained on the packaging. The end 
result is, I hope, a desirable product that people would want in their homes.

We also sell a lot of pencils in the museum shop. I was asked to think of 
something new to refresh what’s currently on offer. Using Science Museum 
equipment, I measured the pencil precisely, wrote exactly 1,000 words and 
measured it again. Extrapolating the wear, I printed a scale on the side of the 
pencil that states approximately how many words you have written as the pencil 
wears down (the average HB pencil contains 36,264 words). But this prompts 
people to ask: what if I push harder or use a 2B pencil instead? Or, if I write 
in a language that uses a lot of compound words, will I get less words from the 
pencil? If people have been provoked to think like a scientist, it’s gratifying.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-mark-champkins-inventor-science-museum-queen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F25%2F1416927376003%2F52e85b61-f8fa-40fd-9994-8637585e99ca-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20Mark%20Champkins%2C%20inventor-in-residence%2C%20the%20Science%20Museum%20%7C%20Arts%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-mark-champkins-inventor-science-museum-queen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20Mark%20Champkins%2C%20inventor-in-residence%2C%20the%20Science%20Museum%20%7C%20Arts%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-mark-champkins-inventor-science-museum-queen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F25%2F1416927376003%2F52e85b61-f8fa-40fd-9994-8637585e99ca-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Word Count Pencils, designed by Mark Champkins 
On occasions, I’ve been asked to make press-worthy objects to accompany the 
launch of a new gallery or exhibition. For example, I designed a desk light to 
present to Stephen Hawking for his 70th birthday on the opening of an 
exhibition about his work. Called theBlack Hole light <http:>, it mimics the 
spiral path that light takes as it falls into a black hole. For the royal 
opening of the new Information Age Gallery, which charts the development of 
communications technology, I made abouquet 
<http://www.markchampkins.com/products/the-queens-bouquet/> of copper, computer 
punch cards and genuine ticker tape for the Queen.

What makes this residency work for you as an inventor?

The museum provides me with a reasonable degree of autonomy to pursue my own 
ideas, while also providing me with design briefs for opportunities they have 
spotted. I usually work on a few products at once, since they often have 
different development times. While not at the museum, I work on my own business,
Concentrate <http://www.markchampkins.com/concentrate/> – which I successfully 
pitched on Dragons’ Den a few years ago – developing ideas through to 
marketable products. This helps me to refine the skill of knowing when to 
pursue an idea and when to drop it. This is the key to making the residency 
fruitful. The museum also tends to throw challenges my way, like those with 
Stephen Hawking and the Queen, which keeps me on my toes and makes the whole 
thing exciting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-mark-champkins-inventor-science-museum-queen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F25%2F1416927602538%2Fa8f02067-7b36-4aba-a26d-0742ae6df714-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interview%20with%20Mark%20Champkins%2C%20inventor-in-residence%2C%20the%20Science%20Museum%20%7C%20Arts%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-mark-champkins-inventor-science-museum-queen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interview%20with%20Mark%20Champkins%2C%20inventor-in-residence%2C%20the%20Science%20Museum%20%7C%20Arts%20head&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F25%2F-sp-mark-champkins-inventor-science-museum-queen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F25%2F1416927602538%2Fa8f02067-7b36-4aba-a26d-0742ae6df714-2060x1373.jpeg>
 The Queen’s Bouquet, designed by Mark Champkins 
James Dyson recently said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/23/age-of-invention-is-not-dead-innovation>
 that“the age of invention isn’t dead, it just needs time” – what do you make 
of his comments?

What constitutes an invention is changing. The tech startups that cluster 
around Silicon Roundabout often have the advantage of being about to establish 
themselves online with very low startup costs. Their innovations often 
reappropriate existing hardware, such as smartphones or computers, and extend 
our capabilities, but in many cases, these are still inventions. The next Frank 
Whittle will probably not be working on something like a jet engine – more 
likely a blend of product and service.

Where I completely agree with Dyson is that consumers underestimate the time 
and effort it takes to develop a physical product. I suspect that society’s 
expectations of shorter “gestation periods” for innovative new products are 
being driven in two ways. First, by the speed that online services are 
developing and second, by low price points and the constant updating of 
consumable products such as electronics and clothing.

How have modern technologies impacted invention and your process?

New manufacturing technologies have lowered the cost and development times 
required to make something. This makes life easier for me, but the step between 
batch manufacture and mass manufacture is still a large one, often requiring 
you to put in place a global supply chain, or having to convince a manufacturer 
to take a risk.

One interesting development is that new technology is opening up “making” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jun/17/tech-talk-chloe-meineck-designer-maker>
 to a wider community. For many companies, this has meant their own products 
are being modified and incrementally improved by their own customers. In turn, 
this has meant that rather than innovation conducted from within the company 
via research and development (R&D) departments, in a top-down system, 
businesses are increasingly sourcing ideas from their customers. This raises 
all kinds of interesting question about the future role of businesses in 
creating the stuff we want to consume.

What career tips would you give to a young, aspiring inventor?

I suspect that most inventors are on the edge of giving up. It’s profoundly 
difficult and precarious to do something new. That said, it can be richly 
rewarding if you get it right, asJames Dyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/james-dyson> has done. The key is to 
know when to invest time and effort in an idea, and when not to.

Also, it goes counter to most professions to diversify your areas of expertise 
and take on projects in as many different areas as possible, but you should. 
It’s essential in order to be able to learn the perspectives from which an idea 
needs to be interrogated. It will likely result in a sporadic and unsteady 
income stream – and an uncertain career – but you will be a better inventor.

More like this

• Tech talk: Chloe Meineck, designer, maker and inventor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jun/17/tech-talk-chloe-meineck-designer-maker>
• Design innovation: new ways of thinking can change the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jun/19/design-innovation-young-people-rsa>
• Innovative design is undervalued in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/mar/31/innovative-design-undervalued-olympic-games-2012>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 