
Hi Charlie, for those who don't know, what is Sheffield Doc/Fest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/sheffield-doc-fest>?

Sheffield Doc/Fest <http://sheffdocfest.com/> is the UK's major documentary 
film festival. Our marketplace is probably the largest and most productive 
documentary market anywhere. TheMeetMarket 
<http://sheffdocfest.com/view/meetmarket> offers one-to-one match-made meetings 
between film makers and commissioning editors, mentors and distributors. We put 
together a giant schedule of about 1,500 meetings that put people on both sides 
of the table. There are also pitching opportunities and networking events that 
connect people who need money with people who can give them money.

Why Sheffield <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield>?

We see being here as a advantage. All our venues are within a 10-minute walk 
so it feels like a real community with industry and public all mixing together. 
People can't escape to their office in Soho; they have to immerse themselves in 
the festival.

People coming from abroad generally don't know Sheffield that well – sometimes 
just the association with steel, music or the football team, so they're 
intrigued. The other big plus for us is that Sheffield was always known as the 
Socialist Republic of South Yorkshire and is a very left leaning city with a 
commitment to social and political justice, which is very convenient for a 
documentary festival. It's a great city.

You've said that you "demystify the routes to getting films made and shown" – 
what do you mean by that?



A lot of my time is spent talking to film-makers, giving presentations, 
running workshops andmentoring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/mar/11/mentoring-tips-mentor-mentee>
 people in the UK industry about how to develop a pitch and ask for funding. 
I'm very honest with people about their ideas and I help them to understand 
crowdfunding and self distribution. Also, when I reject people, I spend a long 
time explaining why their film hasn't been picked or why they don't have 
funding or distribution, which is helpful because in this industry you don't 
often get honest feedback.

You crowdfunded over £16,000 
<http://www.independentcinemaoffice.org.uk/blog/docfestcrowdfunding> for your 
20th anniversary festival last year – got any tips?

Firstly, set a realistic target. It can't be too low because then it's not 
motivating enough. You need to make people feel like they're part of a 
challenge but it shouldn't be so high that you've massively overestimated how 
many kindly people you have in your network. Also, be prepared for lots of very 
hard work: we spent a solid month phoning and emailing people; you can't just 
send out a few tweets and hope people will give you money.

You also need to make people feel like they're getting something back, a sense 
of reward. We had old Doc/Fest t-shirts and merchandise that, even though you 
could have just bought it at the festival a few months before, people felt that 
was something special and unique. Even sending a personal message to say thank 
you helps; it makes people feel like they're part of a community.

What's the biggest misconception about film festivals?

Weirdly, that we're a closed shop and only support our friends. We do actually 
watch all of the 2,000 films that are sent to us; it's a very democratic 
process. The other misconception is that we only work for one month when it 
takes a full year to organise Sheffield Doc/Fest.

The film industry can seem like a very closed world, so how did you get your 
foot in the door?



I was working odd jobs in the TV and film industry and I didn't feel like 
there were any decent short film nights in London so I put one on. Through that 
I met a lot of people, which led to a job at4Docs <http://www.4docs.org.uk/>, 
which in turn led to meeting lots of people in the documentary world. Just 
talking to people and showing genuine interest in their work helped. I 
definitely didn't get in through an old boys network.

Where do you see the documentary industry in five years? 

Documentaries are actually seen as quite cool these days, which was definitely 
not the case five or 10 years ago, so that will continue. We'll also get 
increasing numbers of documentaries released at cinemas that aren't 
specifically marketed as documentary, which we're seeing with the Nick Cave 
film,20,000 Days on Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jun/05/20000-days-on-earth-review-nick-caves-brooding-rockumentary>
, out later in the year.

That excites me because I hate the idea that documentary is niche; for me it's 
completely mainstream and I think we're going to see more of that – people are 
really waking up to documentary.

Charlie Phillips is deputy director of Sheffield Doc/Fest 
<http://sheffdocfest.com/>, which continues until 12 June – follow the festival 
on Twitter@sheffdocfest <https://twitter.com/sheffdocfest>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 