
Twenty-four hours into my visit to Aruba, a tiny island 15 miles off the tip 
of Venezuela, I’ve slipped into an easy routine. It starts with fresh juice on 
the balcony of mycasita at Boardwalk Aruba, on the island’s northern tip. I 
watch the bright green lizards soaking up the first rays of sun before cycling 
to nearbyDushi Bagels <http://www.dushibagelsandburgers.com/home>, a family-run 
cafe whose walls heave with paintings by local artists and shade is provided by 
palm trees wrapped in colourful crochet.

This month, Thomson Airways added direct flights to Aruba from Manchester, and 
Virgin Holidays has just added the island to its portfolio. But growing numbers 
are discovering that Aruba isn’t just for those in search of fly-and-flop beach 
holidays: in 2015 there was a 12% increase in UK visitors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Faruba-wild-side-direct-flights-caribbean-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00b9a72370ba4f6ff66953a15675dc77acf7c19b%2F0_0_3872_2592%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aruba's%20wild%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Faruba-wild-side-direct-flights-caribbean-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aruba%27s%20wild%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Faruba-wild-side-direct-flights-caribbean-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00b9a72370ba4f6ff66953a15675dc77acf7c19b%2F0_0_3872_2592%2F3872.jpg>
 Dutch gabled houses in the capital, Oranjestad. Photograph: Svitlana 
Prada/Getty 
Part of the appeal is its Dutch heritage, with rainbow-coloured, gabled houses 
across the island and in the capital, Oranjestad. Here Fort Zoutman, built by 
the Dutch in 1796 for protection against pirates, is now a museum, where faded 
photographs and old documents provide a fascinating insight into Aruba’s 
history.

Its west coast has the requisite Caribbean beaches, with turquoise water and 
long curves of powdery white sand, dotted with bars and hotels. But the eastern 
side has an altogether different character. Wonderfully untamed, with wide 
stretches of darker sand battered by foamy waves, it’s a paradise for surfers. 
Even the swimming pools are wild: jeep drive across the arid landscape leads me 
to what’s known locally as the Natural Pool, a circular basin protected from 
the pounding sea by a semi-submerged natural rock wall, where where I spend a 
few hours floating in the warm water.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Faruba-wild-side-direct-flights-caribbean-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F787c7ab92536dd39042a487ce8c0e9b8e5ba5404%2F0_260_3897_2338%2F3897.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aruba's%20wild%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Faruba-wild-side-direct-flights-caribbean-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aruba%27s%20wild%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Faruba-wild-side-direct-flights-caribbean-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F787c7ab92536dd39042a487ce8c0e9b8e5ba5404%2F0_260_3897_2338%2F3897.jpg>
 The eastern side of the island has some stunning, remote beaches. Photograph: 
Kjersti Joergensen/Alamy 
The desert-like Arikok national park, which covers almost a fifth of the 
island, has cave drawings by Aruba’s first inhabitants, the Caquetio Indians. 
It’s a great place to explore by bike, but I opt for a hike with a ranger and 
discover a mind-blowing diversity of plant life: 60% of plants here are used by 
locals for medicinal purposes, and the aloe vera is said to be the most potent 
in the world. It rarely rains in Aruba (which claims to have more sunny days 
than any other Caribbean island), so plants’ active ingredients become highly 
concentrated. My guide shows mebasora pretu, a herb used to make a 
kidney-cleansing tea, and theseida bush, whose iodine-rich sap is a good 
antiseptic.

Much of the food eaten on the island has to be flown in, but people are 
passionate about local produce. Aruba’s population of just 105,000 has spawned 
a number of chefs keen to make the most of their heritage. At chicWhite Modern 
Cuisine <http://www.whitecuisine.com/> in Palm Beach, north of Oranjestad, one 
of the most popular dishes is a risotto of local mushrooms served with mushroom 
broth (mushrooms grow in abundance on the island). Another delicacy is 
lionfish: these venonous fish are not native to the Caribbean and were probably 
dumped by aquarium owners off Florida. They now threaten the health of the 
coral reef, so the government encourages locals to hunt the fish and their 
delicious white, flaky meat is found on many a menu. I opt for a salad dressed 
with edible flowers picked by local foragers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Faruba-wild-side-direct-flights-caribbean-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec91936ee019ca7e8fa26edb505b71f704993112%2F0_0_1024_682%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aruba's%20wild%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Faruba-wild-side-direct-flights-caribbean-holiday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aruba%27s%20wild%20side&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Faruba-wild-side-direct-flights-caribbean-holiday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec91936ee019ca7e8fa26edb505b71f704993112%2F0_0_1024_682%2F1024.jpg>
 The Boardwalk Hotel 
Papiamento <http://papiamentoaruba.com/>, a mile or so inland, is the former 
childhood of chef Edward Ellis. Tables encircle a pool beneath palm trees 
draped with fairy lights, and typical Aruban fare includes fresh fish drizzled 
with homemade sauces and huge steaks served with piles of sweet potato mash.

This creative streak doesn’t just apply to food. At Terrafuse Aruba, artists 
Marian and Ciro Abath offer ceramic and glassblowing classes in their 
beautifully cluttered workshop.

“The government’s doing a lot to support local artists,” says Marian, who is 
from the Netherlands. “They’re realising that tourists don’t always want 
plastic souvenirs made in China, or to just laze on a beach. They get that 
promoting the arts helps tourism, too.

“I love it here. It’s so small that you can be in nice bars or fancy shops, 
then within a few kilometres on a totally deserted beach. I’ve been here for 
years and there are still pockets of wilderness I’ve yet to explore.”

• Accommodation was provided by Boardwalk Aruba 
<http://www.boardwalkaruba.com/> (one-bedroom casita from £128 a night). Return 
flights from London to Aruba, via Amsterdam, start from £535 withAirFrance 
<http://www.airfrance.com/indexCom_en.html>. Thomson 
<http://www.thomson.co.uk/destinations/caribbean/aruba-island/holidays-aruba-island/all-inclusive-holidays>
 flies direct from Gatwick and Manchester weekly from £737 return
 