
The asphalt has been laid over Baku’s ancient cobbled streets, many 
residential buildings have been covered with false fronts for the cameras, and 
bling-built new ones are on proud display. Well away from the limelight of this 
weekend’s 3.7-milegrand prix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jun/17/f1-europe-gp-all-you-need-to-know-about-the-baku-circuit-video>
 circuit through the city are Azerbaijan’s prisons – their populations swollen 
by activists, journalists, bloggers and opposition figures.

Human rights campaigners working to draw attention to the restrictive regime 
in the country have appealed to high-profile Formula One fans, celebrities and 
drivers at today’s inaugural Azerbaijan Grand Prix to criticise or draw 
attention to the regime’s human rights record. Formula One’s chief executive 
Bernie Ecclestone, British driver Lewis Hamilton and the three music stars 
scheduled to appear – Pharrell Williams, Chris Brown and Enrique Iglesias – 
have all comeunder fire 
<https://www.indexoncensorship.org/2016/04/azerbaijan-open-letters-pharrell-williams-enrique-iglesias-chris-brown/>
 for not doing so, and the call has largely been ignored as drivers prepare for 
what will be one of the fastest street circuits in the world.

When asked about the criticism on Thursday, Ecclestone gave what campaigners 
described as a “jaw-dropping”response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/16/bernie-ecclestone-f1-clear-conscience-azerbaijan>
: “The minute people tell me what human rights are, then you can have a look at 
them and see how and when and where it applies,” Ecclestone said. “Do any of 
you know what human rights are?” Asked if Formula One had a clear conscience, 
he replied: “Absolutely. 100%.” Asked about dozens of political prisoners 
jailed for criticising the ruling Aliyev family, Ecclestone said: “So they 
should. It depends what they say. You say they write negative things. It 
depends what they write.”

He also dismissed concerns over government corruption in Azerbaijan, 
highlighted in the Panama Papers 
<https://panamapapers.icij.org/20160404-azerbaijan-hidden-wealth.html> leaks. 
“Can you tell me where weare going to be racing?” He said the US – “the 
greatest place in the world” – was a “bit of a shithole” compared with glitzy 
Azerbaijan.

Khadija Ismayilova, jailed for seven years last September, has long suffered 
harassment over her award-winning investigative reporting. In 2012 she was 
subjected to a blackmail plot involving hidden cameras and a sex tape of her 
and her boyfriend. After intensive international campaigning, she wasreleased 
on probation in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/31/freed-journalist-khadija-ismayilova-azerbaijan-interview>
. She said people would engage in “silent protest” during the Grand Prix. “The 
basic things are not available to ordinary people in this oil-rich Azerbaijan, 
like health and education. People will not protest loudly, but they are not 
excited by this race either. Most of them are deprived of an opportunity to see 
it, for a start.

“People are upset that historic streets have been ripped up – how do you 
restore history? When they built the new luxury hotel, they destroyed part of 
the city wall.

“When they were digging foundations, they found ancient tunnels and filled 
them with cement so it would not delay. All such places are owned by the first 
family, who can do as they please.

“Citizens complain about demolition of their houses, but they have nowhere to 
address problems. Civil society has been so weakened, the system torn down, 
independent media outlets shut down. Only a handful of independent journalists 
are left. Absolutely, I am staying. I’m not afraid of being sent back to 
prison.”

Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> is only the latest 
organisation wooed by the elite. The European Games were held there last June, 
and in 2020 Baku will host four games in football’s European Championship.

Ilham Aliyev, who succeeded his father Heydar Aliyev, has been president since 
2003. His wife, Mehriban Aliyeva, from one of the semi-feudal nation’s most 
powerful families, is expected to succeed him. She has been made a goodwill 
ambassador by Unesco, which declared old Baku a world heritage site. Azerbaijan 
has also been criticised for “caviar diplomacy” – bribing foreign officials to 
promote it. Last year the European parliament said Azerbaijan had “suffered the 
greatest decline in democratic governance in all of Eurasia over the past 10 
years”. A 2015 Amnestyreport 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2015/10/azerbaijan-closes-its-doors/> 
stated: “Azerbaijan has been allowed to get away with unprecedented levels of 
repression”.

Rebecca Vincent <https://mobile.twitter.com/sportforrights> of Sport for 
Rights said: “Azerbaijan has courted big international sports events to improve 
its image abroad; the grand prix is no different. But while all this wealth is 
on show, the situation for ordinary people is getting worse. We’re not calling 
for a boycott – that wouldn’t help the people – but attracting attention to 
their plight will.”
 