
Before arriving there by train from Newcastle last week I had never been to 
Cheltenham, a town of about 100,000 in Gloucestershire. What a difference. Over 
the previous three days up north I can't remember reading even once on a shop 
window the words "brasserie", "delicatessen" or "boutique". This place is rich, 
or, in the word of those having a drink that evening in the Beehive pub, it is 
affluent.

Behind a glass of Guinness a local businessman draws a matrix. Two lines 
divide Britain: north-south and city-province. London is the capital, in the 
wealthy south, so it's doing fine; Newcastle is in the poor north but at least 
it's the local capital. Rural areas in the north: "fucked". Rural areas like 
Cheltenham in the south: "holding up pretty well".

On the train to Cheltenham I had sampled the opinions of those following the 
Guardian politics Twitter feed <https://twitter.com/#!/GdnPolitics>: what is 
your burning local issue? One person tweeted "me", some said "capitalism", 
while others echoed the same issues that seemed to be occupying minds in 
Newcastle: poverty, crime, jobs.

Compare that with the Conservative priorities as summed up by councillor 
Duncan Smith to the Gloucester Echo 
<http://www.thisisgloucestershire.co.uk/Election-Cheltenham-Conservatives-release/story-15770824-detail/story.html>
: "Bringing back regular street cleaning in the residential areas, improving 
verge cutting, more tree planting and investing in key town gateways." He 
added: "Conservatives will change council priorities to focus on these key 
services and cut back on the non-essential spending."

Back in the Beehive a cheerful woman in her early 40s explains her politics is 
"all about animals and their rights". On a micro local level she is very happy 
with the new paid parking regime. "Where I live, there was lots of parking by 
shoppers," she explains. "That was so stressful. You couldn't even turn on the 
headlights or immediately some other car would move in, ready to take your 
place. Now there's plenty of room again. And residents get a permit."

I found some areas of agreement with the north. Nobody cared, or knew much, 
about the local elections. And at least some agreed with those in Newcastle, 
that there was no longer much difference between the three main parties. Says 
the businessman: "I am a Tory. They understand what the country needs. But in 
the mid-90s, you know who I voted for? Tony Blair. That's right. Because I 
liked him."

Asked about their voting, people in the Beehive and elsewhere in Cheltenham 
caution me not to read too much into the polls. We will be voting for people, 
not parties, they say, so don't extrapolate the results into a national trend.

A man is coming in. He orders a beer and starts reading the Daily Telegraph. 
He is from a nearby village, but confirms that the Cheltenham election is a 
toss-up between Conservatives and Lib Dems. In his view it's all due to what he 
calls "the Tory cock-up" many years ago, when "they foisted this man on us, as 
an MP [Lord Taylor of Warwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/may/31/mps-expenses-lord-taylor-jailed>
, who failed to win the seat]. They must have assumed this was a safe seat. He 
was black. Then the man had to go to jail because he fiddled with his expenses. 
This cost the Tories a lot of votes."

That evening Bayern Munich are playing Real Madrid in the Champions League, 
with the winner meeting Chelsea. The Beehive supports Chelsea, even though this 
is Manchester United territory. "It's always nice to have an English team in 
the final," says the barman.

I can't help thinking back to the man running my B&B in the Scottish town of 
Aviemore, two days earlier. A former professional footballer with Sheffield 
Wednesday, he almost broke out in giggles when asked how many people were 
supporting Chelsea against Barcelona. All he said was: "In Scotland?"
 