
Sunday's decision to call off the Oval cricket test for "bad light" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/25/england-australia-fifth-test-match-report>
 beggared belief. The most exciting sporting climax of the year had been set up 
by both teams to see a great match thrillingly concluded for the benefit of the 
crowd. They were stopped by fumbling old sports administrators concerned only 
by whether some "health and safety" official might hold them to blame for an 
accident.

Millions of spectators worldwide have been carried to a pitch of tension by 
what is seldom an enthralling contest. It was as if a rugby match were called 
off just as a star winger was racing towards the line, or a marathon stopped 
because someone found a stone in a shoe. The decision showed total 
insensitivity to the spirit of a game, to spectators who had paid money to see 
players play, not umpires umpire.

The rules of cricket, like those of most sports, mystify non-cricketing 
foreigners. The five-day test match can be an attenuated contest of Homeric 
proportions. Fortunes can reverse in minutes, tedium is interspersed with 
intense personal combat and sudden triumph and disaster. But like many sports, 
cricket is fanatically conservative. Limited-over games, hugely popular in 
India and Australia, took years to find approval in England, as did 
professional teams. The adoption of electronic technology, common in tennis and 
athletics, has bordered on farce. Rules on safety, introduced before the days 
of helmets and body armour, are plain daft.

Sport is one of the last refuges of danger allowed by government. Each leisure 
pursuit in turn is surrounded by policing â€“ even a pleasant walk across a farm 
or through a wood. Yet pitting one's body and wits against others or against 
nature is still mercifully fraught with risk. Climbing, riding, rugby, skiing, 
kayaking are dangerous. As they are rendered ever "safer" by inspection, humans 
seek new ways of raising their risk threshold. We go "off-piste" in jungles, 
rivers, deserts, oceans, anywhere to sense contention with raw nature. For 
once, that most timid gentle of pursuits, cricket, was making a stab at real 
human conflict.

Then along came bumbling officialdom to declare it all rather silly and tell 
the plebs to calm down and go have their tea.Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> deserves all the ridicule it gets.
 