
Darren Lehmann has admitted that he has as much to learn as his Australia team 
after landing himself in trouble with the International Cricket Councilfor 
accusing Stuart Broad of cheating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/21/ashes-2013-stuart-broad-lehmann> 
on the eve of the Oval Test.

Lehmann was fined a fifth of his match fee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/22/australia-darren-lehmann-fined-stuart-braod>
, around Â£2,000, for the comments he made in a knockabout interview on the 
Sydney radio station Triple M. He said he had been surprised by the resulting 
fuss and subsequently cleared the air with Broad, but conceded: "It was a good 
learning curve for a new coach, wasn't it? You know, a jovial setting. I've got 
to learn and improve from that. The players aren't on their own in trying to 
improve."

On Monday Broad wrote on Twitter that he had accepted Lehmann's apology: 
"Spoke toDarren Lehmann <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/darren-lehmann> last 
night. He apologised for his comments, I accepted it. He said they were made in 
jest."

Lehmann insisted there is no chance of Australia diverting from the attacking 
mindset displayed by Michael Clarke with his fifth-day declaration,even after 
it came so close to backfiring by allowing England to complete a 4-0 series win 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/25/england-australia-fifth-test-match-report>
.

"I think it's that learning to win attitude," added Lehmann, who is still to 
win after five Tests as a national coach, and will take Australia into the 
return series, starting in Brisbane on 21 November, on a run of three defeats 
and two draws.

"If you look at the way we played [at the Oval] we were quite happy to lose a 
game to set up the game. To come out and see that on the last day I think it 
was outstanding from Michael and the setup that we tried to do. What I do know 
is that game was set up totally by the Australian cricket team and I think the 
crowd probably enjoyed that. That's the brand of cricket we want to play. We 
want to push the boundaries.

"We want to keep challenging our players in those situations to get better, 
learn from the mistakes we make. We're going to make mistakes, we understand 
that. But we've got to improve from there. If we do that, then we can 
challenge."

He believes the greater pace and bounce of the pitches in Australia for the 
return series will suit his team. "We've got to manage to find a way to get 
them out earlier," Lehmann added. "The pitches were obviously a little bit 
slow. In Australia they'll speed up, those nicks will carry and you'll actually 
be able to bowl them out quicker, I would think. We'll be pretty settled in 
Australia knowing the conditions really well."
 