
Call it cricketus interruptus. Just as the match was reaching a climax, with 
England needing 21 runs from 24 balls, the umpires called it all off. And so 
what should have been a great moment, the end of the Ashes, the presentation of 
the urn, was soundtracked by the jeers of thousands of furious fans. They booed 
the umpires. They booed the match referee. They booed the players. The ICC can 
stick its fingers in its ears, bury its head in the sand but it will still hear 
the echoes, which drown out not just the speeches but the fireworks that 
followed. The noise was as loud as any other the players have heard in this 
series, in celebration or jest.

They might have closed their eyes, too, when they saw there were plenty of 
empty seats in the stands at the start of play. That was ominous in itself 
given that the last day of the Ashes has become one of the hottest tickets of 
the sporting summer. People who had bought them in advance decided it was not 
worth using them. That said something about how unappealing the match had 
become to the occasional fans, the kind of people cricket is so desperate to 
attract.

By tea, though, the ground was overflowing, a crowd of 27,000 had come from 
across the city, as they heard word that, after three dull and dreary days of 
play and another totally washed out, a game had broken out at The Oval. They 
wanted to see England win. But more than that they wanted to see the match 
finish. This is not a partisan issue. In truth, it would have been unjust if 
England had scored those few final runs, seeing as it was Australia who had set 
up the possibility of a result with their bowling, batting and their 
declaration.

England's approach throughout the second and third days was to waste as much 
time as possible. They meandered around in the field until the over rate 
dropped to 11 an hour. The umpires could have, should have, forced them to 
hurry up. Then England batted in slow motion on a pitch on which, it turned out 
on the fifth day, they were capable of scoring at four or five runs an over. It 
was trying for their dedicated fans, and too much altogether for the other 
spectators, who reckoned, rightly, that there were cheaper ways to bore 
themselves silly than paying to sit around in the drizzle watching 10 men stand 
in a field while another dries a ball on his trousers.

So, if anything, there was a certain justice in the finish, which cost the 
home side the chance to do what no other England team had done and win an Ashes 
series 4-0. But they were not the only ones who were robbed. The thousands in 
the ground were too, along with all those at home watching on Sky and listening 
to the game on the BBC. Another 10 minutes and this match would have been done, 
one way or the other. For the sake of those 10 minutes, drama became farce.

Of course, as Alastair Cook said, there are rules and regulations to be 
obeyed. The players want the umpires to be consistent – Michael Clarke was 
already furious because he felt the visibility here was worse than it had been 
at Old Trafford, when it was Australia who were on their way to winning as the 
game came to an early halt. Aleem Dar and Kumar Dharmasena had already set a 
standard when they took the players off for bad light earlier in this match, 
and they felt they had to stick to it. It is, they say, a safety issue – not 
for the batsmen nor for the fielders but for the umpires themselves. In which 
case, give them helmets.

One could argue that the regulations should allow the umpires to be more 
flexible and take account of the stateof the match. There are already unique 
playing conditions for the final day of a game, which stipulate that a minimum 
of 15 overs to be bowled in the final hour or the game will run over time. 
Equally the ECB could consider taking a steer from other countries by bringing 
the start of play forward by 30 minutes when time has been lost.

The point is that Test cricket cannot afford to be this precious. The 
simplest, most sensible, solution would be to set a consistent standard which 
is more lenient than the one that currently applies. The light should not just 
be bad. It should be awful. No wonder the ICC has not been able to organise a 
single day-night Test despite MCC's WorldCricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Committee calling for them. Right 
now it cannot even keep a game going under lights on an overcast afternoon. 
Test cricket is said to be on its knees. Which is unsurprising, given that it 
keeps shooting itself in the foot.
 