
Player of the series

Mike Selvey Stuart Broad. Raised his bowling to a new level in this series, 
both technically and strategically. At Trent Bridge, he took on the mantle of 
senior bowler in the absence of Jimmy Anderson,and his spell on the first 
morning was one of the most decisive in Ashes history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/06/england-australia-stuart-broad-joe-root>
, effectively won the match and series for England in the first hour and a half.

Ashes 2015 ratings: How England’s and Australia’s players shaped up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/ashes-2015-ratings-england-australia>
Vic Marks Stuart Broad. Actually his determination to try to bat properly (not 
always successful) after a torrid 18 months was as impressive as anything. But 
he bowled well too – especially on one morning at Nottingham.

Jason Gillespie Stuart Broad, who has been devastating when he has got his 
lengths right. When he goes fuller – that knee-roll length – he is been 
incredibly productive. When he runs through sides, like he did at Trent Bridge, 
this is how he does it.

Ali Martin The series was won on the first morning at Trent Bridge and Stuart 
Broad was the man who effected this knockout blow with his 8 for 15 exposing 
the flaws of Australia’s batsmen in the shortest first innings in Test history.

Barney Ronay Stuart Broad, who bowled more overs with more maidens, more 
wickets and a lower bowling average than any other regular on either side. In a 
funny, in-and-out series, one thing was clear: England won because Broad played 
well in every game. Also the bravest terrified batsman on either side.

Andy Bull Stuart Broad. The Ashes <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashes> 
seem to bring out the best out in Broad, and he’s been brilliant again in this 
series, with 21 wickets at 21 runs each. He also pulled his batting together, 
and played his part in a 50-run partnership in each of the three Tests England 
won.

John Ashdown Stuart Broad has always had the ability for flashing spells of 
near unplayability – so much so that his eight for 15 at Trent Bridge, stunning 
though it was, perhaps shouldn’t really have come as that much of a surprise – 
but he has rarely found excellence so consistently as this summer. Had his best 
series with the bat for quite a while too.

Tom Davies Joe Root. When he fired, England fired. The one batsman on either 
side to combine resilience with flair for any significant length of time, and 
his hundred at Cardiff gave England vital early ascendance after a tricky start.

Nick Miller Joe Root. Despite getting out to a couple of silly shots, Root 
lifted himself to the top of the ICC rankings, but more importantly scored two 
crucial hundreds –one in Cardiff to set the tone for the series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/08/england-australia-first-test-ashes-match-report>
, andone in Nottingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/06/england-australia-stuart-broad-joe-root>
 to place boot to throat after Stuart Broad filleted the Australian line-up.

Dan Lucas Joe Root. Between Root and Steve Smith – the two standouts among two 
disappointing batting line-ups – and though Smith scored more runs, Root 
finished the series with the higher average and the urn.

Best delivery
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c937f76c220389e536ce8dfe890adf2ff906140%2F0_82_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashes%202015%20review%3A%20the%20best%20and%20worst%20from%20this%20year%E2%80%99s%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashes%202015%20review%3A%20the%20best%20and%20worst%20from%20this%20year%E2%80%99s%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c937f76c220389e536ce8dfe890adf2ff906140%2F0_82_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 England’s Ben Stokes is dismissed by Australia’s Mitchell Johnson at 
Edgbaston. Photograph: David Davies/PA 
MS Mitchell Johnson to Ben Stokes, first innings, at Edgbaston. Johnson had 
only a moderate series for someone carrying his reputation for ferocity but 
twice in the space of three balls he produced deliveries of such devastation as 
he had been unable to produce hitherto and incredibly was unable thereafter. 
The first, short and rapid, did for Jonny Bairstow. The second, to Stokes, 
reared at him, was angled in to the left hander and had he not managed a thin 
deflection, would have taken out his throat.

VM Peter Siddle to Ian Bell at the Kia Oval. To the surprise of Shane Warne, 
Siddle upon his recall to the side delivered the perfect trimmer and Bell could 
put nothing, neither his bat nor his body, in the way.

JG Any Mitchell Starc yorker, and we saw a few at Trent Bridge. When he gets 
it right he’s the best on the planet, bowling 90mph and using conventional 
swing with the new ball or reverse with the older.

AM It’s the flip of a coin between Mitchell Johnson’s snorter to remove Jonny 
Bairstow caught behind on the second morning at Edgbaston and Mitchell 
Johnson’s snorter to remove Ben Stokes caught behind two balls later. Very 
2013/14.

BR Mitchell Johnson’s thrilling double-bouncer combination to get rid of Jonny 
Bairstow and Ben Stokes at Edgbaston. A moment of terrifying high-grade fast 
bowling in a series where some have sniffed a little at the quality.

AB Two in short succession from Mitchell Johnson, the first to Jonny Bairstow 
and the second to Ben Stokes. Both shot up at the batsman’s throat from just 
short of a length, as though they’d hit a brick buried under the wicket. You 
needed a shield to survive them, never mind a cricket bat.

JA Take your pick from that Trent Bridge spell of Stuart Broad’s. Ben Stokes’ 
efforts with an ageing ball in the second innings in Nottingham also deserves a 
mention.

TD Mark Wood to David Warner, first innings, Trent Bridge: While Broad rightly 
got the adulation for his eight-fer, the choice delivery of that astonishing 
morning came when Wood cut Warner in half with a stunning ball that shot back 
in at the left-hander and took his inside edge.

NM He might not have been as devastating as he was in Australia, but Mitchell 
Johnson occasionally found the old magic, particularlywith the vicious lifter 
that removed Jonny Bairstow at Edgbaston. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/jul/30/ashes-2015-england-v-australia-third-test-day-two-live#block-55b9f6ede4b016b93fad24d6>
 A delivery to make you curl up in a corner and clutch your teddy bear.

DL Mitchell Johnson to Jonny Bairstow at Edgbaston. Much has been made, on 
social media at least, about Bairstow’s suspect technique against the short 
ball. It made no difference here as only Viv Richards might have been 
comfortable against this venomous bouncer, which the Yorkshireman could only 
glove behind.

Best shot

MS There were many fine cover drives, cuts, dabs, pulls, flicks, and cudgels. 
But the most unobtrusive shot of all, that was instrumental in England’s win, 
and for most of the series was anathema to the Australian batsman, was that 
which involved raising the bat high in the air, and watching the ball sail 
through to the keeper. Hats off to ‘the leave’.

VM Joe Root at Trent Bridge standing on tiptoes against Mitchell Johnson and 
playing a classical back foot drive through the covers with a perfectly 
vertical bat. That’s how Ted Dexter used to do it.

JG Joe Root driving through the off side at Cardiff, in front of square. The 
way he put the pressure back on the Australian bowlers was fantastic.

AM Moeen Ali’s rearguards at Cardiff and Edgbaston – crucial bail-out jobs 
that must not be forgotten – have featured some elegant swishery, but the sight 
of nightwatchman Mark Wood driving Johnson over the covers at Trent Bridge was, 
frankly, glorious.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73674014e6331142d0cc8b7352ccc67d168d691b%2F0_115_3232_1940%2F3232.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashes%202015%20review%3A%20the%20best%20and%20worst%20from%20this%20year%E2%80%99s%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashes%202015%20review%3A%20the%20best%20and%20worst%20from%20this%20year%E2%80%99s%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73674014e6331142d0cc8b7352ccc67d168d691b%2F0_115_3232_1940%2F3232.jpg>
 Moeen Ali cracks a four at Edgbaston Photograph: Andrew Fosker/REX Shutterstock
BR One that sticks in the mind is an Ian Bell drive in Cardiff that almost 
decapitated the cover fielder, howled to the fence, but seemed to involve 
little more than a groovy bend of the knee and a feathery little cuff of the 
wrists. Pure Bell. He was also out next ball prodding. So, pure Bell then.

AB Seems somehow there have been many more bad than good, on both sides. But 
Moeen Ali’s assault on Mitchell Johnson just after lunch on the second day at 
Edgbaston was glorious to watch. One drive down the ground, one pull square, 
and one drive up and over cover. Twelve off the over, and Johnson was yanked 
from the attack.

JA The Joe Root late cut, a shot played so late it’s a wonder the bowler isn’t 
on his way back to his mark by the time the ball is flicked through point. It 
brought him a bucketload of runs and had the added bonus of being insouciantly 
irritating for the fielding team.

TD Moeen Ali off Mitchell Johnson, Edgbaston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/30/moeen-ali-stuart-broad-mitchell-johnson-england>
. After the scratchiest of starts, Moeen’s partnership with Stuart Broad in 
England’s first innings, after Australia had made early inroads on the second 
morning, was as pivotal as any. When Moeen belted Johnson for three fours in an 
over – the last of which was a particularly emphatic lofted off drive – 
England’s dominance was restored.

NM Just after notching his 100 at the Kia Oval, Steve Smith ambled down the 
pitch and chipped Moeen Ali for probably the most effortless six you’ve ever 
seen. It didn’t mean a huge amount, but it was delightful batting.

DL  I’ll go for a shot that best epitomised the series: Adam Lyth’s wilted 
swish at Peter Siddle’s second delivery in England’s first innings at the Kia 
Oval. Another pathetic shot from the opener and an eighth failure to presumably 
end this phase of his Test career. It summed up the frankly awful standard of 
batting from both sides.

Best moment 

MS On what proved to be the final morning of the Trent Bridge Test, England, 
requiring three more wickets to win the Ashes, turned not the senior bowlers 
Broad and Steve Finn, but to Ben Stokes and Mark Wood. It was a master stroke 
of sporting psychology: when Wood uprooted the leg and middle stumps of Nathan 
Lyon, it gave a young man a memory for life.

VM Ben Stokes catching Adam Voges in the gully at Trent Bridge. Then we knew 
this really was England’s morning/day/match/series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/06/england-australia-stuart-broad-joe-root>
.

JG From an Australian perspective, the Lord’s Test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/19/alastair-cook-michael-clarke-england-australia-ashes>
. That was pretty special.

AM That catch from Ben Stokes at Trent Bridge to remove Adam Voges. Diving to 
his right, with the ball almost behind him, it was the champagne moment in a 
morning of destruction. And catch of the series is not on this list.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F683b5b2f8fb709491c9c768158203fbf12a5af27%2F0_141_1402_840%2F1402.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashes%202015%20review%3A%20the%20best%20and%20worst%20from%20this%20year%E2%80%99s%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashes%202015%20review%3A%20the%20best%20and%20worst%20from%20this%20year%E2%80%99s%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F683b5b2f8fb709491c9c768158203fbf12a5af27%2F0_141_1402_840%2F1402.jpg>
 Stuart Broad reacts to Ben Stokes catching Adam Voges. Photograph: Jon Super/AP
BR That catch by Ben Stokes. Otherwise I liked Alastair Cook name-checking 
Peter Moores after England had won the series. Cook isn’t a natural 
communicator and can come across terribly, but that was a glimpse of his best 
qualities.

AB The first morning at Trent Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/06/england-stuart-broad-zone-australia-ashes>
, of course, when someone must have cast a spell over the ground. Every ball 
seemed to take the edge and fly to a fielder. The one moment of the summer when 
it felt like the series had the attention of the entire nation.

JA Ben Stokes’ catch off Stuart Broad at Trent Bridge – it helped turn a 
breathtaking spell of cricket into something almost ethereal.

TD Ben Stokes catches Adam Voges at Trent Bridge: It felt as if the entire 
country had stopped work during Stuart Broad’s stunning spell that morning, and 
nothing caused more delighted surprise – not least in the bowler himself – than 
Stokes acrobatically plucking the ball from behind him to give Broad his fourth 
victim.

NM It’s an obvious one, but the absurd catch by Ben Stokes off Stuart Broad to 
dismiss Adam Voges, in the middle of that absurd morning at Trent Bridge, was 
thrilling. At that point I was just giggling.

DL Stuart Broad’s eight for 15 at Trent Bridge. It might be a touch parochial 
to say quite how much I enjoyed this, but I had the day off and watched the 
first day of the fourth Test in a pub with friends. From a neutral perspective 
though, it was glorious to see such a devastating spell of fast bowling: 
something that is all-too-rare these days and a throwback to the halcyon days 
of Test cricket that I grew up with.

Biggest disappointment

MS Josh Hazlewood arrived with a glowing reputation as a relentless purveyor 
of probing length and line from the school of Glenn McGrath, and had the 
statistics to back it up. Instead, despite deceptive averages, he proved a weak 
link in the attack, unable to apply the pressure at one end to release the 
likes of Starc and Johnson at the other. By the final Test he was gone.

VM The absence of that wonderful uncertainty about the outcome of each Test. 
By the end of the second day of each match we always knew who was going to win; 
sometimes that was obvious by the end of the first day; at Nottingham by the 
first interval.

JG Josh Hazlewood, who is a far better bowler than what he showed. Did he try 
too hard? I don’t know but he needs to be more ruthless and disciplined with 
his length and it was disappointing he couldn’t manage this.

AM The lack of a nail-biting finish in any of the five Tests and, given the 
swaths of column inches dedicated to it beforehand, the failure of the stump 
mics to pick up any sledging. That said, anecdotally it has been little more 
than industrial claptrap.

BR The low standard of batting, with too little in the way of Test-style craft 
and grit. The absence of a single really memorable spell of spin bowling. 
Fielding was good though.

AB The fact that the matches were so one-sided. With the exception of the 
first Test at Cardiff, you pretty much knew which way each game was heading by 
the time the second innings was over.

JA Down at the bottom of the Australia bowling averages – Mitchell Johnson: 15 
wickets at 34.93. Not bad figures by any means, but the bite didn’t match the 
bark on this occasion. Mitchell Starc was also only brilliant in bursts. But it 
will be interesting to see how the pair go in the ODI series.

TD The lack of competitive intensity. Each match was too one-sided for this 
series to truly be a classic. Batsmen too often crumbled, and bowlers too 
frequently lost control.The New Zealand series  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-v-new-zealand-2015>was the superior 
cricketing contest.

NM Generally, perhaps that the quality of the cricket wasn’t higher, but 
specifically Jos Buttler. It’s not that he didn’t score any runs, but more that 
he got out playing timidly and against his nature. Whether his confidence is 
waning is not clear, but it would be good if he attacked like he can a bit more.

DL Jos Buttler. England have not had such a thrilling natural batting talent 
since some guy with a skunk hairdo came into the team a decade ago. True, he 
has been stuffed down the order at seven and too often not had enough of a 
platform from which to explode. But he has barely scored a run. It would be 
ludicrous to think of dropping him from the side but, at 24, he is at the age 
where we should be talking about his exploits, not his potential.

Biggest reason England regained the Ashes was ...
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9104e32a1e4b382f1dee7375b770b9863340d672%2F0_203_3832_2302%2F3832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashes%202015%20review%3A%20the%20best%20and%20worst%20from%20this%20year%E2%80%99s%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashes%202015%20review%3A%20the%20best%20and%20worst%20from%20this%20year%E2%80%99s%20series&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fthe-ashes-2015-cricket-england-australia-writers-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9104e32a1e4b382f1dee7375b770b9863340d672%2F0_203_3832_2302%2F3832.jpg>
 Steve Smith edges to Joe Root at Trent Bridge. Photograph: Matthew Impey/REX 
Shutterstock 
MS On the pitches that offered real help, the England seamers, backed by some 
wonderful catching, bowled superbly, finding the right length and line, where 
their counterparts tended to bowl too full or too short. For the most part the 
Australian batsmen were unable to cope with the relentlessness of the challenge.

VM The Australian batsmen could not play the moving ball (but were damn good 
against the non-moving ball at Lord’s and the Kia Oval). And it was probably 
more difficult to retain the Ashes than they thought.

JG They bowled fuller, tested the techniques of the Australian batsmen in 
English conditions and found them wanting.

AM A combination of being quicker out of the traps at Cardiff and then putting 
on seam-bowling clinics at Edgbaston and Trent Bridge in which Australia’s 
batsmen can only be collectively diagnosed as not being up to it.

BR Australia’s frailty batting in this half of the world, plus two devastating 
spells of seam and swing bowling when it mattered.

AB They were playing at home. The Australians haven’t won in England since 
2001, and they’ve sent better batting sides than this one here in that time. 
They struggle to play well when the ball is moving in the air and off the pitch 
even more than England do when the ball is speeding through Down Under.

JA There was little between the two bowling attacks but while Australia were 
fatally over-reliant on the top three, England’s batting had that bit more 
strength in depth. But it’s a tough one to analyse given the five results.

TD They were sharp and imaginative in the field and knew how to use the 
conditions. That somewhere along the line England players seemed to stop 
playing and talking like robots also helped, for which Paul Farbrace and Trevor 
Bayliss can take much, though not all, of the credit.

NM It would be reductive to say it was entirely down to extreme Australian 
incompetence, but their sugar-paper middle-order, erratic bowlers and muddled 
selection were certainly key factors.

DL Home conditions. Another compacted tour and moderate warm-up opposition 
meant that Australia’s batsmen were ill-suited to the typically English wickets 
at Birmingham, Nottingham and, er, Cardiff. This England attack is not a 
classic one, but watching the tourists flounder on the grass at Trent Bridge 
was like watching someone who has grown up on clay courts face Roger Federer at 
Wimbledon.

If I could’ve changed one thing about these Ashes ...

Australia’s Michael Clarke departs with head high and a parting shot at pitches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/australia-michael-clarke-departs-ashes>
MS There is a tradition of presenting the Ashes at the Oval. But the urn, or 
at least the crystal replica, should have been presented at Trent Bridge, in 
the aftermath of the team triumph, rather than wait until the end of the 
series. As it happens, it brought perhaps the most incongruous champagne shower 
in history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/ashes-2014-england-win-series-australia-fifth-test>
on the back of a massive defeat by an innings and 46 runs.

VM The smugness within the Guardian camp of those who predicted an England 
victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/07/ashes-2015-writers-predictions-england-australia-cricket>
.

JG The result. I would’ve loved it to have been 2-2 going into the Oval Test. 
That would have been the ideal

AM The use of the word ‘brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jul/31/england-ashes-fate-cricket-least-fashionable-shot>
’ when describing a team’s style of play.

BR Missing Shane Watson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/15/shane-watson-dropped-by-australia-for-second-ashes-test>
 already, the most adorably baffled cricketer in Test history.

AB Jos Buttler’s form with the bat, his battling innings at the Kia Oval 
notwithstanding, it would have been wonderful to see him play one a 
match-defining innings somewhere along the way.

JA We would have had more cricket. The visceral thrill of the collapse is all 
well and good but a couple of final day crawls to victory would have been nice 
too.

TD High ticket prices. The authorities need more imaginative strategies than 
just treating an ageing Ashes demographic as a cash cow. To attend an Oval Test 
in the middle of the school holidays and see so few people under 16 - or under 
30 for that matter – was dispiriting and worrying.

NM A proper finale. A meaningless Test at the Kia Oval is no way to end an 
Ashes series.

DL Five-day Test matches. A novel idea, I know, but one I think could work. 
It’s been weirdly entertaining, but just imagine how good this series might 
have been if both sides had deigned to play well in the same Test.
 