
England

Alastair Cook 6/10 Scoring 277 runs at an average of less than 30, with three 
half-centuries but a top score of 62, fell well below the prolific standards he 
set in Australia in 2010-11. Cook insisted that was nothing to do with the 
extra demands of the captaincy, which he admitted was draining. Comments from 
inside the England bubble and the results on the field suggest his leadership 
made up in substance for what it sometimes lacks in style.

Joe Root 6/10 England's third leading runscorer, with 339 at almost 38, but 
180 of those came in a single,memorable innings at Lord's 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/21/england-win-second-ashes-test-australia>
. Could do with adding a touch of the fluency he has shown in one-day cricket 
to his make-up as a Test opener to prevent Australia's seamers tying him down, 
which they have done on occasions. But very early days, a highly promising 
start and even collected handy wickets at Trent Bridge and Lord's – aggregate 
figures of three for 34 from 16 overs suggest he might have bowled more.

Jonathan Trott 5/10 A bit of a puzzle. Like Cook, failed to reach 300 runs in 
10 innings in the series, despite beginning with uncharacteristic swiftness at 
times – his series strike rate of 53.95 was comfortably higher than those of 
Ian Bell, Matt Prior and Jonny Bairstow and Kevin Pietersen only overtook him 
during hisstunning second innings at The Oval 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/25/england-australia-fifth-test-match-report>
. Australia's brains trust could claim victory for something close to leg 
theory, giving Trott much to work on in preparation for the return series. But 
his willingness and apparent relish for fielding at third man remains exemplary.

Kevin Pietersen 7/10 Not his most dazzling Ashes series, with an average below 
40. But showed a mature and even selfless willingness to dig in at some of the 
most crucial times – in thesecond innings at Trent Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/14/the-ashes-england-australia-live>
 andthe first at Old Trafford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/05/england-retain-ashes-rain-third-test-cricket>
 and The Oval – before finally letting himself go on the memorable last evening 
in Kennington. Clearly struggling in the field but again trying his best for a 
self-confessed "old man" – and took a terrific catch to dismiss Shane Watson.

Ian Bell 9/10 Not only for the amount of runs he scored (562, more than any 
other England batsman had previously in a home five-Test Ashes series) but for 
when he scored them. It was no coincidence that Bell hit a century in each of 
the three Tests that England won. Like Pietersen, his Ashes record now stands 
at played five, won four, lost one – and as a still-sprightly 31, would seem 
better-placed of the two to play in at least two more series, in Australia this 
winter and at home again in 2015.

Jonny Bairstow 5/10 Ended his first Ashes series at Trent Bridge, helping 
Yorkshire to extend their lead at the top of the County Championship. But his 
modest statistics (203 runs at an average of 29, with a single half-century) do 
disguise a willingness to rein back his attacking instincts and bat valuable 
time in England's problem number six position, although it was when he cut 
loose and trusted his attacking instincts in the second innings at Durham that 
he threatened to do some damage. Must still be favourite to start the return 
series at six but will be aware that he needs to deliver.

Matt Prior 6/10 Joked that after all the spring hype following his 
match-saving innings in Auckland and the subsequent award as England's player 
of the year, he was bound to come a cropper, and at times that threatened to 
become a self-fulfilling prophecy. His batting stats (133 runs in nine innings 
at an average of 19) are strikingly poor but allowance should be made for the 
fact that he rarely had licence to play with his usual freedom – and credit 
given for the crucial, understated role he played in ensuring that England 
avoided the follow-on, and therefore defeat, at Old Trafford. England's Big 
Cheese will not have enjoyed being upstaged by the record-breaking performance 
of Australia's veteran wicketkeeper Brad Haddin either, although his own 
glovework remained perfectly competent.

Stuart Broad 8/10 Bowled the spell that ensured England won the Ashes, for the 
second successive home series, and that was typical of the way he obviously 
relished every moment of the contest, on and off the field. Add his 179 runs at 
25.57, including a crucial half-century at Trent Bridge, to his 22 wickets at 
27.45, plus his aggression and apparent ability to get under Australia's skin, 
and he becomes one of England's top three performers in the series.

Graeme Swann 8/10 The off-spinner would also sit comfortably in that category, 
as the leading wicket-taker on either side with 26 at 29.03, including nine in 
the match at Lord's. For the second consecutive Ashes series, under pressure to 
justify his status as the best spinner on either team and therefore a major 
difference between the teams – he again rose to rather than shirked from that 
challenge. Like Prior, Pietersen and other ageing members of this England 
squad, a little worrying to consider how tough he will be to replace.

Tim Bresnan 7/10 It is possible to argue that the Ashes result may have been 
different if England did not have the services of their elbow specialist in 
Minnesota.Dr Shawn O'Driscoll (a Guardian reader) repaired the bowling arms of 
both Swann and Bresnan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/mar/14/graeme-swann-england-elbow-operation-ashes>
 during the spring and England can never have been more grateful than on that 
memorable fourth afternoon at Durham, where the extra nip and lift he found to 
have David Warner caught behind set the scene for thematch-winning Broadside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/12/ashes-england-australia-stuart-broad>
. That was one of only 10 wickets Bresnan took in total but that was partly 
because he missed the first and fifth Tests, and he had also made a very handy 
batting contribution.

Jimmy Anderson 8/10 How different the series may have been if Cook had not 
been able to rely upon his senior bowler to deliver the goods on that 
unforgettable Sunday lunchtime at Trent Bridge. Played second fiddle to Broad 
after that but still matched his tally of 22 wickets (and would have beaten it 
if Broad himself had caught Shane Watson at mid-off at The Oval).

Steve Finn 5/10

Chris Woakes 5/10

Simon Kerrigan 0/10

Australia

Chris Rogers 7/10 Gave a sometimes painfully honest press conference before 
the third Test at Old Trafford, admitting that even as a 35-year-old man of the 
world, he was feeling the various pressures of a first Ashes series, from 
justifying his position to fathoming the decision review system. Three Tests 
later, he had established himself at the top of Australia's order – and even 
unjaundiced Poms took some pleasure from that.

David Warner 5/10 Missed first two Tests after going Walkabout in Birmingham 
and did not quite punch his weight in the subsequent three, with 138 runs at 
23. But it may be a different story on faster pitches in Australia this winter.

Shane Watson 6/10 Spent much of the series under fire, from home as much as 
from England, but ended it as second highest run scorer, behind only Ian Bell, 
with 418 at an average of almost 42,thanks mainly to his murderous 176 at The 
Oval 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/aug/21/the-ashes-england-australia-live-report>
. Could that be a breakthrough innings, at No3 and the age of 32? Flattered to 
deceive too often in the past for anyone to be convinced of that yet.

Michael Clarke 7/10 An average of almost 48 is second only to Bell but 
Australia's captain sets such high standards of himself that he remained 
disappointed at his series contribution – knowing that in the first two Tests 
he had failed to score the runs needed by his team. Responded brilliantly at 
Old Trafford and led with imagination on the field and class off it.

Steve Smith 6/10 Maiden Test century at The Oval 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/aug/22/steve-smith-australia-ashes-century>
 but too many failures before that. Still, a vast improvement on his previous 
Ashes efforts in Australia, when he was clearly out of his depth, and has 
earned the chance to make amends this winter.

Brad Haddin 6/10 "Good for the old boy," Clarke said of his vice-captain, 
whose 29 dismissals set a new record for any Test series. But with 206 runs at 
less than 23, Haddin was not quite able to produce what Australia required in 
their lower middle order – he went close at Trent Bridge (although still no 
cigar) but failed completely at Lord's and Durham.

Peter Siddle 7/10 Gave his all for his captain and his country, as ever, but 
his 17 wickets cost more than 30 apiece, suggesting he may have run out of 
steam in the last couple of Tests – perhaps, as Australia's only bowling 
ever-present, the main victim of England's deliberately patient batting 
approach.

Ryan Harris 9/10 "Exceptional", said Clarke of his spearhead and 24 wickets at 
less than 20 back up that description. Also seemed to have confounded doubts 
over whether his notoriously unreliable body would last the course, only to end 
the series with ice applied to "a little twinge in the hammy". What might have 
happened had he played at Trent Bridge?

Mitchell Starc 5/10 In, out, in, out, in and the hokey cokey victim of 
Australia's selection policy occasionally sprayed it all about.

Nathan Lyon 5/10 Did enough in the last three Tests to suggest Australia had 
erred by selecting Ashton Agar for the first two but unable to match Swann's 
impact nonetheless.

Usman Khawaja 4/10 Half-century in the second innings at Lord's proved a false 
dawn and it took Australia two Tests to cotton on.

James Faulkner 6/10 Promising debut.

Ashton Agar 4/10 Unforgettable debut innings but unwise selection punt 
nonetheless.

Phil Hughes 4/10 Good knock at Trent Bridge, could come again.

James Pattinson 4/10 Agar-esque, with handy lower-order runs but expensive 
wickets (seven at 43.85) before he went in the back.

Jackson Bird 3/10 

Ed Cowan 3/10
 