
England

Alastair Cook – I think the word is "conflicted". A lifetime's ambition 
realised, but with the whiff of cynicism and a nagging sense of personal 
underachievement hanging in the air. He will claim that none of that matters, 
but look at his face in interviews as captain and when walking off having made 
another nothing score like 25. These details will fade as the history books are 
written (by the winners of course), but he can prepare for a few awkward 
personal questions in the long phoney war that precedes the first Test in 
Brisbane.

Joe Root – He was just about to lay to rest any criticism of his position in 
the order with a century when a dismal piece of shot selection (an 
understandable weakness in any young batsman) led to him being suckered by the 
improvingNathan Lyon <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nathan-lyon>. In the 
long run, those 32 missing runs may help him, as he still has some technical 
issues to work out and can expect another forensic examination in the winter 
from the magnificent Ryan Harris. Transferring weight across the crease is his 
main problem; he could do a lot worse than to speak to a couple of his 
predecessors. Andrew Strauss had his problems with hanging a little on the back 
foot, before his career-saving 177 in Napier, and Marcus Trescothick was about 
the best at getting to the ball with an economy of movement. Root is young and 
talented enough to work it out.

Jonathan Trott – Like Alastair Cook, he's enduring a curious summer. He is 
still moving around at the crease, but, on an Oval pitch about as ill-suited to 
his style as he could find, he struggled to reach the fluency he had shown in 
cameos in previous Tests. Ten of his summer's 14 innings have terminated in the 
No Man's Land between 23 and 76. That speaks of flawed technique, not just a 
run of bad luck and he might be spending a lot of time on the bowling machine 
before Brisbane.

Kevin Pietersen – The reticence of his celebration of his first innings 50 
(and the contrast with the skunk-haired jubilation of his 150 eight years ago) 
said much about his opinion of the pitch and his inability to get going. But, 
as with all the England bats throughout the series (excluding Ian Bell is his 
annus mirabilis), much of the credit goes to the Australian bowlers, who have 
the imagination to come up with plans and the skills to execute them. Because 
you can't keep a man with his gifts at bay for long, KP's violent assault in 
the second innings showed what he can do. He will relish the ball coming on to 
the bat – as it surely will in Brisbane in just three months' time (where he 
will bring up a century of Tests). He took a tremendously difficult catch to 
dismiss Shane Watson and was good in the field – not bad for a senior statesman 
on a wonky knee.

Ian Bell – It was a quiet end to the series of his life. English cricket, and 
English cricket fans have invested much in Bell since he was a boy. This Ashes 
series were their, and his, reward.

Chris Woakes – A pleasing action with good rhythm got the ball to the other 
end more quickly than many had thought possible. But, as is often the case with 
a bowler short of express pace who does not make the ball swing or seam 
consistently, his mid-80mph bowling merely hastened the impact of the ball on 
to the middle of the bat. He hit the ball hard in both knocks and showed 
clarity of thought in the cauldron of the second-innings chase. At 24, he 
showed the potential to play the role of fourth seamer, but how often will 
England want that balance to their side?

Matt Prior – His arrival at the crease to be met with light meters and 
Australians hastening back to the refuge of the dressing room rather summed up 
his underwhelming 2013. In the race for quick runs in the first innings, he 
showed a little of the strokemaking skills that brought him the England Player 
of the Year award 2012. He will go back to Sussex now and prepare for Brisbane 
in November.

Stuart Broad – As so often this series, his first innings figures belied his 
hostility and craft with the ball, offset a little by cheap second-innings 
scalps. He bowled quickly and used his bouncer well, showing that he'll have 
plenty of ammunition when the entire nation follows Darren Lehmann's crass 
rallying call to get after him Down Under. If he can stay fit – and his role in 
Twenty20 cricket must surely be attenuated to that end – he should be at his 
peak in the next three years. With a bit of luck, he will be a real handful and 
will be up in the 300 club by the end of his next home Ashes.

Graeme Swann – He snared a couple of lefties at the top and bottom of the 
order, but lacked a little of the fizzing snap that characterises both his 
bowling and his personality when in peak form. With runs coming apace at the 
other end, he had to block his and did so to good effect. That he was allowed 
to spend two Test matches with Ashton Agar as his opposite number instead of 
the impressive Nathan Lyon was simply astonishing. He ended the series having 
biffed 126 handy runs at almost a run a ball; those runs may be more crucial in 
the return series.

Jimmy Anderson – He used helpful conditions to run through his repertoire of 
inswing and outswing, the ball on a piece of invisible string. With a little 
more help at the other end, he might have ended up with more than his five 
wickets, but would probably have settled for that after some lacklustre 
performances since his huge effort at Trent Bridge.

Simon Kerrigan – Maybe he was as surprised as everyone else by his shock 
inclusion, but he should not have been surprised to see Shane Watson looking to 
hit him off a length. He bowled all but one of his deliveries to Watson (176) 
and Steve Smith (138*), so it was a tough baptism. The crowd recognised that 
with a wonderful reception when he came out to bat, but his confidence will 
need a careful reconstruction after a chastening first taste of Test cricket.

Australia

David Warner – Missed out back at the top of the order, but charged about in 
the field and looked part of the Australian furniture – the tiresome boos have 
gone too. Another one (with Nathan Lyon) who missed the vital first two Tests – 
a self-inflicted wound, but no less painful to the cause for that.

Chris Rogers – Another two hours at the crease, with less fluency than at 
Chester-le-Street, but he was hardly alone in that. If, as seems likely, he 
will spend time batting with strokemakers pretty much all the way down to 
Nathan Lyon, his low-risk, no-backlift style will be crucial in balancing the 
order come the return series. He might be the last of dying breed; he even 
looks like that.

Shane Watson – He modified his technique by standing a little further towards 
the offside and presenting the front pad more alongside the line of the ball 
(rather than on it), allowing him to use his power to swing through the line 
and not across it. He was rewarded with 176 runs at first drop, with his first 
morning of ODI scoring the highlight. One can't help thinking he's still 
itching to get the ball through midwicket, but if he can resist, he'll be a 
real asset to this still fragile batting order. Quite why it has taken five 
Tests to address so obvious a flaw is unclear, but at least he has done so, and 
the long, long apprenticeship may, at last, be over.

Michael Clarke – Perhaps taking some criticism from home to heart, he was 
uncharacteristically unsmiling at the toss and an angry sledger in the field. 
There may be much to be said for taking a more aggressive approach, but playing 
against type isn't easy – especially with plenty else to think about – and the 
strain may have shown in his missing a good one to be bowled (again) in the 
first dig. He copped a lot of praise for his declaration, but tea was the 
latest he could declare, so I'm not convinced it's warranted.

Steve Smith – The fewer the twitches and quirks, the more the runs flow. 
Unlike contemporary Philip Hughes, he has always looked more likely to score 
runs consistently and, now the head is still at the point of contact, he's 
beginning to use his dead fish eye to smack the ball out of the middle of the 
bat. He was endearingly proud of his maiden century in his post-play interview 
– and why not. Although not picked in the original selection for this tour, 
despite playing well in the shambolic Indian series, he now looks likely to be 
a fixture in the middle order for some time.

Brad Haddin – He came in and got on with it, timing the ball as well as any on 
the slowish pitch. He kept taking catches too, eventually bagging the record 
number of dismissals in an Ashes series. Is it enough to retain his place for 
the return series when, back home, his steadying hand on the tiller may not be 
so necessary? Having played well in three consecutive losing Ashes series, he 
probably deserves it.

James Faulkner – With much talk about the impact of the Big Bash on Australian 
batting, he came to the crease twice and played two Twenty20 style innings – 
which was the unselfish thing to do, especially on debut. Rather like fellow 
newbie Chris Woakes, it's hard to see him as third seamer unless he develops 
more pace or movement, but he is a useful man to have in a squad and has the 
heart to build on some already impressive contributions in the one day stuff.

Peter Siddle – He demanded respect with a lovely line and length that pulled 
batsmen forward but was never quite there to drive. He looks a lot like Ryan 
Harris through his delivery stride, but nags rather than dazzles batsmen and, 
as such, is an ideal foil. Some senior bowlers might sulk at such usurping (not 
least after having bowled so well over the series) but Siddle, as his empathic 
nightwatchman batting (and stealing of the strike) showed, is a team man above 
all else and has been a delight to watch. Curiously underbowled by his captain 
in the second innings.

Mitchell Starc – Might he, like Mitchell Johnson with whom he shares more than 
just a first name and a left-arm over actions, be destined to be a raw quick, 
always mixing up the unplayable with the ordinary? Got one to straighten to 
nail Trott LBW first time round and was rather gifted another wicket by KP. 
Will always get batsmen out, but will never look entirely confident about 
exactly where he's landing it – in other words, those same problems that are 
keeping Steven Finn out of England's XI.

Ryan Harris – Another magnificent exhibition of fast bowling from the British 
passport holder, who charges in, gets in a full shoulder turn and snaps the 
wrist to pitch the ball on the proverbial sixpence. He lured Alastair Cook into 
another prod outside off-stump first time round and stopped KP from winning the 
match second time round. He has charmed English crowds with his craft and his 
world-weary looks after another play and miss – looks that say so much more 
than Pattinson's and Faulkner's sledges. The best of the Aussie spirit made 
flesh, the game will be diminished if he isn't fit for his home series.

Nathan Lyon – Those who saw him in India knew he could get dip and turn and 
had control of his variations – quite why Darren Lehmann couldn't, and 
preferred Ashton Agar, might rank with England's selection of Darren Pattinson 
in the more eccentric choices in Test history. You need balls to be spinner and 
Lyon has shown plenty in taking the humiliation of Trent Bridge and Lord's in 
his stride and getting on with the game once the ball was in his hand. Knowing 
that Root had been boxed up in the first innings, he tossed them up and induced 
a poor stroke – an excellent dismissal of a set batsman with an old ball. Kept 
his head when KP and Trott were taking the game away from Australia on Sunday 
evening.

• This is an article from our Guardian Sport Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/series/guardian-sport-network>

• This article first appeared on The 99.4 Cricket Blog 
<http://nestaquin.wordpress.com/2013/07/22/second-ashes-test-the-report-cards/>

• Follow Gary Naylor <https://twitter.com/garynaylor999> on Twitter
 