
The chief executive of extramarital affairs website Ashley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> has left the company 
after a third leak of emails and suggestions that he had affairs despite 
earlier denials.

“Effective today, Noel Biderman, in mutual agreement with the company, is 
stepping down as Chief Executive Officer of Avid Life Media Inc (ALM) and is no 
longer with the company,” said an unattributed statement onthe Ashley Madison 
website <http://media.ashleymadison.com/>. “Until the appointment of a new CEO, 
the company will be led by the existing senior management team.”


In July details of more than 37m accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/20/ashley-madison-hacked-cheating-site-total-shutdown>
 were stolen from the website, whose tagline is: “Life is short. Have an 
affair.” The company is now being sued foremotional distress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/25/man-sues-ashley-madison-for-emotional-distress-in-potential-class-action-lawsuit>
 and Canadian police are investigating links between the hack andtwo suicides. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/24/toronto-suicides-ashley-madison-hack>

The company said that Biderman’s resignation was “in the best interest of the 
company and allows us to continue to provide support to our members and 
dedicated employees” and that it remained “steadfast in our commitment to our 
customer base”.

Ashley Madison 'discussed hacking competitor site'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/25/ashley-madison-discussed-hacking-competitor-site-nerve-com-emails>
That customer base’s personal information was spread far and wide across the 
internet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/26/the-ashley-madison-online-lives>
 earlier this month, with even those who hadpaid $20 (£15) to delete their 
accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madisons-paid-delete-option-left-data-identifying-users-post-claims>
 being exposed, with police tying multiple blackmail attempts andat least two 
suicides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/24/toronto-suicides-ashley-madison-hack>
 to the leak.

“We are actively adjusting to the attack on our business and members’ privacy 
by criminals,” the company wrote, saying that it would remain in business. 
Biderman has been notable by his silence over the course of the scandal, with 
police and security researcher Brian Krebs communicating much of the available 
information.

Krebs has posted new information on the hack 
<http://krebsonsecurity.com/2015/08/who-hacked-ashley-madison/>, including a 
possible lead: a Twitter user (or, as Krebs speculates, users) calledThadeus Zu 
<https://twitter.com/deuszu> posted a link to the hack before anyone else and 
appears to have had special knowledge of the data breach before anyone else did.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fashley-madison-hack-suicides-possibly-linked-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashley%20Madison%20hack%3A%20police%20say%20suicides%20may%20be%20linked%20to%20leak%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fashley-madison-hack-suicides-possibly-linked-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashley%20Madison%20hack%3A%20police%20say%20suicides%20may%20be%20linked%20to%20leak%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F24%2Fashley-madison-hack-suicides-possibly-linked-video&media=>
 Toronto police say at least two suicides may be linked to the hacking of 
infidelity websiteAshley Madison which exposed exposed tens of millions of 
people’s personal information 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/world/2015/aug/24/toronto-suicides-ashley-madison-hack>
The third and latest data dump, posted at the site that first released the 
user database, appears to be a download of emails from Biderman’s personal 
Gmail account. The second torrent – released by an entity calling itself the 
Impact Team – contained emails that seemed to be from Biderman’s work account 
and its release had already done damage to his personal reputation: the 
executivetold the New York Daily News in 2014 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/life-style/noel-biderman-site-ashley-madison-marrieds-stray-article-1.1642475>
 that he had never cheated on his wife, but the hacked documents suggested 
otherwise.





• In the US and Canada, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 
1-800-273-8255 <>. In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 08457 90 90 
90. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines 
in other countriescan be found here 
<http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.
 