
Taking the positives may have long since entered the lexicon of exculpatory 
sporting platitudes – on England's tour of Australia a couple of players have 
even mentioned the need to "take the negatives" – but when it comes to the 
one-day series, the positives to emerge fromEngland's 4-1 defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/27/ashley-giles-england-australia-cricket>
 are so stark that not to take them would seem a little perverse.

Most obviously, Jos Buttler had a brilliant series, batting with verve under 
pressure and keeping wicket with unobtrusive efficiency, with no dropped 
catches and only two byes all series. With Matt Prior dropped and Jonny 
Bairstow failing to recommend himself either as Test wicketkeeper or batsman, 
the question is what, exactly, to do with Buttler next. Here is a player of 
captivating talent, who appears utterly unaffected by pressure.

Against this it is the huge leap from occasional keeper to keeping wicket over 
a full Test summer in England. And yet, talent often trumps logic, and watching 
Buttler perform so adeptly in Australia on a tour where so many have shrunk it 
is hard to avoid the feeling that here is a cricketer who might just buck 
convention

Asked about Buttler's readiness to play Test cricket, Ashley Giles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashley-giles> was careful to steer a line 
between selectorial caution and purring openly over a rare talent. " I wouldn't 
say I can't see him playing," England's one-day coach said. "Buttler's weakest 
suit is probably his four-day game and how he builds an innings. He knows that 
and won't mind me saying it. He has the potential to transform how you bat at 
No7 in Test cricket. That is exciting. Increasingly since the end of the 
Champions Trophy he has put some impressive performances together. He has just 
got to keep doing that."

Only the most hard-nosed of England supporters could object to an England 
coach becoming enraptured with an exciting young player, not least in the era 
of hard-nosed caution-cricket. When Giles, who played against Adam Gilchrist, 
says Buttler has the potential to transform traditional notions of a No7, it is 
hard not to get caught up in the optimism over a player who hits the ball in 
unusual areas and can counterattack with calculated brutality.

Wicketkeeper-batsman has been a key, and often troublesome, role in England's 
Test team since Alec Stewart's retirement, from the flirtations with Chris Read 
and James Foster, through the brief bloom of Geraint Jones, to Matt Prior's 
reliable brilliance over the last five years. This is the class act that 
Buttler, a much less established first-class cricketer, would have to follow.

"He will have to adapt because up front you need a tighter defence," Giles 
said. "But at the same time you do not want him to lose some of that natural 
flair because if someone can counter the way he does, it doesn't matter if you 
have three slips and a gully, he can really be very dangerous. He needs to be 
himself as well because that is what puts bums on seats."

Of his own intentions with the one-day team in the year to come, Giles was 
more conservative, mentioning the possibility that a young fast bowler – Jamie 
Overton was mentioned – could break into the team, while the hope is still that 
Steven Finn, the world's No3 ranked one-day bowler, will return this summer.

Giles has also spoken through the series about the need to increase the tempo 
of England's batting at the top of the order. So far this has been a case of 
Ian Bell and Alastair Cook simply batting more positively. Asked if Alex Hales, 
the world's No1 ranked Twenty20 batsman, might be a better fit in this regard 
Giles was equivocal.

"I don't think there is necessarily a direct correlation between t20 and 50 
overs; the way you bat," he said. "There is a halfway house there somewhere. We 
know Alex is a fantastic 20-over player but that is a really different game. 
Some of these guys are going to have to play in the 50-over series in the West 
Indies and that will be a good test for them."

Hales has yet to play a 50-over match for England but Giles maintained this 
was an informed non-selection: "Even he would say his record in domestic 
50-over competition is not brilliant compared to some of the other guys but 
certainly he is a very exciting cricketer and very dangerous."
 