
The chief of the defence force, Air Chief Marshal Mark Binskin, has warned the 
alleged hack of personal information from theAshley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> infidelity website, 
including that of defence personnel, is unlikely to be an isolated event.

Ashley Madison hack: five people on getting caught up in the data breach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/21/ashley-madison-hack-five-people-database-experience>
The release of the massive cache of data on Wednesday, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madisons-hacked-customer-files-posted-online-as-threatened-say-reports>
 by a group calling itself Impact Team, has raised serious questions around 
security with experts warning it could expose government employees as well as 
private individuals to blackmail and other criminal activity.

The files are purported to include the email accounts of more than 800 
Australian government employees, both federal and state.

Accounts linked to employees from the federal departments of health, education 
and environment, from the ABC, and from the NSW Attorney General’s Department 
were included, as were many from defence and foreign affairs.

The data included credit card details, email accounts and home addresses.

In a statement issued in response to the release of the data, Binskin said 
there was no evidence Australian-based systems or networks had been compromised.

“The unauthorised material published this month appears to have been enabled 
by individuals associating defence email addresses with private online 
activity, and providing personally identifiable information,” he said in a 
joint statement with Department of Defence secretary, Dennis Richardson.

Radio hosts tell woman live on air her husband had Ashley Madison account
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/20/radio-hosts-tell-woman-live-on-air-her-husband-had-ashley-madison-account>
“There is no evidence to suggest the leak is a result of any compromise of 
Australian-based systems or networks.”

But the statement also cautioned “these are unlikely to be isolated cases and 
the release of similar information may occur in the future”.

Defence personnel have been advised to take a number of steps to reduce the 
risk of their personal information being exposed, including being told to use a 
secure computer and network.

“Be careful posting personally identifiable information that could compromise 
your or other’s security,” the advice said.

“There is no change to the current threat level to defence personnel and you 
should remain alert to your personal and online security.”

The data dump on Wednesday comes after hacking group the Impact Team 
threatened in July to release information on users of Ashley Madison unless its 
publisher took the site down.

Ashley Madison hack: should you look up your partner's details?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/21/should-you-look-up-your-partners-details-in-the-leaked-ashley-madison-profile-list>
Ashley Madison is owned by Canadian-based company Avid Life Media.

There were about 812 user profiles using Australian government email addresses 
in the cache.

There are 234 unique gov.au domains.

The bulk are from the Department of Defence, and the NSW and Victorian 
education departments.

Of the more than one million Ashley Madison accounts linked to Australians, 
about 700,000 have verified their email contact, while the overwhelming 
majority – 86% – are linked to men.

Ashley Madison bills itself as “the most famous name in infidelity”.
 