
Two Canadian law firms have filed a $578m class-action lawsuit against the 
companies that runAshley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> after a hacker group’s 
data breach exposed some 39 million memberships in the adultery website earlier 
this week.

Charney Lawyers and Sutts, Strosberg, both of Ontario, said Friday that they 
filed the lawsuit on behalf of Canadians who subscribed to Ashley Madison and 
whose personal information was disclosed to the public. The website, with its 
slogan “Life is short. Have an affair,” is marketed to facilitate extramarital 
relationships.

The lawsuit, filed on Thursday in the Ontario superior court of justice, 
targets AvidDating <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/dating> Life and 
Avid Life Media, the Toronto-based companies that run AshleyMadison.com. Its 
class-action status “still needs to be certified by the court”, the statement 
says.

Ashley Madison did not immediately respond to requests for comment. It has 
said that the personal details exposed in the initial data leak can’t be used 
to prove the infidelity of their clients.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fradio-presenters-woman-husband-cheated-ashley-madison-live-on-air-audio&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440065884644%2FKP_397381_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Radio%20presenters%20tell%20woman%20her%20husband%20was%20Ashley%20Madison%20user%20live%20on%20air%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fradio-presenters-woman-husband-cheated-ashley-madison-live-on-air-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Radio%20presenters%20tell%20woman%20her%20husband%20was%20Ashley%20Madison%20user%20live%20on%20air%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F20%2Fradio-presenters-woman-husband-cheated-ashley-madison-live-on-air-audio&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F8%2F20%2F1440065884644%2FKP_397381_crop_640x480.jpg>
 Breakfast show hosts reveal to a woman, live on air, that her partner was 
registered with Ashley Madison 
The plaintiff is Eliot Shore, an Ottawa widower. Shore said he joined the 
website for a short time in search of companionship after he lost his wife to 
breast cancer. He said he never cheated and never met up with any members of 
the site.

Ted Charney, of Charney Lawyers, told Associated Press it was the first 
class-action suit filed against the companies inCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada>.

Missouri lawyers have filed a class-action lawsuit in a US district court 
seeking more than $5m in damages. US lawyers filed a statement of claim late 
last month on behalf of an unnamed female plaintiff who said she ponied up $19 
so Ashley Madison would purge her personal information from its website in a 
process called a “paid-delete”.

The lawsuit argues that the privacy of Canadian members was breached in July 
when hackers infiltrated Ashley Madison’s website and downloaded private 
information. The data breach includes users’ personal names, emails, home 
addresses and message history. On Tuesday, the information was posted publicly 
online.

The law firms’ statement said numerous former users of the website have 
approached them to inquire about their privacy rights under Canadian law.

“They are outraged that AshleyMadison.com failed to protect its users’ 
information. In many cases, the users paid an additional fee for the website to 
remove all of their user data, only to discover that the information was left 
intact and exposed,” Charney said.

“The sensitivity of the information is so extreme and the repercussions of 
this breach are so extreme, it puts the damages faced by members in a 
completely different category of class-action suits.”

The law firms said the lawsuit is not being brought against the hackers, who 
have said they attacked the website in an effort to close it down as punishment 
for collecting a fee without actually deleting users’ data.

The law firms did not immediately respond to a request for comment, and it was 
not clear in what court the class-action lawsuit was filed.

There are hundreds of email addresses in the data release that appear to be 
connected to federal, provincial and municipal workers across Canada, as well 
as to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and the military.

According to the data breach, some of the website’s customers made credit-card 
transactions from computers attached to the department of national defense and 
Canada’s House of Commons.

The data, stored in more than 2,500 files, involved transactions spanning from 
March 2008 to several days in June of this year.

National defense referred most questions to the federal treasury board, which 
has an overall responsibility.

Lisa Murphy, spokeswoman for the treasury board, would only say that the 
government has rules for the professional and personal use of its computers.

In a written statement, a DND spokeswoman echoed some of Murphy’s statement, 
and said the department “has policies and practices in place to deter, detect 
and enforce unauthorized and prohibited computer use.”

The credit-card information of US government workers, some with sensitive jobs 
in the White House, Congress and the justice department, was also revealed in 
the data breach.
 