
Welcome back, then, Ashley Cole. For all the urgency of the occasion at the 
Etihad Stadium as Manchester City and Roma shared ataut 1-1 draw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/sep/30/manchester-city-roma-champions-league-match-report>
, this was also a fond reunion – and possibly even a kind of farewell. Who 
knows, after more than 550 matches on English soil for Arsenal, England, 
Chelsea and now Roma, this could even turn out to have been Cole’s last 
appearance here. If it is – and Cole has no intention of returning just yet – 
then Roma’s left-back produced a suitably focused and aggressive performance, a 
fitting snapshot in 90 minutes of the best English defender of his generation 
and a genuine Champions League star of the last decade.

At kick-off it seemed an agreeable oddity that the most experienced player on 
the pitch for this first meeting of Group E’s second-tier hopefuls was an 
Englishman. This was Cole’s 106thChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> appearance, almost twice 
as many as Yaya Touré and Francesco Totti.

In the event, though, it was City’s slight but significant air of callowness 
in this competition that allowed Roma’s venerable A-listers to creep back into 
the match and equalise from a goal down before creating a succession of chances 
on the break in the first half.

Cole himself was composed and even quite coltish on Roma’s left flank. So much 
so that as he led his team-mates off the pitch at half-time it was tempting to 
conclude, as it had been at the World Cup, that England’s best left-back is 
currently retired from international football and plays in Italy.

Indeed, three of the best players on the pitch in that opening 45 minutes – 
Cole, Totti and the haphazardly marauding Maicon – had a combined age of 104. 
Sometimes, at this level,it is a not-so-young man’s game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/sep/30/five-taking-points-manchester-city-roma>
.

What a player he has been: one of the best English tournament players of the 
modern era and perhaps the only member of that fashionably derided golden crop 
who always seemed to rise to rather than shrink from the occasion.

There is, of course, a paradox that a player once hoist as a kind of acme of 
Premier League brattishness should end up representing enduring 
professionalism. Cole is 33 now, and a high-mileage model, but there is a fair 
argument City should not have stopped at Lampard but should have brought Cole 
in, too, last summer.

He offers the same champion qualities and has about him still a calmness and 
presence that is lacking in City’s current left-backs.

Gaël Clichy was Cole’s replacement at Arsenal and here he started for City on 
the left, the same side down which Roma’s early penetration came, with Maicon 
again running in on goal after taking the excellent Miralem Pjanic’s pass into 
a pocket of space behind the full-back. For Cole, this was always going to be 
an intriguing sort of homecoming.

Few English footballers have been so roundly booed and jeered over their 
careers – a peculiar thing in itself, given Cole’s professionalism and air of 
quiet command, and a state of affairs driven almost entirely by off-field 
matters, most notably the laughable Partridge-meets-the-Premier-League episode 
during his salary negotiations at Arsenal. There were no boos here, though, on 
a mild, still night at the Etihad that had seemed likely to be a jittery one 
for Cole, confronted by Jesús Navas, the quickest player in this City squad.

Cole, though, has always relished going toe to toe by the touchline, as he did 
in the opening moments, lunging to steer the ball away from his man as, 
briefly, the match became all about Roma’s grand old rampaging full-backs.

First Maicon, veteran of a miserable 10-game season in the dog days of the 
Roberto Mancini era, gave away a penalty after four minutes. Sergio Agüero 
yawned the kick into the corner but moments later it was almost Maicon redux as 
the Brazilian stormed forward on to a superb lofted pass by Totti and smashed a 
shot on to the bar, the rebound narrowly evading Cole – yes, Cole – inside – 
yes, inside – the six-yard box.

And so it went on in that opening period as Cole in particular made more 
marauding forward darts whenRoma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> 
had possession than he seemed to do in his entire final season at Chelsea. On 
32 minutes he might even have scored, careering in at the back post as Roma’s 
most advanced player and just failing to connect from an offside position with 
Radja Nainggolan’s cross from the right.

When Roma’s goal came it was via a moment of beautiful incision through the 
heart of this City team. The instant pass from Nainggolan to release Totti was 
delicious: even better was Totti’s turning of his back on the ball to allow it 
to arc in behind him and into his path with a ballroom dancer’s timing.

Joe Hart slipped a little as he rushed out but again, two years on from Andrea 
Pirlo’s rather mocking “spoon” in Kiev, an ageing Italian had made him take a 
seat.

The goalkeeper, to his credit, made some fine saves at close quarters later in 
the match and City did enough in the second half to have won the game as David 
Silva began to assert himself: Cole’s late lunging block as Silva burst into 
the box was a moment to treasure.

It has by all accounts been a slightly rocky start for Cole in Rome. Here, 
back on home turf, he looked the familiar model of low-throttle excellence.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F01%2Fmanuel-pellegrini-manchester-city-roma-champions-league-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F1%2F1412155809283%2FCitys-Belgian-defender-Vi-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Manuel%20Pellegrini%20disappointed%20with%20Manchester%20City's%201-1%20draw%20against%20Roma%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F01%2Fmanuel-pellegrini-manchester-city-roma-champions-league-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Manuel%20Pellegrini%20disappointed%20with%20Manchester%20City%27s%201-1%20draw%20against%20Roma%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Foct%2F01%2Fmanuel-pellegrini-manchester-city-roma-champions-league-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F10%2F1%2F1412155809283%2FCitys-Belgian-defender-Vi-017.jpg> 