
Hacked extramarital dating site Ashley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> discussed hacking a 
competitor, according to emails released as part of the massive leak of the 
site’s data.

The leaked emails show that in November 2012, the site’s chief technology 
officer, Raja Bhatia, emailed chief executive Noel Biderman after apparently 
examining the security of the new dating section of online sex and 
relationships magazineNerve.com <http://www.nerve.com/> and finding a security 
hole in the site.

“They did a very lousy job building their platform. I got their entire user 
base,” Bhatia wrote. “Also, I can turn any non-paying user into a paying user, 
vice versa, compose messages between users, check unread stats, etc.”

The email also contained a link to a Github archive with a sample of the 
database, suggesting that Bhatia had acquired some data.

Ashley Madison did not deny the emails were accurate, but said that they were 
taken out of context. The company says that Bhatia’s discovery of security 
holes in the website was part of “due diligence” performed in the runup to a 
proposed partnership between the two firms.

Six months after the first emails and in advance of a meeting between Biderman 
and Nerve.com, Bhatia again emailed the chief executive, asking whether he 
should “tell them of their security hole”. Biderman did not reply.

The emails are contained in the second of the two major document dumps from 
Ashley Madison, which was hacked in late July by attackers calling themselves 
Impact Team. The first dump, released last Tuesday, contained the full database 
of Ashley Madison’s members. But a second database, released on Thursday night, 
contained a number of internal documents from the company itself – including 
the full email spool of chief executive Biderman.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fashley-madison-members-come-clean-risk-extortion-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashley%20Madison%20members%20should%20come%20clean%20or%20risk%20extortion%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fashley-madison-members-come-clean-risk-extortion-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashley%20Madison%20members%20should%20come%20clean%20or%20risk%20extortion%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fashley-madison-members-come-clean-risk-extortion-video&media=>
 Identity protection analyst Adam Levin says Ashley Madison members should come 
clean instead of waiting to be discovered or risking becoming the victim of 
extortion 
In a statement given to Vice 
<http://motherboard.vice.com/en_uk/read/ashley-madisons-ceo-wanted-to-hack-a-competing-site-to-steal-emails>
, Ashley Madison’s parent company Avid Life Media said that the emails were 
“taken out of context” and that the interpretation that Bhatia had hacked Nerve 
was “incorrect and unfortunate”. The statement continued: “Nerve was exploring 
strategic partnerships in May of 2012 and reached out to Noel to determine Avid 
Life Media’s interest in the property. At the time Noel did not act on that 
opportunity.”

“In September PTC Advisors, representing Nerve, contacted Noel and provided a 
more detailed brief on the opportunity. This communique was followed by a 
number of conversations. Subsequently Noel contacted Raja Bhatia and asked for 
his assistance in conducting technical due diligence on the opportunity. This 
activity, while clumsily conducted, uncovered certain technology shortcomings 
which Noel attempted to understand and confirm.

“At no point was there an effort made to hack, steal or use Nerve.com’s 
proprietary data.”

Ashley Madison has refused to confirm the legitimacy of the dump overall, and, 
short of confirming that the hack is being investigated, haslargely failed to 
answer questions surrounding the hack at all 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/21/ten-questions-ashley-madison-needs-to-answer>
. The Guardian has asked Bhatia, who no longer works for the firm, for comment.

 * Five people on getting caught up in the Ashley Madison data breach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/21/ashley-madison-hack-five-people-database-experience>

 * Ashley Madison database suggests paid-delete option left identifiable data 
intact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madisons-paid-delete-option-left-data-identifying-users-post-claims> 