
There were lots of women looking to cheat on their partners on our site, 
honest, representatives of hacked infidelity serviceAshley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> claimed on Monday.

The latest – unattributed – statement from the Canadian company came after 
Annalee Newitz, a writer for several Gawker Media websites including Gizmodo,
studied the hacked database 
<http://gizmodo.com/almost-none-of-the-women-in-the-ashley-madison-database-1725558944>
 for indications that the site’s purported 5.5 million female users had 
arranged trysts using the service. She found that “only 1,492 women had ever 
checked their messages” according to the stolen information, though she allowed 
for the possibility that the data might have been corrupted.

Ashley Madison <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> reps 
said that Newitz misread the information (though they didn’t name her 
personally). “Last week, a reporter who claimed to analyze the stolen data made 
incorrect assumptions about the meaning of fields contained in the leaked 
data,” said the unattributed statement. “This reporter concluded that the 
number of active female members on Ashley Madison could be calculated based on 
those assumptions. That conclusion was wrong.”

There are, the service’s promoters protested, scores of women eager to cheat 
on their spouses with the right guy, or to abet someone else in that goal. Why, 
just last week, women “sent more than 2.8m messages with our platform”, the 
statement boasted, and “the ratio of male members who paid to communicate with 
women on our service versus the number of female members who actively used 
their account [...] was 1.2 to 1”.

“This past week alone, hundreds of thousands of new users signed up for the 
Ashley Madison platform,” said representatives of the site, “including 87,596 
women.” The site will not cease operations, they wrote.

However, emails from the second leak by hackers, calling themselves the Impact 
Team, also seem to indicate that Ashley Madison created many “angels”, to use 
the site’s terminology –fake accounts run by bot 
<http://gizmodo.com/the-fembots-of-ashley-madison-1726670394> programs.

A former employee sued the site in 2013 saying in a complaint 
<http://www.torontosun.com/2013/11/11/dating-website-fires-back-at-employee-who-claims-injury-typing-fake-profiles>
 that the site had required the creation of so many fake profiles, she had 
sustained repetitive stress injuries to her wrists.

In July details of more than 37m accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/20/ashley-madison-hacked-cheating-site-total-shutdown>
 were stolen from the website, whose tagline is: “Life is short. Have an 
affair.” Last Friday CEO,Noel Biderman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/28/ashley-madison-neil-biderman-stepping-down>
 quit the company. Leaked information appeared to show Bidermanused his work 
email to arrange paid assignations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/28/ashley-madison-neil-biderman-stepping-down>
 with young women despite having claimed total fidelity to his wife in an 
interview with the New York Daily News last year.
 