
Nobody ever went broke underestimating the intelligence of the American 
public, H L Mencken famously said. It looks like you can double the truth of 
that the moment penises get involved.

According to Avid Life Media, the parent company of the recently hacked 
infidelity website Ashley Madison,hundreds of thousands of people have signed 
up for its services 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2015/08/31/us-ashleymadison-cybersecurity-idUSKCN0R01CS20150831?feedType=RSS&feedName=topNews&utm_source=twitter>
 in the past week, despite the fact that the hack not onlyreleased details of 
millions of its adulterous clients 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madison-hackers-release-10gb-database-of-33m-infidelity-site-accounts>
, but had also apparently shown thatmost of the female users were fake 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3206846/Hacked-adultery-website-Ashley-Madison-created-hundreds-fake-female-profiles-lure-male-customers-claims-former-employee.html>
.

The latter claim has since been amended – it looks as if there were more real 
women on there than first thought 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/31/ashley-madison-claims-site-has-plenty-of-female-users>
, though still outnumbered by bots that seem to have been specifically designed 
by the company to engage with the men and make it seem like the place was just 
one great welcoming vagina – but the new customers didn’t know that. For many 
thousands of people, the then current knowledge – that there were barely any 
women on the site and that it had all the security of a rotting hammock – was 
apparently nothing compared with the news that there was a site out there that 
offered the chance, however small and dangerous, of being brought into 
conjunction with new sets of genitalia.

This massive uptick in membership suggests that we should have turned to P T 
Barnum rather than Mencken – there really is no such thing as bad publicity. 
For every person who looked at the story and said to himself (going by even the 
revised figures it is evidently very rarely “herself” when it comes to anything 
Ashley Madison): “Dodged a bullet there, mate,” there were dozens more who 
said: “I had never realised that the internet could be pressed into service in 
this way. What a revelation. Sign me up. Literally, sign me up. With my real 
name and credit card details and everything.”

Is it a triumph of hope over (vicarious) experience? Or of the infinite 
corruptibility of man/men over everything else? Answers on postcards to the 
usual address, please, where they will be disposed of using rubber gloves and 
tongs.
 