
Ashley Jensen <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashley-jensen> is 
talking about her career before Extras, the Ricky Gervais series that made her 
famous a decade ago. “What was weird was that I always considered myself a 
success when I was working in theatre, because I was supporting myself in my 
chosen profession,” she says. “America was never on the agenda. Films were 
something other actors did. But I had a partner, we had quite a nice life – we 
had a dog, we did the odd job. I honestly never thought, ‘It’s really not 
working out.’”

Jensen is now sitting among the signs of a successful screen actor: we’re in 
London in the suite of a Soho hotel, a makeup artist is packing away his tools, 
the photographer his lights. There is a selection of tiny cakes on the table, 
as well as an array of snacks. It’s fancy. And the actor, now in her mid-40s, 
is the lead at last, after years of playing the friend: socially awkward Maggie 
in Extras; brittle Fran inSharon Horgan and Rob Delaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/16/rob-delaney-and-sharon-horgan-catastrophe-roundup>
’sCatastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/14/best-of-tv-2015-no-4-catastrophe>
; seamstress Christina inUgly Betty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2010/dec/21/ugly-betty-the-beauty>
.

In Agatha Raisin, Sky1’s bright, funny new series, Jensen is a glossy PR 
executive who moves to the Cotswolds and ends up solving murders. “Desperate 
Housewives crossed with Midsomer Murders,” is how she describes it. In MC 
Beaton’s novels, the lead character is dumpy and a decade older; Jensen’s 
Agatha is slick and confident, her bright colour-block dresses standing out in 
a field of drab Barbours and tasteful Cotswold stone. She doesn’t, says Jensen, 
“apologise for what she looks like. She wears heels and lipstick. I think 
sometimes to be taken seriously as a woman you have to tone that down, which I 
feel sad about.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fashley-jensen-on-finally-playing-the-lead-agatha-raisin-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa79f362f2cb5b55cceae1d1686093479e2900b56%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashley%20Jensen%3A%20'I%20never%20had%20a%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20I%20don't%20even%20know%20what%20I'm%20having%20for%20tea'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fashley-jensen-on-finally-playing-the-lead-agatha-raisin-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashley%20Jensen%3A%20%27I%20never%20had%20a%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20I%20don%27t%20even%20know%20what%20I%27m%20having%20for%20tea%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fashley-jensen-on-finally-playing-the-lead-agatha-raisin-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa79f362f2cb5b55cceae1d1686093479e2900b56%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Partners in crime … Jensen, right, with Katy Wix in Agatha Raisin. 
Jensen always wanted to be an actor. She grew up in Annan, in Dumfries and 
Galloway, raised by her mother, a learning support teacher for children with 
educational needs. She didn’t have much access to the theatre or cinema – it 
was sitcoms she loved. “My obsession was Frank Spencer. I just loved that 
character and the physical comedy. And Fawlty Towers and The Good Life.”

When she was 14, Jensen spent a few weeks in London with the National Youth 
Theatre. “I look back and think what a brave thing for a parent to do: let me 
at that age, from a wee Scottish town, go to London on my own and be part of 
this mad world of acting.” If her mother had hoped it might get it out of her 
system, it didn’t work. “I remember thinking, ‘This is just amazing.’” Her eyes 
shine.


Jensen is too nice to say anything mean about the number of Eton and public 
school-educated actors who seem to dominate the entertainment business, but she 
does acknowledge it would be harder for someone from her background now to 
break in. “I wouldn’t have been able to do it if I hadn’t had a full student 
grant,” she says. “It’s like any further education, now – having to pay back 
loans does make it more difficult.” She is also dismayed bycuts to arts 
education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/23/bob-and-roberta-smith-arts-education-yorkshire-sculpture-park>
. “A drama department is crucial. It’s not only about children who want to be 
actors. It’s about being able to look people in the eye, public speaking, 
communication, self-confidence.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVnU9AZlQaV4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVnU9AZlQaV4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DVnU9AZlQaV4&media=>
After studying drama at Queen Margaret College 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Queen_Margaret_University> in Edinburgh, Jensen 
applied to teacher training college as a back-up plan. Three days before she 
was due to start, she rang them from a phone box and said she wouldn’t be 
coming. “I thought, ‘If I’ve got something to fall back on, I will fall back on 
it.’ I went, ‘Right, I’ve got to earn a living out of this.’”

LA felt like Alice in Wonderland – I once watched a woman hold her chameleon 
up to pee

Even when she moved to Los Angeles for a part in the hit show Ugly Betty, it 
wasn’t planned. Jensen and her husband, the actor Terence Beesley, were in LA 
on holiday when her agent got her some auditions, and she thought she might as 
well go along. They ended up staying for six years. “My husband was always a 
bit like, ‘This is a good laugh, isn’t it? Let’s not take it too seriously – if 
it all falls flat, we’ll go back home.’”

She went to the Emmys (she was nominated for Extras), which was exciting but 
also silly. “I always felt a wee bit like the dirty cousin,” she says with a 
laugh, saying her publicist had ordered her to get a manicure and pedicure 
before she walked the red carpet. “But I liked being a wee bit outside of it. 
LA felt like Alice in Wonderland, with all these strange characters. I remember 
going for a walk with the dog in Runyon Canyon and this woman holding a 
chameleon up like that” – she holds her arms aloft – “while it had a pee. And 
then you’d look to the right and there were people walking backwards up the 
canyon to work different muscles.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fashley-jensen-on-finally-playing-the-lead-agatha-raisin-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ba179f077bb132c8052b7ac36e62ba28983ba62%2F0_0_1670_1670%2F1670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashley%20Jensen%3A%20'I%20never%20had%20a%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20I%20don't%20even%20know%20what%20I'm%20having%20for%20tea'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fashley-jensen-on-finally-playing-the-lead-agatha-raisin-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashley%20Jensen%3A%20%27I%20never%20had%20a%20plan%20%E2%80%93%20I%20don%27t%20even%20know%20what%20I%27m%20having%20for%20tea%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Fashley-jensen-on-finally-playing-the-lead-agatha-raisin-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ba179f077bb132c8052b7ac36e62ba28983ba62%2F0_0_1670_1670%2F1670.jpg>
 Jensen with Ricky Gervais in Extras. Photograph: Ray Burmiston/BBC 
She says nobody tried to change her. There were no requests for her to lose 
weight, have Botox or get her lips plumped up. “Maybe it was because I was too 
old, or I was in comedy. ‘Ah, just leave her, she’s beyond it.’ I think it’s 
because I was a little older, an outsider, and I was always up for the best 
friend [part], so I never felt a pressure. I still don’t feel a pressure to 
change what I look like, and I hope I have the dignity to maintain that. I did 
see a lot of people who’d had Botox, because as a woman you’re not allowed to 
get old.” Is it hard not to when other actors are? “No, because I go, ‘What are 
you doing that for?’ Come on, we’ve got to stick together, women of a certain 
age.”

When she left Ugly Betty and returned to the UK, people questioned why she 
wanted to leave such a successful show. “I became an actor to do different 
things. I didn’t want to get stagnant. It was difficult being in something for 
that long. It was nine or 10 months of the year. I wanted to nip off and do 
something like Catastrophe.” She had also just had her son and wanted to spend 
time with him. So the family settled in Bath.

She’d like to do more independent films like 2015’s The Lobster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/18/the-lobster-review-colin-farrell-rachel-weisz-mark-kermode>
 and a second series of Agatha Raisin – and much more Catastrophe, please. “I’m 
delighted to be clinging on to the coat-tails of the success of that show,” she 
says. And, it seems, there is still no career plan. “People always asked me, 
‘Who do you want to be?’ When I was in America, they all had a plan – where 
they want to be in five years.” She smiles. “I was like, ‘I don’t even know 
what I’m having for my tea tonight.’”

• Agatha Raisin starts on 7 June at 9pm on Sky1.
 