
Toronto police report two suicides associated with Ashley Madison hack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/24/toronto-suicides-ashley-madison-hack>
The infidelity website Ashley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> and its parent company 
are being sued in US federal court by a man who claims that the companies 
caused him emotional damage by failing to adequately protect personal and 
financial information from theft.

 The lawsuit, filed in Los Angeles by a man named as John Doe, seeks 
class-action status, accusing Ashley Madison and parent company Avid Life Media 
of negligence and invasion of privacy, as well as causing emotional distress. 
It seeks unspecified damages.

The lawsuit says that in addition to making “extremely personal and 
embarrassing information ... accessible to the public” the data breach made 
personal details such as addresses, phone numbers and credit card information 
available on the web.


Data from the Toronto-based Ashley Madison website was released by a group 
calling itself the Impact Team. The highly sensitive personal, financial, and 
identifying information of 37 million users was exposed, the lawsuit says, and 
this could have been prevented if the company had taken “necessary and 
reasonable precautions to protect its users’ information, by, for example, 
encrypting the data”.


 The hacker group first threatened to release information if the site was not 
shut down, the suit says, and then in August published the “stolen personal 
information,” the suit said.

 The data, which was dumped online, included millions of email addresses for 
US government officials, UK civil servants and high-level executives at 
European and North American corporations.

Avid Life Media was sued in Canada last week in a class-action suit that seeks 
$760m in damages.


Police in Toronto said on Monday that two suicides they were investigating may 
be linked to the Ashley Madison hack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/24/toronto-suicides-ashley-madison-hack>
. “As of this morning we have two unconfirmed reports of suicides that are 
associated because of the leak of Ashley Madison customers’ profiles,” Toronto 
police service staff superintendent Bryce Evans said on Monday.

Reuters contributed to this report

• In the US and Canada, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 
1-800-273-8255 <>. In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 08457 90 90 
90. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines 
in other countriescan be found here 
<http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>.

 