
It's hard to imagine a less glamorous interview location than the little room 
where I meetAshley Jensen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ashley-jensen> to talk about her new 
play in the West End. Hidden away in the bowels of a gloomy old youth club in 
south London, the room smells overpoweringly of damp. Wires dangle down through 
missing ceiling tiles. Apparently there was a flood in here a few weeks ago. 
Jensen wrinkles her nose when she comes in. "This is a horrid little room, 
isn't it?"

She's happy to be here though. Upstairs, she's been rehearsing her part in an 
Alan Ayckbourn play directed byTrevor Nunn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/trevor-nunn>. In A Chorus of Disapproval 
<http://achorusofdisapproval.com/>, she plays the wife of an amateur operatic 
society director who is struggling to stage The Beggar's Opera in a middle 
England town. Rob Brydon ("absolutely brilliant… such a team player") is the 
husband; Nigel Harman, formerly ofEastEnders, plays the handsome newcomer whose 
arrival stimulates more drama than anyone's bargained for.

Jensen last graced the stage 11 years ago. Since then, she's been off making a 
name for herself on television – she played the chronically tactless Maggie in
Extras with Ricky Gervais and then she went off to the States to star in Ugly 
Betty, as Betty's Scottish seamstress friend Christina. After six years in 
Hollywood, where she married her long-term actor boyfriendTerence Beesley 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0066591/> and had a son, she moved back to London 
in June and now she's relishing the chance to work in theatre again.

"This is the fifth week of rehearsal," she says, "which is an absolute 
indulgence compared to TV and film. Listening to Sir Trevor Nunn on the first 
day talking aboutJohn Gay <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Gay> and London in 
the 1720s – I can't remember the last time I sat down in a working environment 
and talked about things like that."

The glamour of Hollywood – going to the Emmys, hanging out with Ted Danson on 
a plane – was fun in its way but she's happy to be back in the UK, even if it 
means doing interviews in horrid little rooms. "You're able to do a bit more 
here. In America, the world that I was in seemed to be all about sitcoms and 
pilot seasons. I was on that little conveyor belt and I was like, I don't know 
if I really want to be doing this really."

After the play finishes in January, she has only a sketchy idea of what's next 
– possibly a movie in the Scottish Highlands with Kevin McKidd, if the funding 
comes through – but she seems relaxed about the future.

If Gervais asked her to reprise her role on Extras, what would she say? "I 
would say yes, of course I would, I'd love to don that pink beret again. But 
Ricky's on to pastures new. What was that thing he did, with the short man? 
'Life's Too Small'? The one where he had Johnny doo-dah [Depp] on?" Her eyes 
glitter mischievously. "But it's healthy. I have very fond feelings about 
Extras because it was the show that changed things for me. I sometimes think, 
well if I never do anything again" – and here she puts on a funny voice to 
alleviate sentimentality – "I've always gotExtras."

A Chorus of Disapproval is at the Harold Pinter theatre  
<http://achorusofdisapproval.com/>from 17 Sept until 5 Jan
 