
Ashley Cole <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-cole> has completed 
his free transfer move to Roma. The 33-year-old left-back, a free agent 
following his release by Chelsea, had been linked with a number of teams both 
in the Premier League and in Europe.

Cole, who has signed a two-year contract with an option for a third season, 
flew to Rome on Monday, withRoma <https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> 
posting a photo on their Twitter feed, with the message: “Welcome to Rome, 
Ashley!”.

He underwent a medical before travelling to Roma’s Trigoria headquarters to 
sign a contract that will reportedly net him £3.65m in wages.

Cole left Arsenal in May 2000 as part of a deal that saw William Gallas join 
the Gunners, and spent eight seasons withChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>, during which he won the 
Champions League, Europa League, Premier League and four FA Cups.

He earned 107 England caps but announced his retirement from international 
football before the World Cup after he was left out of Roy Hodgson’s squad for 
the finals in Brazil.

At Roma his mission will be to boost the fortunes of a side who improved from 
sixth to second place in Serie A following Rudi Garcia’s appointment as coach 
last summer. Champions League football will return to the Stadio Olimpico later 
this year.

Roma led the table in the early part of the 2013-14 campaign after winning 10 
consecutive games but results dropped off, allowing Juventus to overhaul them 
and clinch a third straight title.

Cole was the second new arrival on Monday, with the Fenerbahce midfielder 
Salih Ucan joining on a one-year loan.

Roma will pay the Turkish club £3.8m to have the player next season and can 
extend the loan for a second campaign at no further cost. They will then have 
the option to purchase the player in the summer of 2016 for an additional 
£8.75m.
AS Roma (@OfficialASRoma) 
Welcome to Rome, Ashley! @TheRealAC3 <https://twitter.com/TheRealAC3> 
pic.twitter.com/wv00DuLINc <http://t.co/wv00DuLINc>
 <https://twitter.com/OfficialASRoma/statuses/486074060229857280> July 7, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/OfficialASRoma/statuses/486074060229857280>  