
The owner of hacked infidelity website Ashley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> will pay a sharply 
discounted $1.66m penalty to settle US investigations into lax data security 
and deceptive practices.


 The remainder of a $17.5m settlement was suspended based on privately held 
Ruby Corp’s inability to pay.

 “I recognise that it was a far lower number frankly than I would have liked,” 
said Federal Trade Commission chairwoman Edith Ramirez. “We want them to feel 
the pain. We don’t want them to profit from unlawful conduct. At the same time 
we are not going to seek to put a company out of business.”

 The size of the payment means Ashley Madison’s customers will not receive any 
financial redress for the breach, whichexposed the personal details of more 
than 36 million people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/international-report-into-ashley-madison-hack-highly-critical-of-sites-privacy>
 who signed up for the site with the slogan: “Life is short. Have an affair.”

International report into Ashley Madison hack 'highly critical' of site's 
privacy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/international-report-into-ashley-madison-hack-highly-critical-of-sites-privacy>
 Class-action lawsuits against the company are pending.

 The joint investigation, which also included authorities in Australia and 
Canada, found the Toronto-based company’s lax security practices allowed 
intruders undetected access to its computer networks several times between 
November 2014 and June 2015.

 The investigation also found that Ruby, as the company previously known as 
Avid Life Media has rebranded itself, created fake female profiles to lure men 
into paying for conversations and retained user information even after 
customers had paid for a service to “remove all traces of your usage”.

 The company first disclosed it was the target of an FTC investigation in a 
Reuters interview in July. At that time it said it was likely to collect $80m 
in revenue in 2016 and had $50m to spend on acquisitions.

 Top executives on Wednesday declined to update that outlook and said they had 
spent millions of dollars to beef up security.

 “The company is stable. We’re very pleased with the outcome,” said Rob Segal, 
who took over as chief executive earlier this year. Founder Noel Biderman left 
the company soon after almost 10 gigabytes of its data was leaked in several 
stages in mid-2015.

 The company has offered a free delete function since September 2015 when it 
discontinued the paid feature.

 Avid shut down the fake profiles in the United States, Canada and Australia 
in 2014 and by late 2015 in the rest of the world, but some US users had 
message exchanges with foreign fembots until late in 2015, according to an 
Ernst & Young report commissioned by the company.

Another site, JDI Dating <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/dating>, 
paid $616,165 in redress for similar fake profile practices in an October 2014 
settlement with the FTC.
 