
Am I supposed to feel sorry for those exposed by the Ashley Madison security 
breach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/21/ten-questions-ashley-madison-needs-to-answer>
? Well, I don’t.

It’s not a moral judgment on my part; it’s just always painful watching people 
posturing as wild freethinkers, unfettered by convention. To my mind, AM 
subscribers come across as faux-sexual libertines – too wussy, miserly and/or 
timid to either have a proper, full-blown affair or hire a sex worker. The 
irony is that most of the women on the site are now said to be (ta-da!) sex 
workers. Either that or photographs of fake-women, who don’t exist beyond their 
beguiling “sexually available” pixels.

Then there’s the stupidity factor, and I’m sorry but it’s predominantly male 
stupidity. Unlike women, men were charged to enter (and indeed exit) the site, 
which might have given them a small clue as to what was going on. Which hinged 
on the same thing that’s always gone on – that it’s generally only men who go 
to such extraordinary lengths to get laid, because women simply don’t need to.

Some of you might have noticed from your own days of going to nightclubs how 
frequently females were let in for free, because that was the only way to get 
the (fee-paying) males in – and how the reverse never seemed to occur. As the
Ashley Madison <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> payment 
system shows, in some ways this never stops.

However “hot” or otherwise, however sexually driven or otherwise a woman might 
be, she knows she can always get sex – so long as sex is all she wants and 
she’s not too choosy about the partner. It’s in the female DNA – or at least 
this is the Ellen view – not to worry about obtaining sex, only about thequality
 of the sex (and the man). It’s a clear-cut marketplace issue. Women know that 
the supply will always be there and that the supply will always exceed the 
demand.

Let’s be clear: there aren’t hordes of insane, conceited, delusional women 
walking around, thinking: “I’m so hot that I can get any man I want!” The whole 
point is that women don’t have to be particularly hot to get sex.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fashley-madison-members-come-clean-risk-extortion-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashley%20Madison%20members%20should%20come%20clean%20or%20risk%20extortion%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fashley-madison-members-come-clean-risk-extortion-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashley%20Madison%20members%20should%20come%20clean%20or%20risk%20extortion%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fashley-madison-members-come-clean-risk-extortion-video&media=>
 Identity protection analyst Adam Levin says Ashley Madison members should come 
clean instead of waiting to be discovered or risking becoming the victim of 
extortion 
While to a straight man being able to always get laid might look like a 
super-power, in reality it’s not, unless it truly doesn’t matter to a woman who 
she has sex with. Once you put desire (whom the woman might want) into the 
equation, this “power” is exposed for what it is – ultimately worthless. What 
does it matter to a woman that she could end up having sex with 
somebody/anybody from a bar/club/website if there’s no one that she’s 
interested in?

Moreover, if a woman wants something deeper, perhaps more relationship-shaped, 
then that’s where the game sharply changes and the playing field levels. This 
isn’t necessarily because women want relationships more, and spend their 
evenings sobbing into their cat’s fur about the non-arrival of their prince, 
but because finding a special, lasting connection is extremely difficult forboth
 sexes.

Ultimately, everyone finds it difficult getting what they really want, just in 
different ways. However, perhaps men in particular could learn from the Ashley 
Madison debacle. Sites such as AM can only work because certain men are 
conditioned to make surreal efforts to obtain sex, so much so that it feels 
“normal” to sign up for adultery websites that demand potentially catastrophic 
personal details.

By contrast, for women, obtaining “just sex” requires little to no effort. So, 
while there probably are some women wanting extracurricular sex, who simply 
can’t source it anywhere else, there wouldn’t be that many, certainly not the 
hordes promised by Ashley Madison. The sad truth is that certain men only 
believed it because it suited them to believe that women could be as sexually 
desperate as them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fashley-madison-men-sex-women-dating-adultery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F22%2F1440258872738%2F5e90e0ac-2ca0-46cd-8862-dbba6700e4f7-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashley%20Madison%20has%20a%20stupidity%20factor%20%E2%80%93%20men%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fashley-madison-men-sex-women-dating-adultery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashley%20Madison%20has%20a%20stupidity%20factor%20%E2%80%93%20men%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fashley-madison-men-sex-women-dating-adultery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F22%2F1440258872738%2F5e90e0ac-2ca0-46cd-8862-dbba6700e4f7-1020x612.jpeg>
 Ah, that’s better. Ditch the beard, Ed. Photograph: /Associate/REX Shutterstock
Come on, chaps, beards aren’t cool - just look at Ed 

That photograph of Ed Miliband sporting a scrubby little beard was 
heartbreaking – “Exhibit A” in the case for him being severely depressed. Ed 
might think he looks sexy and rumpled but, to me, the beard screams: “Don’t 
tell anyone I’ve been sleeping in my car.”

Perhaps the “groovy beard” renaissance has had its day. Very few women like 
them – they give you a rash, they’re stinking food-catchers and it’s like 
getting hot and heavy with loft insulation. I’ve said it before and I’ll say it 
again: men should beware of women who pretend to adore their facial hair – 
these minxes are attempting to fend off serious sexual opposition by 
encouraging your resemblance to a latterday Giant Haystacks. Fact.

The sad truth is that very few men suit a beard – most end up looking like 
that bloke fromThe Joy of Sex. This remains true however many hipsters prance 
around Hoxton channelling Abraham Lincoln.

Beards aren’t even surprising anymore – it’s difficult to find a coffee shop 
barista who doesn’t have one, wilting in the steam of the cappuccino 
milk-frother. Please, I implore all hairies: seize the day and the razor and 
say goodbye to the beard.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fashley-madison-men-sex-women-dating-adultery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F22%2F1440258956084%2F8f4f8dc0-1345-48d2-8a00-a968b17c04b4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashley%20Madison%20has%20a%20stupidity%20factor%20%E2%80%93%20men%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fashley-madison-men-sex-women-dating-adultery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashley%20Madison%20has%20a%20stupidity%20factor%20%E2%80%93%20men%20%7C%20Barbara%20Ellen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F23%2Fashley-madison-men-sex-women-dating-adultery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F22%2F1440258956084%2F8f4f8dc0-1345-48d2-8a00-a968b17c04b4-1020x612.jpeg>
 Cilla’s politics don’t affect her likeability. Photograph: Allstar Picture 
Library 
What’s Cilla’s Toryism got to do with it?

Amid the vast public reaction to Cilla Black’s death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/aug/20/ta-ra-cilla-black-liverpool-on-tv-funeral>
, there was the occasional gripe about her being a Tory supporter. Why is this 
deemed relevant?

Making something of the fact that Black was a Tory supporter, despite being a 
born and bred working-class Liverpudlian also comes across as spite based on 
stereotypes.

The north has a reputation for being anti-Tory, but it’s not an unbreakable 
rule – individuals are still permitted to have their own views and voting 
preferences.

Even more bizarre, bordering on offensive, is this view that Cilla being a 
Tory-supporter was a good reason to dislike her, question her talent, kindness 
or integrity.

What utter codswallop, and I say that as someone who is frequently dismayed by 
what the Tories are allowed to get away with in the nation’s name.

In my experience, how someone votes is not a foolproof litmus test for who 
they are as a person. Members of my family, and some friends, have voted Tory. 
I disagree with them, and vote differently, but that’s the end of the matter – 
the relationship remains undiminished. I imagine they forgive me my voting 
trespasses too.

While I’m all for the positive aspects of tribalism (identity, community, 
camaraderie), it can’t become a lazy excuse to refuse to look for the good in 
people who think differently.

The only time that “Tory” should be used as an insult, if then, is when it’s 
directed at actual Tory politicians – the ones with the power.

Certainly it seems grotesque to have people carping about someone being a Tory 
even as their family lowers them into the ground.

RIP Cilla – it sounds as though I’d have disagreed with your politics but 
you’re still a loss, chuck.
 