
Ashley Cole <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ashley-cole> has claimed 
English players are scared of moving abroad, after completing his free transfer 
to Roma from Chelsea.

The former England defender, 33, was officially unveiled at a press conference 
in the Italian capital on Tuesday after signing a two-year contract with the 
option of a third season.Cole was released by Chelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/20/ashley-cole-offers-eight-clubs-chelsea-transfer-psg-monaco>
 after the end of last season having spent eight seasons at Stamford Bridge.

He becomes the first Englishman to make a permanent move to Serie A since Jay 
Bothroyd signed for Perugia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/nov/15/jay-bothroyd-england> in 2003.

“English players are probably scared to come abroad,” said Cole, who was left 
out of England’s World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/11/ashley-cole-left-out-england-world-cup-squad>
 squad by the manager Roy Hodgson.

“They feel in their comfort zone in the UK. This is a chance for me to try a 
different language, culture and way of living. As soon as I spoke to [Roma’s 
coach Rudi] García and I saw how much they wanted me here at Roma I jumped at 
the chance. I’ve always had a good relationship with José Mourinho but I was no 
longer useful to his project atChelsea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea>.

“I came here to play in the Champions League. Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roma> is an ambitious club, it’s a 
challenge for me and I’m prepared to fight for my place. Hopefully we can do 
something special here next season and win Serie A.”

Having won three Premier League titles and a record seven FA Cups at Arsenal 
and then Chelsea, Cole has joined a side that finished second in Serie A last 
season behind Juventus. Several hundred Roma fans were at the club’s Fulvio 
Bernadini training ground on Tuesday to welcome him and Cole insisted he is 
ready for the next stage in his career.

He said: “I’m not afraid of pressure. I noticed the fans’ passion and love as 
soon as I landed. I’m going to enjoy my time here. I feel fit, I kept myself 
busy in pre-season but I still have a bit to go. Hopefully I’ll be fully fit 
when I come back from America.”
 