
Companies are being urged to identify employees who could be blackmailed into 
revealing sensitive market information following theAshley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> data dump.

After hackers leaked 37 million email addresses used by people who had 
accessed the Toronto-based adultery website, there are fears that blackmailers 
will start demanding money to keep the details of extra-marital affairs secret.

Stephen Coty, security expert at IT security firm Alert Logic, 
<https://www.alertlogic.com> who has analysed the leaked data, said that the 
much more significant problem came from employees being compromised into 
revealing confidential details about their employer’s activities.

“Companies who have threat research and intelligence analysts should be 
looking at this data to see what user names or email addresses are related to 
their organisation,” Coty said. “They should modify their email filters to 
start monitoring any emails coming through that reference Ashley Madison, so 
that they can find if somebody is trying to coerce an employee to go ahead and 
release company secrets.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fashley-madison-members-come-clean-risk-extortion-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ashley%20Madison%20members%20should%20come%20clean%20or%20risk%20extortion%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fashley-madison-members-come-clean-risk-extortion-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ashley%20Madison%20members%20should%20come%20clean%20or%20risk%20extortion%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Faug%2F21%2Fashley-madison-members-come-clean-risk-extortion-video&media=>
 Identity protection analyst Adam Levin says Ashley Madison members should come 
clean instead of waiting to be discovered or risking becoming the victim of 
extortion 
According to his analysis, more than 14,000 government officials globally had 
been compromised, a revelation that has sparked fears some could be extorted 
into revealing matters of national security. But Coty said the major threat 
came from targeting people who had access to market-sensitive information, 
especially those who worked in banks and other financial institutions. “If I’m 
a malicious actor, I’m not really interested in blackmailing these guys for 
money; I’m more interested in where they work, in their corporate information. 
To me that is more valuable. I can sell that on an underground market, I can 
sell it to a competitor, to a startup overseas, and make a lot more money than 
blackmailing a guy for a few thousand dollars.”

Coty said his analysis had shown that hackers also leaked details of the 
internal structure of Ashley Madison’s owner, Avid Life Media, as well as its 
business performance and sensitive corporate information, including the fact 
that it had lent its chief executive, Noel Biderman, $3m.

The leak revealed that more than 173 million credit cards had been used to pay 
for Avid Life services in 2014 – a 44% increase on the previous year. Some 9.7 
million people had signed up, of whom more than 2 million had gone on to become 
active members. Visitors to the site came from 46 different countries.

“They had every single credit card payment going all the way back to 2008,” 
Coty said. “You should not be holding that information.”

While the focus has been on users of the Ashley Madison site, whose slogan is 
“Life is short. Have an affair”, Avid Life had several other adultery sites, 
including Cougar Life and Established Men. “The users of all these sites are 
now vulnerable,” Coty said.

Even those who had used anonymous emails are at risk of exposure. “I randomly 
picked somebody out from one of the dumped lists and I found a credit card 
transaction,” Coty said. “I could trace it to an address that showed that he 
was living in a loft in Toronto. It showed he was who he was and that he 
participated in the programme.”

Coty suggested Ashley Madison would disappear following the furore. “Tens of 
millions of people’s information is now floating out there. This site is 
supposed to be anonymous. That’s what they guarantee. Even if you paid to have 
your data deleted, it’s still there. I wouldn’t be surprised if they closed 
their sites sometime soon.”
 