
I’ve heard a lot of gloating in the light of the Ashley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison> hack - most of it along 
the lines that the cheaters on the site deserved to be outed because cheating 
on your partner is an awful thing to do. It was only today that I saw the first 
solid ground laid for the “well they shouldn’t have been so stupid” argument.

Yesterday, Barbara Ellen explained that she isn’t sorry for any of the men who 
were exposed in the Ashley Madison hack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/23/ashley-madison-men-sex-women-dating-adultery>
 because they were just plain stupid:

“Then there’s the stupidity factor, and I’m sorry but it’s predominantly male 
stupidity. Unlike women, men were charged to enter (and indeed exit) the site, 
which might have given them a small clue as to what was going on. Which hinged 
on the same thing that’s always gone on – that it’s generally only men who go 
to such extraordinary lengths to get laid, because women simply don’t need to.”

It’s not uncommon to see people argue that others deserve to be punished for 
“stupidity”. The neatest example of (and counterargument to) this comes not 
from any ethics blog, but from MoneySavingExpert Martin Lewis. Having been 
repeatedly told to stop giving people advice over PPI because ‘they should have 
paid attention/shouldn’t be idiots etc”, hepointed out that 
<http://blog.moneysavingexpert.com/2011/10/21/a-blog-in-support-of-stupid-peoples-rights-probably-the-most-important-blog-ive-ever-written/>
 “it’s worth thinking about just who these people being accused of stupidity 
really are” before listing some of the reasons people might do things that you 
wouldn’t: mental health problems, first time web users, people who don’t have 
English as a first language, people who don’t read the terms and conditions, 
etc. He’s talking about being protected on a consumer level, from the sneaky 
tricks that banks and insurance companies may employ to catch someone out. It 
may seem a bit of a stretch to apply this logic to those actively signing up 
for extramarital affairs, but it can generally be applied to any situation in 
which one organisation or individual holds power over another. Simply labelling 
an entire group of people “stupid” - a ridiculous and divisive term anyway - 
doesn’t mean that they deserve whatever horrible outcome you, a clever-clogs 
genius, managed to avoid.

Ellen goes one step further in her article, though, claiming that men are not 
only stupid but they are essentially programmed to behave in ways that leave 
them vulnerable to problems like the Ashley Madison hack:

“Sites such as AM can only work because certain men are conditioned to make 
surreal efforts to obtain sex, so much so that it feels “normal” to sign up for 
adultery websites that demand potentially catastrophic personal details.”

First, while it’s not something I’d advise in light of the hack, I don’t think 
joining a website counts as a “surreal effort” to obtain sex. More importantly, 
the assumption that men (even if it’s onlysome men) are rendered unthinking 
brutes when they’re in pursuit of a quick orgasm is a) not true and b) 
inconsistent with Ellen’s lack of sympathy. After all, if they’ve been 
conditioned to do this, then why should they be held morally accountable when 
they lumber into one of the traps their conditioning has set for them?

And what of the people who cheat but never get caught? If we’re condemning 
people partly on the basis that they made mistakes which led to exposure, are 
we also saying that those who are “clever” deserve to get away with it? Perhaps 
just as those with great accountants get away with tax “rationalisation”, those 
with more intelligence, resources, or sheer good luck should be able to cheat 
without consequence.


Consequence is, I think, a pretty important issue when we’re discussing issues 
of “deserved” and “undeserved” punishment. After all, you can’t really make a 
rational decision on whether someone “deserved it” before you fully understand 
what “it” is. You could be forgiven for thinking that the worst consequence 
would be an angry, heartbroken spouse, but in some cases it will be far worse. 
In the aftermath of the Ashley Madison hack there have been a number of 
horrible “outings” of people who were on the site. Someone I follow on Twitter 
mentioned their nonmonogamous friends, who were outed by a work colleague, 
despite the fact that their presence on the site was mutually agreed. Others 
have pointed to theguy on reddit 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/lgbt/comments/3ebzzj/i_may_get_stoned_to_death_for_gay_sex_gay_man/>
 (as yet unverified as far as I know, but more than plausible) who signed up 
while he was studying in the US so he could meet guys, then outed once he was 
home in Saudi, where being gay carries the death penalty. If neither of those 
make you wonder if perhaps Barbara Ellen’s article is a bit too dismissive of 
the people who’ll be affected by this, consider that - as reported in the 
Independent -1,200 of the leaked email addresses have a .sa suffix 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/ashley-madison-hack-leaking-personal-email-addresses-puts-gay-lives-at-risk-around-the-world-10464546.html>
, which stands for Saudi Arabia, where adultery - along with homosexuality - is 
punishable by death. Other consequences will no doubt become clear as more 
people search through the data.

Even if we were all to agree on a correct and proportionate response to any 
moral right or wrong, we’ll never be able to fully assess why each person made 
that choice. Sex advice columnist Dan Savage argued thatwhen it comes to 
discussing the ethics of cheating 
<http://www.thestranger.com/blogs/slog/2015/07/20/22573934/gawker-outs-one-cheater-and-the-internet-condemns-gawkerhackers-expose-37-million-cheaters-and-the-internet-condemns-cheaters>
:

“It’s easy to see cheating as a morality play with clearly identifiable 
victims and victimizers.”

But in reality it’s more complicated than that. Perhaps they were terribly 
lonely, perhaps trapped in an abusive or loveless marriage, or indulging an 
element of their sexuality that their partner wasn’t comfortable with. And yeah,
maybe they were just your common-or-garden cheat, who was too clueless to 
understand that one day the site might get hacked. But whatever people’s 
reasons for being on Ashley Madison, no matter how clever or “stupid” they were 
in joining the site, we can’t possibly decide whether they “deserve it” until 
we know exactly what “it” might be.

But then, that never seems to stop people...

Girl on the Net can be found on Twitter <https://twitter.com/girlonthenet> and 
her (NSFW)website/blog <http://www.girlonthenet.com/>.
 