
Asia’s richest person was the largest loser in Monday’s stock market crash in 
China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2015/aug/24/global-stocks-sell-off-deepens-as-panic-grips-markets-live>
, after stocks in the region fell dramatically.

Chinese tycoon Wang Jianlin, whose UK interests include luxury boat firm 
Sunseeker yachts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/06/sunseeker-british-yachtmaker-london-boat-show>
 and commercial property in London, lost $3.6bn (£2.3bn) on Monday, according 
to theBloomberg Billionaires Index 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/billionaires/2015-08-24/cya>. Wang’s main business 
vehicle intends to build a five-star hotel on theNine Elms regeneration site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/14/battersea-nine-elms-property-development-housing>
 in south-west London, billed as thefirst Chinese luxury hotel overseas. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/19/china-uk-interests-dalian-wanda-luxury-brands>

Chinese businesses have been big investors in Britain in recent years, courted 
by the prime minister David Cameron and London mayor Boris Johnson on 
well-publicised trade visits. Chinese investors have also taken stakes in 
Thames Water, Heathrow and Weetabix.

Wang saw $2bn wiped from his stake in Dalian Wanda commercial properties and 
lost nearly $1bn from his Wanda Cinema Line, the world’s largest cinema 
operator.There were further losses from stakes in private companies.


Even after Monday’s decline, Wang’s fortune stood at $31.2bn, according to 
data compiled by Bloomberg. Earlier this year, Wang took a 20% stake in the 
Spanish La Liga football club Atlético Madrid.

According to Bloomberg, 24 billionaires saw their wealth fall by more than 
$1bn on Monday, with many of them based in Asia. However, those based elsewhere 
were not immune to big falls. Bloomberg said the wealth of Bill Gates, the 
Microsoft founder, fell $3.2bn on Monday, the biggest decline after Wang.


The losses suffered by Wang are likely to have increased on Tuesday following 
further falls in the Chinese stock market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/25/dow-markets-rise-global-market-panic>
.

Elsewhere, Hong Kong resident Li Ka-shing, whose interests span from shipping 
to the Three mobile network in the UK, lost $1.5bn in Monday’s selloff.

The third richest man in Asia, Jack Ma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/19/jack-ma-profile-alibaba-powerful-humble-billionaire>
, founder of ecommerce group Alibaba, lost $546m according to Bloomberg, but 
retains a net worth of $29.6bn.
 