
Australia’s domestic intelligence agency failed to notify the intelligence 
watchdog of a controversial “special intelligence operation” for 10 days in 
what is the first official confirmation of highly secretive missions that give 
intelligence officers immunity from prosecution.

In 2014 the government passed controversial national security laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/16/journalists-face-jail-leaks-security-laws>
 that allow the creation of “special intelligence operations” that must be 
approved by the attorney general, George Brandis. The operations grant 
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation affiliates immunity from 
prosecution.

The new powers also contained a sweeping gag law that news organisations said 
would stifle legitimate public interest reporting on intelligence operations.

A review by the independent national security monitor, Roger Gyles, found that 
the move could be unconstitutional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/02/laws-that-could-jail-journalists-for-reporting-on-spying-could-breach-constitution>
, and recommended limited changes to the law. The government has put forward a 
bill to amend the scope of the offence.

Laws that could jail journalists for reporting on spying 'may breach 
constitution'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/02/laws-that-could-jail-journalists-for-reporting-on-spying-could-breach-constitution>
But a vexed question has been whether these operations had even occurred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/03/theres-no-reporting-on-asio-operations-when-even-the-watchdog-wont-talk>
. Last year the intelligence watchdog declined to respond to Guardian 
Australia’s queries about whether or not they had taken place.

But the inspector general of intelligence and security (Igis), Margaret Stone, 
has finally confirmed that at least one of the operations has been authorised 
by the attorney general and executed by Asio.

In Stone’s 2015-16 annual report 
<https://www.igis.gov.au/sites/default/files/files/7835%20-%20IGIS%20-%202015-16%20AR%20-%20Accessible%20PDF%20-%20HR(1).pdf>
, reference is made to a number of these operations being approved.

“The legislation requires that Asio notify the Igis as soon as practicable 
after the special intelligence operation authority is granted,” Stone wrote. 
“In one case the Igis was notified 10 days after the authorisation was granted. 
We noted that this was not in accordance with the legislation. Asio promptly 
implemented a new procedure, which is working well.”

She said Igis had reviewed the documents provided to the attorney general and 
her office relating to each operation, in some cases requesting further 
information. She said it had “not identified any issues of legality or 
propriety”.

“We will continued to pay close attention to Asio’s special intelligence 
operations,” she wrote.

A spokesman for Asio said: “It is longstanding practice that the Australian 
Security Intelligence Organisation (Asio) does not comment on operational 
matters.

“As noted in the inspector general of intelligence and security’s (Igis) 
annual report, Asio has implemented a procedure to ensure rapid notification to 
the Igis office that a special intelligence operation (SIO) authority has been 
granted.”

The annual report contained some other criticism of how Asio exercised its 
powers. It also noted that there was “some inconsistency” in how Asio kept 
records of sharing information about Australia’s with foreign intelligence 
agencies.

There's no reporting on Asio operations when even the watchdog won't talk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/03/theres-no-reporting-on-asio-operations-when-even-the-watchdog-wont-talk>
Stone’s office has also engaged in an inspection project to review the 
handling of information by Asio. It identified three instances of 
non-compliance with how it held data.

“While these instances did not raise any serious or systemic concerns, we felt 
that they did highlight the need for Asio to continue its efforts to ensure 
that staff were aware of their responsibilities,” Stone wrote.

The Asio annual report also referred to the newly created journalist 
information warrants. These warrants are now required to access journalists’ 
telecommunications data in order to identify a confidential source. They were 
created after the government’s data retention scheme was passed.

Intelligence agencies require the attorney general’s approval before they can 
access journalists’ telecommunications data now.

Stone’s report noted there were procedures in place but was silent on whether 
Asio had sought or been granted any of these warrants.

“We confirmed that Asio has policies and procedures in place to address the 
new journalist information warrant requirements and provide staff training,” 
she wrote. “These policies and procedures will be reviewed in the course of our 
regular inspections.”

Her office declined to release any further information or comment in relation 
to the warrants.

Contact Paul Farrell securely using the Guardian’s Securedrop server. 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/>
 