
I started drinking at university, and 25 years later, I still drink daily and 
often too much. Most would consider me successful: I have a PhD, a great job, a 
nice house, a solid marriage, and good health. So why drink? The short answer 
is, I enjoy it. But I frequently feel tired (or have a hangover) the next day. 
I still go to work, exercise, and do everything I normally do – including drink 
at the end of the day. How do I stop?

Perhaps you drink to release stress at the end of the day, or as a kind of 
congratulations, or a way to rebel in the face of too much responsibility? I 
would recommend investigating other ways to reward yourself to see if, in fact, 
alcohol has more of a hold on you than you think. Would a massage or a bath or 
a homemade lemonade do the trick? If that sounds like a big shift, then you may 
need more support. There are many forms this could take, from seeking rehab, to 
reading self-help books, to attending a local group, or a combination of all 
three.


For me, alcohol served as a brilliant secondary addiction to stave off the 
effects of my three primary addictions, which were love, food and work. Anyone 
who overworks, is overly generous with their time, energy or money, is overly 
responsible (might this be you?), or has a background including trauma, can 
rely on substances of many kinds to reduce this stress.

Ask Alanis: should I follow my boyfriend to the big city?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/05/ask-alanis-should-i-follow-my-boyfriend-to-big-city>
The thing about alcohol that can be so compelling is that it works. It gives 
us an hour or two of calm, or invigoration, or whatever we might be turning to 
a drink for. However, it offers this only temporarily, and as you mentioned, 
there is a fallout – involving health, wellbeing and, often, relationships. If 
attempting to replace the alcohol ritual with something healthier proves to be 
too challenging, I recommend identifying what your primary addiction(s) might 
be, and getting help with those.

Addictions don’t go away on their own. We either choose actively to recover, 
or these same processes and substances that seemed to keep us afloat will 
eventually end our lives, in the most extreme cases. I have been in recovery 
myself for many years now, and there have been many gifts on the road. I wish 
you well in shifting your habit, or with your own recovery.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://alanis.com/?utm_source=Guardian&utm_medium=Campaign&utm_campaign=The%20Guardian%20Website%20Link>
. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to Alanis Morisette 
atask.alanis@theguardian.com <mailto:ask.alanis@theguardian.com>.
 