
I am a 32-year-old man. My girlfriend of two years is older and wants 
children, but says she needs me to grow up before this could happen. We argue 
often, always centred around my selfishness and my uncommunicative attitude. I 
worry that I won’t mature at all, or it will be too late before I realise that 
I’ve messed it up. What should I do?

I think it is wise of you to consider your maturity if you want to be in a 
committed relationship. Otherwise, as you say, there is a strong likelihood 
that you will lose your girlfriend.

But I would also encourage you to see the personal benefits of maturing for 
yourself. Increased self-esteem, self-awareness and perspective will help you 
to grow, as well as to be intimate with your partner. You will gain so much 
life knowledge and wisdom along the way. While growing up can be challenging, 
especially for those of us who were neglected as children, it not only benefits 
us, but all those whose lives we touch.

If you do decide to pull up your bootstraps, I can almost guarantee that it 
won’t always feel good, and it won’t be easy. But you can look forward to a 
deep sense of connection with yourself, your friends and your partner, making 
it all worthwhile.

Ask Alanis: why does my nephew talk about an imaginary sister?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/22/ask-alanis-morissette-why-nephew-talk-imaginary-sister>
There are many resources out there to help you. I can recommend Pia Mellody’s 
bookFacing Codependence 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/369996/>, and Richard 
Schwartz’sYou Are The One You’ve Been Waiting For 
<http://www.amazon.com/Youve-Waiting-Internal-Family-Systems/dp/0615249329>. Dr 
Sue Johnson <http://drsuejohnson.com/>’s books on emotionally focused couples 
therapy andHarville Hendrix’s imago therapy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/getting-the-love-you-want-2.html> are also 
helpful. Having done this work with my husband (and it has not always been 
easy) I can’t extoll enough the benefits of having committed to growing up, 
together.

Both marriage and becoming a parent have their way of growing us up. It is 
just about whether we kick and scream through the process (or, ultimately, run 
from it), or submit to it willingly and with a relatively open mind. The choice 
is yours, and yours alone. Without a deep personal commitment to growing and 
healing (alone and together with your partner), it is simply not possible to 
achieve a functional relationship.

It is admirable that you are taking the time to consider these issues now, and 
it indicates that you are willing to change. Sadly, not everyone is up for this 
transformation. My life is riddled with ex-partners who were never ready for 
this commitment, for various reasons. But for those who are willing to try, 
great gifts await.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available on iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://alanis.com/>.

Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to Alanis Morissette 
atask.alanis@theguardian.com <mailto:ask.alanis@theguardian.com>
 