
One of my dearest friends is now my boss, and it’s really hard. I feel I have 
to keep to myself things I used to tell him because I don’t want to look 
vulnerable in front of him any more. And jealousy comes in, too. Why him and 
not me? I love my job, but I don’t see how I can be a friend and an employee.


I truly believe that friendship and professional relationships simply don’t 
mix. While certainly there are examples where the double-dynamic is harmonious, 
more often than not it is set up to be the opposite. And here’s why: the 
boundaries we have in personal relationships are softer, more diffuse – there 
is usually a mutual vulnerability. With professional dynamics, the boundaries 
are more pronounced, and rightly so. Intimacy is often simply not appropriate, 
and could actually compromise the task at hand. There is the potential for 
hiring or firing, promoting or not promoting, holiday approvals, delegations, 
accountability, supervisions… And that’s before money comes in to play.

In friendship, ideally, the roles are egalitarian. There is an entirely 
different agenda. When these two very different dynamics of work and friendship 
come up against each other the question often arises: what is more important – 
our friendship or this professional relationship?

For me, the former would often trump the latter, especially if that 
relationship started out as a friendship. So I have made it my policy that I 
don’t mix the two. And if I do decide to work with a friend, I have to be clear 
that I am completely OK with their simply being a colleague or an employee 
(certainly a friendly one) – but that ours will be a professional relationship 
nonetheless. It makes for fewer complications, less awkwardness, and avoids 
entirely the grief of a friendship coming to an end because we didn’t see any 
of these complications coming.

Ask Alanis: My mother-in-law is putting my children’s health at risk. What 
should I do?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/19/ask-alanis-my-mother-in-law-putting-childrens-health-risk>
You would need to decide which is more important to you – your friendship or 
your job. And once you have made that choice, try having a heart-to-heart with 
your boss, which would ideally clear the air. Once you have committed to being 
either a passionate employee or a good friend, you will find the delineation 
creates great relief, in my experience.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://alanis.com/?utm_source=Guardian&utm_medium=Campaign&utm_campaign=The%20Guardian%20Website%20Link>
. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to Alanis Morissette 
atask.alanis@theguardian.com <>
 