
With O.J. Simpson again in the news, I was wondering whether any British 
sporting icons went on to become significant movie stars?

Alexander Dulles, Brixham

Former diver Jason Statham may disagree, but our the highest profile 
sportsman-turned-actor is Vinnie Jones. A key member of Wimbledon's Crazy Gang, 
he amassed 386 league and cup games and won eight caps for Wales before making 
the first of his 30+ screen appearances in Guy Ritchie's Lock, Stock and Two 
Smoking Barrels (1998).
 Having a ball ... Michael Caine and Bobby Moore at the British premiere of 
Escape to Victory. Photograph: Ray Moreton/Hulton Archive 
Ever since Ted Drake, Cliff Bastin and Eddie Hapgood figured in Thorold 
Dickinson's The Arsenal Stadium Mystery (1940), footballers have been cameoing 
in movies. Most notably, Bobby Moore and several members of the Ipswich Town 
squad found themselves playing alongside Michael Caine and Sylvester Stallone 
in John Huston's Escape to Victory (1981), since when Alan Shearer and David 
Beckham (the only UK sports star to have had a film named after him) have 
cropped up in the likes of Purely Belter (2000) and the Goal! trilogy (2005-09).

Elsewhere, cricketers Len Hutton, Denis Compton, Jim Laker and Cyril Washbrook 
guested in Anthony Asquith's The Final Test (1953), while boxers like John 
Conteh, Darren Crawford and Gary Stretch have all had a bash at cinema. The 
most successful transition from ring to screen, however, was made by Brian 
Glover. Having wrestled as Leon Aris the Man from Paris, the doughty 
Yorkshireman became a dependable character actor, although he never bettered 
his debut turn as Mr Sugden pretending to be Bobby Charlton in the games lesson 
sequence in Ken Loach's Kes (1969).

And let's not forget Britain's first cinematic sportsman. Born in India to 
English parents, Norman Pritchard became the first Asian native to win an 
Olympic medal when he won silvers in the 200m and 200m hurdles in Paris in 
1900. Adopting the stage name Norman Trevor, he landed a clutch of pivotal 
roles in Hollywood, including Mr Rochester opposite Mabel Ballin in Jane Eyre 
(1921) and Major De Beaujolais alongside Ronald Colman in Beau Geste (1926).

Did Graham Greene ever write a screenplay for Brideshead Revisited?

Rosemary Topliss, Eynsham
 Waugh effort ... Graham Greene in 1989. Photograph: Sean Smith 
If Graham Greene did commence a treatment of Brideshead Revisited, it does not 
appear to have survived. Fresh from Brighton Rock (1947), The Fallen Idol 
(1948) and The Third Man (1949), Greene was approached to adapt Evelyn Waugh's 
1945 bestseller in 1950. Waugh even wrote to his fellow Catholic convert to 
urge, "Please don't try to get out of Brideshead. I'm sure you can make a fine 
film out of it." However, nothing materialised, as was the case when Waugh 
himself travelled to Los Angeles at the invitation of MGM in 1947.

Despite enjoyable meetings with Charlie Chaplin Walt Disney and favourite 
actress Anna May Wong, Waugh hated his Stateside sojourn. Complaining that "no 
one in Hollywood considers the possibility of growing up", he dubbed Louis B. 
Mayer and his cohorts "Californian savages" after studio scribe Keith Winter 
declared Brideshead to be primarily a love story and the Breen Office objected 
to its focus on adultery. Unable to persuade them of the merits of the book's 
theological themes, Waugh turned down the $140,000 rights offer and returned to 
Combe Florey with nothing more than the idea for his scathing expos√© of 
American mores, The Loved One.

The credit crunch has reminded me of a film I saw as a kid about an amnesiac 
realising he's being duped into ruining the economy. Any ideas what it might be?

Graeme Ladbrook, St Albans
 Louis Jourdan, star of Run a Crooked Mile. Photograph: Kobal Collection 
This is Gene Levitt's 1969 TV movie Run a Crooked Mile, which stars Louis 
Jourdan as schoolteacher Richard Stuart, who wakes two years after a polo 
accident to discover he is now a jet-setting Tony Sutton, who is unhappily 
married to Mary Tyler Moore and is involved in a plot to undermine the European 
economy. However, a key among his possessions triggers the memory of witnessing 
a murder at a secluded mansion and being coshed as he tried to investigate. 
With Wilfrid Hyde-White and Stanley Holloway heading an outstanding supporting 
cast, this mind-bending thriller makes fine use of its English locations and 
boasts a score by Gary Glitter's future songwriting partner, Mike Leander.
 