
With Anita Page <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2008/sep/08/1> dying recently, 
who is the biggest silent film star left alive?

Sydney Loten, Colchester

The biggest extant star to debut in the silent film 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film> era is Mickey Rooney. Starting out as a midget 
in the short Not to Be Trusted (1926), he headlined a series of comic capers as 
Mickey Maguire (1927-34) before becoming one of MGM's most popular child stars. 
Among the other juvenile survivors are June Havoc, Virginia Davis (who took the 
lead in Walt Disney's Alice in Cartoonland series), future cinematographer Jack 
Cardiff and Helen Alice Myres and Diana Serra Cary, who were respectively 
better known as Baby Marie and Baby Peggy.

The oldest surviving screen performer is 104 year-old Dutchman Johannes 
Heesters, but his silent experience was limited to Cirque Hollandais (1924). 
More prominently, Marie Glory took the female lead in Marcel L'Herbier's 
L'Argent (1928), which is due out on DVD later this month, Barbara Kent played 
the innocent heroine opposite Greta Garbo's vamp in Clarence Brown's Flesh and 
the Devil (1926) and Daisy D'Ora appeared as Fritz Kortner's bride in G.W. 
Pabst's Pandora's Box (1928).

But the silent actress who went on to have the most significant film career 
was Isuzu Yamada, who followed an inauspicious start in the short Nikkatsu on 
Parade (1930) by working with many of Japan's finest film-makers, including 
Kenji Mizoguchi (Osaka Elegy and Sisters of Gion, both 1936) andAkira Kurosawa 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/akirakurosawa>, with whom she made The Lower 
Depths,Throne of Blood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/78082/throne.of.blood> (both 1957) and 
Yojimbo (1961).

Who wrote the Pearl & Dean music?

Gordon Younds, Shrewsbury
 The Pearl & Dean logo 
Recorded in 1968, the famous theme was written by Pete Moore and is entitled 
Asteroid. In addition to composing library music and performing under the 
pseudonyms Lee Mason and Piet Van Meren, Moore had also worked as an arranger 
in the 1950s and 60s for such musical titans as Bing Crosby, Fred Astaire, Gene 
Kelly, Peggy Lee, Frankie Laine and Connie Francis, as well as comic Peter 
Sellers. However, his finest 20 seconds came when he was commissioned to 
produce an accompaniment to cinema advertiser Pearl & Dean's new logo and the 
title was chosen as the graphics supposedly resembled billboards flashing 
through space.

The track was recorded in mono and it quickly became the British movie-goer's 
anthem. In 1995, it was sampled by Richard Walmsley's Goldbug for their dance 
cover ofLed Zeppelin <http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/ledzeppelin>'s Whole 
Lotta Love, which reached No.3 in the UK charts. By then, however, a stereo 
Asteroid had been recorded, with two of the three original male singers 
reprising their vocals. But Pearl & Dean's new owner, Scottish Media Group, was 
keen to exploit the iconic jingle's download and ringtone potential and, two 
years ago, Moore expanded the tune to two minutes for an Abbey Road session 
with a 30-piece orchestra.

Why do the Golden Globes have best picture awards for Musical or Comedy, as 
well as Drama?

Mary Fowler, London
 Renee Zellweger in Chicago 
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences assigned comic movies their 
own category at the inauguralOscar <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/oscars> 
ceremony in 1928, with Lewis Milestone's Two Arabian Knights holding offCharlie 
Chaplin <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/charliechaplin>'s The Circus and Ted 
Wilde's Harold Lloyd vehicle Speedy to win Best Comedy Direction. However, the 
award was discontinued the following year and Hollywood's foreign press 
associations saw no reason to depart from AMPAS's lead in sticking to the 
single Best Picture rubric for the Golden Globes and named Henry King's The 
Song of Bernadette as its first winner in early 1944.

Seven years later, it was decided to split the Film, Actor and Actress 
categories intoDrama <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/drama> and Musical 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/musical> or Comedy 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/comedy> to redress the perceived bias against 
entertainment titles. George Stevens' A Place in the Sun and Vincente 
Minnelli's An American in Paris were the first victors under the new system 
and, ironically, the Academy mirrored the Globe verdict by making the Gershwin 
musical Best Picture and Stevens Best Director. Subsequently, the Globes have 
remained bipartite, while the Oscars have been dominated by dramas, withAnnie 
Hall <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/36314/annie.hall> (1977), 
Shakespeare in Love 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/74517/shakespeare.in.love> (1998) and 
Chicago <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/94449/chicago> (2002) being the 
only comedy-musical Best Picture winners in the last 40 years.
 