
I’m American, but have lived in Australia for eight years. People often visit 
from back home, which is wonderful. However, the last two out of three house 
guests didn’t offer to pay for fuel or groceries while they were here. One of 
them didn’t even pay for her own meals when we went out to eat; both expected 
my partner and I to organise their trips for them. Those two visitors cost us 
more than A$4,000 (£1,920).

One of them wants to come back in November to meet our new baby (due any 
minute now). While she is a dear friend and we would be delighted to have her, 
we simply cannot afford another round of mooching. I know we’ve been too soft 
in the past and neither of us is good at confrontation. How do we tactfully 
communicate that guests need to pay their own way?

It sounds as if you have reached your limit, and you have every right to feel 
that way. First, I want to be clear that you setting a boundary is not being 
confrontational. If your friend’s response is to be confrontational, then that 
is her choice.

Ask Alanis Morissette: I'm married but attracted to another man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jan/16/emotional-affair-evening-class-husband-alanis-morissette>
Before I set such boundaries myself (and I often do), I imagine what someone 
loving and functional would say in response. In an ideal world, your friends 
would express how excited they are to see you, how grateful they have been for 
your past generosity and that they are going to figure out a way to visit, come 
hell or high water. A girl can wish, can’t she? Although who knows, maybe this 
will be the way they respond.

You could say something like this: “We are so grateful that you are willing to 
come all this way to be with us. But we have been looking at our monthly budget 
and, while in the past we were comfortable with paying your way here, we are 
not able to continue to do so. I hope this doesn’t change your ability to come, 
but the last thing I would want is for us to over-extend and be quietly 
resentful, because our friendship means so much to me.”


At the end of the day, any choice made where everyone doesn’t win is a recipe 
for resentment and decay in a relationship. By communicating so directly, you 
are actually maintaining your friendship. The ball will officially be in their 
court.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://alanis.com/?utm_source=Guardian&utm_medium=Campaign&utm_campaign=The%20Guardian%20Website%20Link>
. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to Alanis Morisette 
atask.alanis@theguardian.com <mailto:ask.alanis@theguardian.com>.
 