
I am 40, my husband is 20 years older, and we have a four-year-old son. Our 
parenting methods are very different: my husband reprehends our son and puts 
him down, and I have to protect him. I want my son to love his dad instead of 
fearing him or feeling resentful, and to grow up confident and emotionally 
strong. What can I do?
It sounds as if your disparate styles of parenting are threatening your bond 
with your husband. While the advice would usually be to make sure both parents 
are united in their parenting approach (and certainly this is the ideal), there 
are times when it might be best to temporarily prioritise your son’s wellbeing 
while working to establish a united front with your husband.

Too often people reprimand their child and send the message that the child’s 
natural impulses are innately “bad”, rather than focusing on the behaviour not 
working in a given context. If you haven’t already, this would be an important 
discussion to have with your husband, perhaps with a therapist if it can’t be 
done alone. Many of my husband’s and my couples therapy sessions focus on how 
we are as parents. Not surprisingly, how we parent our children often mirrors 
how we interact with our spouse and the world around.

If this is not possible, you would need to find a way to set a boundary with 
your husband’s approach, while letting your son know that it is his behaviour 
that is being addressed and not his core self. As an example: if I see my 
husband approaching our son in a way that doesn’t resonate with my values, I 
say: “What behaviour is not working?” This works more effectively because my 
husband and I have discussed it when not around my son. If your bond with your 
husband is strong, he won’t be confused about why you might stand up for your 
son. It is always important to revisit this disconnection later, however, when 
your son is not there, and to let your husband know how important it is to you 
that you are both on the same page when it comes to setting limits for your son.

Ask Alanis: My mother-in-law is putting my children’s health at risk. What 
should I do?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/feb/19/ask-alanis-my-mother-in-law-putting-childrens-health-risk>
Two books you could read and discuss together are No-Drama Discipline 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/no-drama-discipline.html> by Daniel J Siegel 
and Tina Payne Bryson, andParenting Without Power Struggles 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/parenting-without-power-struggles.html> by 
Susan Stiffelman. Hopefully these will help you to form a more united and 
empathic front.

• Alanis Morissette’s podcast is available at iTunes and at alanis.com 
<http://alanis.com/?utm_source=Guardian&utm_medium=Campaign&utm_campaign=The%20Guardian%20Website%20Link>
. Send your dilemmas about love, family or life in general to Alanis Morissette 
atask.alanis@theguardian.com. <mailto:ask.alanis@theguardian.com>
 