
Following the question about the legibility of subtitles, why don't they 
always translate exactly what's being said?
Roger Moreton, London

It's pretty much impossible to squeeze a verbatim translation of any lengthy 
passage of foreign-language dialogue into a screen subtitle. Most 35mm 
subtitles are restricted to two lines, at an average of 35 characters per line. 
As the speech and subtitle have to be in sync, translators have little option 
but to paraphrase, especially as actors tend to speak much more quickly than 
viewers can read. Consequently, subtitles usually carry the sense of what is 
being said rather than provide an exact translation.

This is particularly frustrating for screenwriters who have crafted 
conversations of linguistic and rhythmic precision and few can hope to have 
someone of the calibre of Anthony Burgess produce their captions, as was the 
case with the couplets in Jean-Paul Rappeneau's adaptation of Edmund Rostand's 
Cyrano de Bergerac (1990). Indeed, in some cases, the expense involved in 
subtitling persuades the producers of low-budget pictures to cut corners and 
hacks not entirely fluent in the secondary tongue can come up with some amusing 
howlers. Hong Kong action cinema is particularly prone to such lapses, with 
"Blackie" Sau Leung Ko's Curry and Pepper (1990) containing an exchange that 
ran:

Cop: "I must chase you, as you run away."
Crook: "I must run away from you, as you are after me."

Errors can also slip in when translations are transcribed from tape. But the 
biggest drawback of subtitling is its inability to convey the subtleties of 
cadence, pitch and inflection with which performers invest their delivery, let 
alone any accents or dialects. That said, subtitles remain infinitely 
preferable to dubbing. Don't they?

What was the name of the film about the kid who seeks out J.D. Salinger to ask 
him what happened after Catcher in the Rye?
Paul Albee, Islington

This is Malcolm Clarke's Chasing Holden (2001), in which DJ Qualls plays the 
outsider son of the governor of New York, who is sent to an elite boarding 
school after a spell in a mental hospital. Hazed by bullies, he throws himself 
into an English assignment to find out what happened to his hero Holden 
Caulfield after Catcher in the Rye by setting out with classmate Rachel 
Blanchard to find J.D. Salinger. The road trip, however, proves unduly 
eventful, with imperilled prostitutes, snowdrifts, stolen cars and guns doing 
nothing to alleviate Qualls's suicidal and homicidal tendencies.

Ever since he took exeption to My Foolish Heart (1949), Mark Robson's 
adaptation of the short story Uncle Wiggily in Connecticut, Salinger has 
forbidden movie versions of his works. Samuel Goldwyn, Billy Wilder, Jerry 
Lewis, Marlon Brando, Jack Nicholson, Steven Spielberg, Harvey Weinstein, 
Terrence Malick, Tobey Maguire and Leonardo DiCaprio are among those whose 
Catcher overtures have been declined. Even the author's actor son, Matt, struck 
out. So, Hollywood has had to produce palimpsests in which characters either 
resemble Holden or fixate upon his experiences.

Online movie-makers aren't subject to the same restrictions and YouTube hosts 
homemade interpretations like theKing & Jutras 
<http://uk.youtube.com/watch?v=f65x2y7BcGg&feature=related> effort starring 
Paul Rowe. The most peculiar take, however, is the 2008 "remix" by artistNigel 
Tomm <http://www.nigeltomm.com/main/dvds/trailers/>, which consists of a blue 
screen and 75 minutes and six seconds of silence. Changing only the colour of 
the screen, Tomm - who is the author of the world's longest published novel, 
The Blah Story - has adapted several other literary classics, including 
Oresteia (yellow), Oedipus Rex (red), Hamlet (white), The Brothers Karamazov 
(magenta), Waiting for Godot (green) and A Million Little Pieces (turquoise). 
They were available for purchase on demand, but seem to have been discontinued.

How many foreign-language films have been nominated for Best Picture at the 
Oscars?
Sasha Cepcic, Lancaster 

Costa-Gavras's Z became the first foreign-language feature to be nominated for 
Best Picture in 1970. Subsequently, only Jan Troell's The Emigrants (1971), 
Ingmar Bergman's Cries and Whispers (1972), Michael Radford's Il Postino 
(1995), Roberto Benigni's Life Is Beautiful (1998) and Ang Lee's Crouching 
Tiger, Hidden Dragon (2000) have followed suit. The only Best Picture winner 
with a significant proportion of its dialogue not in English remains Francis 
Ford Coppola's The Godfather, Part Two (1974).

â€¢ Do you have a question? Email ask.parky@guardian.co.uk
 