
2006 

A conglomerate of Kazakh state companies takes over the Liberty Seguros squad 
on the initiative of the country’s rider Alexander Vinokourov after Liberty’s 
backer pulls out amidthe Operación Puerto blood doping scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jan/27/wada-opertion-puerto>. The team 
are refused entry to the Tour de France at the last minute because so many 
riders in their team are implicated in Puerto they cannot field the requisite 
number. Vinokourov goes on to win the Tour of Spain. The UCI licence commission 
is reluctant to issue the team a licence for 2007 but eventually does so as the 
renamed Astana team.

2007 

The Astana <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/astana> rider Matthias Kessler 
tests positive for testosterone in April. The Italian Eddy Mazzoleni leaves 
after being implicated in a legal case nicknamed “Oil for Drugs”. Vinokourov 
admits working with Dr Michele Ferrari who was to be banned from the sport for 
life following the US Anti-Doping Agency’s investigation into Lance Armstrong, 
and is adamant the relationship is legitimate but tests positive for blood 
doping during the Tour de France and is banned for two years. The team quits 
the Tour. Later in the year his team-mate Andrey Kashechkin is tested out of 
competition in Turkey and found positive for blood doping. Team management is 
changed, with Lance Armstrong’s former manager Johan Bruyneel brought in. He 
introduces internal anti-doping system run by Dr Rasmus Damsgard, previously 
with the CSC team.

2008 

Astana are refused an invitation to the Tour de France on ethical grounds. 
They are, however, accepted at the Giro d’Italia at one week’s notice; their 
new leader Alberto Contador wins and also takes the Vuelta a España. The team’s 
internal anti-doping system fingers Vladimir Gusev who is sacked but 
subsequently wins a legal case at the Court of Arbitration for Sport against 
the team.

2009

Armstrong joins up for his comeback to cycling and is immediately embroiled in 
a tense battle with Contador for leadership at the Tour de France which the 
Spaniard wins. The 2012 Usada report is adamant that Armstrong was blood doping 
in the Tour where he finishes third before being relegated; he denies the 
charge. Mid-season the team appears to be running out of money; Armstrong and 
some riders appear at the Giro in jerseys with the sponsors’ names faded out. 
Vinokourov returns at the end of the season; after a power struggle Bruyneel 
and a host of riders quit at the end of the season and new management is 
brought in.

2010

Contador tests positive for clenbuterol en route to overall victory at the 
Tour de France and isstripped of victory after a lengthy legal saga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/feb/06/alberto-contador-ban-tour-cycling>
.

2011

In legal limbo over his 2010 positive, Contador starts the Tour to boos from 
French crowds. He wins the Giro d’Italia but is subsequently stripped of the 
victory when the clenbuterol case is resolved in 2012.

2012 

Vinokourov wins the Olympic road race in London. Usada’s report into Armstrong 
and those around him is published; he is among former Astana members named as 
doping violators along with Bruyneel, Levi Leipheimer, and Doctors Pedro Celaya 
and Luis del Moral.

2014

The UCI opens a biological passport inquiry into Roman Kreuziger for the 
period 2011-12 which he spent with Astana: he was reinstated by the Czech 
authorities but the UCI and World Anti-Doping Agency have since appealed to Cas 
over the decision to clear him. Maxim and Valentin Iglinsky test positive for 
EPO – Maxim is provisionally suspended andValentin sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/11/valentin-iglinsky-sacked-astana-epo>
; Ilya Davidenok, a member of the Astana Continental team – a feeder to the 
WorldTour squad – who is riding for Astana WorldTour as an apprentice, tests 
positive for steroids and is suspended. There are two other positives for 
steroids in the Astana Continental team. Allegations of links with Ferrari 
surface and are denied by both parties. Astana are awarded their WorldTour 
licence but must undergo an audit and they are placed on probation. The UCI 
president, Brian Cookson, calls on Vinokourov to testify to the Independent 
Commission on Reform in Cycling.

2015

The audit findings are delivered to the UCI which calls on its licence 
commission to revoke Astana’s licence.
 