
Astana created Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> history by becoming the 
first team from Kazakhstan to win a point in the group stages of the 
competition. Twice, Astana fell behind in a gripping contest, but the Kazakh 
champions produced a stirring second-half performance to draw 2-2 at home to 
Galatasaray.

Benfica battle back to shock Atlético Madrid at home
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/30/atletico-madrid-benfica-champions-league-match-report>
The Colombian midfielder Roger Cañas produced an 89th-minute equaliser just 
moments after the Turkish visitors appeared to sew up three precious points in 
Group C, much neededafter they had lost their opening match in the competition 
to Atlético Madrid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/15/galatasaray-atletico-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
.

Galatasaray <https://www.theguardian.com/football/galatasaray> deserved their 
half-time lead at the Astana Arena, even though it came from the most unlikely 
of sources. Bilal Kisa was making his Champions League debut at the age of 32, 
but the holding midfielder fired home from 30 yards low into the corner of 
Nenad Eric’s net, after 31 minutes.

Astana had been very much second best until that point but they were a 
different side after the break, and the Galatasaray goalkeeper Fernando Muslera 
made several excellent saves to keep them out.

The Uruguayan was finally beaten 12 minutes from time when Junior Kabananga 
took advantage of Semih Kaya’s slip and his cross went into the net off the 
luckless Hakan Balta.

But Galatasaray’s hopes of claiming a first Champions League victory on the 
road since March 2013 were boosted when Eric made a hash of the substitute 
Sinan Gumus’s shot four minutes from time and the ball trickled over the line.

Astana were crestfallen but they somehow summoned the energy to fight back and 
Cañas headed home after Muslera had punched the ball to the edge of the area.

Beaten 2-0 in their opening group game by Benfica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/15/benfica-astana-champions-league-match-report>
, Astana had displayed plenty of early nerves as Galatasaray’s Wesley Sneijder 
dominated the midfield battle. The Holland international came closest to 
breaking the deadlock in the opening half-hour, forcing Eric into a 
fifth-minute save before firing another effort across goal when the ball fell 
for him in the penalty area.

Astana’s attacking forays were rare in the first half, although Georgi Zhukov 
did latch on to Balta’s weak header to test Muslera low down at his post, and 
the hosts struggled to combat Sneijder’s creativity.

But Astana raised their game at the start of the second half and the 
Galatasaray goal led a charmed life as Baurzhan Dzholchiyev and Kabananga both 
went close.

Foxi Kethevoama wasted an even better opening after 66 minutes when he timed 
his run perfectly into the penalty area but volleyed wide with much of the goal 
to aim at.

Zhukov’s 30-yard shot brought another save from Muslera and Kabananga fired 
wide, but Astana did not give up and their two late goals sparked wild 
celebrations in the stadium, which were set to be matched right around 
Kazakhstan.
 