
Astana, the team of defending champion Vincenzo Nibali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/03/tour-de-france-2015-five-contenders-yellow-jersey>
, invited further scrutiny over its moral code after announcing that the Dutch 
rider Lars Boom would start the Tour de France on Saturday.

The 29-year-old rider has not failed a drugs test, but as Astana are members 
of the Movement for CredibleCycling <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cycling> 
(MPCC) he should, under the organisation’s voluntary code, be removed from 
competition for a period of eight days after returning cortisol levels under 
the normal level.

The UCI regulations stated Boom could not be replaced on the eve of the race 
and he will now roll down the start ramp for opening time-trial after the 
Kazakh squad sought medical advice.

Low cortisol levels could indicate the use of the steroid cortisone, which is 
permitted in some circumstances, with prior approval. Astana said Boom’s result 
was “the consequence of a long-standing and well-known application of 
anti-asthma therapy by the athlete and is not a violation of UCI rules and 
regulations”. It meansAstana <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/astana>, who 
risked having their World Tour licence revoked earlier this year when the UCI 
asked its licence commission to take action after a number of anti-doping 
violations in 2014, could be excluded from the MPCC.

Tour de France 2015: five contenders for the yellow jersey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/03/tour-de-france-2015-five-contenders-yellow-jersey>
Not all leading Tour teams are members. None of the teams led by Nibali’s main 
rivals - Alberto Contador’s Tinkoff-Saxo, Chris Froome’s Team Sky and Nairo 
Quintana’s Movistar - for glory in Paris this month belong to the group. Astana 
said in a statement: “Astana Pro Team will start the 2015Tour de France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tourdefrance> with nine riders, including 
Dutch cyclist Lars Boom (pictured above). Astana Pro Team asked the UCI to 
allow a replacement rider in place of Boom, and received confirmation from the 
UCI that as a low cortisol result is no risk to the health of the rider, 
therefore there are no valid grounds for a late substitution.”

His condition will be closely monitored, it added.
 