
The Aston Villa midfielder Charles N'Zogbia has insisted that he has a healthy 
working relationship with the club's manager,Alex McLeish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish>, after the pair met for 
talks. N'Zogbia was quoted as being "disgusted" by remarks made by McLeish who 
was reported to have said the former Wigan player "preferred cars to football".

Villa's Â£9.5m summer signing was also reported to have quarrelled with McLeish 
after the away game at Newcastle last month and "didn't like the words he said. 
I was really upset". But N'Zogbia is adamant that he and his manager "believe 
in one another" and he is keen to end the season on a positive note after 
struggling to show his best form on a consistent basis.

N'Zogbia, in a statement released by the club, said: "I would like to clarify 
because I have not been quoted correctly. The most important point is that I'm 
very happy to be anAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> player. I appreciate that 
the manager brought me here and I want to repay this by performing well for the 
club. I know now that he [McLeish] did not say this about me [preferring cars 
to football]. He was saying this about every player but he wants players to win 
football games and think about cars and everything else after this. This is my 
attitude also. We have put this behind us."

Meanwhile, Richard Dunne is linking up with the NFL's Cleveland Browns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cleveland-browns> as he tries to return to 
action by the end of April. The Republic of Ireland centre-half is keen to make 
a comeback from a broken collarbone before the end of the season to bolster his 
chances of being fully fit for Euro 2012. He is flying out to Cleveland to 
continue his rehabilitation with the club who are owned by the Villa chairman, 
Randy Lerner.

"Because of the nature of American football, Cleveland have a lot of 
experience in dealing with this kind of injury," Dunne said. "Any help I can 
get will be much appreciated. It will also be a great experience and I think it 
will be a good week. Hopefully I can be back before the end of April, that is 
the aim. But I'll just have to listen to the doctors here at Villa and see what 
is actually possible."
 