
The problems continue to pile up for Alex McLeish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish> after it emerged that Aston 
Villa supporters have taken the unprecedented step of paying for an advert on 
the back page of Saturday's Birmingham Mail expressing discontent to the board 
about the manager's postion. The advert, which was taken out by members of the 
Villa Supporter's Group 'My Old Man Said' (MOMS) cost Â£600 and carries the line 
"We were really hoping never to say this but... WE TOLD YOU SO". MOMS was 
formed in the wake of the initial protest against McLeish's appointment last 
summer and has picked up 3,500 members on Facebook. The group has also been 
campaigning for a Villa v Celtic charity match for Stilian Petrov, who was 
diagnosed with leukaemia at the end of March.

A backdrop of more fan dissatisfaction is just about the last thing McLeish 
needs ahead of Sunday's crucial home game against Tottenham Hotspur and on the 
back of the unsavoury events off the field earlier this week that saw Chris 
Herd, James Collins and Fabian Delph involved in a drunken brawl outside a 
Birmingham nightclub after the club's end-of-season awards ceremony.

McLeish described the latter incident as a "slur on the club" and said that 
the trio, who have all publicly apologised, "owe the Villa fans a massive 
performance". It is quite possible, however, that none of them will start 
against Spurs. Delph has been on the periphery for some time, Collins has only 
just resumed training after recovering from a groin injury and it would not be 
a surprise if McLeish felt that Herd should lose his place as well as two 
weeks' wages. Collins has also been fined a fortnight's money while Delph, who 
was sober and has claimed that he was acting as a peacemaker, is believed to 
have been docked a week's pay.

It has been a hugely embarrassing episode for Villa at a time when the club 
are fighting relegation and emotions are running high among the supporters. "We 
won't tolerate that kind of behaviour," McLeish said. "It's a slur on the club. 
I feel for Randy Lerner [the club's owner], for the fans ofAston Villa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa> FC. The players have got to 
show some respect for themselves and for their profession."

McLeish had a problem with Ben Foster and Colin Doyle 12 months ago, when he 
was in charge of Birmingham and the club were embroiled in a relegation scrap, 
although on that occasion the players had been out partying but had not got 
into any trouble.

He said that he never anticipated for one moment that he would have an issue 
with the Villa players on Monday night. "There was alcohol in the suite but not 
on the players' tables. I thought, naively perhaps, that they would all just go 
home. I left quite early to drive home. I was shocked to hear the news in the 
morning. I think the expectations were that they wouldn't do it.

"I would have thought they would have seen what happened last year at 
Birmingham and wouldn't have even thought about going out. It just became 
unbelievable. They know they have been crazy."
 