
Aston Villa's manager, Alex McLeish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/alex-mcleish>, said Stilian Petrov 
"couldn't wait to get started" after beginning treatment for acute leukaemia at 
a London hospital.

Petrov was accompanied on Monday by his wife, Paulina, and McLeish as part of 
a show of support from Villa after the Bulgarian's diagnosis was revealed last 
Friday. McLeish described Petrov as being in "high spirits" and determined to 
fight the illness "head on" following an outpouring of support from the 
football community.

"The chairman Randy Lerner, the chief executive Paul Faulkner and myself went 
to see Stilian on Monday with the support of his wife on this, the very first 
day of his road to recovery," McLeish said.

"He's determined to meet it head on â€“ we expect that from Stan. He was talking 
really positively and actually couldn't wait to get started to try and clear up 
this illness that he has. Stan has an amazing spirit, he's absolutely 
fantastic. God knows what the lad is thinking. But he's the captain ofAston 
Villa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/aston-villa>, he's a pure leader 
and he wants to lead himself through this particular tough time."

Petrov's initial treatment involves embarking on a course of steroids and 
tablets that will prepare him for chemotherapy. McLeish said despite facing a 
"battle" to return to health the 32-year-old was remaining upbeat, saying he 
was already missing not being able to train with his team-mates.

"He will stand up to that battle," McLeish told Sky Sports News. "This 
afternoon he was talking about wishing he was coming back to training tomorrow 
because he feels as if he could train. That's the kind of spirits that he's in. 
Everybody's here to support him."

McLeish asked that Petrov and his family's privacy be respected during his 
treatment, saying Villa would release updates on the midfielder "when we feel 
it's appropriate".

"We realise there will be a lot of people clamouring to talk to him and I'm 
sure at some stage he will want to say a few words himself," McLeish added.

"I know that the Bulgarian nation are supporting him really strongly and I'm 
sure that people in his home country would like to talk to him as well. There 
won't be daily bulletins. We will tell you and update you when we feel it's 
appropriate on behalf of Stilian and his family."
 