
If recent reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/mar/10/ayn-rand-atlas-shrugged> are to 
be believed, people have started seeing parallels between our current economic 
meltdown and the world collapse outlined in the 1200 pages of Ayn Rand's 
libertarian classic Atlas Shrugged. Rand's fansproclaim her a prophet 
<http://helenlein.blogspot.com/2008/05/wyatts-torch-ayn-rand-was-prophet.html> 
- the hero whose teachings will rid us of recession. This sudden popularity is 
odd (why seek salvation from a situation caused by out of control markets in a 
book preaching less market regulation?) but it's also intriguing. And so it was 
that I recently became one of the millions who have set out to discover the 
answer to the book's opening question:"Who is John Galt?" 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Galt>.

Galt, it transpires (after 700-odd pages of hard yakka) is "Prometheus who 
changed his mind". A man who has refused to accept the increasing socialisation 
of American society in Rand's bleak future, who has "taken away his fire" and 
gone on strike. Living on the principle that "I will never live for the sake of 
another man, nor ask another man to live for mine", he's retreated to the 
Colorado mountains, along with his great big brain and a super-efficient energy 
generator of his own invention. He has also encouraged several other similar 
heroes to join him. These are all supermen: supremely intelligent, rich, very 
good-looking and clever. Without them the world outside begins to collapse and 
destroy itself, as a collection of two-dimensional "college educated" 
caricatures pass increasingly idiotic legislation in the name of "essential 
need", and feed ever more hungrily on the few producers whom Galt has not yet 
taken to Colorado.

Chief among the latter is the focus of the novel, the acting vice-president of 
a railroad,Dagny Taggart <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dagny_Taggart>. She is 
just like the other supermen except she takes a long time to be persuaded to 
join Galt, she is beautiful instead of handsome and enjoys being near-raped by 
whomsoever appears to have the greatest earning potential. In Rand's world, 
dollars are the ultimate in sex appeal and sex is dark, kinky and weird. But 
not in a good way.

It's as unpleasant as it is daft and as a work of literature it's deeply 
flawed. Great chunks of the book are given over to philosophical rants (one 
particularly egregious radio broadcast clocks in at just under 100 pages). 
There are countless tedious repetitions of ideas, phrases and situations. 
Rand's world is a place of black and white morality, good and bad people and 
absolutely no shades of grey. Consequently, none of the characters or 
storylines are at all believable.

To top all that off, the writing is turned up to eleven throughout. It is, as 
Whittaker Chambers noted inthis justly celebrated article 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/flashback/flashback200501050715.asp> in the 
National Review, a work of "shrillness without reprieve".

It's also, as millions have discovered before me, strangely compelling. Rand 
may be shrill, but the high-pitched urgency of her writing and uncomplicated 
morality also gives the book an irresistible force. It might take 900 pages too 
many to properly reveal the workings of John Galt, but it's an intriguing 
mystery. The conclusion might also be postponed in more than a dozen annoying 
ways, but Rand has a unique ability to bludgeon you along to it.

I hated the thing, but I couldn't put it down. It was worth the effort too, 
because the conclusion is one of the funniest things I've read. This mad 
denouement boasted, among other idiotic delights, a particle destroyer, a mad 
electric torture machine, gratuitous nudity, a laboratory, and a man who 
introduces himself in the heat of battle in all seriousness as "Francisco 
Domingo Carlos Andres Sebastian d'Anconia".

Such laughs, however, come bitterly, given how seriously so many take this 
stuff. There is one thing Rand gets right (and, typically, repeats ad nauseam): 
people are frequently nuts and the ridiculous can happen. The cruel irony is 
that the true absurdity lies in Rand's insistence on selfishness, the need to 
create wealth at the expense of all else and the prohibition on sharing it â€“ as 
recent events have shown.

Indeed, Rand's new acolytes all seem to overlook the one true link between the 
writer and the current recession: Alan Greenspan.He was one of Rand's foremost 
disciples <http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/15/business/15atlas.html>, not to 
mention her main source of economic advice. He is also now widely viewed asone 
of the main triggers of the recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jan/26/road-ruin-recession-individuals-economy>
. This being the case, turning to Atlas Shrugged because you don't like the way 
things are going is the equivalent of diving for the centre of the fire because 
the frying pan got too hot.
 