
Brian Tyree Henry has a question. “Have you heard of the Arctic Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/14/canadian-companys-genetically-modified-apples-win-us-approval>
?” he asks in the restaurant of the Ace Hotel in midtown Manhattan. Before I 
can confess that I’ve never heard of it or start Googling, there’s an 
explanation. “If you bite it, it doesn’t go brown, it stays white. It never 
oxidises. I was like, this is next toSoylent Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/79566/soylent-green>; I bet you we’re 
going to start eating people. So yeah, welcome to the future.”

It’s a challenge to keep up with Henry. Fans of Atlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/06/better-things-atlanta-fx-comedy-donald-glover-pamela-adlon>
 – Donald Glover’s auteur drama on FX,which drew three million viewers with its 
season premiere 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/09/fx-atlanta-premiere-ratings-strong.html> – will 
recognise him as Alfred Miles aka Paper Boi, the laconic would-be rapper around 
whom much of the action revolves. But there’s nothing laconic about Henry, who 
seems determined to put the world to rights – one genetically modified piece of 
fruit at a time.

“You can put Trump in the White House, but you need to prepare for a revolt 
because I’m going nuts,” says Henry, as he waits for his English breakfast – a 
deconstructed version including black pudding – to arrive. “It’s going to be 
Escape From New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/sep/08/escapefromnewyork.kurtrussell> in 
here and you might as well call me Kurt Russell because I’m going to be fucking 
people up. It’s going to be Mad Max.”

From the coldly seething anger to the apocalyptic references, Henry’s takedown 
of the Republican presidential candidate and his possibly cataclysmic 
consequences could come straight from the script of Atlanta. It has been the 
most popular of FX’s offerings this autumn and one of the most critically 
lauded of the TV fall debutants. It’s been called genre defying, earned 
comparisons to fellow FX show Louie and The Wire, and was dubbed “shrewd, 
emotional, and impolite 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/09/19/the-slo-mo-specificity-of-atlanta>
” by the New Yorker’s Emily Nussbaum.


It’s also black. Brazenly so – from its cast and crew to its subject matter, 
to the city in which it’s set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/25/the-new-south-atlanta-georgia-city-of-black-power>
. Atlanta has managed to stand out during a season that’s been heralded for 
embracing diversity. But where other shows such as Luke Cage, Pitch or Queen 
Sugar may exist in alternate universes or times, Atlanta is set in the here and 
now, in contemporary America. And that setting, slap bang in the middle of the 
most divisive election race in recent history, feels apt.

“We should be over this by now but we’re not,” says Henry of race relations in 
the US. “Which is why I’m glad we’re doing our show because we’re going to be 
telling you exactly how we feel and exactly where we’re coming from, and 
exactly how it feels to be a black American in this country right now.”

Variations on that line have been used by a lot of the cast while promoting 
the show – Donald Glover said he “wanted to show white people, you don’t know 
everything about black culture”. During the show’s first episode, which focuses 
around a shooting in a car park, the standout moment is when a white friend 
casually throws around the N-word. It’s a scene which finishes on Glover and 
Henry staring down the camera at their acquaintance, and it feels like they’re 
also looking at the viewer and America at large. It’s as if those scenes are 
supposed to elicit a knowing nod from African Americans and a wince from white 
America.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fatlanta-brian-tyree-henry-tv-fx-black-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac0cba26db1ea7df483e93ca404fe679dab3ef4%2F199_126_2603_1563%2F2603.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Atlanta%20star%20Brian%20Tyree%20Henry%3A%20if%20Trump%20gets%20elected%20'it's%20going%20to%20be%20Mad%20Max'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fatlanta-brian-tyree-henry-tv-fx-black-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Atlanta%20star%20Brian%20Tyree%20Henry%3A%20if%20Trump%20gets%20elected%20%27it%27s%20going%20to%20be%20Mad%20Max%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fatlanta-brian-tyree-henry-tv-fx-black-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac0cba26db1ea7df483e93ca404fe679dab3ef4%2F199_126_2603_1563%2F2603.jpg>
 Jumping the couch: Keith Standfield as Darius, Donald Glover as Earnest Marks 
and Brian Tyree Henry as Alfred Miles. Photograph: FX 
“No one seems give a shit about what they say about any race in this country,” 
says Henry. “Which is funny because the last time I checked isn’t this the land 
of immigration? Isn’t this where you’re supposed to come and be what you want 
to be? It’s like, yeah, but only if we say so, though.”

His words are shrewd, emotional and a little impolite, at least by 
conservative America’s standards, but his tell-it-how-you-see-it approach began 
early. Henry was the youngest in a house with four older sisters in Washington 
DC. Acting was a survival mechanism as much as a hobby. “My sisters were 
teenagers when I was born so the last thing they wanted was a little 
nappy-headed boy running around,” he recalls. “I would imitate them or copy 
things off TV. I would leave the house and be these people.”

That early play turned into something more when Henry started acting at 
Morehouse College, the most famous of the historically black colleges and the 
same placeSamuel L Jackson caught the acting bug 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/30/amuel--ackson--was-a-drug-addict-out-of-my-mind-but-showed-up-on-time-and-hit-my-marks>
. The first play he auditioned for was August Wilson’s classic tale of newly 
freed slaves,Joe Turner’s Come and Gone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/jun/04/jow-turners-come-and-gone-review>
 and he landed the lead role ofHerald Loomis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2010/jun/15/august-wilson-joe-turners-come-gone>
. Henry still calls theater his first love and after Morehouse he moved to Yale 
to take part in the acting programme. Uprooting from one of the blackest 
campuses in the US to one which isnotoriously monocultural 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/01/yale-english-students-call-for-end-of-focus-on-white-male-writers>
 was a wakeup call.

“At Morehouse I found myself and my voice and I didn’t want to lose that at 
Yale,” he says. “[At Yale] you’re learning Ibsen and Chekhov and you need to 
learn the Alexander technique, and I was like yeah, but I want to be Brian when 
I leave.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fatlanta-brian-tyree-henry-tv-fx-black-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff49ef646baa2ab131bd9dfbe38b326dd71d2b8aa%2F514_231_2214_1328%2F2214.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Atlanta%20star%20Brian%20Tyree%20Henry%3A%20if%20Trump%20gets%20elected%20'it's%20going%20to%20be%20Mad%20Max'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fatlanta-brian-tyree-henry-tv-fx-black-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Atlanta%20star%20Brian%20Tyree%20Henry%3A%20if%20Trump%20gets%20elected%20%27it%27s%20going%20to%20be%20Mad%20Max%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fatlanta-brian-tyree-henry-tv-fx-black-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff49ef646baa2ab131bd9dfbe38b326dd71d2b8aa%2F514_231_2214_1328%2F2214.jpg>
 Into the woods: Brian Tyree Henry as Alfred Miles, Keith Stanfield as Darius. 
Photograph: Guy D'Alema/FX 
That theater background gave Henry connections. He’s the godfather to recent 
Emmy winner Sterling K Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/07/sterling-k-brown-emmy-people-v-oj-simpson>
’s child and playedTybalt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/27/romeo-juliet-review-royal-ballet-gary-avis-tybalt-steals-the-show>
 in Shakespeare in the Park in New York alongside a youngOscar Isaac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/03/oscar-isaac-most-violent-year>, 
who played Romeo. It also saw him land the role of the General inthe original 
lineup of the Book of Mormon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/mar/21/the-book-of-mormon-review> (“I 
was like, ‘OK, I’m playing a warlord and I get to say fuck and shit on 
Broadway. Let’s do it”). He made the transfer from stage to screen with bit 
parts in The Good Wife, The Knick and Boardwalk Empire, alongsideMichael K 
Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/13/michael-k-williams-interview-omar-the-wire-the-gambler>
. He’s in HBO’s Vice Principals, but Atlanta is where Henry looks most at home, 
which isn’t surprising considering it’s where (at Morehouse) he matured.

But the city itself is important to Henry for another reason: “We went there, 
we created it, we made it a metropolitan,” he says. “It’s the place where a lot 
of black history happened: Martin Luther King was there, Jim Crow was there, 
even the Olympics were there.

“Atlanta has become and has always been a place where you create your own 
universe. That’s what our show is trying to do; create our own universe with 
these two young men trying to make it in this universe which is still part of 
this bigger picture. It’s still part of America, it’s still part of Georgia, 
it’s still part of the south, but it’s created it’s own entity and I love that.”

Talking to Henry, that idea of identity and defining yourself comes up 
frequently. Whether it’s talking about his favourite book as a kid,Antoine de 
Saint-Exupéry <https://www.theguardian.com/books/antoine-de-saint-exupery>’s 
The Little Prince (“[it’s about] opening your mind and not letting people limit 
you”), his dress sense (“I love wearing a fitted hat because as soon as I put 
it on people go ‘oh wait, he went to Yale?’”) or his love of rap (“It’s the 
place I feel like black artists have the most room to be who they want to be”), 
it’s there in the background.

Questioning, teasing and often provoking, there’s an obvious link between the 
world Henry and Glover have created and the real one they inhabit. So what 
about the world ofAtlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/atlanta> 
hip-hop? It’s often presented as an out of control, drug-laced trap house where 
debauchery is next to godliness. For Henry it’s much more complicated than that.

“In hip-hop you can be anything. What you look like is the least of it: Fetty 
Wap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/19/fetty-wap-i-didnt-even-get-to-use-no-bed>
 has one eye.Gucci Mane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jul/28/gucci-mane-everybody-looking-review-trap-stars-quickfire-post-prison-set>
 has an ice cream cone tattooed on his face, and they’re both still great,” he 
says. “That’s what I love about hip-hop: it challenges the norms of what we, 
especially as black men should be and look like. It welcomes the freaks and the 
ones who haven’t been heard.”

Is that what Atlanta is doing? “I don’t want to say it’s necessary, but it is 
absolutely necessary,” he says. Welcome to the future.

Atlanta continues on FX <https://www.theguardian.com/media/fx> tonight at 10pm 
ET
 