
Just weeks before residents of Atlanta shut down their own streets over the 
police shooting deaths ofAlton Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alton-sterling-shooting> and Philando 
Castile <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/philando-castile-shooting> in 
other parts of the country, Deravis Caine Rogers was shot dead by police in 
their own Georgia city.

He was African American, unarmed, and provided “no provocation” for the 
shooting, according to police.

His case didn’t attract the attention that other police shootings caught on 
cellphone videos have. But in a rare development, the officer who fired the 
gun, James Burns, has already been charged with murder and fired.

It is the first time in six years that a district attorney in Georgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/state-of-georgia> has charged an officer 
without the officer first appearing before a grand jury for indictment.

“The decision of APD [Atlanta police department] to terminate and of DA Paul 
Howard to prosecute Officer James Burns for the killing of Caine Rogers does 
indeed mark an unprecedented shift in how Atlanta and Fulton County hold police 
accountable for their actions,” said Xochitl Bervera, director of the Racial 
Justice Action Center, based inAtlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta>.


Criminal charges against police for fatal incidents have been extremely rare 
nationwide. A 2014 Wall Street Journal analysis found that over a seven-year 
period ending in 2011, just41 people 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/police-rarely-criminally-charged-for-on-duty-shootings-1416874955>
 were charged. During that same period the FBI count found that there were 
2,718 “justified homicides” by law enforcement – a figure that is known to 
dramatically undercount police killings. A project by the Guardian found that 
in 2015 alone, there were1,134 deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/31/the-counted-police-killings-2015-young-black-men>
 at the hands of law enforcement.

On the day of the shooting, Burns had been called to an apartment complex 
after a report that a pedestrian was spotted looking into cars in a suspicious 
manner. Burns claims that when he arrived on the scene, a vehicle quickly 
pulled out of where it was parked, coming down the hill toward Burns’ car.


In Burns’s statement of events, he moved his car to try to block Rogers by 
pulling sideways in front of it, but Rogers continued past in what Burns called 
an attempt to run him over.

 Deravis Rogers. Photograph: facebook 
But in an investigation completed within several weeks of the incident that 
included review of dashcam footage, police found that Burns “had no 
provocation, no reason, to discharge his weapon”, according to Sgt Warren 
Pickard. They found that Burns was actually standing behind his own vehicle, 
not in immediate danger of being hit as he had claimed.

When asked by investigators why he chose to block Rogers’s car even though the 
radio report described a pedestrian and not a vehicle, Burns replied that he 
just thought “everyone in this area was of interest”.

Burns shot and killed Rogers through the passenger side window. 

“The driver of the vehicle posed no immediate threat to you,” a disciplinary 
memo issued by Atlanta’s police chief, George N Turner, found.

The Fulton County district attorney, Paul Howard, issued an arrest warrant for 
felony murder, aggravated assault with a deadly weapon and violation of his 
oath, and Burns turned himself in. He is being held in jail until a preliminary 
hearing on 1 August.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fobama-defends-black-lives-matter-movement-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20defends%20Black%20Lives%20Matter%20movement%20at%20town%20hall%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fobama-defends-black-lives-matter-movement-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20defends%20Black%20Lives%20Matter%20movement%20at%20town%20hall%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fobama-defends-black-lives-matter-movement-video&media=>
Obama defends Black Lives Matter movement at town hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/15/obama-defends-black-lives-matter-movement-video>
Bervera said the swift action is “a direct result” of community outcry in 
Atlanta and nationally.

But, she added: “Officer Burns didn’t operate in a vacuum – he was trained and 
supervised by higher-ups. The community should not be too quick to celebrate or 
think that justice has been done.”

Bervera contrasted Rogers’s case to another from more than a year ago. Alexia 
Christian was shot 10 times by two Atlanta police officers in April 2015 while 
she sat in the back of a squad car, and advocates have been calling for the 
release of videotapes associated with the death ever since.

Atlanta police officer in court over fatal shooting of unarmed black man
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/18/atlanta-police-officer-fatal-shooting-deravis-caine-rogers>
Last week, Howard said he would not seek charges over Christian’s death. 
Police say Christian slipped her hand out of a handcuff and fired a pistol at 
the officers, provoking their gunfire.

Bervera called that investigation botched. In general, the department has been 
slow to discipline “any officer for any misconduct”, said Bervera.

Rogers’s father, Deravis Thomas, says he doesn’t want his son’s incident to be 
“swept under the rug” as others have been.

While Thomas commended Turner, the police chief, for swift disciplinary 
action, he called for greater accountability for officers involved in other 
shootings he said are just as unwarranted.

“You can’t have a police force policing the citizens of a city with the police 
believing that they can commit murder and just say some magic words – ‘Oh, I 
feared for my life’ – and it will disappear,” he said. “We need punishment and 
accountability, because that becomes a deterrent.

“Now you’ve got policemen that are getting shot … It’s terrible either way. A 
life taken is a life taken. The trust is gone.”
 