
I wrote yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/mar/29/the-spectator-runs-a-hatchet-job-on-the-frontline-club>
 aboutthe intemperate attack in Spectator Life  
<http://life.spectator.co.uk/2016/03/life-in-the-frontline/>on the Frontline 
Club and its founder, Vaughan Smith. He wrote a right to reply for the magazine 
but its editor, Toby Young,thought it far too long and suggested a cut version. 
Smith considered it to be unacceptable and therefore withdrew his piece. Here 
is his (almost) unexpurgated response:

Jon Swain, veteran journalist, author and Frontline Club member, told me an 
astounding story last week. As a young reporter in Paris in the 1960s, he had a 
girlfriend namedSylvia Rafael <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sylvia_Rafael> who 
was a brilliant and glamorous photojournalist.

Only later did he learn that she was a Mossad assassin in the hit team that 
gunned down an innocent Moroccan waiter in Norway. Swain is taking part in a 
documentary about her, his reason for mentioning it to me.

Another Frontline member, Edward Girardet, went to Afghanistan in September 
2001 to interview the political and military leaderAhmad Shah Massoud 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ahmad_Shah_Massoud>. He had to leave before the 
interview for his wife’s birthday.

Among the waiting reporters were two Al-Qaida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> terrorists posing as a film crew. 
They detonated a bomb in their camera, killing Massoud, themselves and everyone 
nearby – the prelude to 9/11. Swain’s and Girardet’s experiences are not 
unusual among members of the Frontline.

Spies and terrorists use the media. Isis are experts at social media. The 
British government’s obsession with “narratives” costs the British taxpayer a 
small fortune. There are five times as many PR functionaries as journalists in 
this country, and PR pays a lot better.

The same is true in the US, where journalism is becoming a profession on life 
support. The Russians operate “troll houses” to pump out online disinformation, 
making and repeating absurd defamatory statements.

Russia also deals with troublesome journalists the old fashioned way: it kills 
them. Turkey puts them in prison.Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> simply doesn’t allow them to 
write.

This is terrible news for our knowledge of the world and for our liberty. 
Propaganda, or news manipulation, is directed at deceiving the public. 
Journalism’s role as a corrective is diminishing.

Broadcasters and publications are cash-strapped, desperate and fearful as 
social media eat into their trade and audience. Investigative journalism takes 
a backseat to infomercials and the meaningless cavortings of movie stars, 
models, TV game show hosts and others deemed celebrities.

Too many publications, desperate to keep an audience in a shrinking market, 
cut moral corners. They let their journalists accept freebies. They give people 
what they think they want to hear. They recruit staff who promote agendas and 
seek facts only to support their bias. Opinion replaces investigation. Often, 
they just make it up.


An article by James Kirchick last week about the Frontline Club in Spectator 
Life [The Spectator magazine’s lifestyle supplement] provides one chippy 
example worthy of a Russian troll house: truth absent or bent and prejudices 
blatant.

The author’s premise was that the club, which I opened 12 years ago, had 
“become a den of swagger and lefty self-regard.” The author attacked me, 
because I am one of the few people in the British media who still supports
Julian Assange <https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange>. Kirchick and 
his editor, Toby Young, don’t want anyone to stand up for Assange.

Club members approached by Kirchick were appalled by his obvious intention to 
produce a politically motivated hit job. They showed me their email exchanges,
which can be read here <http://www.vaughansmith.com/category/blog/>. 

Kirchick applied for the commission by writing to Young that he had “long 
wanted to write a take-down of that place.” However, he had rarely visited the 
club and then not for more than 10 years.

His goal was to embarrass the Frontline because “it’s always been a nest of 
the worst kind of British foreign correspondents…types who go native and hate 
the UK/US/Israel.” Young deemed this sufficiently profound to reply that it 
“sounds like a good piece.”

Kirchick contacted a club member, Sam Kiley, the Sky News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news> foreign affairs editor, in search 
of a damning quote. Sam replied: “There is no Frontline club position on 
Assange. Vaughan’s opinions are his own… They have a foreign and often human 
rights bias, but I don’t think it is left or right wing.”

This wasn’t enough to dissuade an obviously envious Kirchick from jizzing his 
sanctimonious cyanide.


Dedicated to freelances killed while working

The Frontline Club is dedicated to eight freelance cameramen and women killed 
in the course of their work, mostly in the 1990s, from my old agency, Frontline 
News TV. I launched the club with my wife, Pranvera, whom I met while working 
as a freelance cameraman in her country, Kosovo.

I did so because I felt angry and betrayed by the news industry. While the 
journalists that we worked with were supportive, many editors denied us credit 
and reasonable pay. Some colleagues claimed our work as their own.

The club ensured that my friends would not be forgotten. I wanted their faces 
in front of mainstream journalists and editors every day. They are now – on the 
wall by the bar in the clubroom, where they deserve to be, alongside other 
great journalists likeMarie Colvin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marie_Colvin> 
of the Sunday Times, who lost her life in Syria in 2012.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fattack-on-the-frontline-club-was-a-politically-motivated-hit-job%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6971941041077a6be34977d6c88f0879b86d0d1e%2F0_43_621_373%2F621.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Attack%20on%20the%20Frontline%20Club%20was%20'a%20politically%20motivated%20hit%20job'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fattack-on-the-frontline-club-was-a-politically-motivated-hit-job%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Attack%20on%20the%20Frontline%20Club%20was%20%27a%20politically%20motivated%20hit%20job%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fgreenslade%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fattack-on-the-frontline-club-was-a-politically-motivated-hit-job%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6971941041077a6be34977d6c88f0879b86d0d1e%2F0_43_621_373%2F621.jpg>
 The Frontline Club remembrance wall: Marie Colvin, Tim Hetherington, Rosanna 
della Casa, Nick della Casa and Charles Maxwell Photograph: Agnese 
Sanvito/Frontline Club 
Kirchick criticises me for failing freelancers, advising me that I would do 
“more of a service to freelancers if” I hosted “serious discussion about the 
ethical traps of conflict reporting,” which he feels includes “the temptation 
to make stuff up.”

His article ignored Frontline Club funding of the Frontline Freelance Register 
<http://www.frontlinefreelance.org>, which I launched with young freelancers 
who,for very little pay 
<https://medium.com/@ffregister/journalists-under-threat-from-within-6df64da3274a%23.d0ugt2fe2>
, take the risks needed to cover today’s conflicts.

These are risks that the mainstream industry mostly shies away from, because 
the dangers involved are too great to be compatible with the legal 
responsibility that news organisations have for staff reporters.

He also neglected to mention that we are launching an association to represent 
local conflict freelancers worldwide. It’s these two groups of freelancers that 
are now delivering 90% of news about conflict to British audiences.

The Frontline Club hosts 200 public events a year, many in support of 
freelancers. My wife and I have no editorial control, deliberately. The aim is 
to discuss the world and to promote diverse opinions.

My views on Assange are tolerated by other members, but most disagree with me. 
Julian did stay at the club, but he paid his way and received no special 
favours. Journalists liked the access it gave them for interviews with him. He 
was more popular with the British press then, because he had stories that they 
wanted fromChelsea Manning <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chelsea-manning>
.

I will continue to support Julian publicly, because it’s right to do so. I 
believe that he has been treated unfairly under the law, and a society is 
judged by how it treats people that it doesn’t like. No one criticises a 
barrister for representing an unpopular client, yet you can get royally smeared 
for standing up for someone unpopular in the press.

Last week, the Syrian journalist Kholoud Waleed, winner of the Anna 
Politkovskaya award 
<http://www.voanews.com/content/syrian-journalist-wins-award-for-courageous-reporrting/2995882.html>
, stayed at the club. She is one of the bravest journalists reporting today on 
Syria and edits an underground newspaper there.

She was in London to speak about the exploitation of women 
<http://wow.southbankcentre.co.uk/whats-on/ending-violence-against-women-and-girls-2148>
, but the Turkish authorities wouldn’t let her back into Turkey where she was 
living. We, along with other charities, looked after her while things were 
sorted out. That’s what we do.

Kirchick thinks we sit around on sandbags, telling stories of derring-do. I 
imagine that insecure people who haven’t done much can feel intimidated by 
those that have had the initiative and courage to get out there.

‘People who have really seen war don’t talk about it’

Journalism’s underachievers might feel comforted by Kirchick’s view that we 
are all war bores surrounded by dim admirers. It may be true that an 
unbelievable amount of sex goes on in the club’s bedrooms, but he is wrong 
about the war stories. I have hardly heard any and don’t like to.

First, nobody wants to be embarrassed by someone on the next table with a 
better story. Also, people who have really seen war don’t talk about it. Those 
who have experienced it seek each other’s company, because it comforts them. 
Dwelling on it is for wannabes and never-will-bes.

We launched the Frontline Club for war correspondents and recruited their 
friends: aid workers, soldiers, diplomats, artists and non-conflict 
journalists. I have tried to promote the club more as a place for independent 
journalism than war journalism for a decade now.

I think the Frontline name can still intimidate some people from joining and 
that’s unfortunate. I hope that they will take a second look.

We are not perfect, but Frontline puts mission before profit. Kirchick and 
Young tried to mug me... More importantly, this self-indulgent premeditated 
slander makes mugs out of Spectator readers who expect to find truth and 
fairness in an article they paid for.

Perhaps Kirchick should take time off to study journalistic ethics, or leave 
the trade altogether. And Toby? He just needs a hug.

NB: Two phrases were cut from Smith’s piece prior to publication. When I put 
them to Kirchick, he contested that they were “inaccurate and defamatory.” 
Unlike his native United States, this country does not have a first amendment.
 