
“Listen to any good books on your holidays?” is a question that soon might not 
sound so weird. More and more of us are downloading audiobooks, thanks to the 
ubiquity of smartphones and tablets, and – no doubt – theSerial 
<http://serialpodcast.org> effect, as last year’s true-crime podcast reminded 
thousands of the joys of the spoken word.

The UK audio market rose by nearly 25% in 2014 – and has grown by an 
astonishing 170% in the past five years, making it the fastest growing market 
in publishing. TheBookseller <http://www.thebookseller.com> magazine has 
published an audio chart for the first time, with data from Audible, the 
Amazon-owned company that dominates the market for audiobook downloads. The 
inaugural top 20 list is led by print bestsellers, withGrey and The Girl on the 
Train up top, followed by some backlist titles (Bill Bryson’s A Short History 
of Nearly Everything is 13th) and a couple of Audible-produced sitcoms.

Notably absent from the download chart are any children’s titles. Children, or 
rather their parents, are still buying physical audiobooks: nine out of the top 
10 bestselling audiobook CDs are for kids, as are 36 out of the top 50.

I’m not surprised. Even the most tech-savvy children I know still have CD 
players in their bedrooms. CDs can be given as presents and collected on a 
shelf. They do not require an Audible subscription or an internet connection or 
any setting up of parental controls. They appeal equally to reluctant readers 
and bookworms.

Unfortunately, children’s audiobook CDs are both hard to get hold of, 
especially backlist titles, and exorbitantly expensive (Harry Potter and the 
Goblet of Fire, narrated by Stephen Fry, has an RRP of £62). It’s a shame. 
While the combination of smartphone, headphones and audio subscription may work 
for adults, CDs can be a simpler, safer, more sociable way for children to get 
into the listening habit. 
 