
This year is the 75th anniversary of Audrey Hepburn's birth. When she died in 
1993, the media was saturated with her image, as befits the passing of a 
Hollywood star. Ten years on, though, and Audrey is just as culturally present. 
She regularly tops polls of 'the world's most stylish woman' or 'the woman we 
most admire'. Young celebrities, from Darcey Bussell to Martine McCutcheon, 
cite her as their favourite actress. Just last month, Victoria Beckham admitted 
she has a virginal shrine at Beckingham Palace devoted to the star.

Hepburn's name is synonymous with a retro fashion for 1950s and 1960s styling, 
the popularity of lounge music and nightclubs, the pleasures of playing board 
games while sipping cocktails and dressing up, supper-club style. Her 
performance as Holly Golightly in Breakfast at Tiffany's (1961) is still the 
benchmark of youthful glamour (even though the original heroine of Truman 
Capote's novel was a call girl, and Hepburn was 32 when she played the role).

According to Jo Elvin, editor of Glamour magazine: 'Audrey Hepburn definitely 
remains a style icon - you only have to look at the spring/summer catwalks. 
Prada, in particular are showing that Capri/ Roman Holiday look that Audrey 
launched. She's definitely one of the stars who is periodically referred back 
to, one of those key women of the twentieth century - like Jane Fonda or 
Marilyn Monroe - who launched a style which has endured. Her image is 
clean-cut, gamine yet feminine, chic. When we do features at Glamour on how to 
achieve a "timeless" look, we often look back to Audrey.'

Interestingly, though, it is with 'ordinary women' that Hepburn resonates. 
When I was growing up, my mother always identified Audrey as the ideal 
femininity to which she aspired, and of course - though I resisted at the time 
- the idea must have taken root. In the course of researching my book, Growing 
up with Audrey Hepburn: Text, Audience, Resonance, interviewing women who 
admired Hepburn both at the time of her stardom and in more recent years, it 
emerged that Hepburn was still an important role model. While a woman who grew 
up in the 1950s saw her as 'modern because she was different... but still 
obtainable', a young woman growing up in the Eighties loved her because 'she's 
quite innocent, she's charming and elegant, but there is the fact that she 
could be that Holly Golightly sort of character, who's quite debauched in a 
way, and yet she carries it off'.

It seems incredible that young women in the 'Noughties' should still admire a 
star whose career was over before many of them were born. Hepburn is not 
readily associated with women's liberation - as is, say, Jane Fonda - and 
indeed arguments have frequently been made to the contrary. Her extreme 
slenderness led to suggestions of anorexia, and she is often cited, along with 
Twiggy, as being one of the first extremely thin role models (though it has to 
be said that for the young women who spoke to me, this was not perceived to be 
a problem - her slenderness was seen as 'just her').

Hepburn is not an especially comfortable inheritance. So why do we continue to 
choose such a beautiful burden? In the late-1950s, Hepburn's image meant 
something quite historically specific. In that post-war moment of class 
mobility and a burgeoning popular youth culture, she was able to represent 
modernity and liberation, while remaining respectably 'young-lady-like'. One 
interviewee, Liz, told me that 'she looked as if she thought'. There was an 
attendant sense that there was more to her than her 'look', her body.

Hepburn was boyish, and yet feminine simultaneously - and I don't think this 
is at all the same thing as androgynous, which is how she is often described. 
Bernie told me about wearing trousers as a girl in the Fifties - which enabled 
you to be 'boyish, but still a girl. I can remember us rolling these jeans up 
and sewing on gingham... so they'd be blue jeans, but the turn-ups would be 
pink and white gingham!'

Hepburn was 'different' at the moment of her Hollywood debut in Roman Holiday 
(1953), yet she appeared to be so natural, so 'herself' that her difference 
couldn't possibly be problematic. Many of the contradictions she seems to 
embody are expressed and resolved through the conjunction of her clothes and 
her body - her style. Take the look with which she is often associated - the 
'dancer's black' of slim black trousers, flat ballet-style pumps and a fine 
black jersey as seen in Sabrina (1954) and Funny Face (1957). At that moment, 
trousers were still not widely considered appropriate everyday wear for women, 
but they did allow ease of movement.

Liz told me that she loved Hepburn because, like Natalie Wood, she had short 
hair, and she wore 'little flat shoes', when girls of Liz's age, working in an 
office, were supposed to wear stilettos. Short was modern and easy to care for 
- lots of working-class girls didn't have hairdryers in the Fifties. Hepburn's 
silhouette in the Sabrina ensemble is sleek, and she seems ready for action, 
free. At the same time, though, the black jersey she wears has a deep 'V' back, 
and the outfit emphasises her delicate curves - it is modern, but just 'girly 
enough' (though notably in the film, Hepburn's Sabrina feels too underdressed 
to go out to dinner with Humphrey Bogart and cooks for them both in his 
Manhattan office).

Further, her body was a possible body for young women in the Fifties, both 
physically (in terms of adolescent development) and socially. It was simply 
much more possible to walk down the high street in 1958 looking likeAudrey 
Hepburn <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audrey-hepburn> than Marilyn 
Monroe. 'There's no way we could walk around the streets like Monroe. You 
couldn't attain that! It wouldn't have been right, would it?' Bernie told me.

Hepburn's film roles play out Cinderella (Sabrina, Funny Face, My Fair Lady), 
Cinderella-in-reverse (Roman Holiday) or Cinderella already transformed 
(Breakfast at Tiffany's). This suggestion of a glamorous makeover gives us all 
hope - despite the fact that of course, Hepburn was always already the 
princess. On the one hand, Hepburn's clothes, on-screen and off, were designed 
almost exclusively by French couturier Hubert de Givenchy; but the simplicity 
of Givenchy's designs for Hepburn meant they could be copied easily through 
home dressmaking, or approximated cheaply on the high street with a bit of 
detective work.

Yet it is a complex heritage that we take from Hepburn: glamour with an 
undercurrent of sadness. Her roles have an underlying wistfulness, or a hint of 
trouble - and this is true of the main romantic comedies of her career as well 
as powerful performances in The Nun's Story (1959), The Unforgiven (1959), The 
Children's Hour (1961), with its undercurrent of lesbianism, or Wait Until Dark 
(1967), where she plays a blind girl.

The romantic d√©nouements of so many of her films seem temporary and fragile, 
as does she. Often, her characters are left uncertain of their position - in 
relation to their men, their families, their class and society in general - and 
one is left with the sneaking suspicion that she will take flight again after 
the movie ends. Women I interviewed talked of 'feeling sorry' for Audrey. She 
is often described as looking like a cat or a faun; Lucy, one of the younger 
women who contributed to the book, told me: 'She's so little - well, she's not, 
she's probably very tall, isn't she, but she looks like she needs looking 
after.'

Perhaps we want to be like Hepburn, and take care of her - and this seems to 
speak profoundly to the complexity of our position as 'post-feminist' women who 
can, apparently, 'have it all'. The one certainty with which we are left, 
though, is that of her 'look', and this is perhaps not as regressive as it 
might seem. French philosopher Roland Barthes once famously described Audrey 
Hepburn's face as 'an event', but even if this is partly where her identity 
lies there is always more to come, a depth beneath the image.

If we think about her career in relation to the popular history of feminism - 
broadly the Fifties and early Sixties as 'pre-feminist', the late Sixties and 
Seventies as 'feminist', and the period since then 'post-feminist', it is 
revealing that as Hepburn's popularity waned in the 'feminist' period and was 
revived in the 'post-feminist'. What seems to appeal about Hepburn for young 
women today is not very different from what appealed in the Fifties. We yearn 
for a time of glamorous dressing up, but what is more important is the way in 
which, as a star, Hepburn seemed able to combine femininity and strength - in 
other words, to be 'a strong, independent woman with a man', as one interviewee 
described her. Furthermore she was 'a woman's star'. Never overtly constructed 
as 'sexy' like Bardot or Monroe: she was beautiful, but cerebral. The 
description of Hepburn which came up repeatedly was 'classy, not sexy'.

Even though her films have little to say directly about the difficulties of 
managing work, families and relationships, the tensions in her image still 
resonate in a new historical moment. The Hepburn look is aspirational on more 
than the obvious level. Many women talked about being inspired by Hepburn when 
it came to choosing their wedding dress - that outfit which traditionally marks 
the moment of transition form girl to womanhood. For her Sixties wedding, Janet 
wore 'exactly the same sort of things that she wore... a pure silk, A-line 
shift dress, and a tiny hat with three satin roses in a line and swansdown over 
the top. I wore my hair up in curls around it, which is how she used to wear 
hers, at times'.

Many women also used the 'little black dress' or the 'dancer's black' outfit 
as a way of making them feel glamorous, yet appropriate - for difficult or 
unfamiliar situations: a trip to the theatre with a new boss or a university 
ball in the Sixties, a family party in the Eighties. These are real-life 
Cinderella stories, bound up with dress and class. Hepburn once said that 
Givenchy's designs for her made her feel safe - that they gave her courage to 
be - and lots of us recognise that feeling.

As possible as it is to recreate her dress style, there is still an underlying 
sense of frustration about ever achieving a similar elegance. But then this is 
the nature of celebrity. Stars must be both ordinary and special, attainable 
but of another world. That, it seems to me, is absolutely the appeal of 
Hepburn. We know she's not 'real', but we don't mind. As Holly Golightly is 
described by her agent in Breakfast at Tiffany's: 'She's a phoney, but she's a 
real phoney.'

¬∑ Rachel Moseley's Growing Up with Audrey Hepburn: Text, Audience, Resonance 
is published by Manchester University Press. The Audrey Hepburn season runs 
until 24 March at the NFT, South Bank, London SE1. Box Office: 020 7928 3232;
www.bfi.org.uk/nft <http://www.bfi.org.uk/nft>
 