
So this is what Oscar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars>-bait looks 
like in 2014: a cast of dozens, playing an extended family with more 
disinterred horrors than Night Of The Living Dead and any five Tennessee 
Williams potboilers combined, on fire, in a claustrophobic rural Oklahoma 
farmhouse; meaty parts for a slew of great actors, the majority of the good 
ones for women of a certain age, and an evenly democratic distribution of 
volcanic outbursts for pretty much everyone from actor-playwright and adapter 
Tracy Letts, last seen playing the creepy incoming CIA chief Lockhart on 
Homeland.August: Osage County 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156238/august> comes from a 
well-regarded play, which is always deemed a leg-up come Oscar time, and it's 
in the firm, safe, scissory hands of theWeinstein brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harvey-weinstein>, who have delivered no end 
of dogs into the Best Picture category over the years.

Said extended family convenes back home to aid poisonous matriarch and 
champion pillheadMeryl Streep <https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep> 
after their father (Sam Shepard) kills himself. Three daughters (Julia Roberts, 
Julianne Nicholson and Juliette Lewis), Roberts's soon-to-be ex-husband (Ewan 
McGregor, looking slightly dazed), and Lewis's creepy Floridian fiance (Dermot 
Mulroney) soon crowd the house, and verily, their melodramas cannot be 
contained by bricks and mortar alone. Now, I'm vouchsafed that this all worked 
very well on stage: certainly, few can beat Letts for venomous, viciously 
biting dialogue, and no company in America workshops a play into real, 
breathing life better than Chicago's Steppenwolf. And it's not fair to blame 
the actors for the excess onscreen. If you culled the cast and the earthshaking 
revelations by about 50%, it would breathe a lot more easily as cinema. One 
really has to fight for a clear view of some very fine performances.

Meryl, half slurring from her meds and half an emotional septic-tank explosion 
waiting to happen, is a magician who can cow three generations with one beady 
eyebrow, but we already knew that. The revelations come mainly at the fringes 
of all the heat and light: stay-at-home single daughter Julianne Nicholson, 
fast becoming one of my favourite performers; and, as Meryl's sister, the 
incomparable Margo Martindale (ditto: I cannot wait untilThe Americans  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-americans>returns). Benedict 
Cumberbatch <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch>, with 
that oddly anachronistic 1914 face of his, and miscast in a tricky weakling 
role, somehow gamely snags the loveliest moment, a sweetly crooned love song to 
Nicholson, thunderously curtailed by his brutally overbearing mother 
Martindale. The thespian achievements here are indubitable and impressive, yet 
the pleasures are somehow so fleeting, because thunder is never quite as 
impressive when it's right next to more thunder. Sometimes you can just have 
too much prestige, and choke on it.

• Interview: Tracy Letts
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/16/august-osage-county-always-ended-one-way>
• Interview: Juliette Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/15/juliette-lewis-august-osage-county>
 