
Australia has used a summit on reducing greenhouse gas emissions to lobby the 
US energy minister in support of the development of one of the world’s largest 
coalmines.

The move, by the Australian environment and energy minister, Josh Frydenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/josh-frydenberg>, at the Marrekech 
meeting, won Australia the “fossil of the day” award, announced daily by the 
Climate Action Network to the countries that perform the worst at UN climate 
talks.

Awarding the fossil of the day award, the activists said: “Australia ratified 
the Paris agreement last Friday, so lobbying for coal expansion at the United 
Nations climate negotiations is an ugly, ugly thing to be doing. Shape up, 
Australia.”

Ian the Climate Denialist Potato in Marrakech: the truth about fossil fuel 
lobbyists | First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/ian-the-climate-denialist-potato-in-marrakech-the-truth-about-fossil-fuel-lobbyists>
Frydenberg said he raised concerns with the US energy secretary, Ernest Moniz, 
that Moniz’s Democratic party colleagues were associated with US activists who 
were trying to stop Adani’sCarmichael coalmine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/carmichael-coalmine> in Australia.

If the Carmichael mine goes ahead, it would be the biggest coalmine in 
Australia and one of the biggest in the world. The annual emissions from 
burning the coal it produceswould be similar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/12/coal-from-carmichael-mine-will-create-more-annual-emissions-than-new-york>
 to that of the whole of Malaysia or Austria and more than New York City.

In October it was revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/24/australian-environment-group-wikileaks-democrat-email-release-responds-attacks>
 that among the funders of one low-profile Australian activist group, the 
Sunrise Project, was the US-based charitable trust, the Sandler Foundation.

The Sunrise Project had been involved in campaigns to try to stop Adani’s 
Carmichael coalmine and port expansions going ahead.

The revelations came from hacked emails of Hillary Clinton’s campaign 
chairman, John Podesta, released by Wikileaks. They show Podesta was made aware 
of some of the Sunrise Project’s activities.

The leaked emails reignited a campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/04/environmental-groups-could-lose-charity-status-for-encouraging-civil-disobedience>
 against the charitable status of environment groups.

A report in the Australian newspaper said: “Australia is a key target in a 
global, no-holds-barred war against coal which has set a priority of shutting 
Adani out of Queensland.”

The paper said in an editorial: “We should decide what mining projects are 
opened up in this country and the circumstances in which they open.

“Such authority rests with Australia’s democratically elected representatives 
and established government processes. It does not belong with overseas 
governments (including prospective US presidents or their staff), 
self-appointed meddling international activists or local vigilante ‘lawfare’ 
litigants funded by activists.”

Frydenberg took up this issue directly with Moniz, the Australian reported 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/mining-energy/new-coal-technology-can-halve-emissions-miners/news-story/1b76481a1f12dcc4cda16adbe3975ed5>
.

A spokesperson for Frydenberg told Guardian Australia: “The issue was raised 
by Mr Frydenberg with Mr Moniz. Mr Frydenberg noted the issue raised concerns 
in Australia and reiterated that Australia had a very effective environmental 
approvals process and that a large amount of conditions we’re attached to the 
Adani mine approval.”

Marrakech climate talks: US accepts petition calling for fossil fuel lobbyists 
to be excluded
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/16/marrakech-climate-talks-us-accepts-petition-calling-for-fossil-fuel-lobbyists-to-be-excluded>
After the email leaks in October, head of the Sunrise Project, John Hepburn 
told Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/24/australian-environment-group-wikileaks-democrat-email-release-responds-attacks>
 he was surprised the emails were considered newsworthy and said the Australian 
and the Minerals Council of Australia were acting hypocritically.

“They’re saying that we need to guard our sovereignty from environmental 
organisations when the mining in Australia is 80% foreign-owned,” he said. 
“They put tens, if not hundreds, of millions of dollars into a massive public 
relations machine that is sustained and ongoing over time. They have incredible 
influence and revolving doors between the highest levels of politics and their 
lobby groups.

“And international foreign-owned mining companies dropped $20m into a campaign 
to prevent a new tax on their industry and, in doing so, destabilised a prime 
minister. And that is the big issue in terms of national sovereignty.”
 