
The Australian Bureau of Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/bureau-of-statistics-says-economic-reports-could-be-axed-without-extra-funding>
 has told staff it will be cutting up to 150 jobs, after government cuts to its 
budget.

In an email to staff, the ABS said it would be accepting applications for 
voluntary redundancy until 18 November, to take effect before 9 March 2017.

“The ABS’s preference is for the [leaving] date to occur as early as possible 
but this can be negotiated,” ABS management said in a document sent to staff.

In a statement a spokeswoman for the ABS said the staff cuts were “part of a 
planned approach to transform its workforce for the future”.

The Community and Public Sector Union, which represents public service 
workers, blamed the “Turnbull government’s shortsighted cuts to ongoing 
funding” for the job losses.

Lesson of #CensusFail: continued funding cuts mean agencies can’t do their job 
| Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/aug/11/lesson-of-censusfail-continued-funding-cuts-mean-agencies-cant-do-their-job>
The CPSU’s deputy national secretary, Melissa Donnelly, said: “The ABS is an 
absolutely critical national institution. Its data is a cornerstone not just of 
effective government but is also extremely valuable to the private sector.”

Donnelly said the CPSU was calling on the government to restore funding to the 
ABS and resource it properly.

Donnelly said the staffing levels of the ABS had been shrinking even before 
this large cut. In 2010-11 the ABS had an average of 3,030 staff, a number that 
dropped to 2,871 in 2015-16.

“There were significant problems around the recent census and the job cuts 
undoubtedly contributed to this,” Donnelly said.

The ABS has had its budget cut under several governments. The ALP, under Kevin 
Rudd, cut its budget in 2008,resulting in the ABS halting its job vacancy survey
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/aug/11/lesson-of-censusfail-continued-funding-cuts-mean-agencies-cant-do-their-job>
 just as the global financial crisis was about to hit the Australian economy.

The Abbott government further cut the ABS budget in 2014 and the Turnbull 
government continued the ongoing “efficiency dividends”, which have been 
eroding the organisation’s budget.

Donnelly said: “We are seriously concerned that the ABS is continually being 
forced to make decisions solely based on its meagre budget. The bureau needs 
adequate funding to provide robust, accurate data and that’s clearly not 
currently the case.

“These job cuts have been announced just weeks after the ABS admitted budget 
pressures were also forcing it to consider scaling back its collection of 
retail and housing data and scrapping altogether statistics ranging from prison 
and agricultural data to car sales and lending finance.”

The ABS spokeswoman said: “With the government’s $257m investment to modernise 
the ABS’s ageing IT systems and processes, the agency will achieve efficiencies 
and require fewer staff in coming years. As the ABS shifts from manual 
processes and identifies efficiencies, staff with skills that are not essential 
for the future [including staff in roles that are no longer required] may apply 
for packages.”
 