
Most of Australia <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/australia> can expect a 
hotter-than-average December, with temperatures being forced up by both 
regional climate patterns and a global upwards trend.

Temperatures were forecast to peak between 29C and 34C on Thursday, the first 
day of summer, in all states bar Victoria and Tasmania.Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/melbourne> and Hobart could look forward 
to highs of 21C and 24C.


Queensland would be the worst affected, with Friday expected to be Brisbane’s 
hottest December day in 15 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/queensland-braces-for-hottest-december-day-in-15-years>
 peaking at 38C.

Queensland braces for hottest December day in 15 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/30/queensland-braces-for-hottest-december-day-in-15-years>
Severe heatwave conditions forecast in southern and central parts of the state 
were forecast to continue into early next week. The Bureau of Meteorology (BoM) 
warned residents to be mindful of the impact of heat stress.

There were also low- to severe-intensity heatwave conditions across northern 
Western Australia and the Top End of theNorthern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory>.

Almost all of Australia could expect drier-than-average conditions in 
December, with a 70 to 80% chance of below-average rainfall across most of the 
eastern part of the country.


Above-average temperatures were forecast for days and nights across eastern 
and northern Australia for the entire summer through to February.

The higher-than-usual pressures in the short term were the result of a climate 
driver known as the Southern Annular Mode, typically associated with reduced 
rainfall and higher temperatures.

It was forcing wind systems further north than normal, holding monsoon weather 
at bay while moving air far across the continent.


“It acts a bit like a wall that blocks the influence of the tropical wet 
season,” said Andrew Watkins, the acting head of climate monitoring and 
prediction at BoM.

The combination has resulted in severe fire danger for parts of NSW, Queensland
 <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>, WA and ACT, and that 
risk would persist with the drier and hotter conditions over the summer.

The second-wettest winter on record had encouraged grass growth, prompting 
concerns about fast-running grass fires, particularly on the urban fringe, said 
Watkins.

The Bushfire and Natural Hazards Cooperative Research Centre said the fire 
risk was predominately in grassland areas of Victoria and NSW.

Cyclone season is not set to begin in earnest until January, but Watkins said 
an average to above-average season – typically 11 cyclones – was forecast. Last 
season there were only three, a record low, because of an “exceptionally 
strong” El Niño.

Global warming continues; 2016 will be the hottest year ever recorded | John 
Abraham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/oct/21/global-warming-continues-2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-ever-recorded>
“We don’t want people to be complacent because not much happened last year ... 
It was not typical by any means.”

BoM’s seasonal outlook for December to February 
<http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/outlooks/#/overview/summary/> also warned that 
“Australian climate patterns were being influenced by the long-term increasing 
trend in global air and ocean temperatures”.

This year has already been declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/oct/21/global-warming-continues-2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-ever-recorded>
 the hottest ever recorded.

Watkins said it was difficult to break down the impact of climate change on 
weather in Australia compared with local patterns and drivers.

“The reality is climate change is playing a role in all of our weather and 
climate these days,” he said.
 