
Contrasting centuries from David Warner and Matt Renshaw at the SCG have 
piloted Australia to an imposing total of 365-3 at stumps on day one of the 
third Test against Pakistan. Warner raced to three figures in just 78 
deliveries and 118 minutes, exposing the tourists in an unprecedented pre-lunch 
ton on Tuesday.

The dashing opener became just the fifth batsman in the 140-year history of 
Test cricket to celebrate a hundred in the first session of a game. That 
accomplished list includes Don Bradman, like so many in the sport, but prior to 
Warner nobody had ever achieved the fabled feat in Australia.

The rarest of all: David Warner's century before lunch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/03/the-rarest-of-all-david-warners-century-before-lunch>
Renshaw adopted a decidedly different approach, taking 201 balls and three 
sessions to compile his maiden Test hundred at age 20. Bradman is one of six 
Australian Test batsmen to ton up at a younger age. The burly youngster 
switched gears after tea, almost doubling his score by adding 84 runs in the 
session to finish day one on 167 not out.

Renshaw was assessed for concussion and needed a new helmet after a nasty 
bouncer blow from Mohammad Amir on 91. He batted on to better Warner’s 113 in 
the 71st over of the innings, further demoralising the tourists by successfully 
reviewing an incorrect lbw decision then seeing off the second new ball with 
vigour.

The new-look opening combination shared a 151-run stand, giving the hosts an 
ideal platform to push for a 3-0 series sweep despite the cheap dismissals of 
Usman Khawaja (13) and Steve Smith (24). Renshaw scored a single run in the 
same time it took his vice-captain to score 38 of them, while the youngest 
member of the side was on 21 when Warner was 100.

Warner celebrated wildly in the final over before the meal break, having 
scampered back for a third run to complete his 18th Test ton. “I wasn’t aware 
about the stats,” Warner said of the national first he achieved in the 410th 
Test hosted by Australia since 1877. Warner was in his element after Smith won 
the toss, feasting on anything short or wide. There was plenty of both.

The visitors were also guilty of sloppy fielding. The most cringe-worthy 
culprit was captain Misbah-ul-Haq, who gifted Warner one of his 17 boundaries 
in the third over when the ball passed between his legs. Khawaja was dropped on 
three by Babar Azam but only added 10 runs after the reprieve, and keeper 
Sarfraz Ahmed missed a stumping when Peter Handscomb was on nine. Handscomb 
finished 40 not out.
 