
The Australian Bureau of Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-bureau-of-statistics> 
has blamed service provider IBM for the disruption that forced the 2016 online 
census system to be shut down for nearly 48 hours last month, in its submission 
to a Senate inquiry.

The ABS chief statistician, David Kalisch, says IBM did not properly prepare 
for the risk of a distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack that triggered 
the embarrassing shutdown.

The bureau was forced to apologise last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/09/the-great-australian-census-fail-of-2016-website-crashes-under-load>
 after websites crashed during peak time on census night. At the time, Kalisch 
said the ABS the site had received a sequence of denial of service attacks 
emanating from overseas.

Census 2016: ABS says deliberate attacks were to blame for website crashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/09/the-great-australian-census-fail-of-2016-website-crashes-under-load>
A Senate inquiry was later established to investigate what went wrong.

In his submission to the inquiry – published on the Senate website on Friday 
afternoon but later removed without warning (you can access it here 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B6fRXFvYdlVKLVRPNF94WUIyNXc/view>) – Kalisch 
lays the blame squarely on IBM.

He says IBM had been contracted to host the online census system, and the 
contract required it to deliver a risk management plan which included the 
denial of services as a risk that would be mitigated by IBM.

Kalisch says during 2016, ABS sought and received assurances from IBM about 
“operational preparedness and resilience to DDoS attacks,” and ABS did not 
independently test the DDoS protections IBM was contracted to put in place 
because it believed it had received reasonable assurances from the service 
provider.

“The online Census system was hosted by IBM under contract to the ABS and the 
DDoS attack should not have been able to disrupt the system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/11/census-2016-malcolm-turnbull-shifts-blame-to-ibm-for-predictable-attack>
,” Kalish says in his submission.


Australian census 2016: complaints as people asked to fill out forms again
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/02/australian-census-2016-complaints-as-people-asked-to-fill-out-forms-again>
“Despite extensive planning and preparation by the ABS for the 2016 Census 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/census> this risk was not 
adequately addressed by IBM and the ABS will be more comprehensive in its 
management of risk in the future.”

Kalisch also says that over the last 15 years, ABS resources have generally 
been reducing.


“Its staff numbers have fallen by 14% and the budget appropriation (in real 
terms) has also fallen by 14%,” the submission says.

“In contrast, the demands on the ABS to properly measure the economy, society 
and the environment, and respond to the requirements of governments, has 
increased and become more complex.”

Earlier this month, some Australians who completed the 2016 census were asked 
to resubmit the form, andthe ABS said it was unable to explain the error 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/02/australian-census-2016-complaints-as-people-asked-to-fill-out-forms-again>
.
 