
There is more than a little yellow peril in the latest political donations 
debate, which began with Labor senatorSam Dastyari’s acceptance of payments 
from companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/dastyaris-donations-reveal-a-bigger-story-of-links-and-largesse>
, some of which had links to the Chinese government.

Distractions abound but here is the bottom line. Never mind race. Everyone 
donates for a reason. Often that reason is access or influence. If we all agree 
that undue influence over the political system is a bad thing, change needs to 
happen.

But how hard is it really? Three professors of law, Graeme Orr of the 
University of Queensland, Anne Twomey of the University of Sydney and George 
Williams of the University of New South Wales provided their opinions.

Dastyari affair: goodbye, second-chance Sam. But we really need donation 
reform | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/dastyari-affair-goodbye-second-chance-sam-but-we-really-need-donation-reform>
What are the limitations?

The NSW Liberal government tried to ban donations from all but individuals on 
the electoral roll (an option still favoured by Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/malcolm-turnbull-says-ideally-donations-should-be-limited-to-australian-voters>
). This was struck down in the NSW Unions case as constitutionally invalid by 
the high court in 2013 on the basis it breached the implied freedom of 
political communication in the constitution.


Twomey says the judges took the view that there were many in the community who 
are not electors, but who are governed and affected by the decisions of 
government.

“[The view was] they have a legitimate interest in governmental action and the 
direction of its policy and may seek to influence the outcome of elections,” 
Twomey said.

“This includes unions and corporations. Any ban at the commonwealth level 
would face the same constitutional problems (unless the high court were to 
change its approach).”

But in a later case 
<https://theconversation.com/in-mccloy-case-high-court-finally-embraces-political-equality-ahead-of-political-freedom-48746>
, the high court upheld the validity of the NSW ban on political donations by 
property developers and the imposition of caps upon political donations.

“This tells us that where there is a legitimate reason to do so (for example a 
serious risk of corruption), the parliament may enact laws to ban donations 
from particular groups,” Twomey said.

“Hence, a ban on foreign donations may be permissible, if it is seen as being 
supported by a legitimate concern about foreign influence over Australian 
elections.”


While the Coalition has resisted any donations reform thus far, Labor has 
called for a ban on foreign donors, so let’s start there.

Foreigner money flows 

There is an oft-quoted claim – I have reported it in the past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/05/sam-dastyari-donation-row-coalition-steps-up-attack-on-bill-shorten>
 – that66% of the world 
<http://www.idea.int/political-finance/bans-and-limits-on-private-income.cfm> 
bans all foreign donations. But Orr says many countries included in that 66% 
regulate donations but do not have an outright ban.


“For example, France only bans contributions from foreign states or foreign 
parties,” Orr said. “Sweden’s rule just criminalises money from foreign states 
attempting influence. Canada explicitly permits permanent residents to donate.”

So the world is not at one on this.

But while we recently discovered UK and American investors are the biggest 
buyers of our agricultural land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/uk-and-us-dwarf-china-as-top-foreign-investors-in-australian-agricultural-land>
 – well ahead of China – there is no telling who are the top 10 foreign donors 
to Australian political parties because we do not classify them. Foreign and 
domestic donations are treated the same.

That is, parties and donors have to declare but all we see is a name or 
company name, an address and a phone number.

This creates an extraordinary opaqueness in the financial disclosure list, 
which is broad but shallow. Transparency would be a start.

Orr says while the law reaches outside our borders to limit activity affecting 
Australia, if a foreigner breaches such a law, enforcement is difficult.

He believes banning foreigners is like banning property developers. “It’s too 
piecemeal,” Orr says. “Comprehensive reform would cap donations and 
expenditure.”

It’s all about the domestic donation system

While the Coalition has argued the Dastyari case is about payment rather than 
a donation, a number of Coalition MPs (transport minister Darren Chester, trade 
minister Steve Ciobo and Craig Kelly) have been open to the Turnbull option to 
ban all donations from anyone other than on the electoral roll.

But after the two court cases, is it constitutionally possible? 

Williams says no.


“This is ruled out by the 2013 high court decision in the Unions NSW case,” he 
said.

Orr says “maybe”.

“I believe the court would uphold a Canadian model where only citizens and 
permanent residents can donate and then subject to caps,” Orr said.

“Without caps, a [Gina] Rinehart or [Clive] Palmer could wield even more 
influence.”

Third parties or the GetUp clause

Turnbull also wants to rein in third-party activists like GetUp. In answer, 
Liberal senator Cory Bernardi has startedAustralian Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/06/cory-bernardi-establishes-rightwing-movement-australian-conservatives>
.He claims more than 50,000 potential foot soldiers have registered online 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/cory-bernardis-australian-conservatives-group-signs-up-50000-people-online-20160801-gqin07.html>
 but his effect on the next election remains unclear. Other third-party 
campaigning examples include theunions’ campaign against WorkChoices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/27/coalition-hiding-plans-for-industrial-relations-reform-say-unions>
, themining industry’s against the mining tax 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2012-04-13/miners-launch-ads-amid-fear-of-losing-tax-concessions/3947588>
, or theclubs’ campaign against poker machine reform. 
<https://theconversation.com/paying-the-piper-and-calling-the-tune-following-clubsnsws-political-donations-60639>

Williams says while a ban on third parties would probably not work, limiting 
their contributions is possible.

“The key here is to bring about a regime that creates a fair and level playing 
field,” Williams said. “To ban third parties from participating in this way in 
the process would likely be invalid, but on the other hand appropriate limits 
and caps could be imposed.”

Twomey also says the high court would be likely to strike down laws banning 
third parties from campaigning.

“However, placing caps on their campaign expenditure would probably be valid, 
as long as the caps were not so low that they could not reasonably participate 
in political communication,” said Twomey.

Orr says regulating “third parties” is only fair, even though it is complex.

“But it is constitutionally OK provided the caps are reasonable and the 
regulated ‘election period’ is not too broad,” Orr said.

Abbott joins call for ban on political donations from unions and corporations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/abbott-joins-call-for-ban-on-donations-from-unions-and-corporations>
“This ‘period’ is harder to fix without a fixed election date nationally but 
the UK manages it.”

Put a lid on it

If there is a clear consensus on political donations, it is around limits on 
funding rather than outright bans.

Twomey says upholding caps on donations is important because “it is hard to 
acquire influence if your donation is only as valuable as that of hundreds or 
thousands of others”.

“One effective way of lessening or eliminating undue influence through 
donations is by capping it at a relatively low level ($5,000 in NSW) so that 
the donation of a large company or union of $5,000 is worth the same as the 
donation of any individual or small business of $5,000,” Twomey says.

Williams says for this complex area of law, there is a clear way through which 
will produce an effective and legally viable regime to regulate political 
donations.

“The answer is not to ban corporate and union donors, but to limit donations 
from all sources to a reasonable level, say $5,000,” Williams said.

The answer is not to ban corporate and union donors, but to limit donations 
from all sources to a reasonable level
George Williams 
“This would limit the ability of any donor to exercise undue influence. It is 
possible to ban certain donors, but only where it can be shown that there is a 
danger that donations from that source may corrupt or otherwise damage the 
political process.”

Facts, says Orr, more facts and basic principles.

“Most of all, we need a discussion of principles – the need to balance 
equality, integrity and liberty whilst resourcing politics,” says Orr.

“And then modelling of the effect on different sides of politics, and of the 
need for extra public funding. The freedom of association of Labor/unions is a 
big hurdle for bipartisan reform here. And while public funding is ‘clean’ 
money, taxpayers have to be convinced the medicine is needed.”
 