
The two rivals in the race for the Austrian presidency have traded allegations 
of espionage, economic incompetence and “spreading lies” in the final TV debate 
before Sunday’s rerun of a run-off vote.

Polls show the rightwing populist Norbert Hofer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/norbert-hofer-austria-presidential-hopeful-rightwing>
 and Green-backed Alexander Van der Bellen neck and neck for the vote.

A victory for the Freedom party candidate, Hofer, would make him the first 
far-right head of state in the European Union since the second world war. Van 
der Bellen narrowly won the original vote in May, butit was annulled because of 
irregularities in the counting process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/austrian-presidential-election-result-overturned-and-must-be-held-again-hofer-van-der-bellen>
.

Austria divided as far-right and Green-backed candidates face election rerun
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/tyrolian-villages-divided-as-austria-goes-back-to-the-polls>
In a tetchy and bad-tempered debate on Thursday, Hofer suggested his liberal 
rival would struggle to get an audience with the US president-elect, Donald 
Trump. “I don’t think that Mr Trump would invite you,” Hofer taunted the 
retired economics professor, boasting of strong diplomatic ties to both the 
White House and the Kremlin and calling for an end to sanctions against Russia.

According to a Gallup poll, the majority of Austrians believe Trump’s success 
is more likely to help Hofer. In a survey of 800 Austrians, 53% believed 
Trump’s shock victory would play in favour of the Freedom party candidate.

Van der Bellen on Thursday accused Hofer’s party of slandering his late 
father, whom a member of the Freedom party accused of having harboured 
sympathies for the Nazis.

Holding up a photograph of his father, a Russian national with Dutch roots who 
fled his home country during the 1917 October revolution, Van der Bellen said 
he would defend his father since he was no longer able to do so in person.

Historians have not found any credible evidence for the Freedom party’s 
allegations.

Hofer also accused Van der Bellen of having been a communist and a Stasi spy. 
“I get it, you were nothing,” Hofer said. “You’re lying again!” Van der Bellen 
replied. After Hofer accused him of having been a spy, Van der Bellen said: 
“This is the meanest thing I’ve experienced in a long time ... This is 
ridiculous.”

Hofer said Van der Bellen had lied about his stance on civil service and 
conscription laws as well as Austria’s neutrality. “This is another falsehood,” 
Hofer said.
 