
The Labor frontbencher Anthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> has suggested 
borrowing and spending on new productive infrastructure to stimulate the 
economy as it transitions and to drive future growth.

In a speech on Tuesday night to the Master Builders Association, Albanese, who 
is shadow minister for infrastructure, quotes arguments from both the former 
and current governor of the Reserve Bank in favour of borrowing to fund 
productive infrastructure.

Reserve Bank governor warns against higher level of household debt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/15/reserve-bank-governor-warns-against-higher-level-of-household-debt>
The Labor frontbencher says both Glenn Stevens, the outgoing RBA governor, and 
the current governor, Philip Lowe have “stressed that the government should 
consider borrowing to fund good infrastructure projects that provide a solid 
public benefit in returns for the investment”.

Lowe said last week that the government’s efforts to achieve fiscal 
consolidationshould not preclude spending on infrastructure 
<http://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2016/sp-gov-2016-11-15.html>.

The RBA governor said the government needed to achieve a better balance 
between recurrent spending and revenue, but infrastructure spending, when 
backed by a solid business case, “can provide support for the economy and can 
help generate the productive assets that a prosperous economy needs”.

“Done well, infrastructure spending is not inconsistent with establishing a 
better balance between recurrent spending and revenue,” Lowe said in Melbourne 
last week.

Albanese said on Tuesday the federal government needed to lift infrastructure 
investment across the country for two reasons.

“The first is that if we choose the right projects – those that provide a 
return to the public – we can extract productivity gains that will allow us to 
get more out of existing resources,” the shadow infrastructure minister said.

“Those gains will also set up new waves of growth into the future, but there 
is also a short-term imperative.

“You don’t create new industries overnight. During this period of economic 
transition, we must seek to maintain economic activity and sustain employment – 
government projects will do just that.”

Albanese’s message to the MBA followed a discussion in Canberra earlier on 
Tuesday abouthow super funds could invest their half a trillion dollars of 
capital to boost Australia’s depleted infrastructure stock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/22/coalition-to-reintroduce-superannuation-bill-after-review-disappears-into-black-hole>
.

At the Industry Super Australia conference Chris Richardson, from Deloitte 
Access Economics, said the cost of capital had never been lower in recorded 
human history, so governments ought to be taking the “stunning extra 
opportunity” to do so.

Infrastructure spending should be based on need, not cheap money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/22/infrastructure-spending-should-be-based-on-need-not-cheap-money>
“[But] when the GFC hit NSW had a mini budget, [and] it cut back its capital 
spending,” he said. “So did New Jersey in the US. It’s silly stuff.”

“We need budget repair around the day-to-day stuff, but we also need to be 
doing our capital budget, our investment in infrastructure, better than we have 
been.”

Ross Garnaut, one of Australia’s most respected economists, told the Industry 
Super conference that businesses were not investing in infrastructure because 
of the record-low rate of productivity growth.

He said productivity growth in all developed countries was the slowest it had 
been since the beginning of the industrial revolution.

“That reduces business investment because if there isn’t innovation the 
incentive to put in new capital stock is falling. So we’ve got historically low 
business investment in all the developed countries, so that’s reducing demand 
for capital.”
 