
Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> has decisively rejected 
the possibility of the EU getting its first far-right head of state, instead 
electing a former leader of the Green party who said he would be an 
“open-minded, liberal-minded and above all a pro-European president”.

Alexander Van der Bellen, who ran as an independent, increased his lead over 
the far-right Freedom party candidate, Norbert Hofer, by a considerable margin 
from the original vote in May, which wasannulled by the constitutional court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/austrian-presidential-election-result-overturned-and-must-be-held-again-hofer-van-der-bellen>
 due to voting irregularities.

Far-right concedes defeat in Austrian presidential election – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/04/italian-referendum-and-austrian-presidential-election-live>
Hofer conceded his defeat within less than half an hour of the first exit 
polls on Sunday, writing on Facebook: “I congratulate Alexander Van der Bellen 
for his success and ask all Austrians to pull together and work together.” The 
45-year-old, who said he was “endlessly sad” and “would have liked to look 
after Austria”, confirmed that he would like to run again for the presidency in 
six years’ time.

The Freedom party secretary, Herbert Kickl, who has acted as Hofer’s campaign 
manager, said: “The bottom line is it didn’t quite work out. In this case the 
establishment – which pitched in once again to block, to stonewall and to 
prevent renewal – has won.”

Speaking in front of international press at the end of the evening, a visibly 
emboldened Van der Bellen said the election had not just been a repeat, “but a 
new election after the world around us has changed” with the Brexit vote in 
June and Donald Trump’s win in November. Referring to the colours of the 
Austrian flag, he described the result as “a red-white-and-red signal of hope 
and change to all the capitals in Europe”.

Werner Kogler, a Green party politician, described the result as a “small 
global turning of the tide in these uncertain, not to say hysterical and even 
stupid times”.

The endorsement of the retired economics professor was particularly emphatic 
in urban areas, with all of Vienna’s 23 districts showing up in Van der 
Bellen’s green than Hofer’s blue at the end of the night.


In May, Van der Bellen had won the election by only 30,863 votes and most 
commentators had expected a similarly close result this time around, with some 
predicting that a final outcome would not be determined until as late as the 
middle of the week.


In the end, the outcome of the almost year-long election campaign was clear 
within 10 minutes of the last polls closing. According to the public 
broadcaster ORF’s first exit poll, Van der Bellen had gained 53.4% of the vote 
with over 60% of voting districts counted – too strong a lead to be turned 
around by Hofer, who had 46.6% of the vote. By 7pm local time with almost 100% 
counted, Van der Bellen was still on 53.3% – an improvement of 3% on the May 
vote. In Vienna 65% supported Van der Bellen and only 35% voted for Hofer.

At the run-off vote in May, 50.35% of the population voted for Van der Bellen 
and 49.65% for Hofer. The Austrian public defied predictions that cold 
temperatures and fatigue with almost a year of campaigning would stop many from 
casting their votes: voter turnout was 73.8%, up from 72.65% in May.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Ffar-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5569402705386563104914c218a1f68b1f8e4327%2F0_95_4781_2868%2F4781.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Austria%20rejects%20far-right%20candidate%20Norbert%20Hofer%20in%20presidential%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Ffar-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Austria%20rejects%20far-right%20candidate%20Norbert%20Hofer%20in%20presidential%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Ffar-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5569402705386563104914c218a1f68b1f8e4327%2F0_95_4781_2868%2F4781.jpg>
 Van der Bellen’s supporters celebrate in Vienna, one holding a sign that reads 
‘thank God’. Photograph: Roland Schlager/AFP/Getty Images 
After the first exit polls on Sunday evening, many politicians speculated that 
Britain’s vote to leave the European Union may have played a role in boosting 
Van der Bellen’s lead from May.

Hofer had promised to call a referendum on EU membership if the bloc of states 
took further steps towards integration, while also stating that he believed that
Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> was better off in the EU. 
Van der Bellen had run his second campaign on a decisively pro-European ticket, 
with posters proclaiming that a vote for him meant “no to Öxit”.

Victory for Van der Bellen and the left is a sigh of relief for Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/victory-for-van-der-bellen-and-the-left-is-a-sigh-of-relief-for-europe>
Anton Mahdalik, a Freedom party member of the Vienna city council, criticised 
former Ukip leader Nigel Farage for contributing to the party’s defeat after 
claiming on Fox News that Hofer would hold a referendum on Austria leaving the 
EU. “That didn’t help us, it hindered us,” he said, saying that an overwhelming 
majority of Austrians support EU membership.


Hofer himself described Farage’s comments as a “crass misjudgment”, adding 
that “it doesn’t fill me with joy when someone meddles from outside”.

Reinhold Lopatka, head of the parliamentary group of the centre-right ÖVP, 
speculated on Sunday night that fears about Austria’s EU membership would 
probably have played a role in winning Van der Bellen votes in regional 
districts, most of which profited from EU subsidies. According to an ORF poll, 
65% of Van der Bellen’s voters had cited his pro-EU attitudes as the main 
reason for rooting for the candidate.

Marine Le Pen, the leader of France’s Front National, took to Twitter to cheer 
on the Freedom party, which sits in the same party bloc in the European 
parliament as hers, saying “the next parliamentary votes will be those of our 
victory”. The Freedom party, lead by Heinz-Christian Strache, is currently 
leading polls for the parliamentary vote ahead of the Social Democrats.

Sigmar Gabriel, Germany’s deputy chancellor and the leader of the Social 
Democratic party, described the result as a “victory of reason over rightwing 
populism” and “a massive relief for the whole of Europe”.

Luxembourg’s foreign minister, Jean Asselborn, said: “After the Trump victory 
and the Brexit vote, Austria’s voters have shown that reason, tolerance and 
humanity are not foreign concepts for elections in the European Union. The 
result of the vote is good for Austria’s reputation and the values of the EU.”

More than 10,000 voting booths had opened across the country on a clear but 
cold day at 8am. The Freedom party candidate and his wife, Verena, had cast 
their votes in his home town of Pinkafeld in Burgenland, the eastern-most and 
least populous region ofAustria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria>. “I 
am calm and confident,” he told the press outside the voting booth.

Van der Bellen and his wife, Doris Schmidauer, voted at about 11am at a school 
in Vienna’s Mariahilf district.

In July this year Austria’s constitutional court had annulled the May result 
after an investigation revealed irregularities in the count of the vote in 
several constituencies. While the court had emphasised that there had been no 
evidence of the outcome of the election having been actively manipulated, the 
confirmed irregularities had affected a total of 77,926 votes that could have 
gone to either Hofer or Van der Bellen – enough, in theory, to change the 
outcome of the election.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Ffar-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c7dd2e61f7ffa586605ca384121d19cc8a50d8f%2F1452_851_1247_748%2F1247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Austria%20rejects%20far-right%20candidate%20Norbert%20Hofer%20in%20presidential%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Ffar-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Austria%20rejects%20far-right%20candidate%20Norbert%20Hofer%20in%20presidential%20election&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Ffar-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c7dd2e61f7ffa586605ca384121d19cc8a50d8f%2F1452_851_1247_748%2F1247.jpg>
 Alexander Van der Bellen leaves a polling station after voting on Sunday. 
Photograph: Joe Klamar/AFP/Getty Images 
With officials under clear instructions not to cut any corners to avoid 
another embarrassing recount, many experts had expected that a definitive 
result would not emerge until Monday, Tuesday, or possibly even Wednesday.

Austria’s presidency is neither an executive post, as it is in the USA, nor a 
purely representative role, as in Germany. Van der Bellen will not be able to 
propose laws, give directions to the cabinet, dismiss ministers or declare wars.

But if the presidency has in the past been above all a ceremonial role, it is 
because Van der Bellen’s predecessors have interpreted it that way. A 1929 
reform expanding the president’s role, which was in tune with the authoritarian 
attitudes prevalent at the time, was never corrected after 1945.

Concerns over a Hofer win had grown after the Freedom party politician had 
hinted at his eagerness to explore the role’s limits, saying: “You will be 
surprised by what can be done [by a president].”

A win for Hofer would have also emboldened Geert Wilders’ Freedom party, which 
sits in the same far-right bloc in the European parliament as the Austrian 
Freedom party and hopes to emerge as the strongest force in next March’s Dutch 
elections. France’s Front National and Germany’s Alternative für Deutschland 
have also been keenly studying their Austrian ally’s tactics before general 
elections in the continent’s two largest economies in 2017.














 