
Malcolm Fraser <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-fraser> 
made mistakes in bringing some migrants to Australia and the country is paying 
for that now, Peter Dutton has said.

The immigration minister made the comments in an interview with Sky News 
commentatorAndrew Bolt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/andrew-bolt>, who 
repeatedly questioned whether it was an error to “let in” people from Middle 
Eastern and African nations or cultural groups.

Dutton appeared to connect the immigration program of the 1970s – which saw 
people arrive mainly from Lebanon, Chile and the Czech republic – with 
allegations of Sudanese men committing crime, and the descendants of immigrants 
leaving Australia to fight in the Middle East.

“If there is a particular problem that people can point to within a certain 
community, and we’re talking about a significant number of people in that 
community who are doing the wrong thing, then clearly mistakes have been made 
in the past,” he said.

“The reality is that Malcolm Fraser did make mistakes in bringing some people 
in in the 1970s and we’re seeing that today. We need to be honest in having 
that discussion.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwhat-was-australias-immigration-policy-under-malcolm-fraser-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20was%20Australia's%20immigration%20policy%20under%20Malcolm%20Fraser%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwhat-was-australias-immigration-policy-under-malcolm-fraser-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20was%20Australia%27s%20immigration%20policy%20under%20Malcolm%20Fraser%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fwhat-was-australias-immigration-policy-under-malcolm-fraser-video-explainer&media=>
What was Australia’s immigration policy under Malcolm Fraser? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/nov/21/what-was-australias-immigration-policy-under-malcolm-fraser-video-explainer>
Thursday’s interview began with a discussion about an alleged crime wave in 
Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> which Bolt said 
was largely down to “young men of African descent”, in particular from Sudan.

Dutton said it was a worrying law and order issue, and the Victorian 
government was weak on crime.

Bolt responded: “No doubt the law and order issue is very big and the lack of 
policing is very big, and I have noticed that you have thrown out or intend to 
throw out some people back to Africa, but this is reacting afterwards.”

Bolt said Fraser got the Lebanese refugee program wrong and asked if there was 
“another mistake” made with Sudanese refugees.

Dutton said it was an “open question” what proportion of the Sudanese 
community was involved, but noted an “interesting aspect” of immigration that 
young people going to fight in the Middle East were often born in Australia to 
migrant or refugee parents.

“So we need to have a proper look at what has gone wrong and clearly something 
has gone wrong,” he said.

“We do review the [immigration] program each year, and if we feel there are 
problems with particular cohorts, particular nationalities, particular people 
who might not be integrating well and not contributing well, then there are 
many other worthy recipients who seek to come to a country like ours and make 
an opportunity their own.”

Dutton against criticised the Victorian government on law and order, and Bolt 
again said he agreed with Dutton on those issues, “but the point really is … 
with a lot of these cases I often ask, who let them in? They shouldn’t be 
posing a problem in the first place”.

Bolt questioned if it was a mistake to bring in people from an “imported” 
culture if their children struggled to fit i, and if the government’s one-off 
Syrian refugee intake was a risk.

Dutton pointed to the government’s “slow pace” of processing refugees because 
it was conducting security checks, and said a high proportion of those accepted 
would be from persecuted minorities like Syrian Christians.


Australia saw high levels of humanitarian immigration from Lebanon and Asia 
under then Liberal prime minister Malcolm Fraser. In 2007Fraser rejected any 
link between issues with his Lebanese migration program 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/in-depth/cabinet-papers/fraser-was-warned-on-lebanese-migrants/story-e6frgda6-1111112763458>
 and current racial tensions, after cabinet documents released by the national 
archives found he was warned against increasing the intake at the time.

Refugees are Australia's most entrepreneurial migrants, says research
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/04/refugees-are-australias-most-entrepreneurial-migrants-says-research>
By 1980 more than 16,000 Lebanese people had arrived under humanitarian 
immigration policies enacted in response to the country’s 1976 civil war.A 
draft government document leaked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/05/refugees-may-face-monitoring-further-restrictions-leaked-document>
 earlier this year – and criticised by the opposition as verging on bigotry and 
racism – singled out the Lebanese community in connection with Australian-based 
Sunni extremists.

In the 10 years to 1985 more than 95,000 Indochinese refugees were also 
processed for resettlement in Australia, largely in response to the Vietnam 
war. About 50,000 people arrived as refugees from Vietnam including on boats.

Australia’s acceptance of Sudanese refugees largely began in the late 1990s, 
with the highest number just 10 years ago. More than 20,000 people have settled 
in Australia fromSudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan>.

An immigration department document 
<https://www.border.gov.au/CorporateInformation/Documents/immigration-history.pdf>
 which cites 2011 research on the economic, social and civic contributions of 
first and second-generation humanitarian entrants, found that “they 
demonstrated a greater commitment to life in Australia compared to other 
migrants”.


 