
When I first entered La Trobe University <http://www.latrobe.edu.au/> in 1997, 
things were tough. I might never have gone to university if I hadn't secured 
scholarships for my course fees and accommodation. At first, I was ineligible 
to receiveAbstudy 
<http://www.humanservices.gov.au/customer/services/centrelink/abstudy>, the 
allowance provided by the government for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander 
students.

Embarrassed at needing support to go to university and feeling less entitled 
to be there, I told no one I was on scholarships. Had I known that I would be 
one of only38 Indigenous students  
<http://education.gov.au/selected-higher-education-statistics-2004-student-data>
qualifying for a bachelor degree with honours in my graduation year, I would 
have viewed my entitlement to support very differently.

Inspired by my own student experiences, I began working in the higher 
education sector as an Indigenous student support officer. Indigenous 
Australian student numbers grew steadily over this time as more Indigenous 
people came to see tertiary education as an option. Indigenous staff numbers 
grew as well,almost doubling between 2002 and 2012 
<http://education.gov.au/staff-data>.

Indigenous students and staff now make up about 1% of the student and staffing 
numbers nationally, but 3% of the population as a whole – so there is still 
some way to go before we achieve parity.

Cuts to funding hit Indigenous students hard

Things have got harder, rather than easier, for Indigenous students and staff 
over the years. The base payment rates for Abstudy have barely risen, yet costs 
of living have soared.

The previous Labor government discontinued the student start-up scholarships 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/higher-education/student-start-up-scholarships-will-be-treated-as-loans/story-e6frgcjx-1226621992641>
 and replaced these with a loan to be added to students' Higher Education Loan 
Program (Help) debts for tuition fees. Because Indigenous students are 
significantly more likely to be from lower socio-economic backgrounds and 
therefore qualify for income assistance schemes, they accumulate larger debts 
at a much higher rate than other students.

Indigenous students are also more likely to be older and therefore supporting 
families on their small student incomes. Most of my work in student support 
revolved around finding additional funding sources for students to make ends 
meet – everything from full scholarships to book vouchers.

As the current coalition government implements the previous government's 
A$2.3bn funding cuts 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/higher-education/pyne-goes-head-with-damaging-uni-cuts/story-e6frgcjx-1226765530732>
 to higher education, and also allows universities to dramatically increase 
course fees to account for the shortfall, I feel that the financial situation 
is going to get worse for Indigenous students and attrition rates will 
increase. Our higher education qualification rates are nowhere near those of 
non-Indigenous people and these changes are not going to help.

Indigenous programmes under threat

Another concern students sometimes relayed to me was the lack of inclusive 
spaces within universities. Our universities are based very much on UK teaching 
and learning models, and this is reflected in the curriculum, the support 
services and the cultures of our universities.

In 2011, the Review of higher education access and outcomes for Aboriginal and 
Torres Strait Islander people 
<http://www.industry.gov.au/highereducation/IndigenousHigherEducation/ReviewOfIndigenousHigherEducation/Pages/default.aspx>
 was launched. The report recommended that Indigenous culture and knowledge be 
embedded across the entire university so greater cultural change was achieved, 
and that Indigenous-specific spaces on campus needed to be increased and 
strengthened.

Many universities reacted positively to these recommendations. In a climate of 
cuts to higher education, however, their actions have been quite different.

A number of Indigenous-specific academic programmes at our centres are now 
under threat, with staff either being moved into faculties or deemed surplus to 
the requirements of the university. Reviews and restructures of Indigenous 
centres at Deakin University, Australian Catholic University, University of 
Western Sydney and University of Sydney, among others, are particularly 
concerning.

At some universities, Indigenous support programmes have been absorbed into 
the mainstream support areas where students have been reluctant to access them 
and staff have found themselves inculturally-unsafe  
<http://www.nteu.org.au/library/view/id/4566>spaces. The prospects for 
universities with inclusive attitudes towards Indigenous people are bleak.

Universities in Australia have a long way to go before they become places 
where Indigenous students and staff feel welcomed and valued for the unique 
contributions they make.

Unfortunately, it seems it's going to get tougher before we start seeing any 
real equitable gains. This is a real shame because in a country like Australia, 
which is home to the oldest continuing knowledge systems in the world, 
Indigenous Australia has much to contribute.

Celeste Liddle is the national Indigenous organiser at the National Tertiary 
Education Union <http://www.nteu.org.au/> – follow her on Twitter @Utopiana 
<https://twitter.com/Utopiana>

Australian and UK universities mimic each other's strategies when it comes to 
higher education funding and policy. But who's leading the way, and are they 
going in the right direction? Wespend two weeks debating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/australia-fortnight>, 
sharing stories and opening up the discussion.

Join the Higher Education Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 