
The recent Australian Writers’ Guild report into the state of female 
playwrights 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/theatre/playwright-gender-parity-missing-at-some-companies-20161212-gt95rw.html>
 showed little is improving for women at Australia’s largest theatre companies. 
But to get the full picture of what female theatre makers are doing in this 
country, we need to look beyond the main stages.

In theatre and performance, many women are defying genres and blurring 
boundaries, making the kind of artistic leaps and inspiring work that 
unfortunately can’t always be found at the major companies. The below 
highlights of this year’s most interesting theatre by women also happens to 
include some of 2016’s most groundbreaking and exciting shows.

The Second Woman, by Nat Randall

ACMI, Melbourne; Next Wave festival, Melbourne
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaf05a8ad2489cfeaef8359f19f3fb749746b1f1%2F0_0_2400_1480%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feaf05a8ad2489cfeaef8359f19f3fb749746b1f1%2F0_0_2400_1480%2F2400.jpg>
 Nat Randall’s durational work was ‘ambitious, expansive, intellectual and 
joyous, constantly changing shape over the day’. Photograph: Kate Blackmore 
I wasn’t the only audience member expecting to enjoy The Second Woman 
<https://www.killyourdarlings.com.au/2016/06/radical-capability-endurance-and-mutation-in-the-second-woman/>
 on a purely conceptual level at Next Wave festival. How wrong we were.

Randall’s daring 24-hour durational performance work – repeating a scene 
inspired by John Cassavetes’ 1977 film Opening Night with 100 male volunteers 
who had memorised the script but never met Randall – was ambitious, expansive, 
intellectual and joyous, constantly changing shape over the day.

The Second Woman asked us to consider many things, but has remained with me as 
an interrogation into what it is within ourselves that keeps us coming back to 
live performance. By the time Randall rolled into her final hour, still 
teetering in high-heeled shoes, not only was the theatre filled with people who 
had been with her for hours, but a queue extended down the hallway of hopefuls 
wanting to experience the end of one of the most expansive pieces of new 
Australian performance I’ve had the privilege of witnessing.

Trigger Warning, by Zoe Coombs Marr

Victoria Hotel, Melbourne International Comedy festival; Giant Dwarf theatre, 
Sydney
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb07ca79f6e123cfb8b4319e23c626a3ac01877b2%2F0_0_9332_4016%2F9332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb07ca79f6e123cfb8b4319e23c626a3ac01877b2%2F0_0_9332_4016%2F9332.jpg>
 ‘Coombs Marr’s slippery complex world only becomes richer on repeat viewings.’ 
Photograph: Supplied 
Zoë Coombs Marr at Edinburgh festival review – thrillingly silly meta comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/09/zoe-coombs-marr-at-edinburgh-festival-review-underbelly-cowgate>
Zoe Coombs Marr’s Trigger Warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/09/zoe-coombs-marr-at-edinburgh-festival-review-underbelly-cowgate>
 was the hit of the Melbourne International Comedy festival, winning both the 
Golden Gibbo and the Barry, before flying to Edinburgh to be nominated for best 
comedy.

As theatre, it is a complex and layered creation of worlds within worlds, a 
critique of sexism and comedy constantly folding back on itself. As comedy it 
is side-splittingly funny.

Currently on iView 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/comedy-next-gen/LE1602H006S00> and coming to 
theSydney Opera House 
<http://aaw.sydneyoperahouse.com/line-up-2017/zoe-coombs-marr> next year, 
Coombs Marr’s slippery complex world only becomes richer on repeat viewings.

Time of Life, by Gabi Barton and Simone Page Jones

Dark Mofo, Hobart


Getting on a mystery bus tour in Hobart in the dead of winter isn’t the safest 
bet at any time – and certainly not during Mona’sDark Mofo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jun/24/dark-mofo-a-strangely-beautiful-town-becomes-deliciously-deranged>
. But with Gabi Barton and Simone Page Jones’ Time of Life there was solid 
payoff: an increasingly sinister hens’ night experience, in collaboration with 
Glenorchy women’s football team.

Writing for The Lifted Brow 
<http://theliftedbrow.com/post/149302582682/time-of-life-penis-whistles-and-performance-art>
, Kate Hennessy marvelled at “how its smartness can co-exist with Simone 
cruising the aisle offering us the ejaculations of a booze-filled penis pistol 
while wearing a veil embroidered with plastic penises”.

Feminist, subversive and utterly reliant on its audience: no theatre could 
hold work like this.


Hot Brown Honey, by Lisa Fa’alafi and Candy and Kim Bowers

Royal Croquet Club, Adelaide fringe; Northcote Town Hall, Melbourne 
International Comedy festival;Sydney Opera House; Arts Centre Melbourne
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7bd072012f634d049a6cc82c01a89bd67607fad%2F0_0_4246_2825%2F4246.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7bd072012f634d049a6cc82c01a89bd67607fad%2F0_0_4246_2825%2F4246.jpg>
 Hot Brown Honey: front, from left to right, Juanita Duncan, Lisa Fa’Alafi and 
Crystal Stacey. Back, left to right, Hope Haami, Busty Beatz, Ofa Fotu 
Photograph: DylanEvans 
Hot Brown Honey was developed at the Judith Wright Centre of Contemporary Arts 
in Brisbane before seasons in Adelaide, Brisbane and Melbourne in 2015, but 
2016 was really its year.

Featuring performances by first nations women from Australia, Samoa, 
Indonesia, Tonga, New Zealand and South Africa, the work is a radical and 
necessary return of cabaret to the subversive and political – taking music, 
dance, burlesque and circus in its stride in both a joyous celebration of their 
bodies and their voices, and a searing critique of having to shout so loud to 
be heard.

Refined and sharpened over their first year of performances, Lyn Gardner said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/aug/14/feminist-revolution-edinburgh-stage-fringe-2016-burlesque>
 of the Edinburgh season: “Smashing the patriarchy has never seemed quite so 
much fun.”

Piece for Person and Ghetto Blaster, by Nicola Gunn

Perth Institute of Contemporary Art, Perth Fringe World; Brisbane Powerhouse, 
New Farm, WorldTheatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> festival

Nicola Gunn never stops moving through Piece for Person and Ghetto Blaster 
<http://www.realtimearts.net/article/issue130/12099>. It’s disorienting to see 
so much energy around such a small story: of a woman running alone in Ghent, 
seeing a man throwing stones at a duck, and then getting caught in a loop of 
thinking about what she could have done.

Gunn lulls the audience into her steady rhythm before exhausting us with her 
relentless, increasingly anxious stream of associative thoughts and repetitive 
actions, until the final moments when – finally, hearing the inner voice of the 
duck – the work becomes almost impossibly (and certainly improbably) affecting.

The Drover’s Wife, by Leah Purcell

Belvoir St Theatre, Surry Hills, Sydney
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfe7878358c47fcf9901994bb360ccd336ecb00a%2F0_0_4724_3149%2F4724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfe7878358c47fcf9901994bb360ccd336ecb00a%2F0_0_4724_3149%2F4724.jpg>
 The leading Indigenous theatre maker Leah Purcell reinvented a cornerstone 
piece of the white Australian canon in The Drover’s Wife. Photograph: Brett 
Boardman 
The Drover's Wife review – plot twist leaves Australian classic spinning on 
its axis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/23/the-drovers-wife-review-australian-classic-revitalised-with-a-new-muse>
When it was announced, The Drover’s Wife seemed like one of the country’s most 
incongruous new works: a leading IndigenousAustralian theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/australian-theatre> maker adapting a 
cornerstone piece of the white Australian canon.

But Leah Purcell’s version, directed by Leticia Cáceres, was a necessary and 
resonant retelling, recasting the story in a postcolonial light.As Kate 
Hennessy wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/sep/23/the-drovers-wife-review-australian-classic-revitalised-with-a-new-muse>
 for Guardian Australia, “It pauses history’s accretion of half-truths and 
delivers our cherished classics back to us, alive with a new muse.”

This is exactly what theatre should be doing with the canon: tearing it up, 
imbuing it with a new and current meaning, and making us see it afresh.

Women of Fairfield, curated by Karen Therese and Anne Loxley

Fairfield, western Sydney

Curated by Karen Therese (also behind western Sydney’s Funpark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jan/19/sydney-festival-live-sunday-january-19-2014>
) and Anne Loxley, Women of Fairfield was a two-night event where more than 100 
local woman and 12 local women’s community organisations collaborated with some 
of Sydney’s leading contemporary artists to explore and celebrate the place 
these women call home.

Reviewing for RealTime <http://www.realtimearts.net/article/issue135/12438>, 
Caroline Wake explained the “experience as an audience member seems less 
important than that of the local participants”. Yes, Women of Fairfield worked 
to amplify and support the voices of women in western Sydney, where cultural 
capital is lower than in more central suburbs – but by both taking over public 
spaces, and giving the community access to spaces usually occupied by artists, 
that community became both artist and audience at once.

Moreover, contemporary art culture and community culture combined to create 
something wholly new – something of and for western Sydney – which can never be 
repeated in another space.

Rumpelstiltskin, by Rosemary Myers

Dunstan Playhouse, Adelaide
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff83aa302e6a7d270c3a740592c3fcc66fc1298c1%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff83aa302e6a7d270c3a740592c3fcc66fc1298c1%2F0_0_5184_3456%2F5184.jpg>
 ‘A deeply intellectual work where otherworldly magic and human angst and 
foibles exist in the same space.’ Photograph: Windmill Theatre 
Rosemary Myers is often overlooked as one of Australia’s leading theatre 
directors, an unfortunate side effect of making work primarily for young 
people, and being based primarily in Adelaide.

Girl Asleep: how an Adelaide theatre company made one of this year's best 
Australian films
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/girl-asleep-how-an-adelaide-theatre-company-made-one-of-this-years-best-australian-films>
When her debut feature film Girl Asleep hit cinemas this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/09/girl-asleep-review-rosemary-myers-bethany-whitmore-harrison-feldman>
, Myers was still working in the theatre with Rumpelstiltskin: a contemporary 
Australian musical about the price we pay for fame. Beneath the bright lights 
of musical theatre, and the facade of children’s theatre, Rumpelstiltskin is 
deeply intellectual work where otherworldly magic and human angst and foibles 
exist in the same space; it assumes intelligence among its young audiences, who 
deserve to see art forms challenged in the same way that adults do.

Australia is at the forefront 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2013/jul/19/australia-theatre-young-people-excels>
 of theatre for children, and Myers continues to remind us there is so much 
left to discover; so much more which can be achieved.

Animal, by Susie Dee

TheatreWorks, St Kilda, Melbourne

Director Susie Dee is most known for her collaborations with playwright 
Patricia Cornelius, works that revel in fast and dirty language. All that is 
stripped away in Dee’s dialogueless physical theatre piece Animal, a visceral 
work about violence against women.

No men are present on stage. Instead, all we have are two women’s bodies 
thrown about by themselves, each other and unseen forces: this is violence 
brutally internalised.

Writing for Time Out <https://www.timeout.com/melbourne/theatre/animal>, Tim 
Byrne said the “nightmarish expectation of trauma is present in every 
expression, and the audience only need to look into the performers’ eyes to see 
the damage wrought on their psyches”. It’s tough viewing – but for Dee, it’s 
necessary.

The Lightning Furies, by Snapcat

Perth; Newcastle, Crack Theatre festival
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1c470911558d81c30db1c44104fa8159828d0d4%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20theatre%202016%3A%20the%2010%20most%20groundbreaking%20shows%20by%20women&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Faustralian-theatre-2016-the-10-most-groundbreaking-shows-by-women%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1c470911558d81c30db1c44104fa8159828d0d4%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 All-girl bike gang The Lightning Furies turned something as innocuous as 
commuter cycling into a political performance. Photograph: Kristinn 
Hermanniusson 
Sometimes the most exciting performance strips away everything we think it 
needs. From Perth artists Anna Dunhill and Renae Coles, akaSnapcat 
<http://www.snapcatsnapcat.com/about/>, The Lightning Furies 
<http://www.snapcatsnapcat.com/the-lightning-furies/> is a monthly bike gang 
for women and non-binary people “ready to smash the patriarchy with boots and 
glitter”.

By making a political statement out of something as innocuous as commuter 
cycling – with the addition of the decoration, costuming, an oath (“no men”), 
gang colours, and specific moments to make noise and denote streamers – The 
Lightning Furies make the everyday powerful, and remind us there is nothing in 
life we can’t turn into a performance.
 