
Australia's selectors can be no easier to read than a James Joyce novel. 
Sometimes they can be as impenetrable and shocking. No one could anticipate
Ashton Agar's Test debut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/11/ashes-ashton-agar-first-test> at 
Trent Bridge just as it was impossible to envisage such a staggering first 
innings from the 19-year-old.

The philistines among us might even conclude that the Aussie selectors can 
provide more accessible entertainment than Joyce, who liked cricket. There is a 
passage in Finnegans Wake in which he smuggles the slightly altered names of 31 
cricketers (OK, ed, I agree â€“ enough Joyce).

Darren Lehmann and Rodney Marsh were the men who chose Agar but this pair are 
not the first Australia selectors to leave the experts on the outside 
scratching their heads.

Over the last three decades most gobsmacking Australian selections have 
usually involved spin bowlers. For the Sydney Test of the 1986-7 Ashes tour 
they plucked outPeter Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/jun/28/10-unlikely-ashes-heroes-cricket>
, a journeyman off-spinner from New South Wales. "Peter Who?" was the cry and 
it was thought that the selectors had made an administrative error and that the 
invitation had been meant for Mark Taylor, the opening batsman and future Test 
captain. As it happened, Taylor (Peter that is), took eight wickets at Sydney, 
he was man of the match and Australia's victory at the end of a losing series 
kept Allan Border in his job as captain.

Not so long after that there was another shrewd choice. In 1992 they tossed a 
young Victorian into a Test against India after only four Sheffield Shield 
appearances and eight first-class wickets. Heads may have been shaken when he 
took one for 150 against India at the SCG. This was another gamble but one has 
to conclude it came off.Shane Warne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2013/apr/29/20-great-ashes-moments-shane-warne>
 retired 15 years later with another 707 wickets to his name.

But those gambles have not always paid dividends. In the post-Warne era, there 
was the wonderfully named Beau Casson, who bowled chinamen in one Test in the 
Caribbean in 2008.Jason Krejza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/nov/07/australias-krejza-stars-in-india>
, an off-spinner, took 12 wickets in his first Test but gave away 358 runs 
while doing so in his debut Test in Nagpur later in the year. He played once 
more.

Bryce McGain, a leg-spinner, made his debut at 36 in Cape Town. That was a bit 
of a punt and it did not work even though McGain was not flattered by figures 
of 18-2-149-0. He did not play again. On England's last Ashes tour a left-arm 
spinner, Michael Beer (two Tests) was also plucked from obscurity.

And now we have Agar. He will not be a one- or two-Test wonder. His 98 was 
like a dream sequence. He must have had to snap his fingers once or twice to 
check that it really happened. That innings entranced the world of cricket and 
almost won a Test match; Marsh and Lehmann had pulled a rabbit out of the hat 
more in the manner of Copperfield D than Cooper T. Yes, Agar will have to have 
another game. He is clearly an extremely gifted cricketer.

One only has to watch him bat and field to know that. Yet he was picked for 
his bowling. At Trent Bridge with the ball in his hand Agar's nerve was steady; 
so too his line and length. Even without his batting Australia would have been 
pleased. There was nothing special but for a teenager thrown in at the deep end 
his control and composure with the ball from an easy, uncomplicated action, was 
mighty impressive.

But this leaves Australia with something of a conundrum. Agar surely has to 
play but he is in the side primarily as a spinner. Is he really a better bowler 
than Nathan Lyon? That is not so clear cut.

Perhaps their selectors will shock us again after considering the following 
factors. The drought is set to continue. The pitch at Lord's is bound to be 
drier than usual. Cloud cover, beloved by seamers (especially during the Lord's 
Test against New Zealand in May), will be absent. Maybe the pitch will 
encourage spinners more than usual, a circumstance that we all assume will suit 
England. However, the home side havealready declared their hand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/15/andy-flower-steven-finn-england> 
(they will play Graeme Swann with a little help from Joe Root, and maybe 
replace Steve Finn with Tim Bresnan).

Australia's most vulnerable batsman after Trent Bridge was Ed Cowan, who 
failed twice. Is it possible that Australia will gamble once again and replace 
Cowan with James Faulkner, the all-rounder who bowls left-arm seamers. They 
will also bring in Lyon instead of one of their pace bowlers, thereby giving 
them two proper spinners in their attack It's a long, long shot but so was 
Agar's selection at Trent Bridge.
 