
12.00pm GMT 

Right, that's it from me

Thanks for your company. Stick around on site for Barney Ronay's match report, 
but from me cheerio!

11.57am GMT 

Australia win by 13 runs

So that's 10-1 to Australia, but at least England put up a fight.

Updated at 11.59am GMT

11.56am GMT 

20th over: England 200-9 (Bopara 65, Briggs 0)

Tremendous effort from Bopara, who finishes with 65 off just 27 balls. 
Australia, though, win by 13 runs.

11.55am GMT 

19.5 overs: England 199-9 (Bopara 64, Briggs 0) 15 from one ball

SIX! And another!

11.55am GMT 

19.4 overs: England 193-9 (Bopara 58, Briggs 0) 21 from two balls

SIX! Another great shot from Bopara, this time over square leg.

Updated at 11.57am GMT

11.54am GMT 

19.3 overs: England 187-9 (Bopara 52, Briggs 0) 27 from three balls

Hoik! Drops safe. Dot.


11.54am GMT 

19.2 overs: England 187-9 (Bopara 52, Briggs 0) 27 from four balls

SIX! A beauty from Bopara, who brings up his half century (from 23 balls) with 
a glorious drive over the covers)

11.53am GMT 

19.2 overs: England 181-9 (Bopara 46, Briggs 0) 33 from five balls.

Hazlewood follows the batsman outside off. A thrash. A dot.

11.52am GMT 

19.1 overs: England 181-9 (Bopara 46, Briggs 0) 33 from six balls.

A wide – four wides in fact. So now six sixes will be enough

11.52am GMT 

19th over: England 176-9 (Bopara 46, Briggs 0) 38 required from six balls

That was the final ball of the over.

11.51am GMT 

WICKET! Dernbach run out 5 (England 176-9)

Shot! Bopara heaves a single away off Dan Christian's first, then Dernbach 
plays a beauty – the straightest of straight drives for four. Bopara joins the 
party with a lovely cover drive for four, then a pull for four more. From the 
last they have to attempt a single, but Dernbach can't get home as the throw 
from backward square leg finds Wade's gloves. He has time to remove the bails 
with Dernbach a couple of feet short.

11.47am GMT 

18th over: England 162-8 (Bopara 37, Dernbach 0) 52 required from 12 balls

Dernbach closes his eyes and heaves … and misses the ball by something 
approaching a yard. He neatly carves the next through the covers but opt 
against a single so Bopara keeps the strike. Coulter-Nile ends with enviable 
figures of 4-0-30-4.

11.45am GMT 

WICKET! Broad b Coulter-Nile 13 (England 162-8)

Bopara can only squeeze a single off Coulter-Nile's first. Broad can't make 
contact with the next, but the third disappears over square leg for a huge six. 
And cue this …
 Tramampoline! Photograph: /Screengrab 
… and a search for a new ball. The next is a yorker, though, that beats the 
outside edge and breathes on the outside of leg stump (which gives you an idea 
of Broad's position at the crease) just enough to remove the bails.

11.40am GMT 

17th over: England 155-7 (Bopara 36, Broad 7) 59 required from 18 balls

"Broad described this batting line-up as scary," says Nick Knight on Sky. "But 
they've had a bit of a horror show." ZING! Broad slog sweeps his first for a 
flat six, but can only miscue the next for a single. That brings Bopara on 
strike for the last … another single. Eleven off the over. Twenty an over 
required from here.

11.38am GMT 

WICKET! Bresnan b Muirhead 11 (England 147-7)

Muirhead again. He offers Bopara the juiciest of full tosses, a prime 
Porterhouse steak of a full toss, with a grilled tomato, your choice of sauce 
and a hearty portion of pommes frites … but Bopara can't get hold of it and can 
only swipe away a single. And two balls later the 20-year-old bowler has his 
first wicket for Australia. Bresnan. Swipe. Miss. Bowled.

11.36am GMT 

16th over: England 144-6 (Bopara 34, Bresnan 9) 70 required from 24 balls

Henriques (2-0-20-2) returns, with the required rate up at nearly 18 an over. 
Bresnan shovels away a single off the first, then Bopara puts him into the 
stands with an effortless flick. What a shot that is. And he repeats the trick 
again with the next ball! Another heave, another six. Bopara has four sixes 
from his 12 balls faced. Thirteen off the first three balls then. A better ball 
from Henriques, fuller, outside off, denies Bopara the option of the leg-side 
smash, so just a single from the fourth. Bresnan drives for another single, and 
Bopara does likewise from the last. So despite Bopara's efforts, the run rate 
increases …

11.31am GMT 

15th over: England 128-6 (Bopara 20, Bresnan 7) 86 required from 30 balls

Muirhead again. Bresnan steps away to leg and wafts airily without making 
contact. Wade whips off the bails, but the England man had jabbed his toes back 
just in time. Bresnan is giving it his all, but he's been left with far too 
much to do by those further up the order (although those further up the order 
could always turn around and blame those lower down the order for their bowling 
performance).

11.28am GMT 

14th over: England 123-6 (Bopara 17, Bresnan 3) 91 required from 36 balls

Shot! Bopara catches a Hazlewood length ball sweetly and sends the ball into 
the stands at cow corner. And then repeats the trick two balls later! What a 
monumental hit that is! It's too little, too late, but at least they're adding 
a soupçon of respectability to the score.

11.25am GMT 

13th over: England 108-6 (Bopara 4, Bresnan 3) 106 required from 42 balls

Muirhead once more (he's been used cleverly by Bailey, who has twice brought 
him on with the pressure off). The first is a nervous half-tracker that Bopara 
tries to smash back to the mainland but can only squirt away for a single. The 
good news for England is that they're not going to be close tothe top 10 of 
Twenty20's biggest hammerings 
<http://stats.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/stats/index.html?batting_fielding_first=2;class=3;filter=advanced;orderby=amount;result=2;template=results;type=team;view=results>
 – thanks in no small part to Kenya, Scotland, Canada and co.

11.20am GMT 

12th over: England 101-6 (Bopara 1, Bresnan 0) 113 required from 48 balls

Buttler never really got his teeth into that innings. Root batted well but was 
always going to struggle when he had to force things – it's just not his game 
really. Three runs and two wickets from the over.

11.18am GMT 

WICKET! Root c Finch b Coulter-Nile 32 (England 100-6)

Stick a fork in this one, it's done. Root holes out to the man at long off.

11.15am GMT 

WICKET! Buttler c Muirhead b Coulter-Nile 20 (England 98-5)

Coulter-Nile returns, which England fans could see as a sign of slight nerves 
from Australia. If they were feeling particularly optimistic. Which the 
shouldn't be. Because Buttler has sent his first ball down the throat of the 
man on the cover boundary. Obviously.

11.12am GMT 

11th over: England 98-4 (Root 30, Buttler 20)

Dan Christian comes into the attack for the first time and bowls a foxtrot of 
an over: slow, slow, slow, quick, quick, slow. The batsmen again struggle to 
get him off the square: dot, single, dot, single, single. But from the last 
Root latches onto a full toss and gets him down to the midwicket boundary for 
four.

11.09am GMT 

10th over: England 91-4 (Root 25, Buttler 18)

Root bashes Henriques first for six, then the second for four. His place in 
this team is under scrutiny, but he's played reasonably well here. He has 25 
from 18. And England have 91 at the halfway point.

"The England Tour Of Utter Misery eh?" writes John Starbuck. "You could turn 
that into an ETOUM T-shirt. Bags I get the first one if you do, please." 
Something along these lines (with the tour dates on the back, obviously …)
 Photoshop skillz. Photograph: /The Internet 
11.04am GMT 

9th over: England 77-4 (Root 14, Buttler 15)

"Well, this match is not going where I'd like it to be going, so all I can 
hope is that a couple of new OBOccasionals will be joining the veterans of last 
year's tour to Tallinn and come to Finland come summer," writes Sara Torvalds. 
"For all the non-existent details (no, we still don't know when the tour will 
be, but it seems likely to be the first weekend of August) go to
http://oboccasionals.weebly.com/2014-tour.html 
<http://oboccasionals.weebly.com/2014-tour.html> and start planning the 
experience of a lifetime. Or weekend. Or whatever. But rest assured: for 
mediocre cricket, you need no longer rely solely on England."

Maxwell again. Buttler clubs him back over his head for a one-bounce four, 
Root whelps a thigh-high full toss for another down to cow corner. Again, 11 
from the over.


11.02am GMT 

8th over: England 66-4 (Root 8, Buttler 10)

Time for James Muirhead's first over in international cricket. Who he? Here's 
some background 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/sport/cricket/overlooked-leg-spinner-james-muirhead-in-world-t20-mix/story-e6frg7rx-1226806226412>
.And here's some more 
<http://www.smh.com.au/sport/cricket/slow-bowler-james-muirhead-on-ashes-fast-track-20140121-316x2.html>
. He's played two first class games and five Twenty20s. At one point this 
season he was without a Big Bash contract. Joss Buttler welcomes him with a 
belting slog-sweep for six. He shows a bit of gumption, though, keeping Buttler 
to one from the next and Root to two from the penultimate ball of the over. 
Eleven in total off the over.

10.58am GMT 

7th over: England 55-4 (Root 4, Buttler 3)

Two of the four England wickets have come from batsmen missing straight balls. 
Australia, it goes without saying, didn't really do that.

10.56am GMT 

WICKET! Morgan b Maxwell 4 (England 51-4)

Welcome to the latest instalment of the England Tour Of Utter Misery. Glenn 
Maxwell returns. Root drives the first for a single, then Morgan smashes a 
floaty nothing ball through the covers for four. From the third ball, though, 
Morgan attempts a slog sweep, misses and is bowled.

10.54am GMT 

6th over: England 46-3 (Root 2, Morgan 0)

Root fails to get the first three balls of Halzewood's over away, but takes a 
single from the fourth. And Morgan lets the last two zip through to Wade 
outside off. Just one run from the over, which turned into a six-ball deep 
breath for England.

10.51am GMT 

5th over: England 45-3 (Root 1, Morgan 0)

This isn't going particularly well for England is it? Still, credit to 
Henriques, who bowled bravely there, varying his pace and sticking to his line.

10.49am GMT 

WICKET! Hales lbw b Henriques 22 (England 45-3)

So, here comes Joe Root. And there goes Alex Hales. He stepped across his 
stumps, swiped and, crucially, missed.

10.47am GMT 

WICKET! Wright b Henriques 9 (England 44-2)

Moises Henriques comes into the attack. Wright drags his first to square leg 
for four, but then drags the next onto the stumps. A scratchy 10-ball innings 
from the England No3, the sort that is always just a touch too familiar for me.

10.45am GMT 

4th over: England 39-1 (Hales 22, Wright 5)

Coulter-Nile once more, but Hales has begun in superb style. He skips down the 
pitch and carts him wide of mid on for four more, then makes space outside off 
and carves him over the top of the covers for four more. He moves on to 21 off 
nine. The final ball of the over slaps him on the pad, bringing frustrated 
yelps from the fielding side. He got a bit of bat on it, which is probably all 
that saved him.

10.41am GMT 

3rd over: England 29-1 (Hales 13, Wright 5)

Josh Hazlewood, reckoned by some pretty well-qualified sources to be the next 
cab off the rank when it comes to Test pace bowlers for Australia. replaces 
Maxwell. Wright looks to chop him away through point, but in fact edges over 
slip for four to get off the mark. He's struggling to get the young quick off 
the square, though, attempting to take the leather off every ball in the 
familiar Wrightesque style. Just six from the over.

10.36am GMT 

2nd over: England 23-1 (Hales 13, Wright 0)

So here comes England's T20 batting fruit machine, Luke Wright. Is he in Three 
Cherries mode, or 
Lots-Of-Wasted-Pound-Coins-That-Could've-Been-Spent-On-Something-Far-More-Worthwhile 
mode? We'll find out soon enough, but for now Alex Hales is the man paying out. 
A hurricane of a pull whistles away for four to square leg, then a 
sweetly-timed drive does likewise through the covers. England still up with the 
run-rate.

10.34am GMT 

WICKET! Lumb c Lynn b Coulter-Nile 9 (England 14-1)

Nathan Coulter-Nile takes the ball at the other end and strays too full with 
his first. Lumb guides it just in front of the man at backward point and away 
for four. He survives that scare, but not the next. The bowler takes just 
enough pace off the ball to ensure that Lumb's clubbing drive, rather than 
clearing the ropes, plops apologetically into the hands of mid-off.

10.30am GMT 

1st over: England 10-0 (Hales 5, Lumb 5)

Glenn Maxwell kicks things off for Australia. Interesting. Presumably they see 
a weakness in Michael Lumb against the spinners … but his first ball he drives 
sumptuously through the covers for four, all along the ground. Fine shot. The 
fifth ball is dragged down by Maxwell, Hales extracts full value. Well, not 
quite full value, a four. Ten off the over for England, and achieved without 
having to do anything special.

10.27am GMT 

Australia are in the huddle …

… then stride out to the middle. Hales and Lumb follow them in short order. A 
huge responsibility for this run chase lies on the shoulder of the England 
openers. It would beThe Greatest Twenty20 International Run Chase Of All Time 
<http://stats.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/stats/index.html?batting_fielding_first=2;class=3;filter=advanced;orderby=team_score;result=1;template=results;type=team;view=innings>
.

10.14am GMT 

END OF INNINGS: Australia 213-4

So England need 214 from their 20 overs. Not impossible, although the highest 
score they've ever chased is 181 
<http://stats.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/stats/index.html?batting_fielding_first=2;class=3;filter=advanced;orderby=team_score;result=1;team=1;template=results;type=team;view=innings>
 in Mumbai in 2012 and, as it has been pointed out, they struggled to reach 
this score several times in the Test series …

Updated at 10.15am GMT

10.09am GMT 

20th over: Australia 213-4 (Lynn 33, Christian 6)

Lynn gets out the ramp, or the ramp-sweeep at least, clipping the ball over 
the man loitering backwards of square and watching it rattle away for four. He 
does look quite the prospect. A couple of balls later, one of the more 
ridiculous fours you'll ever see – Christian attempts the ramp, gets it wrong, 
edges with his bat pointing towards the heavens, and the ball goes fine to the 
rope. Two off the last leaves England 214 to win.

10.05am GMT 

WICKET! Bailey c Bresnan b Dernbach 14 (Australia 200-4)

The first ball of the over is a slower delivery that foxes Bailey, who can 
only skew vertically. Bresnan takes a safe catch.

10.04am GMT 

19th over: Australia 200-3 (Bailey 14, Lynn 30)

Lynn's potential has our antipodean colleagues rather excited:
Russell Jackson (@rustyjacko) 
All jokes aside, Chris Lynn is still only 23 and could be a 10-year Test 
player.
 <https://twitter.com/rustyjacko/statuses/428467604974342145> January 29, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/rustyjacko/statuses/428467604974342145> 
He's certainly looked the part thus far here. As much as you can look the part 
in this thrash-fest. He plays another beauty here – Bresnan sticks one in the 
slot outside off, Lynn strikes it sweet-as-a-nut back over his head for six. 
Bailey then joins the party – another bad ball from Bresnan, a full toss, juicy 
as a freshly picked pineapple, disappears through the covers for a one-bounce 
four. A single from the last brings up the 200, the sixth time Australia have 
reached the mark in T20s. Bresnan finishes with figures of 4-0-40-0.

10.00am GMT 

18th over: Australia 186-3 (Bailey 9, Lynn 17)

So Jade Dernbach will bowl overs 18 and 20, Bresnan will return for No19. 
Buttler does well to prevent four leg byes as batsman and bowler look to second 
guess each other, and Dernbach gets it right with the next two – Lynn can't get 
him away. That's Good Jade. This is Bad Jade. A length ball, a stodgy, average, 
bog-standarder, is ploughed away into the rubble at cow corner. If any of the 
cement in that building site hasn't quite set yet, it's going to dry like the 
crater-pocked surface of the moon. And then there's more Bad Jade – a hip-high 
leg-side no-ball that is gloved away for four to fine leg. Then Good Jade – a 
dot. The last is carved away to deep square leg but drops safe. Just a single. 
Insert your own joke about "Dernbach's variations" here …

9.55am GMT 

17th over: Australia 173-3 (Bailey 9, Lynn 10)

Bresnan returns. Lynn crumps him back over his head for a straight six, which 
is the cue for this sort of thing:
 It's a six! Photograph: /Screengrab 
The bowler relocates his radar, though, and joins Broad and Bopara in 
restricting the batsmen to ones and twos, though he does throw an off-side wide 
into the mix. Still, 13 from the over.

9.50am GMT 

16th over: Australia 160-3 (Bailey 5, Lynn 2)

Chris Lynn, on debut, strides to the crease. He's coming into the side on the 
back of a couple of big innings for the Brisbane Heat –81 off 53 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/the-ashes-2013-14/engine/match/654037.html> 
against Perth, and56 off 35 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/the-ashes-2013-14/engine/match/654065.html> 
against Sydney. Bopara, though, is bowing brilliantly here – just three off the 
over, meaning the last two have gone for only seven runs.

9.47am GMT 

WICKET! Maxwell c Bresnan b Bopara 20 (Australia 157-3)

Well bowled Ravi Bopara! He takes just enough pace off the ball to make 
Maxwell mistime his reverse-scoop-sweep and plop it into the hands of Tim 
Bresnan.

9.45am GMT 

15th over: Australia 157-2 (Maxwell 20, Bailey 4)

Broad once more. Here's an image from today that pretty much sums up the game 
situation for the England captain:
 Arrrrghh. Photograph: /AFP/Getty Images 
He keeps it tight, though. Single, dot, single, single, dot, single. Brilliant 
over. Broad ends with figures of 4-0-25-1.

9.41am GMT 

14th over: Australia 153-2 (Maxwell 18, Bailey 2)

Briggs (3-0-35-0) comes in for his final over. Maxwell gets his reverse-sweep 
out again … and to devastating effect! Holy moly, this is ridiculous! The first 
flies away for four, but the second is creamed unceremoniously into the night 
sky and lands in the vicinity of Row EE at what used to be square leg. Poor old 
Danny Briggs. The last ball of a trying spell also zips away for four. He ends 
with figures of 4-0-53-0. Maxwell has 18 from eight balls.

9.36am GMT 

13th over: Australia 134-2 (Maxwell 2, Bailey 0)

Bailey dabs his first ball, the last of the over, into the leg side for a 
single to get off the mark. That was some innings from White, by the way – 75 
from 43 balls.

9.35am GMT 

WICKET! White lbw b Wright 75 (Australia 134-2)

Luke Wright into the attack for the first time today. And, not for the first 
time today, Cameron White has sent the ball crunching into the stands at cow 
corner. The second also reaches the rope, but it's tickled to square leg for 
four in neat fashion. The third is a one-bounce four wide of long on. Fourteen 
off the first three balls. Yipes. And the fourth looks to have brought him a 
wicket in the ugliest way possible – a huge full toss skewed into the Hobart 
sky by Maxwell and caught by square leg. But it's such a big full toss that the 
square leg umpire calls it a no ball on height. It was borderline, 
top-of-the-thigh-high at most, but it's hard to feel too much sympathy for the 
bowler in that situation. You can't complain too much if your big ugly pie of a 
delivery doesn't bring you the flukey wicket you thought it warranted. Stuart 
Broad manages to persuade the on-field umpires to refer it to their colleague 
in the stands, but he agrees with his colleagues.

Two balls later Wright does have his wicket! White has a wipe across the line, 
misses, and is trapped lbw.

9.28am GMT 

12th over: Australia 117-1 (White 60, Maxwell 1)

Briggs twinkle-toes his way in for his third over. Maxwell, who has made one 
decent score for the Melbourne Stars in the Big Bash 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/the-ashes-2013-14/engine/match/654059.html> but 
has hardly been setting the world on fire, looks to reverse-sweep his first 
ball, but can only glove it away for a single. And that's all this pair can 
manage off a useful over from the spinner.

9.24am GMT 

11th over: Australia 111-1 (White 56, Maxwell 0)

Will that wicket halt the momentum. Not yet – a deft dab brings White four 
more.

9.23am GMT 

WICKET! Finch c Hales b Broad 52 (Australia 106-1)

Broad returns, the captain taking responsibility for turning this tanker 
around. Or at least taking responsibility for rearranging the deckchairs. The 
first is clever – Finch backs away to leg, so Broad sends a full one through 
outside off. Dot ball. A couple of deliveries later we have a moment for the 
purists – a huge ugly full toss is skewed up into the air so badly by White 
that it drops safe. ThenWICKET! Another full toss, another skew, but this time 
Finch gets enough on it to send it into Hales's hands on the long on boundary.

9.19am GMT 

10th over: Australia 104-0 (White 50, Finch 51)

Briggs continues. White flogs him over cover and down to the boundary for 
one-bounce four. It's a clear plan of attack from the batsmen, so England tweak 
the field and Briggs switches to come over the wicket. That does the job, 
keeping Finch and White to ones and twos … for a couple of balls at least. Soon 
enough White plays an extraordinary shot, a sort of vertical slog-sweep, that 
beats the man at backward square leg and trickles away for four more. From the 
last he sprints through for two more to bring up his 50, off a comparatively 
sedate 32 balls.

9.13am GMT 

9th over: Australia 89-0 (White 37, Finch 50)

A short slower ball is barely timed by White … but he still gets enough on it 
to send it whistling over Bresnan down at cow corner. Another six. Finch brings 
up his half-century (from 26 balls!) with a chop to the point boundary for a 
couple more. Australia are on course for 200-plus here.

9.10am GMT 

8th over: Australia 78-0 (White 30, Finch 47)

Time for some spin. Danny Briggs comes into the attack. Finch backs away to 
leg, relies on his hand-eye co-ordination, and peppers the cover boundary. He 
squeezes two through for boundaries, the second a beautifully brutal strike, 
then tickles one away to leg to rotate the strike. White then artfully dibbles 
one to third man for another boundary. Fourteen from the over.

9.06am GMT 

7th over: Australia 64-0 (White 25, Finch 38)

Ravi Bopara comes into the attack for the first time today. He's been 
preferred to Ben Stokes, so there's a certain amount of pressure on his 
shoulders. His first is a leg-stump full toss that Finch punches away for four 
in economical style. CLONK! A length-ball, the cardinal sin of T20 cricket, 
disappears over square leg for another White six. But having conceded 11 runs 
from his first three balls, Bopara bounces back with some nicely disguised 
leg-breaks. The last three balls go for just one run.

9.02am GMT 

6th over: Australia 52-0 (White 18, Finch 33)

As Bumble points out on Sky, this start is nothing exceptional given the 
recent T20 scores on this pitch. Bresnan continues and restricts Australia to 
four singles. A very good over.

"Why is Root playing?" growls Lanky. "Appalling decision in my estimation. 
Same goes for Bresnan and Dernbach, who presumably hasn't played any cricket 
for six months. Appalling decisions yet again from England - who's in charge 
here?"

8.58am GMT 

5th over: Australia 48-0 (White 16, Finch 31)

Dernbach has switched ends here. His first disappears for four through the 
vacant gully region courtesy of Aaron Finch (a shot the inner curmudgeon wants 
to call A ProperCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Shot). The 
next is mowed high to cow corner for a one-bounce four. The next, the third of 
the over, is full and belted back over the bowler's head for another six, clean 
as a whistle. So 14 off the first three. A good recovery from Dernbach, though 
– he keeps the batsmen to one off the next, the next is a dot, and the last a 
cleverly-disguised looping slower ball that concedes only another single.

8.54am GMT 

4th over: Australia 32-0 (White 15, Finch 16)

Bresnan replaces Dernbach. He kicks off with a wide after following White too 
far down the leg side, but the next three see the batsmen take only one run. 
The fourth is a slower ball that Finch picks before it leaves the bowler's hand 
– SIX! Another smear high into the building site at square leg. All in all, 
though, it's a very decent over from Bresnan, with just the one aberration.

8.50am GMT 

3rd over: Australia 23-0 (White 14, Finch 9)

I try to keep an open mind about Twenty20, I really do. But it's hard when 
this sort of thing is happening down at fine leg:
 Tramampoline! Photograph: /Screengrab 
Anyway, it's Aaron Finch's turn to clear the rope this time – Broad strays a 
little too full and the opener drives him sweetly back over his head and into 
the stands. A ball or two later, though, Broad finds the edge of White's bat 
and Root shells a simple catch at slip. His weight seemed to be on the wrong 
foot and he couldn't react quickly enough. It looked to me to be the attempt of 
a man who is not a natural slip fielder – do any county watchers out there know 
if Root tends to field in the corden for Yorkshire?

8.45am GMT 

2nd over: Australia 13-0 (White 11, Finch 2)

And here's the much-maligned Jade Dernbach. I must say he's more maligned by 
others than he is by me. His status asthe No7 T20 bowler in the world 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/rankings/content/page/211270.html> is neither here 
nor there really, but when he gets it right he's perfectly attuned to this form 
of cricket. The problem, of course, is his tendency to get it wrong …SIX! White 
backs away to leg, Dernbach follows him, but it's short enough for the batman 
to swing it away over square leg for six. The ball disappears into the building 
site scaffolding on that side of the ground.

8.39am GMT 

1st over: Australia 4-0 (White 3, Finch 1)

Cameron White, who hasn't been in great form for the Melbourne Stars in the 
Big Bash but is always a dangerous player in this form of the game (although 
you do sometimes wonder how he has managed to bag four Test caps), drives 
Stuart Broad's first ball uppishly over extra cover for three, but it's an 
excellent over from the England captain. The fifth jags back inside White's 
groping swipe and the fifth is on a tricky length outside off. Another dot, so 
just four from the over.

8.35am GMT 

Right, out come the players

Cue fireworks and the strains of a popular beat combo booming out over the 
Tannoy.

8.33am GMT 

Like a gas fire …

… there's no need for Stokes. "No Stokes I see," notes Joanne Beasley. "I see 
English cricket decision making, has rescued itself, once again – out of the 
jaws of common sense." Yes, Stokes for Bopara would be the obvious choice. But 
perhaps he's just in need of a rest.

8.29am GMT 

The form book

It was 1-1 in the T20 series back in England and prior to that Stuart Broad's 
side tasted defeat against New Zealand. But since their astonishing winning run 
in 2010, England's T20 performances have been a bit of a coin toss.

Australia, on the other hand, have been pretty miserable in T20s of late. That 
win at the Rose Bowl at the end of August – in whichAaron Finch walloped his 
sensational 156 <http://www.espncricinfo.com/ci/engine/match/566937.html> – is 
their only win in the past eight T20s, a run that has included defeats to West 
Indies, Sri Lanka, Pakistan and India as well as England.

8.23am GMT 

Pre-match reading

• England have won the Ashes! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/29/charlotte-edwards-england-retain-womens-ashes>
 Charlotte Edwards was in fine form as England chased down 151 to win in their 
first T20 international and clinch the series.

• And here's this week's Spin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/28/india-aces-future-of-cricket>, 
in which Andy Bull outlines who holds which cards in the ICC discussions. To 
switch parlour-game analogies, essentially India have Mayfair and Park Lane, 
all three greens, hotels on Vine Street and the rest of the oranges, and all 
the stations. And they got to be the car.

8.19am GMT 

The toss

Australia have won it and they're going to have a bat.

Teams

Australia: Finch, White, Maxwell, Bailey, Lynn, Christian, Henriques, Wade, 
Coulter-Nile, Hazlewood, Muirhead.

England: Lumb, Hales, Wright, Root, Morgan, Buttler, Bopara, Bresnan, Broad, 
Dernbach, Briggs.


11.08pm GMT 

Preamble

Morning all. So, Twenty20 time – usually the cricketing equivalent of some 
vaguely trashy airport novel (usually with the word "Strike", "Force" or 
"Eagle" in the title) to be enjoyed while it lasts and then quickly forgotten. 
But this time there's a point: no, it's not a 
if-we-throw-this-shoe-over-the-pub-we-win-the-Ashes situation, it's the World 
T20 in Bangladesh on the horizon, so these teams will want to work out their 
sides for that competition.

Updated at 12.02pm GMT
 