
On Sunday night Australia premiered its very own version of Whose Line Is it 
Anyway? – perhaps in response to the blood debt incurred by the US with its 
vicious murder of our own comedy export, Thank God You’re Here.


Let’s call it even. Too many have suffered.


The US can’t claim complete ownership of the improvisational sketch show, 
though; they merely liberated it from their one-time oppressors: the English.


All iterations bearing the WLIIA acronym follow the same template: a host 
submits four fast-thinking improvisers to a series of games in which the guests 
are expected to joke, sing, rap, impersonate and, most importantly, mug in 
pursuit of laughs – and nothing else. It’s “the show where everything is made 
up and the points don’t matter” and it can be liberating to watch comedians 
work tirelessly to simply fire up viewers’ pleasure centres with short bursts 
of primal, instinctive comedy.


Whose Line Is it Anyway? What to expect from the Australian iteration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/25/whose-line-is-it-anyway-what-to-expect-from-the-australian-iteration>
When they can pull it off, that is.


The UK version – itself a spin-off from a radio show – debuted in 1988, and 
its first season starred Stephen Fry, Peter Cook and thefried Sparrow 
<http://www.salon.com/2016/06/29/cheering_the_high_sparrows_death_why_the_end_of_this_game_of_thrones_villain_was_so_satisfying/>
 himself, Jonathan Pryce. Esteemed pedigree aside, the players took part in the 
same goofy theatresports as their Aussie counterparts do today: Film Dub, where 
the actors are at the whim of those doing the speaking off stage; Party Quirks, 
where an unwitting host must identify their guests’ specific peculiarities; and 
Rap, which speaks for itself while remaining utterly inexplicable.

The premise of the show was so simple – and inexpensive – it was easily 
transplanted across the globe, resulting in remakes both official and highly 
unofficial (from India’s Lo Kal Lo Baat to the Netherlands De Lama’s). Best 
known, of course, was the US version, originally hosted by Drew Carey (today, 
Aisha Tyler), in which Colin Mochrie, Ryan Stiles and Wayne Brady spun genuine 
gold from the much-maligned sport of short-form improv.


The US version of Whose Line acted as a potent gateway drug into the world of 
comedy for many. The resurrected version of the show welcomedCrazy 
Ex-Girlfriend’s Rachel Bloom <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c2buoNT8ti0> on 
to the stage, a talent whose self-deprecating, vaudevillian charm seems forged 
from Whose Line’s inspired silliness.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc2buoNT8ti0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc2buoNT8ti0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dc2buoNT8ti0&media=>
It’s also a place where Alfonso Ribeiro can still walk out to rapturous 
applause <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DmJ7kmqnqmI>. No one said comedy had 
to be cool.


 Short-form improv sits at the bottom of the comedy hierarchy but as anyone 
who has sat through an evening of long-form improv already knows, sometimes 
this style is at its best when fleeting. That holds true for this new 
Australian iteration of Whose Line Is it Anyway? Though fleeting may not be 
short enough for some viewers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Faustralian-whose-line-is-it-anyway-suffers-from-dated-jokes-and-too-much-ocker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5786d2747eea23dc265673007a05e80da5960c08%2F438_81_4371_2622%2F4371.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20Whose%20Line%20Is%20it%20Anyway%3F%20suffers%20from%20dated%20jokes%20and%20too%20much%20ocker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Faustralian-whose-line-is-it-anyway-suffers-from-dated-jokes-and-too-much-ocker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20Whose%20Line%20Is%20it%20Anyway%3F%20suffers%20from%20dated%20jokes%20and%20too%20much%20ocker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Faustralian-whose-line-is-it-anyway-suffers-from-dated-jokes-and-too-much-ocker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5786d2747eea23dc265673007a05e80da5960c08%2F438_81_4371_2622%2F4371.jpg>
 Stacks on: Josie Lawrence, Greg Proops, Brad Sherwood and Colin Mochrie in the 
UK version of Whose Line Is it Anyway? Photograph: Manuel Harlan/Katie French 
At first glance, it’s Whose Line as you know and love it. The standup comedian 
Tommy Little mans the desk, his playthings comprised of recognisable, seasoned 
professionals (Rhys Darby and Cal Wilson among them) and up-and-comers from the 
local comedy scene. Its main point of difference is its Australianness.


Given Australia’s disastrous history of 21st-century sketch comedy, that’s not 
necessarily a plus.

You can see why it was commissioned by Foxtel’s Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/comedy> Channel, almost 30 years after its 
namesake arrived. There are few outlets for our burgeoning comedians on 
television, for one. Plus this is a proven format. And, significantly, the bar 
for success couldn’t be lower. (Pour one out for two-episode wonder Let Loose 
Live, for which the term “dumpster fire” is too noble to adequately describe 
the general awfulness and swift axing of our failed Saturday Night Live).


But despite the boundless enthusiasm of literally every contributor, the 
Australian Whose Line falls victim to the same cultural cringe that has felled 
so many variety shows before it.

The first episode opens with host Tommy Little crying “G’day, you good lookin’ 
bastards”, and it’s followed by such a stream of Strayanisms you half expect 
Alf “Flaming” Stewart to rock up and take over proceedings.

The games played are familiar yet the Aussie references are dated (Daryl 
Somers is invoked) and the coarse language, another Aussie flourish, is 
jarringly graphic. As Cal Wilson remarks after an admittedly very funny, very 
dirty joke in which the Cookie Monster conducts some vigorous oral sex: “My son 
will never see this show!” Makes you wonder who it’s for then.


The “fun for the whole family” vibe is what allowed us to justify the cheeky 
originals show’s predilection for being a bit naff. An adults-only audience is 
less likely to make excuses. We can get our gags about puppet coitus elsewhere, 
and probably from something with a better hit rate.


There are signs of promise for future episodes. Wilson, always reliable, is a 
fearless performer, and the presence of Tegan Higginbotham, Bridie Connell and 
Susie Youssef already make this a far more diverse enterprise than its 
dude-centric predecessors. I made a point to note the occasional barbs from 
Wilson, Darby and Steen Raskopoulos that drew literal LOLs, breaking what 
seemed like a ceaseless laughter drought – reminders that improvisation is 
high-risk, high-reward. But Australian audiences have not proven themselves to 
be a patient bunch when it comes to comedy shows finding their footing.


Josh Thomas on Please Like Me season four: 'We're doing so many sex scenes'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/09/josh-thomas-on-the-new-season-of-please-like-me-the-hardest-thing-now-is-being-surprising>
Our modern success stories range from the self-spoofing (Kath and Kim, the 
newly resuscitated Russell Coight) to the urbane (Utopia,Please Like Me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/09/josh-thomas-on-the-new-season-of-please-like-me-the-hardest-thing-now-is-being-surprising>
) to the deliriously bizarre (The Katering Show <http://thekateringshow.com/>, 
Mad as Hell). The clownish make-em-ups seen in Whose Line Is it Anyway? are 
relics of Australia’s past, formerly of variety shows such as In Melbourne 
Tonight, The Graham Kennedy Show and Hey Hey It’s Saturday. We’ll accept them 
from Americans, clearly, but put an ocker (or even Kiwi) accent on it, and we 
getRed Faces <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rHREdO9-l5w> flashbacks.


Seeking a return to those salad days, regardless of Whose Line’s 
tried-and-tested branding, is to not understand our current comedy climate. Not 
being uproariously funny – or even mildly funny – in combination with that 
misunderstanding is suicidal.


In time, our Whose Line Is it Anyway? might get funnier and even capture the 
zeitgeist. Unfortunately, time is the only thing comedy shows don’t get in 
Australia.

• Whose Line Is it Anyway? Australia is on the Comedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/comedy> Channel on Foxtel, Sundays at 
7.30pm
 