
England will go into the opening Ashes Test in Cardiff on 8 July with, for the 
first time in the country’s history, an Australian head coach afterTrevor 
Bayliss <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/trevor-bayliss> was confirmed in the 
role on Tuesdayon Tuesday.

The 52-year-old former batsman, who was not capped by his country, has been 
persuaded to give up his roles coaching New South Wales and the Indian Premier 
League side Kolkata Knight Riders byAndrew Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss>, the director of England 
cricket.

“It is obviously one of the big jobs in the cricket world,” Bayliss said. “To 
be asked to go on the shortlist was good enough. To be successful and get it is 
an unbelievable feeling.”

With Bayliss due to start at the beginning of July, Paul Farbrace, who oversaw 
the thrilling 124-run win over New Zealand at Lord’s, will continue as the 
interim head coach before returning to his role as assistant.

The pair worked together in the Sri Lanka set-up six years ago and, while 
Bayliss will still push to bring his start date forward, he is happy to have a 
friend at the tiller for Friday’s second Test at Headingley and the 
limited-overs series that follows.

“The great thing for me is that Paul Farbrace is in charge there and we go 
back a fair way,” Bayliss said. “I’m really looking forward to renewing our 
working relationship and friendship. I’ve already been speaking to him about 
the job and the team. He and the other coaches will be my eyes and ears.”

Bayliss also gives up a role as an adviser to Australia’s head coach, Darren 
Lehmann, whom he even covered for during a Twenty20 series against South Africa 
last November. The close friends will now go up against each other during the 
Ashes.

“I have coached against Australia before with Sri Lanka and the way I 
explained it then is that in Australia your toughest battles are against your 
brothers and best mates in the backyard,” Bayliss said. “I expect them to come 
out and play some tough, hard cricket and they wouldn’t expect anything 
different from a team I’m coaching either.”

While regaining the urn remains a natural priority, Strauss opted for Bayliss 
ahead of the Yorkshire head coach, Jason Gillespie, because of Bayliss’s record 
of success in limited-overs cricket. Strauss has been set the target of 
ensuring England challenge for the 2019 World Cup on home soil.

Bayliss’s Sri Lanka side reached the final of that competition in 2011 and he 
has since gone on to win two IPL titles with Kolkata and the Big Bash League 
with the Sydney Sixers. In red-ball cricket he boasts two Sheffield Shields 
from two spells in charge of New South Wales.

“Trevor has an outstanding record as a coach, has global experience and is 
very highly regarded in the game,” Strauss said. “He has proved himself in 
domestic and international cricket, has a strong reputation for man-management 
and has shown how to build winning teams in all three formats.”

Bayliss, speaking to the website of the England and Wales Cricket 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board, claimed his preferred 
approach was to work in the background and let others take the publicity – 
something Farbrace has confirmed.

“Trevor is an old-fashioned cricket coach and is a very calm guy who doesn’t 
say a great deal,” he said. “But when he does people listen. He won’t be sat 
out at the front all the time. It’s not about him. He encourages players to 
play. That’s his natural way.”

Both men were on the Sri Lanka team bus that was shot at during the Lahore 
terrorist attacks in 2009, an experience Farbrace admits strengthened their 
bond. “We’ve always had a good relationship but we were just grateful we got 
through that to be honest,” he said. “Something like that certainly does bring 
you closer together.”

Trevor Bayliss expertise in white-ball cricket a fine fit for England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/25/trevor-bayliss-england-new-head-coach-pedigree>
ECB (@ECB_cricket) 
ECB names Trevor Bayliss as @englandcricket 
<https://twitter.com/englandcricket>'s new Head Coach pic.twitter.com/KbWa1ZXV6u
 <http://t.co/KbWa1ZXV6u>
 <https://twitter.com/ECB_cricket/status/603168467517382657> May 26, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ECB_cricket/status/603168467517382657> ECB (@ECB_cricket) 
"It’s an honour to be appointed England Coach" - Trevor Bayliss READ: 
http://t.co/t4tAp7Kekn <http://t.co/t4tAp7Kekn> pic.twitter.com/4IjUVhKYM8 
<http://t.co/4IjUVhKYM8>
 <https://twitter.com/ECB_cricket/status/603169506920419328> May 26, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/ECB_cricket/status/603169506920419328>  