
Australia’s coach Michael Cheika has dropped the loosehead prop Scott Sio and 
overhauled his front row for the second Test against England in Melbourne on 
Saturday.

Sio, hailed as the saviour of the Australian scrum after his performances at 
last year’s World Cup, was comprehensively overpowered by England’s Dan Cole 
and ended up in the sin-bin inlast weekend’s 39-28 first Test defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/australia-england-first-test-match-report>
.

Chris Robshaw and England sense history in the making against Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/14/chris-robshaw-england-australia-second-test-melbourne>
James Slipper is promoted off the bench to replace Sio, while Sekope Kepu also 
steps up from the replacements to start instead of Greg Holmes at tighthead.

Otherwise, Cheika has kept faith with the tactics if not the personnel of the 
team that started in Brisbane. Sean McMahon will start at No8 in place of David 
Pocock, who fractured an eye socket in the opening match and was ruled out for 
the series. The dynamic McMahon, like Pocock, is a specialist openside flanker 
and will operate alongside Michael Hooper in the back row.

“Based on last weekend’s performance, we decided that we wanted some new 
combinations for Saturday’s game,” Cheika said. “Sean never takes a backwards 
step while James and Sekope add plenty of Test match experience.”

Sam Carter comes into the second row for Rob Simmons, who suffered a back 
injury in the opening Test, and will lock with his Brumbies team-mate Rory 
Arnold.

With a third ACT Brumbie in captain Stephen Moore throwing in, Cheika is 
clearly hoping club familiarity will add some solidity to the Australia lineout.

England’s Joe Marler faces RFU sanction for tweet about former Australia coach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/14/joe-marler-tweet-censure-england-australia-coach>
There are no changes to the backline, with wing Rob Horne having recovered 
from a knock to the head and Cheika sticking with his inexperienced centre 
partnership of Tevita Kuridrani and Samu Kerevi.

On the bench, where Cheika named 11 players with three to be omitted, a third 
openside flanker in Liam Gill earned a recall, while Wycliff Palu and Ben 
McCalman offer their coach the choice of two more traditional No8s.

Australia must win in Melbourne to stay alive in the series. The final Test 
takes place at the Sydney Football Stadium on 25 June.

Australia team to face England

15 Israel Folau, 14 Dane Haylett-Petty, 13 Tevita Kuridrani, 12 Samu Kerevi, 
11 Rob Horne, 10 Bernard Foley, 9 Nick Phipps, 8 Sean McMahon, 7 Michael 
Hooper, 6 Scott Fardy, 5 Sam Carter, 4 Rory Arnold, 3 Sekope Kepu, 2 Stephen 
Moore (captain), 1 James Slipper

Replacements (three to be omitted): Tatafu Polota-Nau, Toby Smith, Greg 
Holmes, James Horwill, Dean Mumm, Wycliff Palu, Ben McCalman, Liam Gill, Nick 
Frisby, Christian Lealiifano, Luke Morahan.
 