
Let’s redefine Australian patriotism.

It’s time, because on the eve of a two-month long federal election campaign, 
we’re about to be subject to all manner of evocations from public figures about 
their advancement of the national interest and their love of their country.

And there’s nothing quite like an election campaign, either, to bring on a 
thoughtless flood of metaphors likening political competition to mortal combat 
(and a thoughtless flood of metaphors, full stop).

And, so, the election, we’ve been advised, will be an exercise in drawn out 
“trench warfare”. Labor is already on the “war path” 
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/budgetelection-circus-the-greatest-show-ever-20160505-gomyyd.html>
, apparently, over an element of this week’s federal budget whilethe government 
has prepared itself a massive “war chest” 
<http://www.afr.com/news/politics/election/australias-longest-election-campaign-will-be-malcolms-biggest-test-20160419-go9q2b>
.

I shouldn’t be surprised that the language of war and street violence 
(factional bosses are “warlords” – yeah, right! – and you don’t undermine or 
challenge an opponent but knife them, they don’t suffer but bleed) has so 
imbued our political discourse.

For a century now, but with increasing emphasis in the past few decades, 
Australian history and culture has become increasingly militarised. The 
rose-coloured, government-funded (to the tune of up to $600m)festival of 
commemoration for the centenary of Anzac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/apr/25/australias-anzac-carnival-of-commemoration-leaves-some-things-not-talked-about>
, now in full swing, makes that even more pronounced.

Australia's Anzac carnival of commemoration leaves some things not talked about
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/apr/25/australias-anzac-carnival-of-commemoration-leaves-some-things-not-talked-about>
Sport and politics are the greatest examples.

Which brings me back to Australian patriotism and how the term has come to be 
increasingly and overwhelmingly applied to Australians who have fought – and 
continue to fight – wars in the name of Australia, all too often at the 
direction of Britain and the United States.

I’m not denying the sincerity of the proud patriotism – that is, the love of 
Australia – that many members of the armed forces espouse when asked why they 
fight.

But Australia, overwhelmed with nationalistic, rose-coloured, 
government-funded sentimentality during the four-year festival of Anzac 
commemoration, is blinkered when it comes to looking too far beyond the 
military for its patriotism.

The governor general, Peter Cosgrove, is a military man. Australia Day – for 
all its inappropriate symbolism given that it falls on the day of British 
invasion, 26 January – has as chair of its governing council, another military 
man, Ben Roberts-Smith.

Australia Day, Anzac Day <https://www.theguardian.com/news/anzac-day> and 
Remembrance Day (Armistice Day) are the big secular commemorative days in 
Australia. Whatever happened to Federation Day? Increasingly, meanwhile, the 
country stops at the behest of politicians, to remember troops who fought and 
died in a number of battles like Lone Pine, Fromelles, Bullecourt and Ypres.

So, let’s take a step back to consider what patriotism might mean for those 
who love and have loved their country, but would never fight in its name 
overseas or don an Australian military uniform.

Think about what a love of country really means. It’s something I’ve been 
questioning some of my Indigenous friends about in recent weeks. I’ve done that 
because, to my mind, the Indigenous experience of loving one’s country is 
closest to the purest form of Australian patriotism I can find.

Country: the earth from which the life force grows and to which it should 
ultimately return. Country: the place that provides food and shelter, and 
sustainable natural wealth. Country: the beauty of its trees, rocks, seas and 
creatures, and its sky overhead, to be celebrated and shared by all who 
experience it.

It’s why we should also celebrate the protectors of the environment, be they 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people or non-Indigenous farmers who work 
hard to work the soil naturally and replenish it for future generations.

One of my friends, an urban Indigenous man, described the surprising visceral 
outrage he felt when he’d witnessed a simple act of thoughtless pollution while 
visiting his people’s country. This was by way of explaining a deep spiritual 
connection to – and love of – country that he rarely visits.

Plenty of Indigenous people I know talk about how their responsibility to 
country begins and ends with protecting the land, and traditional ways of life, 
from the ravages of some mining ventures.

Land protection and climate change mitigation is franked with spiritual 
responsibility for Indigenous peoples the world over, not least in Australia. 
ManyIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians>, therefore, 
not surprisingly, see themselves as the first patriots of this continent – 
those who resisted attack and who’ve fought for their land from 1788. As an 
extension of that, they see fighting national and multinational mining 
companies that divide their communities and rape their lands as a continuum of 
the invasion and resistance.

The first person to really point this out to me was Garrwa artist and 
environmentalactivist Jacky Green, who is fighting the appalling Glencore 
mining venture on his family’s traditional lands at Borroloola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/30/jacky-green-nothing-has-really-changed-since-whitefellas-came-first-it-was-horses-now-bulldozers>
, Northern Territory.

I can begin a list of all of the other Australian patriots – Aboriginal, 
Torres Strait Islander and non-Indigenous. They are people motivated every day 
by love – a love that is sometimes hard and critical and questioning – of a 
land, and an ideal, that they want to protect from unfairness, cruelty, pain 
and inhumanity and environmental degradation. Theirs is a patriotism that will 
never wear a military uniform. They are refugee advocates, scientsists and 
doctors. Naturalists and archivists. Writers and artists. Teachers and 
occupational therapists. They include the man who drives the bus that takes the 
disabled young woman down the road to her place of work every day. They are the 
lesser known and the famous. Continue the list yourself.

But now, back to the politicians.

It's not 'politically correct' to say Australia was invaded, it's history | 
Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/mar/30/its-not-politically-correct-to-say-australia-was-invaded-its-history>
And where better place to finish than with Labor’s Melissa Parke, who spoke 
her valedictory in the House of Representatives this week after a decade as the 
member for Fremantle.

Australia needs more politicians like Parke, an often iconoclastic but always 
very important voice 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22chamber%2Fhansardr%2Fb610d191-4da6-422a-8c90-055755970d9e%2F0075%22>
 when it comes to pursuing peace, the rights of refugees and national security 
overreach.

“I came into this place to represent the Fremantle electorate and to engage in 
what I termed the war against indifference.

“Before I expand on that I would observe that there have been many wars fought 
in this place: the war on terror, the war on drugs, the war on people 
smugglers, the war on each other. Only the last one seems to have had any 
success, and that has been to the ultimate detriment of all of us and of public 
trust in our political system.”










 