
Michael Cheika has said Australia will not flinch from the “Bodyline” campaign 
being promised by his rival head coach Eddie Jones before this month’s triple 
bill against England, the first time the two countries have contested a 
three-Test series.

Dan Cole warns Australia that England’s scrummaging has regained its edge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/08/dan-cole-australia-england-scrummaging-first-test>
Having named four uncapped players in his match-day squad of 23 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/09/three-news-faces-to-start-for-wallabies-in-england-test-series-opener>
, including the tallest Australian new cap in history, Cheika is looking 
forward to matching his coaching wits against his old Randwick team-mate Jones 
and insists the Wallabies will not take a backward step in the opening Test at 
Suncorp Stadium on Saturday.

With the towering 6ft 9in lock Rory Arnold – nicknamed Three-Storey Rory – 
selected alongside the muscular midfield duo of Samu Kerevi and Tevita 
Kuridrani, Cheika’s selection has a distinct physical edge and he is 
unconcerned by English plans to rough up their hostsas Douglas Jardine’s 
cricketers did in the 1932-33 Ashes series on Australian soil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket-the-old-batsman-blog/2013/mar/13/fear-batting-bodyline-devastation-england-ashes>
.

“I understand the analogy but I’m not sure what it means,” said Cheika, after 
confirming his starting XV beneath clear blue skies at Ballymore, the 
traditional home of Queensland rugby. “I don’t know if it means head-high 
tackles or if it means aggression. If it means aggressive footy that’s good. 
That’s the game, it’s meant to be aggressive. It’s a contact sport and we love 
that. Respect to our opponents if they bring it on.”

The original Bodyline concept involved swift, short-pitched leg-side bowling 
aimed at discomforting the master batsman Donald Bradman and his team-mates and 
yielded a 4-1 series win for England. Cheika’s side, though,reached the World 
Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-v-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-live>
 last year and, in David Pocock, Michael Hooper and Scott Fardy, possess as 
effective and durable a back-row trio as any.

The Wallaby scrum is also significantly improved, with the ever-dangerous 
Israel Folau lurking at full-back. “We’re up for it – the contact part of the 
game, the aggression,” continued Cheika. “I imagine that’s what Bodyline means 
because you’re not going to come out and do head-high tackles. I don’t think so 
at least. I think fair play to them, it’s good stuff.”

In addition to Arnold and Kerevi, the Western Force winger Dane Haylett-Petty 
will also make his Test debut, while the uncapped Reds scrum-half Nick Frisby 
is on the bench.
 