
The Australian Bureau of Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-bureau-of-statistics> 
has had 14 data breaches since 2013, but it has defended its handling of 
Australians’ personal information amid privacy concerns over the 2016 census.

The Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) told Guardian 
Australia it had received 14 data breach notifications with regard to personal 
information held by the ABS since 2013.

The ABS has faced criticism from a number of privacy and civil liberties groups
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/census-2016-australians-who-dont-complete-form-over-privacy-concerns-face-fines>
 over changes to the 2016 census that will involve the retention of 
Australians’ names and addresses. This will mean that for the first time, the 
census will retain identifiable information on all Australians for a period of 
four years. The ABS has said this will allow it to form a “richer and dynamic 
statistical picture” of the country.

While none of the breaches were related to the handling of census details, a 
key criticism from groups such as the AustralianPrivacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/privacy> Foundation highlighted how 
difficult it was to secure vast amounts of personal information once it was 
retained.


Census 2016: Australians who don't complete form over privacy concerns face 
fines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/census-2016-australians-who-dont-complete-form-over-privacy-concerns-face-fines>
All 14 data breach notifications since 2013 were voluntarily made to the OAIC 
by the ABS, a spokeswoman for the information commissioner’s office said.

“The ABS appears to have taken a precautionary or ‘pro-disclosure’ approach to 
voluntarily notifying the OAIC of all matters regardless of the severity of the 
breach, indicating a transparent approach,” she said.

“None of the notifications received related to disclosure or mishandling of 
any census data, or to attempts by an external party to expose or steal 
information.”

 The ABS’ decision to voluntarily report the data breaches is considered best 
practice in a legal environment where it is not yet a mandatory requirement.

A spokesman for the ABS said it took its privacy obligations very seriously.

“The ABS continually reviews its processes to strengthen data handling 
policies and procedures. OAIC notifications routinely result in reviews that 
further strengthen ABS’ approach,” he said.

2016 is census year! But you can stick your census in your ear, you won't get 
any data here | First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2016/mar/30/2016-is-census-year-but-you-can-stick-your-census-in-your-ear-you-wont-get-any-data-here>
The spokesman said the bureau’s handling of information was audited externally 
as well as internationally.

“The ABS securely manages hundreds of thousands of electronic and paper forms 
every year – with more than 9 million forms received during a census year 
alone. Forms are tracked from the point of collection to secure destruction,” 
he said.

“The public can be confident that the ABS has stringent policies and vigilant 
staff to protect privacy and confidentiality.”

The census debate has continued to cause alarm, and some individuals and 
groups have called for a boycott of the count.Australians who refuse to answer 
questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/census-2016-australians-who-dont-complete-form-over-privacy-concerns-face-fines>
 in the 2016 census over privacy concerns surrounding the retention of their 
personal information could face fines.
 