
The release last week of the latest capital expenditure 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/ProductsbyReleaseDate/C6EF1D79E13B24EACA257235007866B1?OpenDocument>
 figures reminded us yet again that the mining boom is well and truly over and 
that this Wednesday’s GDP figures will see us hoping for a strong performance 
from our exports. Investment has deteriorated quickly and horribly in the past 
year – so much so that finding any good news amid the figures requires digging 
through an awful lot of muck.

Australia's transition from the mining boom is bust. Or is it? | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2015/nov/30/transition-mining-boom-is-bust-or-is-it>
My favorite comment on the capital expenditure figure was from economist 
Stephen Koukoulas <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stephen-koukoulas> who 
tweeted <https://twitter.com/TheKouk/status/702673143173816320>: “Capex data 
sort of unhorrible. That is still bad, especially the outlook, but could have 
been worse.”

Welcome to Australia after the mining boom – where describing investment 
figures as “sort of unhorrible” qualifies as a positive outlook.

Personally I think the figures stink worse than a backed-up sewerage pipe. But 
Koukoulas is right in that there is some good news. The only problem is that to 
reach it you have to dig deep and pull out the economic equivalent of a7m snake 
of baby wipes 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-02-25/monster-wet-wipes-blockage-pulled-out-of-sewer-pipe/7199230>
 (and that might be underselling it).

How badly do the figures stink?

The December quarter recorded just $31.3bn worth of new investment – the 
lowest volume since March 2011 down 4% on the September quarter. Worst of all 
it was a horrific 17.8% below the level of 12 months ago:

That 17.8% fall is the second largest annual fall on record, going back to 
1988. The only bigger fall occurred in 1991 – in the midst of one of 
Australia’s worst recessions.

The main culprit, as ever, is the mining industry.

Capital expenditure in mining fell 28% in 2015 – the worst fall since 
September 2000.

But investment in the manufacturing and “other selected” industries also fell. 

The fall in mining investment has been so sharp that there is now more 
investment occurring in the “other selected industries” group (although it is 
worth remembering “other selected industries” is made up of 10 separate 
industries, the largest of which has investment about 20% that of the mining 
industry):

The fall in “other selected industries” however is in some ways more 
concerning than that in the mining sector, because we need investment to crank 
up in those industries if we want to transition smoothly away from the mining 
boom.

This was the sector that Joe Hockey and Bruce Billson targeted in last year’s 
budget with a $20,000 instant asset write-off for small businesses. The hope 
was that small businesses would take the opportunity to invest in machinery and 
equipment.

But on the surface it seems the response has been pretty pathetic. 

In the December quarter, investment in machinery and equipment the “other 
selected industries” sector fell 2.7%. As this followed falls in the September 
and June quarter, it means investment in machinery and equipment in the very 
sector Hockey was targeting is lower now than it was at the time of the May 
budget:

All of which adds up to something rather worse than “sort of unhorrible”.

Fortunately the news is slightly better when we look to the future. 

The capital expenditure figures not only provide data on how much expenditure 
has been made, but also how much firms expect to invest over the coming 
financial year.

In the latest batch of data we have the fifth estimate for capital expenditure 
in 2015-16 (there are seven estimates made each year, with the last one being 
the actual figures), and also the first estimate for investment in 2016-17.

The first estimate is always lower than the final tally, so the best way to 
analyse it is to compare it to the first estimate of the previous year. This 
allows us to see whether firms are getting more optimistic about investing:

And it is fair to say, they are not. 

The first estimate for investment in the mining industry in 2016-17 is 36.2% 
lower than was first estimate for 2015-16.

That’s a record fall.

The estimate is lower than the amount the mining industry thought it would 
invest all the way back in 2009-10 – and this is in current dollars so the 
volume will be even worse.

How bad is it? Well last year’s budget 
<http://www.budget.gov.au/2015-16/content/bp1/html/bp1_bs2.htm> expected mining 
investment in 2016-17 to fall 30.5%, so it is even worse than those very 
pessimistic forecasts.

Even worse, the non-mining sector side is stinking up the joint as well. 

The budget hoped investment in the non-mining sector in 2016-17 would rise by 
7.5%. Unfortunately the first estimate for investment in that area of the 
economy is 1.1% lower than the previous year.

Cheery eh?

So what is that good news? Well it is small, but significantly it in the area 
where Hockey and Billson were hoping to create some buzz.

The plan to lift the investment in machinery and equipment appears at first 
glance not to have paid off. Not only is current investment in such things 
lower than last year, so too is the fifth estimate for 2015-16 lower than was 
the fifth estimate for 2014-15:

But when we compare the fifth estimate to the second estimate – as that was 
the one made just before last year’s May budget – we find a faint pleasant 
smell amidst the odorous refuse of the rest of the figures.

While the fifth estimate is always a larger than the second estimate, it is 
usually only about 25% larger. The latest estimate for non-mining investment in 
machinery and equipment however is 43% larger than that made prior to last 
year’s May budget – the third biggest jump on record, and the biggest since 
1997-98.

Boom and dust: uncertain future for the mining town run by Rio Tinto
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/11/-sp-boom-to-dust-uncertain-future-for-town-run-by-rio-tinto>
Clearly the $20,000 instant asset write off has had an impact. Firms are 
investing a lot more than they were planning to before the May budget, and the 
increase is much greater than normally occurs.

So yes, you can say the policy has worked – but it really only translates to a 
state where things are “not unhorrific” rather than it showing a great positive 
spur in investment growth.

For the most part however, when you look at the capital expenditure figures, 
you just want to hold your nose and hope better news from exports and other 
areas of the economy will soon flush the smell away.
 