
All the main parties’ manifestos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/manifestos-2015> include in their arts 
programmes commitments to increasing access and diversity. These are worthy and 
important goals in themselves, but at the same time no party – savethe Greens 
<https://www.greenparty.org.uk/we-stand-for/2015-manifesto.html> – addresses 
the issue of the cuts in local arts services, which are severing the branch on 
which these twin goals sit.


These cuts are part of the hidden and rarely commented on effects of austerity 
over the last five years, which have had a considerable impact on local 
government services of all kinds, but which have fallen particularly hard on 
areas such as culture, which some perceive as non-essential.

The result is a severe erosion of the availability of culture to young people 
with the closure oflocal libraries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jul/12/library-campaigners-1000-closures-2016>
,smaller theatres 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/funding-cuts-threaten-future-wales-6715406>
, andcuts to the provision of music services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2014/jun/05/music-education-england-michael-gove>
.

It is pointless having a top-down commitment to access and diversity from the 
government-supported institutions if considerable cuts to funding are forcing 
local authorities to narrow their cultural programmes and opportunities.

Costs of music lessons in Pembrokeshire 
<http://www.westerntelegraph.co.uk/news/11597127.Pembrokeshire_music_lessons_cost_to_rise/>
, for example, are expected to rise by up to £4 an hour, with an additional 
travel cost of around £60 per pupil per term for transport to ensemble 
practices which was previously free, all as a result of Pembrokeshire county 
council music service needing to cut their funding by £75,000 in 2014/15, and 
having to cut by the same amount in 2015/16. If theplans by Wiltshire council 
to cut music tuition <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-wiltshire-31746007> 
as part of making a required £30m of savings go ahead, they could deprive those 
from lower-income families of benefiting from funding that placed music 
teachers in schools. These cases are not isolated; we are seeing similar 
occurrences right across the country.

There is not merely a disjunction between pious but empty commitments in the 
manifestos and the reality within the fabric of cultural provision, but also 
between other official statements about the role of the arts in education. As 
Vikki Heywood said, the key message of theWarwick Commission’s final report on 
the future of cultural value 
<http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/research/warwickcommission/futureculture/finalreport/warwick_commission_report_2015.pdf>
 – which found that only 8% of the population can be defined as “culturally 
active” – is that “... the government and the cultural and creative industries 
need to take a united and coherent approach that guarantees equal access for 
everyone to a rich cultural education and the opportunity to live a creative 
life. There are barriers and inequalities in Britain today that prevent this 
from being a universal human right. This is bad for business and bad for 
society.”

At the moment, the manifestos suggest that government expects the creative 
industries to take a lead on this, without acknowledging that the unintentional 
consequences of government policy on local government is raising those barriers 
and inequalities.

With the creative industries worth £76.9bn per year to the UK economy, it 
doesn’t make sense to hack off the grassroots provision that leads to the 
discovery and nurturing of talent and expressive ability

The commission quite rightly sets out the value to Britain of the entire 
“eco-system” of cultural life, which starts with provision at the school level, 
and ends up by delivering brilliant public spectacles such asthe opening of the 
Olympics <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4As0e4de-rI>. With the creative 
industries worth £76.9bn per year to the UK economy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/394668/Creative_Industries_Economic_Estimates_-_January_2015.pdf>
, it doesn’t make sense to hack off the grassroots provision that leads to the 
discovery and nurturing of talent and expressive ability. This damage to the 
fabric of cultural provision is especially dangerous as we may not even be 
aware of the full consequences till these children mature in 15 years’ time 
into an increasingly segregated society.

DCMS statistics <https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/sat--2> already 
evidence that participation in arts activities in schools is dropping, with 
participation in music activities dropping from 55.3% to a worryingly low 37.2% 
between 2009 and 2013/14. While inspection targets appreciate the arts in 
schools, the focus remains around literacy and numeracy levels and the decrease 
in education budgets across the UK doesn’t allow for additional cultural 
provision.

This is the opposite of what is proposed by the Donaldson Report into 
education in Wales <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-31606122>, which 
specifically recommends that the curriculum be organised into “six areas of 
learning and experience: expressive arts; health and wellbeing; humanities; 
languages, literacy and communication; maths and numeracy; and science and 
technology”.

Inspired by the placing of “expressive arts” at the head of this list, the 
Welsh government has announceda fund of £20m over the next five years for arts 
in education 
<http://learning.wales.gov.uk/news/pressreleases/launch-of-creative-learning-through-the-arts-an-action-plan-for-wales/?lang=en>
 with the potential to reach a third of schools in Wales over the five-year 
period of this plan, which is in itself highly admirable, but is simultaneously 
undermined by the local authority cuts.

Essentially, I don’t believe this problem is truly political. I don’t believe 
anyone set out with the specific intention of slashing cultural provision at 
the grassroots, and whichever government comes into power, the amount of 
available money is not going to change radically. So what is really important 
is that the damage is recognised and acknowledged rather than being buried 
under more eye-catching headlines. For instance,Labour has made a commitment in 
their manifesto <http://b.3cdn.net/labouruk/e1d45da42456423b8c_vwm6brbvb.pdf> 
to a “universal entitlement to a creative education for every child”, but the 
achievement of this policy could be being simultaneously undermined by the 
withdrawal of local authority support.

This may seem like a tough case to make in the face of financial pressure on 
mainstream health and education, but we are all increasingly aware that 
well-being is not something that can be segmented into physical health alone. 
There are many kinds of health, and a lively mind stimulated and nurtured by 
cultural experience is one very important kind of health – a kind of health 
that can inspire and energise a new generation. We urge all parties to wake up 
to the reality, before that new generation becomes a lost generation.

David Pountney is chief executive and artistic director of Welsh National Opera
 <http://wno.org.uk>. 
 