
In a week dominated by controversy over China’s soft power forays in 
Australian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics>, a new report 
recommends the Australian government take practical steps to level the playing 
field, and exert some soft power of its own.


The report from Wanning Sun, professor of media and communication at the 
University of Technology, Sydney, suggests the Australian government “could 
take the opportunity to use Chinese online media to exert Australian soft power 
and explain its position on controversial matters such as the SouthChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea dispute.”

Dastyari affair: goodbye, second-chance Sam. But we really need donation 
reform | Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/dastyari-affair-goodbye-second-chance-sam-but-we-really-need-donation-reform>
It also suggests Australian business interests should be much more active on 
Chinese social media sites, like WeChat.


The new analysis considers whether or not Chinese media outlets in Australia 
are now little more than propagandists for the regime at home.

It notes that Chinese-language media in Australia used to be dominated by 
outlets catering to earlier Cantonese-speaking generations.

“Nowadays a vibrant media landscape has emerged that targets a 
Mandarin-speaking migrant community from the People’s Republic of China,” the 
report says. “Accompanying this shift in consumer demographic has been a 
discernible shift from a mostly critical coverage of China to a mostly 
supportive stance.”

The analysis notes that the shift in tone has happened during a period where 
the Chinese state-run media has become “to some extent, integrated with Chinese 
media in Australia.”

“That said, there is little clear evidence that such localised propaganda has 
a direct impact on Chinese-speaking audiences, let alone the broader Australian 
community,” the report says, noting Chinese migrants are often sceptical about 
state media, and have access outside China to a range of publications and 
points of view.

The report follows a week of controversy after it was revealed the Labor 
senator Sam Dastyari, asked a Chinese businessman to cover a travel overspend.

In asking for and accepting a payment of $1,670.82 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/04/sam-dastyari-donation-legal-but-way-outside-voter-expectations-says-labor>
 from a businessman Minshen Zhu, Dastyari said he had “fallen short” in his 
duty as a member of parliament, andhe resigned from the Labor front bench on 
Wednesday evening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
.

The imbroglio has triggered a conversation about China’s exercise of soft power
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/dastyaris-donations-reveal-a-bigger-story-of-links-and-largesse>
 in this country through business and political networks, andthere is now a 
significant push on to ban foreign donations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/sam-dastyari-resignation-coalition-open-to-labor-calls-for-donation-reform>
 as part of an overhaul of the donations and disclosure system.

Malcolm Turnbull has also faced questions at the G20 and the East Asia Summit 
about China’s aggressive posture in the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/malcolm-turnbull-urges-caution-on-south-china-sea-before-asean-summit>
, and the prime minster has called for a de-escalation of tensions.

The report says Chinese-language online media, particularly social media, has 
helped major Australian political parties to win votes from the Chinese 
diaspora.

“But they have also fanned Chinese nationalist sentiments, mostly siding with 
China if there is a potential clash between the two nations on matters of 
national pride, sovereignty and territoriality,” it says.

“This online space has also become a popular forum for the Chinese migrant 
students to express palpable frustration, even anger, with Australia’s 
perceived tendency to follow the United States in its foreign policy towards 
China.”

It suggests the Australian government should be less passive given there has 
been a huge expansion in the use and influence of Chinese online and social 
media: “It is not the exclusive domain of the Chinese government to spurt 
propaganda or give fuel to nationalist sentiment,” the report says.

“The Australian government, for example, could take the opportunity to use 
Chinese online media to exert Australian soft power and explain its position on 
controversial matters such as the South China Sea dispute,” it says.

“Likewise, Chinese social media are extremely powerful tools for networking 
with Chinese business individuals, promoting Australian brand names and 
products, identifying trade and investment opportunities, and targeting the 
Chinese population in order to grow one’s business clientele.”

“Yet due to cultural and linguistic barriers the mainstream Australian 
business sector has been slow to take advantage of what Chinese social media 
such as WeChat has to offer.”
 