
Australia’s political donations regime is so inadequate that 85% of the 
privately raised income going to major political parties is hidden from public 
scrutiny, a new report has found.

The report by the activist group GetUp, Dark Money: The Hidden Millions 
Corrupting Australian Politics 
<http://cdn.getup.org.au/1955-1611_Dark_Money_Full_Report_(1).pdf>, shows the 
disclosure of donations is “entirely optional” in practice, since sums as large 
as $20m can easily be hidden using donation splitting.

 “Dark money <https://darkmoney.getup.org.au/>” refers to privately raised 
income that cannot be attributed in a transparent way to specific donors.

GetUp calls for real-time disclosure of political donations above $500
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/01/getup-real-time-disclosure-political-donations-above-500>
The report – written by Belinda Edwards of the University of New South Wales, 
a former economic adviser under John Howard – shows the amount of declared 
donations has shrunk over the past decade.

Donations declared to the Australian Electoral Commission (AEC) made up 30% of 
the Liberal party’s income in the 2007-08 election year, but only 25% in 
2013-14 – $19.3m of the party’s total income of $78.6m.

For Labor the pattern was less clear, complicated by the fact its income fell 
over the period.


In 2013-14, Labor’s declared donations made up 25%, or $11.6m of its total 
income of $46.3m. The unions accounted for $3.8m of that $11.6m, and another 
$1.8m came from organisations whose sources of income are difficult to track.

“Only 12% of [Labor’s] income of $46m can be seen to be clearly and easily 
identified as political donations in the AEC database,” the report said.

Natalie O’Brien, GetUp’s campaigns director, said where such huge proportions 
of party incomes were not transparently disclosed, it threw “considerable 
doubt” over the disclosure system.

“By piecing together fragments of publicly available data, this research 
reveals millions of dollars in dark money hidden from public scrutiny,” O’Brien 
said.


“Australian law requires all payments to politicians over $13,200 to be 
publicly declared – an important transparency measure to stop corruption.


“But right now there are gaping legal loopholes that see tens of millions of 
dollars funnelled into the pockets of our politicians with no oversight, no 
accountability.”


The report said there were significant problems with the way the AEC presented 
political donations data, making it impossible for researchers and journalists 
to know who was donating to whom, and how much was being donated.

In the 2013-14 election year, the year for which the most recent data was 
available:


 * The two major parties declared less than 25% of their privately raised 
income as donations to AEC 
 * About half of those donations came from party fundraising bodies. As a 
result, only 12-15% of the two major parties’ incomes could be clearly and 
easily attributed to specific political donors. 
 * This meant the majority of major party income was undisclosed dark money – 
63% ($48m) in the case of the Liberal party, and 50% ($23m) for the Labor party.
 * Similarly, 79% ($4m) of the Nationals income and 85% ($8.9m) of the Greens 
income, was undisclosed dark money, although the total sums involved were far 
lower. 
GetUp says all donations to a party or party group above $500 a year should be 
disclosed on the internet in real time. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/01/getup-real-time-disclosure-political-donations-above-500>

Australian political donations 2014-15: search the data
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/datablog/ng-interactive/2016/feb/01/australian-political-donations-2014-15-search-the-data>
It also wants to cap the amount any individual or corporation can donate at 
$1,000 per financial year, and introduce expenditure caps on election campaigns 
to remove incentives to accumulate large political fighting funds.

Edwards, in her submission to the parliamentary inquiry into electoral 
matters, said the AEC could improve its data presentation by categorising 
political donations and other receipts received from businesses, unions and 
other organisations using Australian Bureau of Statistics industry codes.

She said donations should also be categorised by the electorates the donor 
records as their address.
 