
Austria’s rejection of far-right presidential candidate Norbert Hofer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
 is a rare high note in 2016. Unlike the Brexit referendum and the US 
elections, this vote was not just a choice between the status quo and change, 
or the establishment and the fringes. Mainstream politicians had already been 
eliminated in the first round, leaving only outsiders in the game: a xenophobic 
gun enthusiast and a green party-backed professor. It was a runoff between 
greed and solidarity, hatred and empathy, and, potentially war and peace.

Italy referendum: 'Period of uncertainty' predicted after Matteo Renzi's 
defeat – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/dec/04/italian-referendum-and-austrian-presidential-election-live>
The victory of the left-leaning Alexander Van der Bellen has provided many 
Europhiles with hope for the continent’s future. All acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, liberals have celebrated it as 
a sign that not all countries are turning their backs on rationality and 
progress. Some have even read it as a positive omen for the 2017 elections in 
Germany and France.

Yes, there is reason for optimism – but optimism within reason. After all, 46% 
of Austria’s votes went to a man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/victory-for-van-der-bellen-and-the-left-is-a-sigh-of-relief-for-europe>
 whose party was partly founded by Nazis with a record of antisemitism and an 
agenda of anti-Muslim bigotry. The sheer fact that a country in the heart of 
Europe was so close to electing Europe’s first far-right head of state since 
the second world war is deeply unsettling.

Like many of its neighbouring countries, Austria’s political centre ground is 
clinically dead. Reanimating it for the country’s much more meaningful 
parliamentary elections – expected to be 2018 – will be difficult, if not 
impossible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdefeat-austria-far-right-norbert-hofer-hope-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6678538ea93f8140c6d5f46cd21b4d0d01d8aff4%2F0_152_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Austria%20defeated%20the%20far-right%20Norbert%20Hofer%20%E2%80%93%20finally%2C%20some%20hope%20for%20Europe%20%7C%20Julia%20Ebner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdefeat-austria-far-right-norbert-hofer-hope-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Austria%20defeated%20the%20far-right%20Norbert%20Hofer%20%E2%80%93%20finally%2C%20some%20hope%20for%20Europe%20%7C%20Julia%20Ebner&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fdefeat-austria-far-right-norbert-hofer-hope-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6678538ea93f8140c6d5f46cd21b4d0d01d8aff4%2F0_152_3296_1978%2F3296.jpg>
 ‘Norbert Hofer wanted to take the country two steps back.’ Photograph: 
GmbH/Rex/Shutterstock 
French far-right leader Marine Le Pen consoled Hofer and his team on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/MLP_officiel/status/805451935495127040> shortly after 
their defeat, asserting that “the next parliamentary elections will see their 
victory”. With current polls suggesting that the Freedom party will win with 
roughly one-third support over all other parties, Le Pen’s prediction is not 
that far-fetched. Although, whobelieves in polling these days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/tyrolian-villages-divided-as-austria-goes-back-to-the-polls>
?

Regardless of Austria’s fate, it is impossible to overlook the general trend 
that is emerging across western liberal democracies: a battle against the 
“corrupt” politicians; the “educated” elites; the “biased” media; the 
“multicultural” left; and above all against the “others”. Countries who do not 
have to reserve seats for regressive, far-right party members in their 
parliaments have become the exception rather than the norm.
Marine Le Pen (@MLP_officiel) 
Félicitations au FPÖ qui s'est battu avec courage. Les prochaines législatives 
seront celles de leur victoire ! MLP
 <https://twitter.com/MLP_officiel/status/805451935495127040> December 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MLP_officiel/status/805451935495127040> 
There was much deja vu for Austrians in this election. Yes, there was the fact 
that they had to complete their ballot papers for the third time this year, 
after enduring the longest – and most expensive – campaign in Austria’s 
history. But there was also something much more troubling. When listening to 
Hofer’s populist-nationalist rhetoric, one could not help but feel reminded of 
the 1930s. He increasingly hijacked religion as a populist mobilisation tool, 
to the extent that even Austrian church officials felt compelled to distance 
themselves from his campaign posters, which read “so help me God”.

Austria rejects far-right candidate Norbert Hofer in presidential election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
Much of the progress achieved over the past century was at stake. Minority 
rights. Gender equality. Religious freedom. European cooperation. While Hofer 
wanted to take the country two steps back – chillingly close to the 1930s – we 
can expect Van der Bellen to take it a step forward.

The outrage of Hofer’s sympathisers was palpable both on social media and in 
the streets. Similar to the spikes in post-Brexit referendum hate crimes, the 
Freedom party’s aggressive campaigning has fuelled political violence and hate 
speech across the country. Since the start of the year,hate crimes 
<http://www.thelocal.at/20161125/hate-speech-cases-soar-in-austria> against 
ethnic and religious minorities and re-engagement into Nazi activities have 
risen at an unprecedented pace.

But finger-pointing is unhelpful. In order for history not to repeat itself, 
we have to start asking where this aggressive anti-establishment wind that is 
sweeping across Europe and the US is coming from. We need to dissect the 
complex cocktail of grievances that has brought us this rough climate in the 
first place: the marginalisation of majorities whose anger, fear and perceived 
powerlessness is being transformed into greed, bitterness and hatred.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fvan-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Van%20der%20Bellen%3A%20Austria%20vote%20a%20signal%20of%20hope%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fvan-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Van%20der%20Bellen%3A%20Austria%20vote%20a%20signal%20of%20hope%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fvan-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video&media=>
Van der Bellen: Austria vote a signal of hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/05/van-der-bellen-austria-vote-a-signal-of-hope-video>
Overcoming these strong emotions and mending the deep divisions they have 
caused will be a tremendously difficult task. But with a president who views 
the strength of his country in its heterogeneity rather than its homogeneity 
and brings out the best in its population rather than its worst, we are in a 
good starting position to take on this challenge.

In the 20th century we Austrians have been responsible for history’s most 
destructive wars. Now we have the chance to show the world that we can be a 
force that drives peace and solidarity rather than conflict and divisions in 
the 21st century.
 