
The 2016 budget hit poor families hardest even though high income earners were 
slugged through tighter superannuation tax concessions, according to new 
modelling.

The analysis by Australian National University associate professor Ben 
Phillips found the main changes in the budget left Australian households $345 a 
year worse off, on average.

Beware tax cuts for 'Middle Australia'. Above-average earners benefit most
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/may/07/beware-tax-cuts-for-middle-australia-above-average-earners-benefit-most>
The modelling found households in the lowest 20% of income earners were $446 a 
year worse off, a loss of 1.5% of their disposable income, compared with the 
top 20% of households who were $434 a year worse off, just 0.2% of their income.

When superannuation changes are ignored, top-income households were actually 
$211 a year better off, showing the extent to whichthe tighter concessions were 
key to the government’s claim not only low-income earners were hit <http:// 
http://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/superannuation-coalition-tighter-tax-concessions-budget-wealthiest>
.

The ANU modelling considered the effect of nine major budget changes in the 
year 2018-19, when they would be fully implemented.

The changes measured included reductions in family tax benefit payments, 
increasing tobacco excise and personal income tax cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/03/budget-2016-jobs-and-growth-pitch-costs-wealthy-retirees-smokers-and-multinationals>
 for workers earning more than $80,0000.

The hardest hit by changes were single parents in the lowest 20% of income 
earners, who lost $1,407, or 3.6% of their income. Couples with children in the 
lowest bracket lost $1,146 or 2.7% of their income.

It concluded the modelling “clearly shows that the proposed measures in the 
2016-17 budget would impact low-income families with children more 
significantly than other families”.

“The losses for the middle and top income groups are proportionately much less 
than low income families.”

The largest measure in overall dollar impact terms are the welfare changes 
which have an average annual impact of taking $254 a year away from families in 
2018-19. Those hit hardest by this measure were families in the second lowest 
income group, who lost $460 a year on average.

The next largest impact was from increases to tobacco excise, which caused 
families to lose on average $173. For those in the bottom income group, they 
lost 0.5% of their disposable income to higher tobacco tax, but for high income 
earners just 0.1% was lost on this measure.

Moving the 37% tax bracket from $80,000 to $87,000 had the third largest 
impact, with average gains of $118 for families, which almost entirely benefit 
the top 40% of income earners.

The report said “the superannuation changes do assist in providing a more 
progressive budget impact”.

The superannuation changes that were considered included reintroducing the low 
income superannuation tax offset, increased taxation on superannuation balances 
over $1.6m and restricting concessional annual contributions to $25,000 a year.

These cost households $92 a year on average. The top 20% were worse off by 
$645, due to superannuation changes, while the bottom 20% were better off by 
$34, thanks to the low-income superannuation tax offset.

You're not a 'bludger' if you pay no net tax in Australia | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/may/12/youre-not-a-bludger-if-you-pay-no-net-tax-in-australia>
“The superannuation changes, while significant, are not enough to alter the 
conclusion that this budget has a regressive impact,” the report concluded.

That was because superannuation changes were only $900m of the $3.4bn of 
changes modelled.

Despite the regressive impact, the report said “this budget has a lower impact 
on low-income families than the previous two budgets”.

“Analysis of the 2015 budget shows that budget to have an impact more than 
twice that of this budget for the lowest income families and a roughly similar 
impact [very little] for high- and middle-income families for 2018-19.”
 