
Canberra <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/canberra> was never meant 
to have an Australian war memorial.

In 1912 when Walter Griffin and his wife, Marion Mahony Griffin, won the 
international competition to design the capital of newly federated Australia, 
their plan included a casino where the monument to this country’s 102,000 war 
dead now stands instead.

This “casino” defied any evocation of poker machines, blackjack or roulette. 
Instead, set at the foot of Mount Ainslie (an elevation named after fake 
Scottish war hero, James Ainslie, that anchors the northern end of the land 
axis on the Griffins’ plan of beautiful geometry and orbit) the casino was to 
feature a leisure park, al fresco cafes, a theatre and beer gardens.

The city’s conservative Anglophile planners, chief among them veteran generals 
of the Boer War, loathed the European-style casino as much as they did the 
Griffins. They had already set about undermining the Griffin plan when the 
first world war intervened to do it for them. Australia’s optimism and social 
cohesion vanished. Suddenly a federation, uncharacteristically born without 
bloodshed, found itself divided over war and stoically nation building while 
mourning 62,000 killed and missing – and several hundred thousand more who 
could never be the same.


Australia changed irrevocably. The plan for Canberra was correspondingly 
redrawn to include the Australian War Memorial whose concept came to the 
country’s official first world war historian, Charles Bean, after a dying 
digger on the European western front asked if the people back home would 
remember him.

Bean could not have imagined Australia today. But given its immense popularity 
among Australian and international visitors, and the resurgence of 
commemoration during the centenary of the first world war there is no doubt the 
memorial stands as a prescient testimony to national sentiment and the 
bipartisan politics underpinning it.


Last year the war memorial was named Australia’s top landmark by TripAdvisor 
<http://www.traveller.com.au/canberras-australian-war-memorial-named-top-landmark-by-tripadvisor-zsaqu>
 – ahead of the Sydney opera house, the Great Barrier Reef and Uluru. It also 
came in at 17 worldwide.


The memorial’s director, Brendan Nelson – who took up the post almost two and 
a half years ago after a career as a doctor, head of the Australian Medical 
Association, federal government minister, Liberal leader and diplomat – 
inquired about number 18.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Faustralian-war-memorial-the-remarkable-rise-and-rise-of-the-nations-secular-shrine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d2c86dca33b3b9c0016fe1cb006b316ce12d954%2F0_235_5424_3255%2F5424.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20War%20Memorial%3A%20the%20remarkable%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20the%20nation's%20secular%20shrine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Faustralian-war-memorial-the-remarkable-rise-and-rise-of-the-nations-secular-shrine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20War%20Memorial%3A%20the%20remarkable%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20the%20nation%27s%20secular%20shrine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Faustralian-war-memorial-the-remarkable-rise-and-rise-of-the-nations-secular-shrine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d2c86dca33b3b9c0016fe1cb006b316ce12d954%2F0_235_5424_3255%2F5424.jpg>
 Dawn breaks over the Australian War Memorial on 25 April 2015 – Anzac Day. 
Photograph: Mark Graham/AFP/Getty Images 
“When I asked them what was number 18 they said the pyramids,” 56-year-old 
Nelson tells me, as we sit in his office overlooking the land axis that serves 
as the militarily precise Anzac Parade (the Griffins had planned it as a midway 
pleasance gardens leading to the casino).


“The centenary has heightened interest in all things that relate to our 
military history. I also think the way in which the stories are presented here 
[is] consistent with Bean’s vision of the place – it’s a semi-spiritual 
ambience in the Hall of Memory but in the galleries themselves ... there is no 
sense of triumphalism, there’s no sense certainly of the glorification of war, 
there is respect that is shown to our former foes ... the stories themselves of 
the individuals ... are told in ways that are compelling and interesting.”


Nelson, about half way through his five-year contract, ranges broadly during 
our conversation about the direction of the memorial on his watch, its 
depiction of Indigenous Australians, its refusal to depict colonial frontier 
war, the impact of war on service personnel and their families, and the 
pantheon of the first world war in Australia’s cultural and historical 
narrative.


Prime minister Tony Abbott paid tribute to Nelson 
<http://www.pm.gov.au/media/2015-05-12/motion-one-hundredth-anniversary-landings-gallipoli>
 in federal parliament last week, praising the war memorial’s part in first 
world war commemorations on which the federal government has spent more than 
$330m, including $32m on upgrading the memorial’s galleries.

Nelson and the federal government had been expecting a crowd of perhaps 50,000 
to attend the memorial’s dawn service. But more than 100,000 turned up to see a 
lone Indigenous serviceman playing the yidaki at sunrise – a moment of acute 
commemorative (and televisual) sentiment and emotion.

The memorial is charged with helping Australians “remember, interpret and 
understand” Australia’s war experience. Directors will, inevitably, prosecute 
that mandate according to individual predilection and interpretation. Certainly 
in the case of Nelson (appointed by a Labor government as Australian ambassador 
to Nato and the European Union, and to the memorial directorship) Australia’s 
secular shrine has become ever more visible.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Faustralian-war-memorial-the-remarkable-rise-and-rise-of-the-nations-secular-shrine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0097ab3625ad967529dc95dea7a746c4adc4cbb%2F0_0_2456_3679%2F2456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20War%20Memorial%3A%20the%20remarkable%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20the%20nation's%20secular%20shrine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Faustralian-war-memorial-the-remarkable-rise-and-rise-of-the-nations-secular-shrine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20War%20Memorial%3A%20the%20remarkable%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20the%20nation%27s%20secular%20shrine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Faustralian-war-memorial-the-remarkable-rise-and-rise-of-the-nations-secular-shrine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0097ab3625ad967529dc95dea7a746c4adc4cbb%2F0_0_2456_3679%2F2456.jpg>
 Brendan Nelson with one of the Menin Gate lions at the war memorial. The two 
lions once stood at the Menin Gate at Ypres. Photograph: Alan Porritt/AAP 
He has: introduced a daily Menin Gate-style Last Post ceremony; projected the 
names of the 62,000 first world war dead onto the memorial’s exterior; opened a 
permanent exhibition on Australian service personnel in Afghanistan (while 
operations continued); overseen the refurbishment of the first world war 
galleries; attracted considerable new media attention (a Google app features 
schoolchildren speaking the names of the first war’s 62,000 dead; History 
Channel filmed a documentary). Controversially, he has also continued 
sponsorship from corporations, some of which manufacture military hardware and 
weapons. All the while, he has effectively been Australia’s civilian 
commemorator in chief - preparing Australia’s most revered and popular public 
institution for thefour-year festival of commemoration  
<https://www.awm.gov.au/1914-1918/commemorative-crosses-project/>of the global 
cataclysm that was the first world war but to which Australia refers 
parochially as Anzac100.


He has, meanwhile, expanded the narrative about Indigenous personnel in all 
Australian wars and conflicts (except those between soldiers, settlers, 
militias and Aboriginal people on the colonial frontier) and has commissioned a 
statue of a black digger (with a white comrade) for the memorial grounds.


He has also asked the federal government for more money so that the memorial 
might expand and build galleries about other more recent combat and 
peacekeeping operations including, East Timor, Solomon Islands and Iraq. (Some 
senior staff at other cultural institutions that have faced major cutbacks 
criticise the resources dedicated to Anzac100 and the memorial during the 
centenary years.)


When Nelson began at the memorial an insider told him “it takes at least five 
years to have any impact on the memorial”.

“I didn’t say anything, but I thought ‘gee, if I can’t have an impact within 
two years I’ve failed’.”

What impact does he believe the first world war had on Australia and its 
national narrative?

If I can’t have an impact within two years I’ve failed
Brendan Nelson 
Nelson cites John Stuart Mill’s preconditions for nationhood: the peoples’ 
desire to be governed as one and a common feeling rooted in language, 
literature and history.

“If you think back on it we had tens of thousands of years of very rich 
indigenous history, the first fleet arrives and all of the devastation that 
meant for Indigenous Australia. But from that arrival nonetheless [are] the 
origins of the Australia that we now have and all of the things that happened 
through the nineteenth century. We got a flag in 1903 and we gave women the 
vote, our country was becoming increasingly confident and so on,” he said.

“But it wasn’t until the cataclysm that unfolded in late 1914 and we put 
Australians in an Australian uniform ... we sent them overseas with an 
Australian flag and all of the series of events that then happened, the series 
of military battles, many of them catastrophic until (general Sir John) 
Monash’s leadership of the corps in 1918, the very, very deep divisions at 
home, the secular divisions, the conscription debates ... the peace movement, 
all of those very deep and polarised debates that occurred, and then emerging 
from all that, proud of what had been achieved but with a generation of 
inconsolable grief, mourning 62,000 dead.

 “At the beginning of the war we were Victorians, New South Welshmen, 
Queenslanders and Western Australians ... buildings had state flags on them and 
the only buildings that had the Australian flag on them were Commonwealth and 
so on. By the end of the war we were Australian. We went away firmly British 
and we went away as Queenslanders and Victorians and we came back – at least 
those who did – came back with a greater sense of being Australian .. . And I 
think it is a big part of our story.”

Anzac Day should be quarantined from politicians – a solemn moment to reflect 
on the agony of war | Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/apr/23/anzac-day-should-be-quarantined-from-politicians-a-solemn-moment-to-reflect-on-the-enduring-agony-of-war>
Abbott recently said participation in the allied invasion of Gallipoli on 25 
April 1915 was thebirth of the Australian nation 
<https://www.pm.gov.au/media/2015-04-10/joint-press-conference-amberley>. 

Abbott is not the first prime minister to speak what is, arguably, 
historically spurious, sentimentally inspired, hyperbole.

I asked Nelson if he agreed Australia was born at Gallipoli 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallipoli>.

“I don’t,” he said, before recounting his first trip to Gallipoli as a Howard 
government minister when he and two Special Air Service minders stood at Anzac 
Cove and marvelled at the courage of the Australian volunteers who’d landed and 
made for the enemy up the cliffs. He stressed again how nationally formative 
was the experience of men from the recently disparate colonies fighting 
together for the first time.

 “It is certainly not correct to say that Australia was born at Gallipoli. I 
mean we’ve got, as I say, centuries of Indigenous history, we’ve got the 
stories of the making of the nation in every sense of the word and in the 
federation . . . and the things that were happening in that first decade of the 
20th century. But this whole concept of here we are it’s our first military 
engagement . . . and the nation is told they’ve done us proud. I think that’s 
what it’s about.”

I ask him, too, for his response to the somewhat religious language 
(references to the “spirit”, the “fallen” and “sacrifice” for example) that 
have imbued the public conversation, especially among political and 
commemoration leaders, about Anzac.

Nelson responds by saying that resilience, the key to human life, is inspired 
by three factors: stable and loving relationships; belonging to a small 
community, and living in a society that “gives meaning and context to your 
life”.

“And what’s happening is that these kids are finding the latter in these 
(Anzac) qualities, these values, and I think spirit is an appropriate kind of 
word – I certainly don’t mean spirit in terms of the Holy Spirit – I mean 
spirit in terms of that sense of inner emotion that inspires you. That’s my 
sense of the spirit. And . . . I mean we’ve got 102,800 names out there on that 
roll of honour, it includes people who died being awarded the Victoria Cross, 
and it includes people that were murdered by their own mates – there’s all 
kinds of people on that roll of honour. As Bean said – the good and the bad and 
the great and the small. It’s all of that that I think informs in many ways who 
we are and if you think about . . . what makes us Australians . . . (it) is our 
values and beliefs and the way we relate to one another and how we see our 
place in the world.”

As the war memorial seeks innovative means to engage new audiences with the 
stories of Australia’s service personnel, Nelson ponders why the young are so 
interested in the Anzacs.

“Young people especially are increasingly looking for and finding meaning . . 
. in the qualities that they perceive to find or do find in these men and 
women. And we are also now in a period where if you go back to even the 60s and 
70s we were still living with families who had lost the father, the son, or the 
severely physically and or emotionally disabled veterans who had returned from 
the first world war. We were still living with families that had endured 
domestic violence as a consequence of first war service – in other words the 
tangible negative impact. Whereas now it’s a question of memory. So there’s 
good and bad in the story, as Bean himself said, there is great(ness) and 
smallness . . . but in my view it is our story.”

Nelson owns two limited edition prints by Ben Quilty who served as official 
Australian war artist in Afghanistan in 2013. His evocative portraits of 
serving personnel offer profound insight to the inner turmoil of some soldiers. 
In the first world war such malaise was dismissed as “shell shock”; others had 
their medical files marked NYD – not yet diagnosed. Today, post-traumatic 
stress disorder is medically and officially acknowledged – although the 
Australian military still struggles badly with identification and treatment of 
the afflicted.

“I think everybody that goes to war and is exposed to violent circumstances . 
. . is affected. Everybody. I think everybody is affected but there is a point 
on the spectrum where it becomes a problem,” Nelson said.

While the memorial does tell the stories of first world war milestones and 
battles that Gallipoli has culturally eclipsed (Pozieres, Fromelles, Ypres, 
Passchendaele, Hamel, Villers Bretonneux, Beersheba and Damascus), Nelson is 
mindful of recounting demobilisation and the generational social and emotional 
legacies of the great war.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Faustralian-war-memorial-the-remarkable-rise-and-rise-of-the-nations-secular-shrine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb8dc1f33745c5c48150cdf82c32839d5cfc27e1%2F0_264_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Australian%20War%20Memorial%3A%20the%20remarkable%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20the%20nation's%20secular%20shrine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Faustralian-war-memorial-the-remarkable-rise-and-rise-of-the-nations-secular-shrine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Australian%20War%20Memorial%3A%20the%20remarkable%20rise%20and%20rise%20of%20the%20nation%27s%20secular%20shrine&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fpostcolonial-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F19%2Faustralian-war-memorial-the-remarkable-rise-and-rise-of-the-nations-secular-shrine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb8dc1f33745c5c48150cdf82c32839d5cfc27e1%2F0_264_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 French president Francois Hollande at the war memorial’s roll of honour with 
Brendan Nelson in November 2014. Photograph: David Gray/AAP 
“There was an embitterment of public discourse and policy debate following the 
war ... 80% of the men who did return were between the ages of 18 and 24. A lot 
of them were gassed, limbless, disfigured, psychologically wounded – all of 
that. Families were carers, you had fatherless families, you had degrees of 
domestic violence associated with post traumatic stress, you had the 
pro-conscriptionists and the anti-conscriptionists still deeply embittered and 
polarised – the shirkers versus those who served. There was a sense that a man 
who had served or a woman who had gone off ... was somehow a better Australian. 
The Indigenous men who had volunteered came back and returned to a desperately 
unequal society and were treated unequally,” he said.

“One of the things that I certainly will want to be doing here ... is to see 
that these stories are drawn out and told too. One of the things I will be 
thinking about then [in 2018] is some sort of special exhibition.”

Frontier wars ‘belong in National Museum of Australia’

For some years I have been a vocal critic  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/15/why-the-number-of-indigenous-deaths-in-the-frontier-wars-matters>
of the memorial’s refusal to tell the story of the violence that raged across 
the Australian colonial frontier after British invasion and occupation in 1788.

Estimates of the number of Indigenous Australians killed by British troops, 
settlers, vigilante groups and “black police” vary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/15/why-the-number-of-indigenous-deaths-in-the-frontier-wars-matters>
 from a conservative 20,000 to many multiples thereof. There is credible 
academic research pointing to 60,000 such deaths in Queensland alone (a figure 
with profound national implication and which parallels the number of Australian 
fatalities in world war one).

Indigenous Australians in wartime: it's time to tell the whole story | Paul 
Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/07/indigenous-australians-in-wartime-its-time-to-tell-the-whole-story>
There is no doubt some colonial governors (not least Lachlan Macquarie, who 
has recently been miscast as some sort of Renaissance leader when it came to 
the black man) who oversaw military moves against Indigenous inhabitantsviewed 
the operations as “war” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/12/australian-war-memorial-ignores-frontier-war>
. There is no less doubt the resistance fighters saw it similarly; Indigenous 
art and oral history is rich with stories of the “war” and of the guerrilla 
leaders.

The 2012 appointment of Nelson, long and correctly viewed as a progressive on 
Indigenous issues, brought false hope that the memorial would change its 
position on depicting frontier violence.

Nelson has listened to and read the arguments from historians, Indigenous 
leaders and others about why the memorial should change its position.

But he believes the story of frontier violence should be fully told by the 
National Museum of Australia not the memorial; a monument in Canberra (though 
not at the war memorial) should commemorate those who died; frontier conflict 
was immensely complex and did not amount to war, and that serving Indigenous 
personnel do not support portraying frontier conflict at the Australian war 
memorial.

The memorial’s governing act gives it the discretion to tell the combat story 
of military forces of the crown raised in Australia before and after the 
establishment of the Commonwealth. Opponents of frontier war “recognition” by 
the memorial – Nelson included – argue no Australian-raised army units waged 
war against black people. (Prominent historians say this is wrong and point to, 
among other units, the Military Mounted Police, raised by the British army in 
Sydney in 1825, which participated in numerous attacks on the Indigenous 
including atSlaughterhouse Creek in 1838 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterloo_Creek_massacre 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waterloo_Creek_massacre>.)

Nelson says: “In terms of what are called the frontier wars ... as you know 
I’m not a historian and I know [historian] Henry Reynolds and others certainly 
say there were frontier wars, my own view is that it is much more complex than 
that. Australia was not North America. We weren’t even New Zealand.

“When the first fleet arrived ... the instructions as you know were to be as 
beneficent as possible if you like to the Indigenous population ... and the 
relationship between the Indigenous peoples and the European arrivals was in my 
view a very complex one, it was a very broad spectrum from extraordinary acts 
of kindness and beneficence at one end to brutal acts of violence with 
massacres at the other. There was not any occasion that I’m aware where a 
colony specifically formed an army or a unit to go out and run a war with 
Indigenous Australians. The other problem is that after the British garrisons 
left, the violence where it was conducted, was conducted by colonial militia, 
mounted police militia and Indigenous militia.


“Look ... I know you’ve got a completely different view. And this is not me 
telling you something that I’m instructed by the [memorial’s governing] council 
to tell you. This is the memorial’s view. It is certainly my view and I 
certainly don’t say this with anything but immense respect for Indigenous 
peoples, and a sense none of us will ever be able to understand what they went 
through when that first fleet arrived and everything that came afterwards and 
to some extent still happens today. But that’s why we are not about to do it 
and we won’t be doing it. I’ve had some very good people here who are very 
strong advocates for it. And I’ve said to them, ‘Well I’ve got two years and 
nine months to go – you can try the next person’. And they say ‘you are wrong 
and history will overtake you’ ... and I respect that.”

Under Nelson’s watch the memorial has increased its efforts to tell the story 
of Indigenous service personnel – “black diggers” – in the world wars and in 
subsequent peacekeeping and peacekeeping operations.


Of the black digger opening the Anzac Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/anzac-day> dawn service with the yidaki, 
Nelson said: “Which says a lot, without actually saying a single word.”


Which brings us to the optics of another portrayal of Indigenous Australians 
at the memorial –the stone gargoyles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/25/gargoyles-depicting-indigenous-man-and-woman-are-no-statues-of-liberty>
 depicting an Aboriginal man and woman set, consecutively, at the end of two 
native fauna in the memorial’s courtyard.

Gargoyles depicting Indigenous man and woman are no statues of liberty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/25/gargoyles-depicting-indigenous-man-and-woman-are-no-statues-of-liberty>
The gargoyles have long divided memorial historians between those who believe 
they are an offensive anachronism (Indigenous people were officially considered 
part of the Australian fauna until 1967) that ought to be removed on cultural 
grounds, and those who believe they should remain as an historical testament to 
how Australia was. A third, according to Nelson, believe the gargoyles were 
created out of respect to the original Indigenous owners of Canberra (the 
Ngambri).

In February it was determined that all 26 of the gargoyles would need 
replacing due to potential asbestos contamination. This inspired calls for the 
stone Indigenous faces not to be permanently replaced along with the other 24 
that depict, among other creatures, a kangaroo and a koala, a platypus and a 
frill necked lizard.

But Nelson insists all 26, including the Aboriginal man and woman, will be 
replicated and replaced.

“From our point of view, obviously we are going to be consulting a whole range 
of people but we are not going to take 26 down and put 24 back. So they will go 
back and if you’re in the view that this is wonderful – we have to be reminded 
of how racist we were, you’ll be comfortable, if you are of the view as I am 
that they were actually placed there as a sign of respect for Indigenous 
Australia and custodianship of the continent before we certainly arrived, then 
you’ll be happy – and there will be a group of people as is always the case who 
will not be happy at all.”

So what next for Nelson, whose efforts at the memorial have won bipartisan 
political praise?

He has already been somewhat mischievously touted as the next Australian 
ambassador to Washington 
<http://www.afr.com/news/politics/national/us-ambassador-role-most-likely-candidates-20140224-ixpv9>
, a post currently held by another one-time defence minister and federal 
opposition leader, Labor’s Kim Beazley. Abbott recently extended Beazley’s term 
until the end of 2016.

Nelson responds to that speculation with a politician’s answer: “All I can say 
is the first thing is no one at all has spoken to me about any of that . . . no 
one in the government has spoken to me about that and I wouldn’t expect them 
to. The second thing is, as I have often said to young people, the best way to 
get the job you want – and I am not suggesting for a moment that I want to be 
doing that – is just to concentrate on the job you’re doing. I’m a thousand per 
cent immersed in doing this, in doing the best job I can. And whatever I do 
after this, I’ve got no idea yet.”

So here’s another mischievous suggestion: as far as our politicians are 
concerned, Beazley, a military history obsessive, would make an equally 
appealing Australian War memorial director as Nelson does a future ambassador 
to Washington.



















 