
The Australian Olympic Committee has decided to ban the only sport Australia 
is still good at from the Olympic Games in Rio de Janeiro. That’s right,
drinking will be forbidden 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/sport/athletes-facing-a-dry-time-at-2016-rio-de-janeiro-olympics/story-e6frg7mf-1226745602649>
 in the Olympic village for Australian athletes.

"We will be expecting an extremely high standard of behaviour in Rio – bad 
behaviour will not be tolerated," warned Australia’s ironically named Olympic 
team leader, Kitty Chiller.

The change is expected to have a particularly harsh impact on dual-sport 
athletes like swimmers and rowers, who have traditionally contested their 
primary events in the first week of the Games, before making the switch to 
competitive drinking in the second.

"Many countries send their athletes home after they finish competing. We don't 
do that because we want our athletes to have a holistic experience but that 
does not mean spending every night in a nightclub and sleeping the next day,” 
said Chiller, who appeared not to be full of ice cold beer.

James O’Connor, Blake Ferguson and other proponents of holistic lifestyles are 
reportedly upset with the AOC’s definition.

The justification for banning athletes whose events are done from getting on 
the tiles is that they could disturb those still in competition by coming home 
drunk, making instant noodles loudly and generally being bad roommates. Rowdy 
team-mates probably aren’t the biggest threat to a good night’s sleep for the 
dressage team, though, since the village is reportedly just agiant sock on a 
giant doorknob 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2012/08/08/sport/olympics-village-sex-party-athletes/>, 
with 150,000 condoms handed out at the London Games.

Which brings us to another competitive disadvantage that Australian athletes 
will have to endure: have you ever tried to chat up Usain Bolt sober? Neither 
have I. But I don’t imagine it would go down very well.

Of course the AOC is right, though. It’s just completely inappropriate for 
young people to have any fun at all and it will definitely be easy to enforce 
these rules on 200+ young people in the party capital of the world 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rio_Carnival>. After all, Olympic officials 
definitely lead by example and never let a drop of alcohol pass their lips on 
their many round the world junkets. In fact, athletes shouldn’t even let their 
hair down on the way home.

"Athletes need to understand their responsibilities, so our village and the 
flight home will be dry," added Chiller, ruling out any challenge toDavid 
Boon’s 52 can in-flight 
<http://www.foxsports.com.au/cricket/the-ashes/great-ashes-moment-no14-david-boons-52-cans-of-beer-on-the-way-to-england-in-1989/story-e6frf3gl-1226670111988>
 record as a mark of respect.

With rugby included in the Olympics for the first time at Rio, it seems 
Australia’s chances of regaining the world No1 drinking ranking are slim. Even 
Josh Dugan is on the wagon.David Warner was in the form of his life in England 
earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jun/13/david-warner-suspended-joe-root>
, but he’s only one man.

Ah well, at least we’re still the best in the world at Aussie Rules.
 