
The election of Alexander Van der Bellen as president of Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
 puts a spanner in the works of the myth machine suggesting that the majority 
of the electorate across Europe are embracing the far right. For once, it was 
the progressive, pro-EU, pro-internationalist vote that confounded the polls. 
The assertion that the anti-immigration, gun-toting candidate Norbert Hofer 
would win, proved wrong. Indeed, the re-run of May’s neck-and-neck presidential 
contest gave Van der Bellen a larger margin over his rival than seven months 
ago. Austria has seen off a man who would have become Europe’s most rightwing 
elected leader since the second world war.

Van der Bellen is a former leader of the Green party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/green-party> in Austria who stood as an 
independent, believing the office of president is a service to the country 
rather than a service to a party. Despite not having his colours pinned to his 
chest, his political allegiance is clear. He ran on a ticket of unity above 
division; love not hate; and confidence rather than fear. He has pledged to 
work for a more equal society, where the divisions between rich and poor are 
narrowed. He also stood proudly and confidently as a global citizen within the 
family of Europe. He robustly rejects Öxit, the Austrian campaign to leave the 
EU, and celebrates the ability of Austria to mediate as a neutral country in 
international conflicts.

Austria defeated the far-right Norbert Hofer – finally, some hope for Europe | 
Julia Ebner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/defeat-austria-far-right-norbert-hofer-hope-europe>
Van der Bellen’s win makes it clear that Greens have learned to operate 
effectively within the mainstream political system. But we can do so 
untarnished by being associated with failed political elites who have ignored 
working people’s concerns. Neither are we afraid to name and fight fascism. We 
challenged unfair trade treaties before it was fashionable to do so and have 
always resisted privatisation and corporate power. Our ongoing successes rarely 
gain coverage but they make an important contribution for the common good.

As Greens, we don’t have friends in high places or media moguls at our beck 
and call. We trade in the politics of hope not fear. We have the courage to 
face the future in all its complexity and with all its challenges and trust in 
the wisdom and compassion of human beings to make it work for us all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Faustria-green-victory-president-elect-alexander-van-der-bellen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dbeb9b5907e602c92e9d9229a12935a0e749248%2F0_134_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Austria%E2%80%99s%20quiet%20Green%20victory%2C%20trading%20in%20the%20politics%20of%20hope%20not%20fear%20%7C%20Molly%20Scott%20Cato&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Faustria-green-victory-president-elect-alexander-van-der-bellen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Austria%E2%80%99s%20quiet%20Green%20victory%2C%20trading%20in%20the%20politics%20of%20hope%20not%20fear%20%7C%20Molly%20Scott%20Cato&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Faustria-green-victory-president-elect-alexander-van-der-bellen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dbeb9b5907e602c92e9d9229a12935a0e749248%2F0_134_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘Greens have secured a human rights resolution on the persecuted 
Guarani-Kaiowá people of Brazil.’ A Guarani-Kaiowá girl, Sandriely, cries in 
front of her hut destroyed by a fire set by an unknown arsonist. Photograph: 
Lunae Parracho/Reuters 
And with this outlook, Greens have won support for a wide range of measures in 
recent weeks. These include raising theVAT threshold for small and 
microbusinesses 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/eu-proposes-simplifying-vat-rules-boost-online-trade-105705209.html?ref=gs>
; eliminating thetrade with the EU in conflict minerals 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-3931_en.htm> that finance armed 
groups, and securing ahuman rights resolution 
<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/sides/getDoc.do?pubRef=-//EP//TEXT+MOTION+B8-2016-1260+0+DOC+XML+V0//EN&language=en>
 on the persecutedGuarani-Kaiowá people 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-latin-america-34183280> of Brazil. Not that 
any of this is of course the stuff of populist posturing, which makes for 
headlines and fills column inches. Nonetheless these are small practical and 
incremental steps towards creating a fairer society.

The fact that the far right has shouted loudest and provided a simplistic 
narrative for working people feeling challenged by globalisation makes Van der 
Bellen’s victory even more remarkable and significant. We must celebrate the 
fact that so many of our fellow citizens now see themselves as citizens of the 
world. This does not, in Theresa May’s desperately crass phrase, mean that they 
are “citizens of nowhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-treads-the-brexit-path-of-empathy-and-righteousness>
”. It means that they acknowledge the need for human solidarity and compassion 
if we are to continue to lead peaceful and happy lives on this one fragile 
planet we share.

Just as in the Brexit vote, half of Austrians chose this openness to the 
world; an optimism about what humanity can achieve. That so many Europeans 
continue to welcome the cosmopolitan culture of our continent, against the 
background din of far-right rhetoric which feeds on people’s insecurity, is 
extraordinary. We should feel proud that the siren song of a narrow and 
self-serving nationalism has been rejected.
 