
10.49am GMT 

Right, that's it from me

Thanks for your company. Stick around for all the reports and reaction from 
the SCG. But from me, cheerio!

10.48am GMT 

What they're saying

Here's David Warner, the man of the match: "It's been overwhelming. I've been 
able to show my true potential … It was a great wicket … Credit to the ground 
staff." 

Here's Alastair Cook: "Everyone got 20 or 30 and you need to go on … We've got 
to try and win a game … Every time we play at these grounds it gives us 
experience and information … we've got a young side."

And here's Michael Clarke: "Our bowlers did an outstanding job. Both our 
spinners were fantastic. Our fielders? We did our job … I don't think I'll go 
to Perth, the selectors are going to give me Perth off, but I'll be back for 
Adelaide."

10.40am GMT 

So… pick the bones out of that one

England were outclassed. The fundamental problem is that Australia have a 
better team than them. And even their pundits are calling it spot on …
Shane Warne (@warne888) 
Outstanding n the field Aust. Eng with a series on the line have to do 
something amazing, otherwise Aust will win with 10 overs to spare !
 <https://twitter.com/warne888/statuses/424795561129037824> January 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/warne888/statuses/424795561129037824> 
10.36am GMT 

And Australia win the ODI series

With two matches to spare. 

10.35am GMT 

Australia win by seven wickets

With 10 overs to spare. I make that 8-0.

10.34am GMT 

40th over: Australia 244-3 (Marsh 71 Haddin 37)

A Jordan yorker strays to leg – clipped for four by Marsh. A single means 
Haddin can win it with one blow … but he can only dig out a better yorker for a 
single. Marsh, though, clumps the final ball of the over for four. So that's 
that.

Updated at 10.36am GMT

10.29am GMT 

39th over: Australia 234-3 (Marsh 62 Haddin 36)

Haddin whelps Bresnan over the top for four more. It looked like he'd sent the 
ball into the harbour, but in fact it dropped a yard or so short of the rope. 
From the first five overs England haven't looked like restricting the home 
side. It has been a cruise for Australia. Just 10 more required.

10.24am GMT 

38th over: Australia 227-3 (Marsh 60 Haddin 31)

MOW! Haddin goes over the top with a big old slog-sweep down to cow corner for 
four. DAB! Another beauty, dinked away for four more. Haddin's moved on to 29 
off 27 if you believe Sky, 31 off 27 if you believe Cricinfo. And me. Broad 
recovers with a couple of dots, but this is all but done and dusted.

10.19am GMT 

37th over: Australia 218-3 (Marsh 59 Haddin 23)

Bresnan returns. And it's a decent over, one full of variation. Just two from 
the first five balls … but then he strays horribly wide and hideously full, so 
Haddin carves him through the covers for four.

10.15am GMT 

36th over: Australia 212-3 (Marsh 58 Haddin 18)

Haddin wants to finish this quickly. He steps away to leg and lashes Broad for 
a flat-batted straight six. Then he repeats the trick, this time aiming for 
long on and edging for four through backward point. 

10.10am GMT 

35th over: Australia 200-3 (Marsh 57 Haddin 7)

A Marsh dab from the last brings up the Australia 200. And at the end of the 
over, John Farnham's You're The Voice rings out at the SCG. Incongruous 
perhaps, but still pretty much the highlights of the innings for me.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtbkOZTSvrHs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtbkOZTSvrHs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtbkOZTSvrHs&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtbkOZTSvrHs&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtbkOZTSvrHs>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtbkOZTSvrHs&media=>
close 
10.06am GMT 

34th over: Australia 197-3 (Marsh 55 Haddin 6)

Bopara jogs in once more and we have a brief delay as Haddin points out 
England have only four men in the ring. They're supposed to have five. He's 
right. Though the umpire for some reason doesn't call a no ball. Perhaps it was 
too late. Perhaps he just couldn't really be bothered with the hassle. Anyway, 
three from the over.

10.01am GMT 

33rd over: Australia 194-3 (Marsh 54 Haddin 4)

A drinks break, which here in the UK means a coffee advert featuring George 
Clooney. On the resumption, Tredwell finds Marsh's edge. Cook, in at slip, 
can't get down quickly enough to take the catch. The ball actually clunked him 
on the ankle, so it did carry. Marsh celebrates his reprieve by carting 
Tredwell away for a four that brings up his half century. And on commentary 
greg Blewett reckons that Marsh has no chance of a place in the Test team, 
which shows what I know. 

9.56am GMT 

32nd over: Australia 187-3 (Marsh 47 Haddin 4)

Marsh tucks away a Stokes full toss for four, then scuttles two off the next 
as the bowler strays too full in search of the yorker. And all in all, 
Australia take nine from the over. Just 57 more required from the 18 overs 
remaining.

9.52am GMT 

31st over: Australia 178-3 (Marsh 39 Haddin 4)

Greg Blewett and Nasser are discussing Australia's reported plans to rest Brad 
Haddin for the final two gamesif when Australia win this one. If they were 
going to do that, wouldn't it have been worth dropping down the order here, 
given the match situation? He plays out four dots as Bopara keeps things 
tights. Bopara;s figures now read a handy 4-0-13-1.

9.48am GMT 

30th over: Australia 177-3 (Marsh 38 Haddin 4)

Jordan sends down six fairly uneventful balls (the fifth bringing an lbw shout 
– it was a tad high), so here's Mark Waugh in a special shirt:
Russell Jackson (@rustyjacko) 
The shirt... pic.twitter.com/ZbWgmDRB7i <http://t.co/ZbWgmDRB7i>
 <https://twitter.com/rustyjacko/statuses/424839775099445248> January 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/rustyjacko/statuses/424839775099445248> 
Updated at 9.50am GMT

9.44am GMT 

29th over: Australia 173-3 (Marsh 37 Haddin 1)

Replays show that ball just seaming in a touch. It really was a useful 
delivery from – and I still maintain this – a very useful cricketer.

"Morning John, morning everybody," Morning Guy Hornsby. "After actually 
cracking a joke that 'the game is won, I may even stop watching' last time out 
when nine wickets were down, I've given up. I actually have no expectations of 
victory any more. Historically, I've come to expect this as a Spurs fan, but I 
can't remember in 30 years of watching England when I've actually expected us 
to lose every game. This is a new low. Can I pray for rain?" Apparently there 
is some rain heading towards the Sydney area, but it's going to arrive too late 
to save England.

Updated at 9.50am GMT

9.42am GMT 

WICKET! Clarke b Bopara 34 (Australia 172-3)

Well bowled RavBop! He angles one through the gate as the Australian captain 
pushes forward awkwardly. Another TIE fighter bites the dust, while a planet 
smoulders in the background.

9.39am GMT 

28th over: Australia 169-2 (Marsh 36 Clarke 32)

The ball is going to be changed, always an England favourite. And it almost 
produces an immediate wicket – a Jordan slower balldoes Marsh, whose uppish 
push flies just wide of a diving Ian Bell. The batsmen run two. And then from 
the fifth, Clarke's straight drive just slips through the bowler's fingers. It 
was a sharp chance, but probably more straightforward than the one he took in 
the second ODI. This time, though, the ball simply flies away for four. Clarke 
celebrates the reprieve with a clip through midwicket for four more. He has 32 
off 25, having barely played a shot.
Sydney Cricket Grnd (@scg) 
Official crowd figure: ODI #AUSvENG 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23AUSvENG&src=hash> 19 Jan, 37,823. Thanks for 
your attendance.#loveourSCG 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23loveourSCG&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/scg/statuses/424837082133970944> January 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/scg/statuses/424837082133970944> 
9.31am GMT 

27th over: Australia 158-2 (Marsh 33 Clarke 24)

Tredwell v Marsh is pretty much the only battle England have won in this game. 
But it's a very minor victory in the grand scheme of things. A solitary TIE 
fighter blown up, while the Death Star destroys Alderaan. Four singles from the 
over, Lord Vader.

Updated at 9.32am GMT

9.28am GMT 

26th over: Australia 154-2 (Marsh 31 Clarke 22)

Chris Jordan returns. It's tight again, but from the last Marsh frees his arms 
and clubs him over the top for four. Australia need 90 more runs from 144 
balls. The word "cakewalk" springs to mind.

9.26am GMT 

25th over: Australia 149-2 (Marsh 27 Clarke 21)

Tredwell returns and beats Marsh's outside edge again. He's struggled against 
the England spinner. After five dot balls England are on the verge of their 
first maiden of the innings … but the last is tickled away for a couple.

9.21am GMT 

24th over: Australia 147-2 (Marsh 25 Clarke 21)

Here's out man at the SCG, Barney Ronay, with a refreshingly upbeat approach:
Barney Ronay (@barneyronay) 
With an ICC tournament coming up those last three Twenty20 matches have always 
been the most important part of this whole tour
 <https://twitter.com/barneyronay/statuses/424831683829841920> January 19, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/barneyronay/statuses/424831683829841920> Barney Ronay 
(@barneyronay) 
Take the positives out of these ten warm-up matches and move on
 <https://twitter.com/barneyronay/statuses/424832097388216321> January 19, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/barneyronay/statuses/424832097388216321> 
Meanwhile Stuart Broad, who increasingly gives the impression of a man utterly 
pig-sick of this tour (and who could blame him really?), struggles to find the 
right line here and sends down the sort of nothing-much over that England 
would've taken three or four from. Australia take eight. 

9.15am GMT 

23rd over: Australia 139-2 (Marsh 23 Clarke 16)

Stokes strays too full and Clarke guides him straight for four – a Proper 
Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Shot – then lashes hard for 
a single. A top edge that flies away for four adds insult to injury. This is 
drifting into no-contest territory.

9.11am GMT 

22nd over: Australia 128-2 (Marsh 22 Clarke 6)

This pair work Broad around for ones and twos, with the last a full toss that 
is punched away for three by Clarke. 

9.06am GMT 

21st over: Australia 122-2 (Marsh 21 Clarke 1)

A fine innings from Warner, one that always shimmered with intent. He's taken 
Australia to the halfway mark of their required total well ahead of schedule. 

Meanwhile, over in Napier, New Zealand have wrapped up a 24-run victory over 
India, despite a decent run chase from the tourists. I think I'm right in 
saying (ie. I heard it on Sky earlier and haven't had chance to check it) that 
if NZ win that series 3-0 and Australia win this one 5-0, then Australia go to 
the top of the ODI world rankings.

9.03am GMT 

WICKET! Warner c Bell b Stokes 71 (Australia 121-2)

England get Warner, but 71 runs too late really. Stokes is into the attack and 
despite his first ball disappearing to the rope, the second is drilled hard at 
cover, where Bell takes a decent catch.

8.59am GMT 

20th over: Australia 117-1 (Warner 67 Marsh 21)

Broad returns with England in need of something rather remarkable. Warner 
mistimes another attempted six, this one aimed over mid off, but gets enough on 
it to pick up a four, but then (sound the cliche klaxon) blots his copybook 
with a wafty play-and-miss at the next. 

8.56am GMT 

19th over: Australia 112-1 (Warner 62 Marsh 21)

Warner, who had been keeping his powder dry, gets on one knee and gives 
Tredwell the full beans down to cow corner. That's six! Amid the milking that 
was akin to chopping a a chunk of steak out of England's rump. Twelve from the 
over.

8.53am GMT 

18th over: Australia 100-1 (Warner 54 Marsh 17)

So has anybody read any good books recently? Discovered any great new bands? 
Turned up a terrific chilli recipe? How are those new year resolutions going? 
And what about all that politics and all those global issues of note? 
Australia, you might have gathered, are on full-on milk mode, with Bopara 
sending down only the one dot ball.

8.45am GMT 

17th over: Australia 93-1 (Warner 50 Marsh 16)

David Warner brings up his 50 off 56 balls. He could've been run out before 
facing a ball. And two from the next brings up the 50 partnership (off 57 
balls). Tredwell keeps it tight in the main though.

Updated at 8.50am GMT

8.44am GMT 

16th over: Australia 90-1 (Warner 49, Marsh 14)

Ravi Bopara comes into the attack for the first time. It's a very fine over, 
just two runs coming from it. And the last squirts away of the thick edge of 
Marsh's bat, but dropsjust short of Morgan at backward point.

8.39am GMT 

15th over: Australia 88-1 (Warner 48, Marsh 13)

Marsh skips down the track and whups Tredwell past mid on for four. They add a 
couple of serene singles. England need wickets.

8.36am GMT 

14th over: Australia 82-1 (Warner 47, Marsh 8)

A drop-and-run adds another single to Warner's tally. Marsh has found runs a 
little harder to come by, but Bresnan drops too short and the Australian No3 
pulls firmly for four, his first boundary. The last zips past a flashing 
outside edge, but Australia are still absolutely cruising at the moment.

8.32am GMT 

13th over: Australia 77-1 (Warner 46, Marsh 4)

A beauty from Tredwell grips a touch and beats Marsh's outside edge by a 
whisker. It's good stuff from the spinner, just a single from the over.

8.30am GMT 

12th over: Australia 76-1 (Warner 45, Marsh 4)

From nowhere, Bresnan sends down a jaffer, one that moves away sharply off the 
seam and beats Warner's outside edge by a couple of inches. And he's finally 
switched his radar on here, the batsmen restricted to manoeuvring ones and twos.

8.25am GMT 

11th over: Australia 71-1 (Warner 42, Marsh 3)

James Tredwell twirls his way in for the first time today. Xavier Doherty 
played a crucial role for Australia despite the pitch offering about as much 
turn as a laminate flooring. He keeps Warner and Marsh honest. Four singles 
from the over.

8.23am GMT 

10th over: Australia 67-1 (Warner 40, Marsh 1)

Shaun Marsh gets off the mark with a single from the first ball of Bresnan's 
next over. I get the sense from those in Australia that he's the next in line 
for a place in the Test team, though whether he'll come in for George Bailey 
for the South Africa series I'm not sure. The squad for that tour is to be 
announced on Monday morning. One man who'll definitely be on that plane is 
David Warner, who has taken a liking to Bresnan here. He cracks three fours off 
the over – a hoik high to cow corner, a clever cut, a tickle down to fine leg. 
Tim Bresnan's two overs have gone for 20 runs.

8.19am GMT 

9th over: Australia 54-1 (Warner 28, Marsh 0)

Jordan continues. Warner chops away for a couple, and then grabs a couple more 
off the last. But that's another handy over from the Sussex bowler.

8.15am GMT 

8th over: Australia 50-1 (Warner 24, Marsh 0)

The first bowling change of the innings. Tim Bresnan rumbles in, buoyed by 
his, perhaps not match-changing, but at least match-tweaking innings. Warner 
welcomes him with a glorious straight-drive for six. And he holds the pose for 
full effect.And holds it. And holds it. 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IbRXQ-A6-O8#t=2m0s>

8.11am GMT 

7th over: Australia 43-1 (Warner 17, Marsh 0)

And that's over. "That was the kind of innings when John Trott would have 
scored a 100 ball 80, got out in the 46th over and England would score 275-7," 
writes Chris Evans. "We'd still lose and Trott would get blamed for slow 
scoring. I miss him." Yep – England's top order is considerably weaker in both 
forms of the game without him. Still, England have got oodles of ODIs between 
now and the World Cup to sort things out, and who knows, maybe Jonathan Trott 
will be available again by then. 

Updated at 8.11am GMT

8.10am GMT 

WICKET! Finch c Bopara b Jordan 22 (Australia 43-1)

Jordan strikes! And what a vital wicket this is, as Finch was beginning to 
show signs of moving up through the gears. The fifth ball of the over was met 
with a crunching square drive that flew away for four. The sixth and last was 
driven equally hard, but straight at Bopara who made no mistake.

8.04am GMT 

6th over: Australia 36-0 (Finch 17, Warner 16)

While Australia are easing themselves intot he ascendancy in Sydney, there's 
quite a game on in Napier. New Zealand have set India 293 to win (Corey 
Anderson again to the fore)and the tourists are 181-4 in reply 
<http://www.espncricinfo.com/new-zealand-v-india-2014/engine/match/667641.html>
, with Virat Kohli 96 not out off 92. Meanwhile at the SCG, Warner rocks back 
and carts Broad through midwicket for four. Six off the over once more.

8.00am GMT 

5th over: Australia 30-0 (Finch 17, Warner 10)

Worryingly for England, this pair have been cruising along at six an over 
without having broken sweat. Warner has a bit of a waft outside off, but 
Jordan's delivery skids below the bottom edge. And though he ties the batsmen 
up in the main, the last ball of the over is a touch too full and driven 
ruler-straight down the ground for four by Finch.

7.55am GMT 

4th over: Australia 24-0 (Finch 12, Warner 9)

Broad again. A few slide down leg side, but the batsmen opt for the Tuck and 
the Push rather than the Absolutely Leathering The Thing. Five singles from the 
over.

7.50am GMT 

3rd over: Australia 19-0 (Finch 10, Warner 7)

Amid this concept album of misery for English cricket, here's a jaunty hidden 
bonus track –the women's side are one win away from claiming the Women's Ashes 
win after their victory in the latest ODI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/19/england-beat-australia-womens-ashes>
. Jordan again keeps things reasonably tight here, but the batsmen are able to 
accumulate in ones and twos.

7.47am GMT 

2nd over: Australia 13-0 (Finch 5, Warner 6)

Stuart Broad comes into the England attack for the first time since the Test 
series. A leg-stump half-volley is flicked away imperiously by Finch for the 
first boundary of the innings. And a couple of balls later, a wide short effort 
to Warner allows the other Australian opener to free his arms and send the ball 
whistling through the covers for four more.

7.42am GMT 

1st over: Australia 3-0 (Finch 1, Warner 1)

Expect an early onslaught here. Chris Jordan has the ball in his hand for 
England and there are two early scares for Australia. First, Finch gets a 
leading edge that drops safe a yard or so in front of his boots, and from the 
second he gets off the mark with a ludicrous single – but Warner essentially 
jogs it because he knows he's got no chance of getting home safe. Bopara, 
though, misses with a shy at the stumps. That would've been just the start 
England needed. Still, Jordan was largely on the money there.

7.05am GMT 

Morning/afternoon/evening all

Russell has summed things up rather well there. Australia are favourites; 
England have a chance.

In other news, I can report that a large special fried rice and sweet & sour 
king prawn balls do not a pleasant pre-OBO sleep make.If things get a bit 
sketchy in this innings it's because I'm coming in off four hours of 
MSG-muddled shut-eye.

6.49am GMT 

And that is all from me

I will hand you over to my old mate John Ashdown now, but it's worth taking a 
look at some stats and figures from that England innings. Eoin Morgan led 
England's batsmen with 54, while Bresnan's unbeaten 41 came from 29 balls and 
put his batting colleagues to shame. Stokes and Ballance were the most culpable 
in failing to capitalise on dreadfully slow starts.

For the Aussies, Dan Christian finished with 2-52 from his 9 overs but Bresnan 
really got hold of him in that final over. Xavier Doherty was miserly with 1-28 
from his full allottment and Nathan Coulter-Nile was consistently impressive 
with 3-47 off 10. The only major concern was the rustiness of the returning 
James Pattinson, who was all over the shop in his six unimpressive overs.

Australia are in the box seat still, but England will sit down for some tea 
with renewed enthusiasm after Bresnan's efforts. 

6.41am GMT 

50th over: England 243-9 (Bresnan 41, Tredwell 2)

Tredwell does the right thing by his partner and turns a single off 
Christian's first, before Bresnan does his part and slogs one high and long 
over the mid -wicket fence. The next gets the same treatment and just eludes a 
diving Maxwell to carry over the boundary rope as well. An enterprising knock 
from Bresnan ends with a single and that was far from what Christian would have 
wanted from his final over, though he laughs with teammates as he collects his 
cap.

England were pulled back from the brink there by Bresnan. It's now a 
semi-competitive total.

6.37am GMT 

49th over: England 227-9 (Bresnan 27, Tredwell 0)

Bresnan close sthe over out with a two and he'll be looking to get the strike 
back off Tredwell as soon as possible.

6.35am GMT 

WICKET! Jordan c Finch b Faulkner 10 (England 225-9)

Well, that was second time lucky for Faulkner, who was slogged through 
mid-wicket for a boundary the ball before but drew Jordan into slapping the 
next one straight down the throat of Finch at deep square leg. 

6.31am GMT 

48th over: England 220-8 (Bresnan 24, Jordan 6)

The English pair are mainly scratching around for singles from Christian now 
and not doing a bad job of it. They've got two overs to lift this to 240, which 
wouldn't be a total disgrace. 

6.28am GMT 

47th over: England 215-8 (Bresnan 21, Jordan 4)

Bresnan does his level best here, flicking Coulter-Nile wide of mid-wicket for 
a boundary and then a single. Mike Hussey has entered the Nine box and thinks 
England are still right in this if they're able to take early wickets. 
Coulter-Nile finishes with 3-47 from his 10 overs and in classic fast-bowler 
style, signals that he wants to come straight off the ground for a breather. 
Good lad. 

6.23am GMT 

46th over: England 208-8 (Bresnan 15, Jordan 3)

Christian continues to Jordan who squeezes out a single from the second 
delivery, before Bresnan clumps one through mid-wicket for another. Jordan is 
nearly stumped by a quick-moving Haddin but got his toe back in in time. With 
four overs remaining it's going to take some glorious slogging from Bresnan to 
drag this total towards anything half-impressive. 

Updated at 6.24am GMT

6.20am GMT 

45th over: England 204-8 (Bresnan 13, Jordan 1)

One other thing that needs saying: it's been a greatly improved fielding 
performance form Australia in the second half of the innings. It's gone hand in 
hand with England's stutter and then total collapse. Haddin also just tried to 
throw the ball at Spidercam, which I rate. It annoys the piss out of everyone 
in the crowd and adds a minimal amount to the coverage. Get rid of it.

6.17am GMT 

WICKET! Broad c Haddin b Coulter-Nile 1 (England 198-8)

Coulter-Nile has another! Broad succumbs meekly, swatting a short one straight 
up in the air to a waiting Haddin. With 5 overs remaining it's a far from 
responsible shot from the senior player, not that the failings of the top order 
are his fault. 

6.14am GMT 

44th over: England 197-7 (Bresnan 8, Broad 1)

Broad enters to the predictable boos of the SCG crowd and then nearly hits 
another return catch to the man of the moment, Christian. He spoons an 
unconvincing single through mid-wicket. Another very handy over for Christian 
and Australia. 

6.12am GMT 

WICKET! Buttler b Christian 4 (England 195-7)

The controversial catcher Christian returns for another over and will be even 
happier with himself now after forcing Buttler to drag one onto his stumps. 
England are crumbling now and still well short of a competitive total. 

6.09am GMT 

43rd over: England 194-6 (Buttler 4, Bresnan 6)

Coulter-Nile would have been as glad as anyone at the SCG to see the back of 
Morgan and now resumes to the two new batsmen. Both of them are flicking him 
through the vacant gully region for singles before a short one jags into the 
rib cage of Buttler and dribbles away for a bye. 

260 is now looking a pipe dream unless Buttler can get going quickly. 

6.06am GMT 

42nd over: England 190-6 (Buttler 3, Bresnan 4)

As Tim Bresnan marks his guard we see some replays of the Clarke v 
Morgan/Buttler contretemps. They look to be in aggreeance now that the danger 
man is in the pavilion though. Bresnan watches the first couple but then slaps 
Christian through cover for four to finish an eventful over. 

6.02am GMT 

WICKET! Morgan c&b Christian 54 (England 186-6)

Ooh, this one just heated up. Christian draws a false strike from Morgan, who 
spoons a return catch. Christian had to dive for it and Morgan thought it might 
have bounced. His refusal to walk on the word of the fielder is not met well by 
the Aussies, but it's a game-changing wicket once confirmed. 

5.58am GMT 

41st over: England 185-5 (Morgan 54, Buttler 2)

Now Morgan is bringing up a well-compiled 50 off Maxwell's first delivery and 
otherwise directing the new man, Jos Buttler, through a busy first oevr at the 
crease. We all know Buttler can hit but he really has to give Morgan the strike 
here, you'd think. 

5.55am GMT 

40th over: England 177-4 (Morgan 48, Buttler 0)

Did anyone else catch Tubby Taylor revealing that he had a "little wager" with 
Brett Lee over the latter's Big Bash bowling speeds? It possibly wasn't the 
wisest thing to say on national TV. 

Updated at 5.56am GMT

5.54am GMT 

WICKET! Bopara caught Haddin bowled Faulkner 21 (England 177-5)

After both batsmen had been nudging it around, Faulkner's sixth ball of the 
over catches the edge of Bopara's bat and flies through to Haddin. The 
Englishman was trying to run it down to third man but failed. 

5.50am GMT 

39th over: England 173-4 (Morgan 45, Bopara 20)

Bopara really sprints through for a second off Coulter-Nile's first ball and 
then a smart piece of fielding by Christian turns another two into a single. 
It's a blessing in disguise for England, because Morgan flicks his wrist on a 
lofted straight drive and watches it fly past the sight screen for another big 
six. It brings up the 50 partnership from 60 balls. 

Bopara cracks an ungainly but rocket-powered pull shot but it's cut off by 
Finch at deep mid-wicket and restricted to a single. 8 an over from here gets 
England that 260 I spoke of earlier. 

5.46am GMT 

38th over: England 162-4 (Morgan 38, Bopara 16)

Faulkner resumes after drinks and concedes three singles to start with before 
Morgan backs away and takes an almighty heave at the fourth, almost altering 
the course of the passing ball with the sheer velocity of his airy swipe. It's 
the only ball from which this pair fail to nudge a single. 

5.43am GMT 

Meanwhile in the Women's Ashes game at the MCG

England are 172-3 after 42.2 overs in pursuit of Australia's 209. More scores 
here. <http://livescores.cricket.com.au/summary_2916_1.html>

5.40am GMT 

37th over: England 157-4 (Morgan 36, Bopara 13)

Coulter-Nile returns now to try and clamp down on this budding partnership, 
and Rudi Edsall seems to agree with both Clarke and I about Pattinson. "I think 
it's worth putting a line through Pattinson for this game," he says. "Unless 
England are 7 or 8 down in the last few overs. I wouldn't be surprised to see 
Clarke have a trundle shortly.

Coulter-Nile is throwing in some short ones now and a few whistle past 
Bopara's ear at a decent clip. As drinks come out, England are now setting 
themselves for a far more frenetic finish. 

5.35am GMT 

36th over: England 153-4 (Morgan 34, Bopara 11)

Morgan must have watched this highlights montage of his six-hitting at 
Brisbane up on the big screen, and a few of them are required here. The 
aforementioned James Faulkner returns to the Australian attack and Morgan duly 
advances down the wicket and thumps him over extra cover for a towering six. A 
proper one, it went over the fence and everything. 

Bopara is doing a decent job of handing him the strike and nine comes from the 
over. 

5.31am GMT 

35th over: England 144-4 (Morgan 26, Bopara 10)

"41 dot balls out of 60 and he's not spun a ball," notes an incredulous David 
Lloyd of Xavier Doherty's earlier spell. He might say much the same thing of 
England's failure to hit Maxwell off square and this over again costs only the 
two singles. Clarke is quietly chuckling to himself, no doubt. 

5.29am GMT 

34th over: England 142-4 (Morgan 25, Bopara 9)

Bopara chips and runs to get off strike before Morgan miscues one of his own. 
It's going to require a little more than accumulation here though, so Morgan 
pulls one out in front of square leg and just past Aaron Finch at deep 
mid-wicket, who I must say made very little attempt to dive for that one. It 
was going away from him at a decent rate but only by a couple of metres, so the 
bowler Christian grimaced at the lack of physical sacrifice. 

Updated at 5.29am GMT

5.25am GMT 

33rd over: England 135-4 (Morgan 20, Bopara 7)

Maxwell replaces Coulter-Nile now as Clarke looks to keep his golden-armed 
paceman fresh and able to bowl in the last 1o-12 overs. Only two runs come from 
another fast, stealthy Maxwell over.

5.22am GMT 

32nd over: England 133-4 (Morgan 19, Bopara 6)

He's had an odd couple of years, Christian. After a number of discipline 
issues (which is the politest way of putting "smashing up dressing rooms") last 
season, South Australia basically traded him away for the ageing, 
continually-injured Andrew McDonald. The change of scenery has clearly done him 
wonders. It had been a sharp fall from ODI regular and 12th man in the Test 
squad to where he was.

He digs one in short late in his over and Morgan swings it away through fine 
leg for four. It was a tight over otherwise but Morgan pounced on the loose 
one. 

5.18am GMT 

31st over: England 127-4 (Morgan 14, Bopara 5)

Bopara pushes a single to start the over and Brett Lee is more pessimistic 
than me, predicting something in the order of 250 if Morgan and Bopara do their 
job. The Aussies have already used six bowlers, with Faulkner and Pattinson 
having 8 and 4 up their sleeves, repsectively. Aaron Finch might be an option 
if Clarke doesn't trust Pattisnon in the closing stages, but this English pair 
should be looking to score off Christian as well.

5.14am GMT 

30th over: England 124-4 (Morgan 13, Bopara 3)

After such a promising start with Cook and Bell at the crease, this England 
innings has fallen into a bit of a hole at the 30-over mark. As Bopara pushes a 
two square of fine leg, they'd probably be hoping for 260-270 but Bopara and 
Morgan have some heavy lifting ahead if that is to happen. 

5.11am GMT 

29th over: England 121-4 (Morgan 13, Bopara 0)

Coulter-Nile's return was a fruitful one there and Australia basically look 
brilliant at the moment as long as Pattinson isn't bowling. Coulter-Nile can 
now boast 2-13 from his four busy overs. 

Updated at 5.12am GMT

5.09am GMT 

WICKET! Gary Ballance c Christian b Coulter-Nile 26 (England 121-4)

Another change of bowler has done the job for Clarke as Ballance biffs an 
uppish cut into the deep and straight into the hands of Christian off the 
bowling of Coulter-Nile. Not ideal for England, that. A terrible shot. 

5.05am GMT 

28th over: England 120-3 (Ballance 26, Morgan 12)

Dan Christian is on for his first trundle and is coming around the wicket to 
these two lefties, with the 'keeper Haddin up to the stumps under a helmet. 
He's taking the pace off the ball and minimising the scoring avenues for Morgan 
and Ballance. Three singles come from his tidy opening over. 

5.02am GMT 

27th over: England 117-3 (Ballance 25, Morgan 10)

Ballance and Morgan trade singles again from the bowling of Doherty; four of 
them. He finishes with 1-28 from his 10 overs and should be a little bit 
happier with his efforts than another snatching of the cap suggests. Well 
bowled, X-Man.

5.00am GMT 

26th over: England 113-3 (Ballance 23, Morgan 8)

After Ballance flays a wayward Pattinson delivery over point for four, the 
Aussie bowls a dreadful wide down the legside. 

Greig White agrees with me on Hawkeye: "Is it still the case Hawkeye technlogy 
has not been subject to independent testing? The only testimony as to its 
accuracy I have heard came from the manufacturer. Only asking because both 
Cook's and Stokes's Hawkeye predictions seemed utterly preposterous (as tacitly 
acknowledged by even the boofheads on Channel 9).That said, I thought Clarke 
might have grounded the ball in the act of taking that catch from Stokes."

Something else about Hawkeye, on a non-scientific level: I think that like 
bullets, cricket balls sometimes act in ways that aren't able to be mapped by 
conventional metrics. I realise I sound like a JFK conspiracy theorist in 
saying that and cannot prove it in any way, I just know that it's true. 

Pattinson's descent into filth continues as he gives up a free hit. He wisely 
decides to bowl it short on Morgan's hip, so it's flicked away for a boundary. 
He's got 0-41 from 6 overs and is bowling like a drain today.

4.54am GMT 

25th over: England 97-3 (Ballance 15, Morgan 2)

Morgan gets off the mark with a gentle single to long-on and Ballance 
contributes a couple of his own, meaning that England already look more 
purposeful with their number five at the crease. Doherty looks livid with that 
relative glut of runs and slams his cap down on top of his head in frustration. 

4.51am GMT 

24th over: England 93-3 (Ballance 13, Morgan 0)

Pattinson returns to the attack for his third spell and Clarke might actually 
be looking to get as many of his overs out of the way now as possible, because 
he's looked a little rusty. After a wide, Ballance bunts him down to mid-wicket 
for a single. 

Robin Mudie rubbishes claims by the Nine team that England have been unlucky. 
"England are far from unlucky, they are just blunt at this moment when 
Australia are starting to look sharp."

Pattinson finishes tidily but looks a bit like he's trying too hard to do 
everything and thus doing nowt.

4.47am GMT 

23rd over: England 91-3 (Ballance 12, Morgan 0)

Well, Australia are nominally on top here but I would argue that England are 
actually far better off with MOrgan at the crease. That wicket could be a net 
win for them because Stokes never really got going in that innings. His 15 came 
from 39 deliveries. Doherty finishes it off with some dots and it's a wicket 
maiden. 

4.45am GMT 

WICKET! Stokes c Calrke b Doherty 15 (Egnland 91-3)

Stokes pulls one that looks to fly through the square leg region but Michael 
Clarke plucks a catch from nowhere, diving low to his right and claiming it no 
more than an inch from the turf. Stokes takes his word but it did look at least 
a little bit "turfy", actually. 

4.43am GMT 

22nd over: England 91-2 (Stokes 15, Ballance 12)

With all that review drama out of the way, England still have theirs in the 
bank and Stokes at the crease. He turns Maxwell for a single to finish off the 
over. Tubby thinks a right-hand/left-hand combination would have been better 
than this pair and he might have a point. 

4.41am GMT 

NOT OUT!

Well, the entire Nine team had gunned him and lucky they're not umpires 
because Hawkeye showed it was bouncing well over. It looked skiddier than that 
though. Hmm.

4.40am GMT 

REVIEW!

Maxwell gets one to skid on and trap Stokes in front but he's called for a 
review. 

4.38am GMT 

21st over: England 86-2 (Stokes 11, Ballance 11)

In saying all that, if tidy ODI bowlers are your type, then Doherty is 
actually doing a decent job here. Ballance has had enough of the nudges and 
nurdles though so slams him over long-off for a well overdue boundary. It's the 
only score from the over. 

4.36am GMT 

20th over: England 82-2 (Stokes 11, Ballance 7)

After drinks, Stokes and Ballance are at least now showing some attacking 
intent, turning singles and trying to pierce the infield on the off side. 

Ian Jones has an odd comparison: "Don't you think that Xavier Doherty has a 
bit of Maria Sharapova about him. Like her when he delivers the ball he has a 
loud and distinctive grunt. The main difference from my point of view is that 
Sharapova is very attractive despite the grunt, indeed some may find it 
enhances her appeal."

I have to say, Xavier is not my type. Sorry X. 

4.31am GMT 

19th over: England 77-2 (Stokes 9, Ballance 4)

This is getting ridiculous now. As drinks approach England have gone into 
their shell, happy to take only a single or two from the innocuous spin of 
Doherty and Maxwell. They're playing right into Clarke's hands and eating into 
the overs that Morgan, Bopara et al would rightly have had their eyes on.

4.28am GMT 

18th over: England 75-2 (Stokes 8, Ballance 3)

Stokes is 7 from 22 at the start of this over and struggling to turn the 
strike off the relative part-timer Maxwell. After going millimetres from edging 
to Haddin he finally gets Ballance on strike. Australian are racing through 
these cheap overs here and hurrying the English pair. 

4.26am GMT 

17th over: England 74-2 (Stokes 7, Ballance 3)

Ballance seems quite keen to run himself out as well here, and advances 
halfway down the wicket before Stokes sends him diving back into his own 
crease. Clarke was a fraction too slow to stalk that down so Ballance survives 
Doherty's maiden.

4.23am GMT 

16th over: England 74-2 (Stokes 7, Ballance 3)

A trio of singles start Maxwell's next over and some consolidation is now 
required from Ballance and Stokes after the loss of the two set batsman. Those 
two wickets have the match evenly paused I'm still a little bit bemused to see 
Eoin Morgan batting so low given the capablities on display in Brisbane. 

4.21am GMT 

15th over: England 71-2 (Stokes 6, Ballance 1)

That run-out did have one mitigating circumstance, to be totally honest. The 
deflection from Michael Clarke at point was key but Warner's side-on throw from 
deep was still really something. Bell was fuming on his way off and it was up 
to Ben Stokes to call that one through. 

4.18am GMT 

WICKET! Ian Bell run out (D Warner) 29 - England 70-2

What a disaster. Bell came through for another dicey two and even with a 
despairing dive at the keepers' end he was well short. David Warner's direct 
hit from the deep has got him. Terrible running from England.

Updated at 4.18am GMT

4.17am GMT 

14th over: England 69-1 (Bell 28, Stokes 6)

The thing I love about Glenn Maxwell's bowling is that he thinks he's about 
800% better at it than he actually is. That can really go in your favour in ODI 
cricket. This time around the English pair are miling singles but there's also 
a stifled LBW appeal from Haddin off the final ball. He was even more 
optimistic than Maxwell there, which is saying something. 

4.14am GMT 

13th over: England 66-1 (Bell 26, Stokes 5)

Stokes turns a single off Doherty's first ball and then Bell is playing the 
reverse sweep again, this time to no great effect. Amid some confusion between 
he and Stokes, the pair only manage a single off the final ball. Bell thought 
there was two there but I think Stokes was probably on the money with his 
pessimism.

4.11am GMT 

12th over: England 64-1 (Bell 25, Stokes 4)

Clarke has seen enough of Pattinson for the second time in half an hour, so 
Maxwell comes on now to partner Doherty and take some pace off the ball. Bell 
is busy in his footwork and miscues a pull out to the man at deep mid-wicket. 
He then plays a very Maxwell-like stroke himself, a lofted reverse sweep that 
dribbles away for four over gully. He's looking short on form again but getting 
his runs through sheer willpower.

4.07am GMT 

11th over: England 55-1 (Bell 19, Stokes 1)

England force a quick single to the arm of the returning Dan Christian and 
those are the kind of acts of pressure they've been short on this summer. The 
Aussies have been sloppy thus far.

There are two men saving the single on the leg side to Stokes. He pierces them 
for a single out to the mid-wicket boundary and gets off the mark.

I was a bit late on this one but you get the point...
Barney Ronay (@barneyronay) 
Nice bold approach from England's openers as trailed by Graeme Thorpe 
yesterday. Might even start enjoying themselves if they're not careful
 <https://twitter.com/barneyronay/statuses/424750100401754113> January 19, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/barneyronay/statuses/424750100401754113> 
4.03am GMT 

10th over: England 53-1 (Bell 18, Stokes 0)

Pattinson returns now that Cook is out of the way and will hope for a better 
spell this time around. Aussie Will emails in now full of hope for England: 
"Mitch out, Broad in, “new” Aussie faces everywhere…all a conspiracy to keep 
the interest up and the turnstiles squeaking. We’re sick of winning anyway."

Well, I'm not sick of it. Not yet, anyway. Bell lifts one over cover for three 
off the fifth ball of Pattinson's over, which has been tidy but toothless. 

3.59am GMT 

9th over: England 50-1 (Bell 15, Stokes 0)

After a single to Bell and the demise of Cook, Ben Stokes makes an unscheduled 
appearance at three in place of the omitted Root. It's another positive move by 
the tourists. I like it.

3.57am GMT 

WICKET! Cook c Maxwell b Coulter-Nile (England 50-1

Well, I was just about to say that things were going England's way but then 
Cook rocks back and flays one loosely through cover. Glenn Maxwell pounces, 
diving low and to his right to take the catch and get a desperately-needed 
breakthrough for the Aussies.

3.55am GMT 

8th over: England 49-0 (Cook 35 Bell 14)

Clarke has had enough of watching the ball fly off the bat with his pacemen 
operating, so turns to left-arm spinner Xavier Doherty while we're still within 
the Powerplay. From his second delivery Cook is scooping one through mid-wicket 
for a boundary, a shot not without its risks. Doherty responds with a shocker, 
dragging it short and watching the English skipper flog it through the same 
region, this time along the ground and to the boundary.

After the LBW decision, which was denied on review, Cook sees out the over.

3.53am GMT 

NOT OUT!

Well, it looked out to the naked eye but Hawkeye says, "are you kidding me? 
That is flying well over!"

Cook survives.

3.52am GMT 

REVIEW!

Cook is flogging Doherty for two boundaries but then appears to be trapped in 
front by the Aussie spinner.

3.48am GMT 

7th over: England 41-0 (Cook 27 Bell 14)

Conversation in the Nine box has turned to Will Ferrell films, but 
Coulter-Nile is affording this clash the gravitas it deserves, bending his back 
with purpose in a tight over. Cook cuts for a single to 3rd man before Bell 
edges through the completely vacant slips cordon for two of his own.

3.44am GMT 

6th over: England 38-0 (Cook 26 Bell 12)

Bell is keen to assert himself too and belts Pattinson's opening delivery of 
the over straight at mid-wicket before flicking a straight one just beyond the 
fingers of a diving Coulter-Nile at a short fine leg. It runs away for a 
boundary. He's hooking far less convincing to a short one next up and is 
relieved to see his loose hook shot fly over 3rd man for another four. 

3.40am GMT 

5th over: England 30-0 (Cook 26 Bell 4)

Proving why I'm a cricket blogger and not an international captain, Clarke has 
promptly withdrawn the wayward Faulkner from the attack and replaced him with 
Nathan Coulter-Nile, who is straight on the mark with his first two deliveries. 
Pitching just short on the third, he watches Cook lean back, pick up the length 
and pull it over mid-wicket for six.

He'll fancy himself here, Cook, and he should. He's got a rookie 
(Coulter-Nile), a returning quick short on match practice (Pattinson) and an 
oft-maligned spinner (Doherty) to contend with. Two from the final delivery 
takes him to 26 already. Bell is a bystander for now.

3.36am GMT 

4th over: England 22-0 (Cook 18 Bell 4)

Now it is Pattinson's turn to cop the technically correct wrath of the English 
captain. The first ball is flying to the cover boundary from a lofted drive and 
a well-timed cut next up flies through point for another. From the penultimate 
delivery Cook turns a single through mid-wicket and his intent right now is 
aggressive. 

3.32am GMT 

3rd over: England 13-0 (Cook 9 Bell 4)

Cook now walks down this placid pitch to Faulkner and drives beautifully 
through mid-on for a boundary. Nice positive use of the feet by the captain. 
The Tasmanian then drags one out wide and draws a false stroke from Cook, who 
flashes at it and narrowly avoids edging to Haddin. Off the next ball he is 
cutting with power and gets a single from Clarke's fumble.

Bell then gets in on the act, crisply driving wide of mid-on for a boundary. 
Clarke will most likely give Faulkner another over here but England are all 
over him.

Updated at 3.33am GMT

3.29am GMT 

2nd over: England 4-0 (Cook 4 Bell 0)

Pattinson is into the attack to partner Faulkner and it's his first 
international since last September, the hulking Victorian. He's rather slipped 
down the pecking order in this summer of Mitch and despite some early swing 
Cook is turning him through mid-wicket for two. He's then angling across Cook 
and forcing some watchful backward defence. 

I thought Gary Naylor was avoiding me in my early OBOs, but he has a good 
point here: "Andy Roberts at 11? He averaged 31 in World Series SuperTests." 
Pretty handy last man, Gary.

After a single from Cook, Pattinson is right on the mark just outside off 
stump to Bell, who lets it pass through to Haddin.

3.24am GMT 

1st over: England 1-0 (Cook 1 Bell 0)

Faulkner is the man of the moment in more ways than one and actually takes the 
new ball here. He has Cook pushing forward in defence to start us off. The 
skipper is off the mark with a streaky edge through gully. There's two slips 
and a gully in place for Bell, who is also watchful in defence. A couple more 
of the same rounds out an unthreatening first over.

3.18am GMT 

Some iconic ODI moments between these two sides

Stephen Wright is far more talkative than his famous namesake and weighs in on 
the summer of commentary. "The cricket commentary is a real problem on both the 
ABC and 9. The overt or covert sexism, the inane analysis and blokey 'banter' 
and cackling has all the charm of a men only pub lounge circa 1970. A team of 
women commentators might help matters, or possible a reminder to all concerned 
that it's 2014. Consequently I'm reduced to watching the TV on mute, with 
occasional check ups at OBO. Who also might consider asking a woman or two to 
speak up."

By the way, if you want to check out an iconic ODI moment or two between these 
two countries,check out this week's Joy of Six 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jan/14/-australia-v-england-one-day-internationals>
.

"I'm making wine at home but I make it out of raisens so it will be aged 
automatically."
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiVjVt98iHkQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiVjVt98iHkQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiVjVt98iHkQ&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiVjVt98iHkQ&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiVjVt98iHkQ>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiVjVt98iHkQ&media=>
close 
3.08am GMT 

The pitch looks like a belter

But... does anyone else get the impression that the Channel Nine pitch report 
is now just an elaborate ruse so that Slats can get out into the middle and do 
some shadow batting? He's out of his Buzz Lightyear costume now but the result 
is just as manic and maddening.

Meanwhile, a rare revelation: Glenn Maxwell has just told the broadcaster in a 
pre-recorded interview that he honed his reverse-pull in his primary school 
days, when he monstered classmates so badly that teachers made him bat 
left-handed. "I try to manipulate fields to my advantage," says the 
all-rounder, who really is far more technically astute than he's given credit 
for. I like him. I mean, a lot of his limited overs shots are just absolute 
filth, but I'm beginning to come around to the theory that there is some real 
strategy at play as well

3.00am GMT 

More on Nine's coverage and even more on my snacking plan for this England 
innings

Kael Da Costa is unimpressed by the antics of Slats and co. "The pre-match 
costumed idiots (commentary team) are talking about it being "very hard to 
recover when things go horribly wrong in cricket" apparently with no sense of 
irony at all," he says. "I feel the need to hide under the couch whenever Slats 
or Bumble open their mouths."

You're not the only one, Kael,

Meanwhile, a snack update at OBO towers: to paraphrase Jeremy, I did the big 
shop yesterday and I did it brilliantly, so there’s Sprite and there is 
Arnott’s ‘Premier’ chocolate chip biscuits. No run of the mill biscuits for 
this OBO, premium products all the way. I expect we’ll be through half a box by 
the conclusion of the 1st innings.

(language warning and all that)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8RBvh-9JGIo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8RBvh-9JGIo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8RBvh-9JGIo&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8RBvh-9JGIo&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8RBvh-9JGIo>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8RBvh-9JGIo&media=>
close 
2.57am GMT 

The Toss and the selected sides

Clarke tosses, Cook calls heads, wins it and will have a bat. "We've gotta 
make use of what looks like a good wicket," says the England skipper, who again 
aims for a score around the 300 mark.

"I think you've gotta look at what you did well...of course it hurts your 
heart, but both teams have got to start fresh." He then reveals that 
James Tredwell and Stuart Broad are into the side, while Joe Root and Rankin 
miss out.

"It looks like a really good SCG wicket," agrees Aussie skipper Michael 
Clarke. 

For Australia, paceman James Pattinson is into the side today, along with 
Xavier Doherty and all-rounder Daniel Christian. Mitchell Johnson is rested, 
George Bailey injured and Clint McKay misses out today. 

2.51am GMT 

Some pre-game reading

To prepare for the day of cricket ahead, you can catch up with Barney Ronay on 
Eoin Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jan/18/eoin-morgan-england-australia-one-day-international>
, or maybe Andy Wilson onthis whole ICC imbroglio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/18/england-australia-india-icc-test-cricket-superpowers>
. If you're in an England fan in the mood for some vaguely good news, look no 
further than Richard Gibson's report that Ben Stokes and Jos Buttler now 
apparently plan to put country before the almighty dollar andgive the IPL a miss
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/18/ben-stokes-jos-buttler-set-to-snub-ipl-england-cricket>
.

2.42am GMT 

If you thought James Faulkner was brilliant/horrifying, check this out.

Yes, that was only the second greatest 10th wicket run-chase in an ODI. Thanks 
to the golden god of cricket videos, the incomperable Rob Moody, we can now 
delight in the Murray/Roberts pairing chasing down 63 last-wicket runs to beat 
Pakistan.

Hats off to that man.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DufzMgucLgSs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DufzMgucLgSs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DufzMgucLgSs&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DufzMgucLgSs&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DufzMgucLgSs>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DufzMgucLgSs&media=>
close 
2.40am GMT 

A little bit on THAT pdf from the ICC

Tim Pickering has his eyes on far loftier concepts than the goons in the Nine 
box and says, "A pretty meaninless ODI in the scheme of things. I hope your obo 
has a running theme of how duplicitous, selfish, elitist and disgraceful the 
new proposals for the ICC and how Giles Clarke and his cronies should hang 
their heads in utter shame."

It really is something, Tim. I particularly liked the bit where they claimed 
the current edition of the FTP would remain intact. Well, apart from the Aus v 
Pakistan Test tour that was just shortened from three Tests to two in order to 
accommodate some more T20s and ODIs, anyway...

Meanwhile, Richie Benaud just died a little bit inside:
Michael Slater (@mj_slats) 
The things you do!!! To infinity and beyond!! #wwos9 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23wwos9&src=hash> #AUSvENG 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23AUSvENG&src=hash> pic.twitter.com/9IPHVgAmTu 
<http://t.co/9IPHVgAmTu>
 <https://twitter.com/mj_slats/statuses/424730454386688000> January 19, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/mj_slats/statuses/424730454386688000> 
2.36am GMT 

Afternoon all

Welcome to a sunny afternoon at the Sydney Cricket Ground, which today 
welcomes England back for another chapter of this summer of woe. It really has 
been as bad as the brown suit Mark Nicholas just wore out to the centre with 
Ian Healy.

"That will change lives" says Heals of James Faulkner's innings in Brisbane, 
which was a real dagger in the heart for England, just when they dared to hope 
for a consolation win. You can email me all of your comments and quips at 
russell.jackson.casual@guardian.com

Feel free to also open up a vein about Michael Slater's Buzz Lightyear costume 
or the complete mental deterioration of the Channel Nine team this summer. Sky 
viewers, be thankful you're missing this.

6.33pm GMT 

Russell will be here shortly with all the build-up before the third ODI 
between Australia and England. In the meantime, remind yourself of how England 
managed to lose the second one dayer despite appearing to be set for victory.

Oh, England. So close. But still so very, very far away. There have been 
precious few moments of grace for England's cricketers over the past 11 weeks 
and they were denied one at the Gabba in the most agonising of circumstances as 
Alastair Cook and his teamfound a new and yet more painful way to lose a 
cricket match <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket/match/36139>, 
snatching ignominious defeat from the jaws of what would have been a first 
international victory after 84 days of this traumatic tour.

In the event, Australia won the second one-day international by one wicket 
after a breathtaking long-range finish to steal a match that looked set in 
England's favour, with Australia on 244 for nine and still needing 57 to win. 
Spurred on by a pyrotechnic century by Eoin Morgan, England's total of 300 had 
looked a significant step towards erasing the distant prospect of a 
multi-format Australian summer whitewash. Instead, England were simply blown 
away by a superb match-winning innings of 69 from 47 balls by James Faulkner, 
who hit five sixes, all of them off Ben Stokes, and towards the end reeled in 
the total with a sense of gathering inevitability.

If Faulkner produced a superb finisher's innings, it must also be said that 
England's bowling was callow and Cook's captaincy flat at vital moments. It was 
not possible to discover the reasons why Chris Jordan, who had bowled with pace 
and control with the new ball, did not return at the death because Cook failed 
to appear afterwards to discuss the defeat. Either way, it was a fateful 
decision: Stokes, who had just been hit for three sixes by Faulkner, went for 
two more in the crucial penultimate over, attempting to bowl full at the stumps 
but instead producing an eminently hittable good length.

These are really details though. The larger picture is that England conceded a 
record total on this ground to lose to a team that was nine wickets down, with 
the finish all but out of sight. There are defeats and there are defeats. 
England are only 2-0 down in this series, having played well here right up 
until the final 10 overs, when all the old unscabbed wounds were gouged open 
once again by the aggression of Faulkner's batting. They will find it 
desperately hard to lift themselves after this.

Read the full story here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/17/england-lose-australia-second-odi-cricket>
.
 