
A national hot spell will bring temperatures of more than 30C to Adelaide, 
Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/weather/melbourne>, Canberra and Sydney 
this week, according to the Bureau of Meteorology.

The three-day forecast <http://www.bom.gov.au/australia/majorcities.shtml> 
predicts maximums of 35C for Sydney, 34C for Melbourne and 32C for Canberra 
from Monday until Wednesday. Adelaide and surrounding areas can expect a 
maximum of 34C on Monday and Tuesday.

It will be the first time all four major cities hit temperatures of more than 
33C in December for 51 years,according to the Sydney Morning Herald 
<http://www.smh.com.au/environment/weather/sydney-weather-rare-heatwave-a-chance-for-southern-australia-20161208-gt7f0a.html>
.

Teenager reportedly struck by lightning as thousands lose power in Queensland 
storms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/04/teenager-reportedly-struck-by-lightning-as-thousands-lose-power-in-queensland-storms>
The Bureau of Meteorology’s Heatwave Service 
<http://www.bom.gov.au/australia/heatwave/index.shtml?ref=marketinghttp://www.bom.gov.au/australia/heatwave/index.shtml?ref=marketing#heatwave-forecasts>
 has issued a warning of “low to severe intensity heatwave conditions” for 
eastern New South Wales, while also noting low-intensity conditions might 
affect northern Western Australia and far north Queensland.

The bureau’s John Turnbull said the unusually hot weather was the result of a 
high-pressure system in the Tasman sea drawing in hot air from the north of the 
continent.

However, he told Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/weather/australia> he considered the southern hot 
spell “not really a heatwave as such” and more “a usual summer pattern of a 
couple of days of hot weather”.

The bureau classifies “higher intensity heatwaves” as posing a health risk to 
those over 65, pregnant women, babies and young children, and those with a 
chronic illness.

The Victorian Country Fire Service has also issued severe fire danger warnings 
<http://www.cfa.vic.gov.au/warnings-restrictions/total-fire-bans-and-ratings/> 
for parts of northwest rural Victoria on Tuesday.

The hot weather is expected to clear by Wednesday, as a low-pressure trough 
moves east and brings a change in wind direction, promising cooler 
southwesterlies.
 