
The prime minister will tell parliament on Wednesday that Australia’s cyber 
capability, through the Australian Signals Directorate, is being deployed 
offensively to support coalition military operations againstIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> in Iraq and Syria.

Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
will make a security statement at noon addressing directly the sensitive 
subject of Australia’s offensive cyber capabilities – while the minister 
assisting the prime minister on cyber security, Dan Tehan, will use a separate 
outing at the National Press Club to argue that, domestically, Australia needs 
to step up its preparedness against hacking and malicious cyber-attacks.

The cyber caliphate: how the war against Isis went digital – Tech Weekly 
podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audio/2015/nov/20/isis-islamic-state-internet-digital-technology>
In April the government confirmed 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-04-21/australia-admits-it-can-launch-cyber-attacks-turnbull/7343620>
 that the Bureau of Meteorology and the Department of Parliamentary Services 
had been targets of cyber-attacks, and the prime minister also confirmed for 
the first time that Australia possessed the capability to launch such attacks.

Building on those revelations, according to an excerpt of the prime minister’s 
security statement, Turnbull will confirm for the first time on Wednesdaythat 
capabilities within the ASD are now supporting coalition operations against 
Isis in Iraq andSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> – as well as 
helping the government to respond to and deter cyber-attacks against Australian 
agencies.

The prime minister will say in the statement that he won’t provide details of 
specific operations, but cyber capabilities “are being used to make a 
difference to the military battle”.

Turnbull insists that “all offensive cyber activities in support of the ADF 
and our allies are subject to the same rules of engagement which govern the use 
of our other military capabilities inIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> and Syria, such as our F/A-18 Hornets”.

Tehan will focus on domestic preparedness and identify four areas where 
Australia could improve its capacity to repel cyber-attacks. He will say the 
government needs to accelerate the implementation of its cyber security 
strategy “and look to where we can further address our vulnerabilities”.

“First, while government has a strong level of coordination against cyber 
threats, we need to stay ahead of the game,” Tehan will say. “Departments need 
to take greater responsibility for the security of their agencies and policy 
needs to reflect that all areas of cyber security – crime and safety – overlap.”

Are you a top secret cyber-security genius? Take our test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/shortcuts/2016/nov/02/are-you-a-top-secret-cyber-security-genius-take-our-test>
Tehan will also argue that government and businesses need to be clear when 
attacks occur, arguing that information needs to be released to the public as 
soon as the details become known “and it is safe and secure to do so”.

“And we need to encourage and create the environment where business can do the 
same.”

“Third, cybercrime is a growing problem and we need to be more proactive. 
Cybercrime can be deterred and we should protect ourselves and our communities 
just as we do offline in the real world by having a strong cop on the beat and 
other forms of social and civil rules of the road.

“Fourth, we need to work with businesses and state and territory governments 
to better secure our critical infrastructure. This will involve better 
coordination and strong legislation reform, where appropriate.”
 