
The Australia team’s problems with their accommodation in the Olympic village 
have gone from bad to worse. Having initially refused to move into their 
building because of concerns over “blocked toilets, leaking pipes and exposed 
wiring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/24/blocked-toilets-exposed-wiring-olympic-village-australia>
”, they have now become victims of theft having been forced to evacuate their 
rooms because of a fire. To make it worse, they claim the fire alarms had been 
deactivated.

Belgian decathlete overcomes cancer to compete at Rio Olympics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/31/thomas-van-der-plaetsen-cancer-doping-rio-olympics-games-belgium-decathlon>
Two laptops and team shirts were stolen from the Australia team’s 
accommodation on Friday night when a fire started in the basement. The team 
suspect the fire was caused by a cigarette being carelessly tossed into rubbish 
by a worker. Around 100 of the team and staff left the building for half an 
hour, which is when the thefts are alleged to have taken place.

“We did lose some shirts and a couple of laptops, one on the fifth floor from 
a cycling official and one in the office downstairs,” the Australian Olympic 
Committee spokesman Mike Tancred said on Sunday.

However, the Australians are angrier that the fire alarms had been 
deactivated. They claim that the veteran shooter Warren Potent slept through 
the fire and was not woken by knocks on his door or phone calls.

Kitty Chiller, the Australian chef de mission, said: “Obviously that is 
completely unacceptable that a) the fire alarm was disabled and b) that if it 
had to be, that we weren’t warned about that.” The team have now elected fire 
wardens for each floor of the 18-storey building.

The Rio mayor, Eduardo Paes, had previously sought to play down the Australian 
team’s concerns before this latest incident. He told the athletes that perhaps 
they might be more comfortable if he installed a kangaroo.Chiller responded by 
giving Paes a toy kangaroo in return 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/28/australia-ends-olympic-village-spat-with-gift-of-toy-kangaroo-for-rio-mayor>
.
 