
Some of the people who completed the 2016 census have been asked to resubmit 
the form and theAustralian Bureau of Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-bureau-of-statistics> 
(ABS) is unable to explain the error but says it is “inevitable” a small number 
of mistakes will happen.

Several people have complained, including some who had digital receipts from 
the online submission. Some have refused to resubmit the form, amid the 
widespread confusion.

Despite the reports, the bureau said it did not ask or require people to 
resubmit an already completed form.

When asked how it could tell if someone was falsely claiming to have completed 
the form, it said it had sufficient processes in place to verify the entries.

The 2016 census has been widely labelled a disaster, after initial privacy 
fears over increased data retention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/census-2016-australians-who-dont-complete-form-over-privacy-concerns-face-fines>
 gave way to frustration asthe online system collapsed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/census-2016-website-was-not-hacked-or-attacked-government-claims>
 on census night.

Census 2016: Australians who don't complete form over privacy concerns face 
fines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/census-2016-australians-who-dont-complete-form-over-privacy-concerns-face-fines>
Australians have until 23 September to complete the survey.

Tasmania’s census director, Georgia Chapman, told the ABC 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-09-01/census-form-confusion-isolated-says-tasmania-director/7801470>
 the incidents of people being incorrectly contacted were “isolated”, but 
according to the report, at least one field officer had repeatedly come across 
the problem.

Ian Reilly told Guardian Australia he had successfully completed the online 
form before the meltdown on 9 August, but then received an email saying “we 
noticed you haven’t submitted your completed census”.

Reilly said the letter confusingly added: “if you have already completed and 
returned your census form, thank you. No further action is required.”

“So basically – ‘you haven’t done it, but if you have, thanks’,” he said.

One woman said her afternoon had been interrupted by a census officer and she 
told her she had already filled it out and showed her the digital receipt.

“[The officer] even suggested to me that I had probably just saved it and 
didn’t actually submit it,” said the woman.

“At that point I was succinct in my response that I had in fact submitted it 
correctly. I didn’t suggest that perhaps it was the freaking government that 
don’t know how to use websites, not me.”

One person told Guardian Australia he had been at his mother’s house and had 
filled out the form there, but a census officer had since left him reminder 
notices. He contacted the ABS to ask if he needed to fill out another form.

Census 2016: outage due to 'overcautious' response, not hacking, government 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/census-2016-website-was-not-hacked-or-attacked-government-claims>
“They replied within an hour saying: We have recorded your house as being 
unoccupied for census purposes and you should not receive any further contact 
about the census to your address. No further action will be required,” he said.

“I don’t believe I provided enough personally identifiable information in the 
inquiry for them to know which dwelling is mine. Waiting to see if anything 
further happens.”

A spokesman for the ABS told Guardian Australia it was “inevitable” that a 
small number of wrong reminders would be sent out in an operation of this size, 
but the most common reasons were a lag between a paper form being sent and 
received, and people not clicking on “submit” at the end of their online form.

He did not say how the ABS would resolve cases where a person claimed to have 
submitted the form online but the bureau’s system did not recognise this. Nor 
would he say what the consequences would be for those who refused to resubmit a 
form.

“In each case, the ABS will cross-check an individual or household’s online 
receipt number and home address to verify its completion. Those who have 
already submitted the census online will be substantiated and therefore do not 
need to take further action,” he said.

“To date, more than 80% of Australian households have already completed their 
forms, and the ABS is ahead of schedule and on track for a very high quality 
census. The ABS will do everything it can to verify each submission claim, and 
where required work with the individual or household to confirm this.”

The bureau has received more than 7m of the 9m forms, and its census program 
manager, Duncan Young, predicted an increase of 2m participating households 
compared with 2011.

Young said 62% of the forms were completed online, compared with 33% five 
years ago.

“Our census field officers will continue to visit households that haven’t 
completed the census over the coming weeks,” he said.

“Please go online or fill out a paper form now, and this will save a field 
officer from needing to visit you.”
Georgia Scutt (@GeorgiaScutt) 
Another Census visit! 2 workers didn't knock & left another paper form without 
letter re: fines or Sept. 23rd deadline.#CensusFail 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/CensusFail?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/GeorgiaScutt/status/771290529543827456> September 1, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/GeorgiaScutt/status/771290529543827456> CapableCate 
(@CapableCate) 
@Info_Aus <https://twitter.com/Info_Aus> @Asher_Wolf 
<https://twitter.com/Asher_Wolf> Just found this on my front porch; already 
checked off last week by Census Officer; what the?!pic.twitter.com/xUx655RpAV 
<https://t.co/xUx655RpAV>
 <https://twitter.com/CapableCate/status/771274110542290944> September 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/CapableCate/status/771274110542290944> Caitlin Raschke 
(@_treehugger) 
A friend told me today she's been sent three census forms since she filled 
hers in and posted it#CensusFail 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/CensusFail?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/_treehugger/status/771302601031770112> September 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/_treehugger/status/771302601031770112> Lady Max (@LladyMax)
3 of these left over 5 days, no name, date. Handed last one & told at 4th 
there'll be "trouble"#CensusFail 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/CensusFail?src=hash> 1/2 pic.twitter.com/jujncKMwSy
 <https://t.co/jujncKMwSy>
 <https://twitter.com/LladyMax/status/771455960426565632> September 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LladyMax/status/771455960426565632>  