
"It doesn't matter what the situation is in the game, never, never give up. 
Fight all the way to the end." Those were my words toAshton Agar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ashton-agar> as I handed him his Baggy Green 
at the start of the first day at Trent Bridge – and it's fair to say both he 
and Australia did just that.

The honour of presenting a debutant with his cap is something really special – 
both for the guy who is receiving it and the ex-player who is handing it to 
them. It's changed a bit since I made my Test debut – when I got my Baggy Green 
the AustralianCricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Board just 
couriered it to me in a cardboard box in the post.

These days an ex-player may be fortunate enough to be able to offer a few 
words. Just before I handed him Baggy Green No434 I told Ashton: "Just go out 
there and enjoy yourself, play the way you've been playing because that's why 
you've been picked." And also to remember the players that have gone before 
you, because that's part of the reason you're here. I've been lucky enough to 
present three caps: the first was to Nathan Hauritz, the next to Mitchell 
Johnson and now Agar. Every time it really is a special honour.

Agar's knock in that first innings was just incredible and the team as a whole 
showed a lot of fighting spirit. The way they came back in the fourth innings 
and took the chase right down to 14 runs tells you that this Australian side 
aren't going to lie down and die when the going gets tough.

That's a great sign. Without a doubt they'll take a lot of confidence out of 
the game, despite the result.

One thing I noticed both at the start of the match and then after the match 
when I had dinner with the squad was that there is a really good feeling around 
the team, a really good energy. That's very important. It's something I really 
like and it's going to hold them in good stead. They'll only get better from 
here. The loss will have hurt them. They'll come out fighting again in the next 
Test.

Another big positive for Australia is that it shows that you can score runs 
against this England attack and that it's an attack heavily based around Jimmy 
Anderson. Jimmy played a huge part in the game and if they can get on top of 
him or control him to a degree that will make life a lot easier. He was always 
going to be the key bowler.

Obviously one of the major issues coming out of the Test was the use of DRS. 
I'm a fan. I like it, I like the idea of it and I'd have liked to have had it 
when I played but not necessarily because it would have meant more wickets – in 
fact it might actually have saved me a bit of cash.

I remember once we were playing Sri Lanka in Cairns and right at the start of 
the match I thought I had Sanath Jayasuriya out absolutely plumb lbw. The 
umpire gave it not out. If we'd had DRS, I would've gone straight to the 
captain and said: "That was absolutely dead, he got nowhere near it." We would 
have reviewed it and picked up the wicket.

Instead I, shall we say, let my frustrations out and I ended up getting fined 
a quarter of my match fee. The umpire came up to me in the next break in play 
and apologised for missing it, so in one sense DRS is a way to keep emotions in 
check when things are a bit fiery.

Umpiring is a tough job. Don't get me wrong – I wouldn't want to be an umpire. 
You've got a split second to make a decision. When you're sitting at home or in 
the changing rooms, you've got replay after replay, there's Snicko, there's 
HotSpot, there's HawkEye – we've got the benefit of all of that. So we need to 
be a little bit easier on the umpires. I'd like to see how these people who are 
complaining would get on out there making those decisions.

To me there's only one real issue with the current DRS system – lbw when it's 
hitting leg stump. At the moment if the umpire gives it out and the DRS shows 
the ball hitting any part of the stump, even just nicking the stump, then it's 
umpire's call – out. If the umpire says not out and HawkEye shows the same 
thing, then it's umpire's call – not out. You had a situation where Shane 
Watson and Chris Rogers were both given out when the ball was just clipping the 
stump and then Steven Finn given not out when the ball was hitting a lot more 
of the stump.

So I don't like the umpire's call element – it creates a grey area and I think 
it's causing captains to call for the DRS when they shouldn't. I'd prefer it if 
it was clear cut. The way I would have it is that if more than half of the ball 
is hitting the stump then it's out – if less than 50% is hitting the stump then 
it's not out. It would draw a line in the sand.

One final thing to clear up that doesn't require the help of DRS: I heard Sir 
Ian Botham <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ian-botham> naming me as chief 
suspect in a practical joke played over the weekend. Apparently Beefy ordered 
some grapefruit and coffee on the breakfast order slip that he hung outside his 
hotel door overnight on Friday. Someone then changed the order to include every 
single item on the menu, which duly arrived in the morning. The only thing I'd 
say in my defence is that I wasn't in the same hotel. But I thought it was a 
very good joke. I'm just surprised there wasn't a repeat the next day as well …
 