
Italy’s referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/italy-referendum-result-not-another-brexit-trump>
 might well have been one of the biggest smoke screens in modern Italian 
politics. Many Eurosceptics have wrongly portrayed the vote as a plebiscite on 
Europe. What was presented as a noble institutional reform became a vote of 
confidence in the Italian government and the prime ministerMatteo Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/matteo-renzis-future-in-the-balance-amid-high-turnout-in-italy-referendum>
 himself. In fact, it was nothing more than an all-too-familiar rejection of 
the Italian political establishment.

Renzi’s defeat was written in the stars; a sitting government linking its fate 
to a referendum almost always ends in tears. The historical examples are 
abundant. TheDutch <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/jun/02/eu.politics> 
andFrench 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/French_European_Constitution_referendum,_2005> 
referendums of 2005 on the European constitution were successfully hijacked by 
opposition parties, who turned them into a plebiscite on the government of the 
day. However, the example that best explains Renzi’s defeat is the 1969 
referendum in France called by Charles de Gaulle.

Italy’s referendum result is not another Brexit or Trump | Luigi Scazzieri
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/italy-referendum-result-not-another-brexit-trump>
The similarities are striking. Both votes proposed a drastic diminishing of 
the senate’s role and both of them wanted to change the relationship between 
regional and central government. Just like Renzi, De Gaulle personalised the 
referendum by announcing he would step down if the French voted “no”. More than 
52% did so. The hero of the second world war had failed to understand that the 
France of the “deadlocked 1950s” had been replaced by the one of May ’68.

Matteo Renzi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-renzi> was equally 
blind in not recognising that Italians are fed up with the country being run – 
or rather: mismanaged – by the two old socialist and conservative groupings. In 
2013, Renzi entered national politics as a young lion promising change, but he 
proved to be nothing more than a younger version of the old crocodile Silvio 
Berlusconi. He tried, but failed, to hide the fact that the main goal of the 
referendum was to give electoral bonuses to the two big parties and to punish 
political initiatives outside the old party structures.

The young crocodile struck a deal with the old one by trying to prevent new 
political movements from flourishing, despite the fact this is exactly what 
Italian voters crave: fresh blood in their out-of-date political system. The 
way politics in Italy is organised has a real and devastating effect on 
people’s lives. Youth unemployment inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> is sky-high, yet the kids of 
well-connected families get well-paid jobs. Pension reform is on hold, while 
government officials give themselves very generous schemes. The list goes on.

It is because of these core issues that Italians voted “no”. It was not a vote 
against the European ideal, as some populists have tried to spin it. Italian 
voters are fed up with the static division of power between the two big 
groupings, who have mismanaged both Italy andEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> for decades.

The result of the presidential election in Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/defeat-austria-far-right-norbert-hofer-hope-europe>
, meanwhile, was a victory against the hard-right populism engulfing the west. 
It is telling that Arron Banks, a close confidant of Nigel Farage and 
bankroller-in-chief of Ukip,yesterday tweeted 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/Arron_banks/status/805482046676148225> after the 
result that “I suppose they [the Austrian people] haven’t suffered enough rape 
and murder yet.” In one tweet, the mask slipped and the ugly xenophobic, racist 
face of the populist right was exposed for all to see.

It’s telling that many in Norbert Hofer’s party actually blamed Farage’s 
intervention for its defeat – after he went on US television to suggest that 
Hofer would propose a referendum on EU membership if he won. Austrians remain 
in favour of EU membership, with the latest polls suggesting34% wish to leave 
the EU <https://mobile.twitter.com/EuropeElects/status/805475479734075393>, 
down from 49% prior to the UK referendum. As a result of the Brexit referendum, 
support for EU membership has increased significantly across Europe. Did
Europe’s Brexit backlash 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2016/11/24/europeans-start-liking-the-e-u-again/?utm_term=.40a04adbea27>
 help defeat Hofer? Quite possibly.

Austria defeated the far-right Norbert Hofer – finally, some hope for Europe | 
Julia Ebner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/defeat-austria-far-right-norbert-hofer-hope-europe>
Of course, this increase in support for EU membership must not be taken for 
granted. Arguably, the EU remains one or two elections away from 
disintegration. But the Austrian result shows that so-called “alt-right” 
populist coup attempts can be defeated, even in the current climate. If we dare 
to radically reform the EU, then the tide can be turned. The upcoming Brexit 
negotiations offer the possibility to start this process.

If the EU is to survive, people want to see that it is capable of producing 
results. They want a convincing European stimulus package to end the economic 
crisis and tackle the obscene youth unemployment plaguing so many European 
countries. They want a sizable border and coast guard that can actively manage 
the refugee crisis. Moreover, they want an EU that will intervene to manage 
globalisation so that it offers opportunities for everyone, not just the few. 
So long as mainstream politicians continue to play party-political games with 
referendums, instead of putting genuine radical reforms on the ballot paper, 
people will continue to vote “no”.
 