
A court in Norway has ordered Åsne Seierstad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/sep/21/books.afghanistan>, author of 
the Afghanistan-set bestsellerThe Bookseller of Kabul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/sep/13/featuresreviews.guardianreview>, 
and her publisher, Cappelen Damm, to pay 250,000 kroner (£26,276) in damages to 
a woman portrayed in the book.

Oslo district court ruled that the Norwegian author and journalist, whose book 
was based on the three months she spent living with a bookseller and his 
family, had breached the privacy of Suraia Rais, wife of bookseller Shah 
Muhammad Rais, and included inaccurate information in her account.

"The information [in the book] about Rais's thoughts and feelings is 
sensitive," the Oslo district court ruled, according to a report in the 
Dagbladet newspaper. "They are attributed to her as true, and neither Seierstad 
nor Cappelen Damm can be considered to have acted in good faith to ensure they 
were correct and accurate." Seierstad's lawyer said he would be strongly 
encouraging his client and her publisher to appeal against the fine.

The book was an international bestseller when it was published in 2003, and 
its success in the UK was fuelled by it being included in theRichard and Judy 
TV bookclub <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/magazine/8128436.stm>. However, Mr Rais 
– the bookseller of the title – has always disputed its contents, which portray 
him as a tyrannical head of the household. He claimed that the book was 
distorted, revealed family secrets and put his family in danger, to the extent 
that his two wives both fled the country to live in exile in Canada and Norway.

In 2007, Mr Rais wrote his own account of his life, Once Upon a Time There was 
a Bookseller in Kabul. Last year hesigned a deal with Indian distributor 
Motilal Books to sell his books into the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/07/real-bookseller-kabul-uk>.
 