
More than 100 writers, including Pulitzer Prize winners Alice Walker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alice-walker>, Richard Ford and Junot Díaz, 
have called on the PEN American Center “to reject support from the embassy of 
Israel” in a furious open letter.

Sent to PEN American Center and other festival participants in March but 
published online on Wednesday,the letter 
<https://adalahny.org/web-action/1376/letter-pen-american-center-don-t-partner-israeli-government>
 opposes the Israeli embassy’s sponsorship of PEN’s annual World Voices 
Festival (PWVF), a seven-day event in New York at the end of this month.

In the festival’s promotional materials, PEN America lists the Israeli embassy 
<https://adalahny.org/downloadable-files/1378/pen-world-voices-festival-2016-program>
 as a “champion” of the festival, one of the tiers of festival involvement, and 
a sponsor of theNinety Minutes, Three Minds panel discussion involving 
Ethiopian-born Israeli author Dalia Betolin-Sherman.

“It is deeply regrettable that the festival has chosen to accept sponsorship 
from the Israeli government, even as it intensifies its decades-long denial of 
basic rights to the Palestinian people, including the frequent targeting of 
Palestinian writers and journalists,” says the letter, sent byAdalah-NY, The 
New York Campaign for the Boycott of Israel 
<http://adalahny.cmail20.com/t/r-l-edtlult-duujuihdih-d/>, an American group 
that campaigns for boycott, divestment and sanctions against Israel.

Among the writers who have put their names to the protest are the former 
president and vice president of English PEN, Gillian Slovo and Kamila Shamsie; 
poet Eileen Myles; authors Louise Erdrich and Ahdaf Soueif; and the Palestinian 
writer Ahmad Qatamesh, whose imprisonment without charge by the Israeli 
government wascriticised by PEN International 
<http://adalahny.cmail20.com/t/r-l-edtlult-duujuihdih-h/>.

The Colour Purple author Alice Walker said: “As a PEN member, I want this 
organisation that is supposed to be a champion of writers’ rights to stand up 
for Palestinian writers, academics and students who are suffering under a 
repressive Israeli regime that denies their right to freedom of expression. The 
last thing PEN should be doing is partnering with and promoting a government 
that denies Palestinians basic human rights.”

PEN American Center responded with an email to its members from author Colm 
Tóibín, who is chairing the 2016 festival, and Jakab Orsos, its director. 
Referring to its policy,formally adopted in 2007 
<http://www.pen.org/press-release/2007/06/22/pen-american-center-urges-rejection-academic-boycotts>
, the letter says the venue will not participate in “cultural boycotts of any 
kind – which impede individual free expression – no matter the cause”.

It adds: “In the dozen years since its founding, PWVF has received funding 
from many sources, including several dozen governments that have provided 
individual writers from their own countries with travel and other expenses. 
This includes the subsidies received for PWVF 2016.

“The diversity of our funding helps to ensure that programming decisions are 
our own. ‎It is important to note that national sponsorships of festival 
writers do not imply any endorsement of those governments’ policies, and have 
no bearing on PEN’s free expression advocacy decisions.”

Marilyn Hacker, recipient of PEN Voelcker award for poetry and PEN award for 
poetry in translation, said: “Even if PEN opposes all forms of boycotts, PEN 
should have policies and ethical standards in place forbidding partnerships 
with significant human rights abusers. On that basis alone, PEN should rule out 
a partnership with the Israeli government.”

PEN American Center spokeswoman Sarah Edkins said the Israeli embassy’s 
sponsorship “does not go towards overall festival costs” and only “covers the 
travel related costs for Israeli authors already selected by our team to 
participate”. She said the money went towards air fares, accommodation and 
interpreters for the Israeli authors.

The Israeli embassy has participated in the festival on and off since 2006, 
listed as a festival patron 
<http://worldvoices.pen.org/2015-world-voices-sponsors> alongside the 
Australian government and the British Council in 2015. In the aftermath of the 
Gaza war in 2008 and 2009, Israel’s foreign ministry was granted an extra $2m 
to improve Israel’s global image, with the ministry’s then-deputy director 
general for cultural affairs Arye Mekeltelling the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/03/19/world/middleeast/19israel.html?_r=3&partner=rss&emc=rss>
: “We will send well-known novelists and writers overseas, theatre companies, 
exhibits. This way you show Israel’s prettier face, so we are not thought of 
purely in the context of war.”

The PEN American Center has been criticised by members of other PEN branches 
before. In 2015,more than 200 writers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/27/peter-carey-among-writers-to-protest-pen-honour-for-charlie-hebdo>
 protested after it gave a freedom of expression award to the French satirical 
magazine Charlie Hebdo in the wake of the attack on its Paris offices earlier 
that year.

That letter 
<https://theintercept.com/2015/04/30/145-pen-writers-thus-far-objected-charlie-hedbo-award-6/>
 said that by selecting Charlie Hebdo, PEN was “valorising selectively 
offensive material: material that intensifies the anti-Islamic, anti-Maghreb, 
anti-Arab sentiments already prevalent in the western world”.

• The headline on this article was amended on 7 April 2016 to better reflect 
the content of the report.
 