
Avignon, on the leafy banks of the Rhône, is probably best-known these days 
for the children’s song –Sur le pont d’Avignon and all that. But for several 
decades in the 14th century it was the capital of Christendom, after Pope 
Clement V moved his court here to avoid the chaos in Rome. The legacy of that 
papal schism can be seen today in the city’s Unesco-protected architecture, 
including the vast Palais des Papes. And nearby Châteauneuf-du-Pape, site of a 
now-ruined castle built by a later pope, still produces acclaimed red wines.

The city’s intact ramparts and pedestrianised centre lend Avignon a 
small-town, medieval feel. Yet each summer, the city goes totally 21st century, 
as thousands of visitors descend for a contemporary performing arts 
extravaganza, theFestival d’Avignon <http://www.festival-avignon.com/en/> (from 
4-25 July this year). And the new Eurostar route will bring all of these 
delights within six hours’ journey from London.

What to do 

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F25%2Favignon-france-city-guide-eurostar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429891423348%2F5be4813d-4f32-4122-9ca7-89742a81cd3d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Avignon%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F25%2Favignon-france-city-guide-eurostar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Avignon%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F25%2Favignon-france-city-guide-eurostar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429891423348%2F5be4813d-4f32-4122-9ca7-89742a81cd3d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Palais des Papes in the heart of the town. Photograph: Bernard Jaubert/Bernard 
Jaubert/incamerastock/Corbis 
The Palais des Papes  <http://www.palais-des-papes.com/en>on place du Palais 
(adults €11, children €9) sits squarely at the heart of Avignon’s old town. 
Bear in mind that those breakaway popes of the 14th century weren’t short of a 
franc or two. The palace is a warren of serpentine corridors, imposing stone 
halls and apartments frescoed with ornate hunting and fishing scenes. For an 
insider’s peek at what life in the 700-year-old palace was really like, join 
one of the weeklySecret Palace 
<http://www.palais-des-papes.com/en/content/follow-guide> tours (reservations 
+33 4 3274 3274, in English April-May and September-October, Saturdays 10.30am, 
€24.50 including refreshments). The guide will share papal anecdotes as you 
wind your way through areas normally off-limits to visitors, including private 
chambers and hidden passages.

If you’re there in late summer, you may find children prefer Les Luminessences 
d’Avignon <http://www.lesluminessences-avignon.com/> (in English Mondays, 
Wednesdays and Fridays, 10.15pm, 12 August-3 October, adults €10, children €8), 
a 35-minute 3Dson et lumière in the central courtyard of the Palais des Papes, 
documenting the palace’s construction and life under the Avignon popes.
 Les Luminessences d’Avignon. Photograph: Alamy 
You can walk along the remains of the St-Bénézet medieval bridge  
<http://www.avignon-pont.com/en/content/discover>(the one in the song, adults 
€4.50, children €3.50), but you can get great views of it for free just north 
of the palace, in theJardin du Rocher des Doms. This public garden, on a 
hillside 30 metres above the Rhône, also has its own tiny Côtes du Rhône 
vineyard and a bar where you can sip its wines.

A short stroll south of here, Collection Lambert 
<http://www.collectionlambert.fr/> (5 rue Violette, adults €10, children €8) is 
a contemporary art space in an 18th-century townhouse and courtyard. Following 
a two-year renovation, it is set to reopen on 3 July, with an extension that 
doubles its size. Inaugural exhibitions include Un Musée Imaginare, dedicated 
to the work of opera, film and theatre director Patrice Chéreau.

To explore further, try a cycling trip on an electric or classic bike with 
Daytour <http://www.daytour.fr> (from €18 for two hours). An app that comes 
free with the bike rental offers self-guided itineraries that range from the 
banks of the Rhône to the Châteauneuf-du-Pape vineyards. If that sounds too 
taxing, hop aboard Avignon’s regular free ferry service (daily in sumer from 
11am to 8.45pm) by the bridge and stroll the network of footpaths of verdantÎle 
de la Barthelasse, the river island opposite the city.

Where to eat and drink

Once the palatial home of a 14th-century cardinal, the elegant Hôtel de La 
Mirande <http://www.la-mirande.fr/#/en/accueil/> (4 place de l’Amirande, +33 4 
9014 2020) also has a cooking school, with adults’ classes from €90 a head, 
children’s from €47. Michelin-starred chefs from across the region, including 
Avignon’sChristian Etienne <http://christian-etienne.fr/>, teach participants 
how to whip up innovative Provençal delights such as strawberry salad and 
stuffed guinea fowl. On Tuesdays and Wednesdays, in the hotel’s 19th-century 
basement kitchen, chef Séverine Sagnet runs atable d’hôte (€86pp, maximum 12 
diners), a private Provençal cooking demo followed by a three-course gourmet 
dinner with wine tasting – and perhaps a friendly game of pétanque to round off 
the evening. A secret passageway leads from this basement into the Palais des 
Papes.
 The cooking school at the Hôtel de La Mirande. 
At La Cuisine du Dimanche <http://www.lacuisinedudimanche.com/> (31 rue de la 
Bonneterie, +33 4 9082 9910), chef Marie Ohanessian sources most of her super 
seasonal ingredients daily from Avignon’s covered market,Les Halles 
<http://www.avignon-leshalles.com/> on place Pie. Dishes might include homemade 
gnocchi with tomato fondue or slow-cooked Aveyron lamb with roast potatoes and 
oyster mushrooms. Lunch is a steal, with aplat du jour for just €12, and a 
two-course set menu for €17. The covered market offers free cooking 
demonstrations by local chefs at 11am every Saturday (except in August).

Oenophiles should time a visit to Avignon to coincide with the inauguration of 
theCarré du Palais <http://carredupalaisavignon.com/english> on place de 
l’Horloge this autumn. This wine-tourism complex, inside the 18th-century Hôtel 
Calvet de la Palun (which isn’t a hotel), will be home to theÉcole des Vins du 
Rhône <http://www.carredupalaisavignon.com/ambiances/l-ecole-des-vins-du-rhone> 
wine academy (with workshops in several languages), a fine-dining restaurant 
and a terrace wine bar overlooking the Palais des Papes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F25%2Favignon-france-city-guide-eurostar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429891634095%2F727f7372-482a-4890-999d-374abe22e930-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Avignon%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F25%2Favignon-france-city-guide-eurostar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Avignon%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F25%2Favignon-france-city-guide-eurostar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F24%2F1429891634095%2F727f7372-482a-4890-999d-374abe22e930-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A bedroom at the Bastide de Gordes hotel. Photograph: PR 
Out in the splendid Lubéron countryside, in the postcard-perfect village of 
Gordes, 40km east of Avignon, Michelin-starred chef Pierre Gagnaire will from 
July be taking over the newly refurbished restaurant atBastide de Gordes 
<http://bastide-de-gordes.com/en/page/flavours-luxury-and-indulgence.html> (rue 
de la Combe, +33 4 9072 1212). The restaurant has views over rolling vineyards 
and pale stone farmhouses and servesbrunch every Sunday  
<http://m.bastide-de-gordes.com/models/gallerymedia/assets/0//06fe2defe3b35_brunchs-bastide-a4-fr.pdf>
(adults €48 including unlimited champagne, children €24).

For an informal evening out, with fine wines from the Languedoc-Roussillon 
region west of Avignon, and bountiful platters of local charcuterie and cheese, 
head toAOC (5 place Jérusalem, +33 4 90 25 21 04), a popular wine and tapas bar.

Where to stay 


Thames Résidences
Overlooking Avignon’s medieval ramparts, and two minutes’ walk from the city 
centre station where the Eurostar arrives, this hotel offers a mix of spacious 
suites and apartments, many with their own terrace. The decor is romantic 
(cast-iron bedsteads, embroidered Provençal wall-hangings) with plenty of mod 
cons (kitchenettes, Wi-fi, iPhone chargers). It’s a great choice for longer 
stays.
• Suites from €129, +33 4 3270 1701, thames-residences.com 
<http://english.thames-residences.com/v2/index.php?option=com_frontpage&Itemid=1>

Péniche QI
For a novel place to stay, try this houseboat B&B moored on the Île Piot, a 
10-minute stroll across the river from Avignon’s old town. It has four snug en 
suite rooms, all individually designed during the 1950s, and a petite swimming 
pool on deck. The affable owner, Laurent, is a font of local knowledge.
• Doubles from €70 B&B, chemin de l’Ile Piot, +33 4 9025 4061, 
chambrepeniche.fr <http://chambrepeniche.fr/fr.html> 

La Banasterie

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F25%2Favignon-france-city-guide-eurostar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F23%2F1429787195288%2F3c7fcf47-4f3e-4729-aa5d-015f716af643-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Avignon%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F25%2Favignon-france-city-guide-eurostar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Avignon%20city%20guide%3A%20what%20to%20see%20plus%20the%20best%20bars%2C%20restaurants%20and%20hotels&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fapr%2F25%2Favignon-france-city-guide-eurostar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F23%2F1429787195288%2F3c7fcf47-4f3e-4729-aa5d-015f716af643-2060x1236.jpeg>
Back in town and close to the papal palace, this 16th-century townhouse has 
been turned into a B&B by chocolate lovers Françoise and Jean-Michel Rivière. 
Each of the five guestrooms is inspired by a type of cocoa bean (such as 
Criollo and Forastero), and on cooler evenings they will offer guests a 
steaming mug of top-quality hot chocolate before bedtime.
• Doubles from €100 B&B, +33 687 729636, labanasterie.com 
<http://www.labanasterie.com/> 

Hôtel Le Colbert
With its central location inside the city walls and neat (if a touch kitsch) 
Provençal décor – a riot of red, orange and yellow, this budget-friendly 
two-star hotel is one of Avignon’s best spots to bed down. Breakfast (€8) – 
with bread and croissants sourced each morning from the owners’ favourite 
bakery – is served on the sunny patio.
• Doubles from €64 room-only, +33 4 9086 2020, avignon-hotel-colbert.com 
<http://www.avignon-hotel-colbert.com/> 

Don’t miss

Musée Angladon
Charming Musée Angladon in the old town displays the art collection of Jean 
and Paulette Angladon-Dubrujeaud on the upper floor of their former home.
• angladon.fr <http://angladon.fr/>, €6.50

Trompe-l’oeil frescoes

 Photograph: Alamy 
There are more than 50 trompe-l’œil frescoes by artists Dominique Durand and 
Marion Pochy positioned around the streets of the city, each commemorating a 
past Festival d’Avignon. Trompe-l’œil is an art technique that creates optical 
illusions.
 