
I hired a car from Avis in Murcia, Spain. Soon after returning home, I 
received an invoice for €400 plus tax for accident repairs. We had noticed a 
dent in the door during the week, but I absolutely deny causing any damage. We 
travelled only 67 miles. When we returned it to the airport, the office was 
closed so I could not discuss this with anyone.MS, Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire

Your only mistake was not to check the car before you drove off. It was late, 
dark and you had problems fitting the child seat, so it was understandable, but 
it left you without proof that the car was already damaged. Avis says you could 
have noted damage on the rental agreement form, but you were asked to sign this 
before even receiving the keys, well before you could have checked the car. The 
company eventually produced an incident report form but you had not signed this 
– obviously not because it could have been filled out only after the office 
reopened. Avis insists you are responsible and will not listen to any argument 
you did not cause the dent.

It also says that you "chose" to return the car outside office hours, 
forfeiting the opportunity to speak to a representative. This ignores the fact 
that customers return cars just before catching their flight whatever time that 
is, in your case mid afternoon which surely is within office hours. Avis later 
refunded £45 saying the repairs had cost less than expected. Next time, 
photograph the entire car when you drop it off.

You can email Margaret Dibben at your.problems@observer.co.uk <> or write to 
Margaret Dibben, Your Problems, The Observer, Kings Place, 90 York Way, London 
N1 9GU and include a telephone number. Do not enclose SAEs or original 
documents. The newspaper accepts no legal responsibility for advice.
 