
First came promises of a fairer deal for black talent; now comes a call for 
action. TheLondon film festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/londonfilmfestival> is to put black 
film-makers and actors centre screen on the largest scale yet, and then come up 
with a plan to promote their profile in national cinema.

The Black Star symposium, together with a Black Star season of films 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/black-star> that will follow the festival, mark an 
unprecedented push from the British Film Institute to promote black artists and 
acknowledge their historical exclusion from the higher-profile side of the 
industry.

“We don’t want just to create debate here, we want to create an environment 
where things can actually happen,” Clare Stewart, director of the BFI’s annual 
festival in the capital, told theObserver, as she revealed the names of 15 
British writers, directors and producers from black, Asian and minority ethnic 
(Bame) backgrounds who will receive intensive mentoring during the festival as 
part of the Net.Work programme. “There is feeling now that by concentrating on 
tactics we can really make things shift.”

Can such a drive to salute and evaluate black creativity really hope to 
redress years of struggle, limited funding for directors and a restricted range 
of parts on offer to actors?

Joseph A Adesunloye, who is of Nigerian descent and is one of the young 
directors in the running for a new £50,000 award for the best emerging British 
film-maker, pinpointed the problem when he spoke recently about the need for 
unexpected platforms, in this case the South London Gallery in Camberwell, for 
showing his work. “It’s a really needed resource, to get African stories out 
there seen by the diaspora, but by others too. Because the important thing is 
just visibility; it breaks up this idea of this monolithic continent,” he said.
Adesunloye’s new film,White Colour Black, <http://www.whitecolourblack.com> 
will be shown at the LFF alongside films fromthe other three (white) finalists 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/news-bfi/announcements/four-britains-brightest-new-filmmakers-shortlisted-uk-films>
 for the inaugural IWC Schaffhausen Filmmakers bursary award.

Coincidentally, the new ways into the entertainment industry necessarily being 
found by black talent are highlighted by the imminent launch ofLaid In America, 
a mass-market offering which stars the black British comic vloggerand rapper 
KSI, real name Olajide Olatunji, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/03/youtube-urged-to-remove-ksi-videos-rape-trivialisation>
 the cult youth star who boasts 14.4 million subscribers to his YouTube channel.
 Laid in America, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TlyenjHEmZE> a raucous buddy 
movie co-starring fellow vlogger Casper Lee, is aimed at the sort of audiences 
that once flocked to teen comedies likeAmerican Pie and Superbad. The film, in 
which the two play high-school exchange students desperate to lose their 
virginity with the girls of their dreams on their last night in America, may 
not go on to win any arthouse plaudits, but it does demonstrate the potential 
commercial appeal of more culturally diverse voices.

The BFI’s Black Star project, trailed in cinemas over the summer, features 
John Singleton’s 1991 filmBoyz n the Hood and a re-release of the 1967 Sidney 
Poitier classic,In the Heat of the Night. But during the 12-day run of the film 
festival, now in its 60th year, work by black artists has been given serious 
extra space for the first time.

The LFF will open in Leicester Square with the European premiere of director 
Amma Asante’sA United Kingdom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/09/a-united-kingdom-review-rosamund-pike-david-oyelowo-toronto>
. Asante’s film stars David Oyelowo in the true story of Seretse Khama, king of 
Bechuanaland, who in 1947 married London office worker Ruth Williams, played by 
Rosamund Pike, despite fierce opposition from their relatives and the British 
and South African governments. The gala premiere will be simultaneously 
screened at cinemas across the country. “I’m really hopeful we’re about to 
segue from talking about diversity to actually doing it,” said Oyelowo, who 
starred as Martin Luther King in the 2014 filmSelma.

The festival programme also features Nate Parker’s new American epic, The 
Birth of a Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/26/the-birth-of-a-nation-review-sundance-slavery-epic-as-brutal-as-braveheart>
, which won the grand jury prize at the Sundance festival at the beginning of 
the year. Parker, whose personal reputation was seriously dented this summer by 
discussion of a historic rape charge (of which he was acquitted), produces, 
directs, writes and plays the lead role in this harrowing account of the life 
of Nat Turner, the enslaved African American who led a slave revolt in Virginia 
in 1831. Fox Searchlight paid top dollar for the film, which provocatively 
shares a title with DW Griffith’snotoriously racist 1915 film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/jul/29/birth-of-a-nation-dw-griffith-masterpiece>
. Other black work to be screened at LFF includesQueen of Katwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/11/queen-of-katwe-review-ugandan-chess-movie-could-be-new-slumdog>
, a story about playing chess as an escape route for a young Ugandan woman and 
which also stars Oyelowo.Spike Lee’s Chi-Raq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/25/chi-raq-review-spike-lees-urgent-angry-and-very-sexy-midlife-masterpiece>
, a hip-hop version of Aristophanes’ sex wars playLysistrata, also gets a 
screening, while Barry Jenkins’Moonlight, which is set in 1980s Miami and based 
on Tarell Alvin McCraney’s playIn Moonlight Black Boys Look Blue, is in 
competition at the festival.

Oyelowo is the top billed speaker at the Black Star symposium, where Asante, 
whose previous films include the costume dramaBelle, will talk about her 
experience as a black director. Other speakers include Jenkins and Noel Clarke, 
writer and directorbehind the “‘hood trilogy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/aug/26/why-noel-clarkes-hood-trilogy-remains-a-vital-snapshot-of-britain>
,Kidulthood, Adulthood and this year’s Brotherhood, and Julie Dash, whose first 
feature in 1991,Daughters Of The Dust, was the first feature-length film by an 
African-American woman to be released theatrically in American and British 
cinemas.

The symposium will be asked to respond to a new set of figures about Bame 
involvement in British film over the last decade which is being compiled by the 
BFI for the festival. Points already on the agenda include the obstacles faced 
by black actors in America and in Britain, the truth about “colour-blind” 
casting, and the difficulties of finding funding.

“We want to be able to build some strategies and work out how the industry 
should adjust to create the diversity we need,” said Stewart this weekend. “We 
have already found that there is a strong correlation between what goes on 
behind the scenes and behind the camera and what ends up showing on screen in 
terms of diversity, so we have to open up opportunities.”

The powerful new documentary, The 13th, by Ava DuVernay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/19/ava-duvernay-the-13th-documentary-new-york-film-festival>
, director ofSelma, will be the documentary special presentation this year. In 
it, DuVernay methodically tackles the history of race relations in America and 
examines how the US has produced the highest rate of incarceration in the 
world, with the majority of those imprisoned being African American. The title 
refers to the 13th Amendment to the US Constitution: “Neither slavery nor 
involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall 
have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States.”

For the new British black film-making hope, Adesunloye, access to funds and 
exposure remain the key issues, even with a voguish new transatlantic interest 
in telling the story of the African diaspora.

“It’s got to do with who funds film and the kind of stories that they want to 
tell,” he told a journalist atOkayafrica. “For example, Beasts of No Nation has 
been getting a lot of wonderful press but there is something problematic about 
the fact that that one wonderful story, which was written by an African (I 
haven’t seen it, so I can’t say) isn’t made by Africa – or rather the director 
isn’t African. But most importantly, the finance and the funding isn’t African.”

Acclaimed for his short film, Beyond Plain Sight, Adesunloye’s new film, White 
Colour Black, stars Dudley O’Shaughnessy as a young mixed-race British man 
returning to Senegal to bury his estranged father. Born in Lagos, the director, 
screenwriter and producer is a graduate of the University of Aberdeen and the 
London Film Academy. “Will African film-makers tell those kind of films 
differently? More problematic is why is it always stories about conflict or 
suffering that seem to get the most attention?

“Really, it’s got to come down to funding. Africans have to find a way to fund 
stories that are about themselves,” he said.
 