
Some literary fans show their dedication to a particular author by traipsing 
to book signings or festivals; others track down elusive first editions. Nick 
Newcomen went a little further than most, spending a month driving more than 
12,000 miles to inscribe his message –"Read Ayn Rand" 
<http://worldsbiggestwriting.com/earth.html> – on a vast swath of US land.

Using a GPS tracking device as a "pen", Newcomen took about 10 days to 
complete each word, turning on his GPS logger when he wanted to write and 
turning it off between letters, videoing himself at landmarks along the route 
for documentation. He drove 12,328 miles in total, across 30 American states, 
inputting the data once he was finished into Google Earth to create the world's 
largest book advertisement.

"I saw on the internet some GPS 'penned' shapes and drawings done by others. 
They intrigued me because I saw potential there to use GPS to create a 
'written' message on a very large scale," said Newcomen.

He decided to point people towards the author because he believes that "'Read 
Ayn Rand' deserves to be the world's biggest message".

"She is the only modern author and thinker to offer ideas that have the 
potential and power to genuinely reshape the world for the better," he said. 
"And on a personal level, her books and ideas have been instrumental in helping 
me achieve success and happiness in life."

Rand counts among her disciples former chairman of the Federal Reserve Alan 
Greenspan <http://www.nytimes.com/2007/09/15/business/15atlas.html>, along with 
Brad Pitt, Oliver Stone and Ronald Reagan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/mar/11/ayn-rand> – although Noam 
Chomsky once called her "one of the most evil figures of modern intellectual 
history". She is best known for her novel Atlas Shrugged, in which she trumpets 
the right of individuals to look out for themselves even as the world collapses 
without them ("I will never live for the sake of another man, nor ask another 
man to live for mine," says hero John Galt), for her philosophy of Objectivism 
and her advocacy of "full, pure, uncontrolled, unregulated laissez-faire 
capitalism". She has undergone a revival in recent months,with Atlas Shrugged 
enjoying a boost in sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/mar/10/ayn-rand-atlas-shrugged>.

Newcomen listed his top 10 reasons to read the author 
<http://worldsbiggestwriting.com/> on a website about his travels: "She 
explains with refreshing honesty and clarity which basic ideas America must 
adopt and which it must reject if it is to remain a great nation," he wrote, 
and "her ideas in essence are true".

Other writers hoping for similar endorsements will be disappointed: Newcomen 
says he has "no plans at this time to do any more GPS 'writing'".
 