
Now this one 
<http://www.alternet.org/teaparty/149721/ayn_rand_railed_against_government_benefits,_but_grabbed_social_security_and_medicare_when_she_needed_them/?page=1>
 is fascinating. From Joshua Holland at Alternet:

[Ayn Rand's] books provided wide-ranging parables of "parasites," "looters" 
and "moochers" using the levers of government to steal the fruits of her 
heroes' labor. In the real world, however, Rand herself received Social 
Security payments and Medicare benefits under the name of Ann O'Connor (her 
husband was Frank O'Connor).

As Michael Ford of Xavier University's Center for the Study of the American 
Dream wrote, "In the end, Miss Rand was a hypocrite but she could never be 
faulted for failing to act in her own self-interest."

She was elderly and sick and needed surgery (lung surgery, after knocking down 
two packs a day for decades). Presumably she had a fair amount of money. But 
she turned to Social Security and Medicare. And under her husband's name!

All right, I hear some of you now. We're all hypocrites to some extent. I 
accepted the Bush tax cuts I oppose (although I do make charitable 
contributions that I think cover the difference, so I give the money back).

But I am not the leading "moral" philosopher of my age on the subject of rates 
of taxation, as Rand was to her many disciples on the question of the state. 
Besides which, there is no way to tell the IRS, look, I want to be taxed at the 
old Clinton rate. Whereas Mrs. O'Connor could surely have turned to other 
sources. What a hypocrite and fraud.

So, happy Monday. A few other items. One, I have a big-think Egypt-related 
piece on US hegemony and the right side of history and all that, which I wrote 
this morning for tomorrow's paper. It should be posted today sometime.

Two, I want to pursue this matter of reader-made quizzes. What's a good 
logistical way to proceed with this, without me having to post publicly my 
personal email address?

Three, re the thread on last Friday's quiz: wow. Sometimes I wonder if you 
folks need me at all. And Madame Max, as one who has pulled Vicious Misanthrope 
back from the rhetorical brink more than once in this lifetime, permit me to 
assure you that he's a good egg deep down. Stay with us.

 