
The police marksman who shot dead 24-year-old Azelle Rodney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney> has applied for a judicial 
review of a public inquiry that found he had no lawful justification for the 
fatal shooting.

The officer, known as E7, killed Rodney in Edgware, north London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, in 2005 after the car in which Rodney 
was travelling with two other men was stopped by armed police. They suspected 
the three were on their way to rob a gang of Colombian drug dealers and had an 
automatic weapon capable of firing 1,000 rounds a minute.

Former judge Sir Christopher Holland chaired a three-month public inquiry into 
Rodney's death and last month published his findings, which said the killing 
was not justified. On Monday, lawyers for E7 served a claim for judicial review 
on Holland, seeking a declaration that his conclusions relating to E7's use of 
force were "irrational", or an order quashing parts of the report that conclude 
the officer's use of force was not justified. Alternatively, they want a 
declaration that the conclusions in the report about E7's beliefs have breached 
procedural rules.

Holland said in his report: "There was no lawful justification for shooting 
Azelle Rodney so as to kill him. Granted that E7 had an honest belief that 
Azelle Rodney posed a threat to himself or to other officers, this threat was 
then not such as to make it reasonably necessary to shoot at him."

He also said: "E7's accounts of what he saw are not to be accepted. Prior to 
firing he did not believe that the man who turned out to be Azelle Rodney 
hadÂ picked up a gun and was about to use it. Further, on the basis of what he 
was able to see, he could not rationally have believed that."

E7 could face a criminal trial over the death, and prosecutors are considering 
whether to bring charges. Rodney was shot six times, once each in the arm and 
back and four times in the head.
 