
A former police marksman has been cleared of murdering a suspect he shot six 
times, a killing that the dead man’s mother said had effectively seen her son 
subjected to the death penalty.

Anthony Long, 58, was cleared by an Old Bailey jury of the murder of Azelle 
Rodney <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/azelle-rodney>, 24, whom he shot on 
sight – four times in the head – in north London in 2005.

Rodney was the third suspect Long had killed in his career. Long said he fired 
in self-defence.

He said he did not see a gun on Rodney before he opened fire, but he could not 
wait because intelligence and Rodney’s movements left him convinced the suspect 
was going to shoot at him and other officers with a machine gun that fired up 
to 1,000 rounds a minute.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fpolice-marksman-anthony-long-cleared-azelle-rodney-murder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0b3f382a10931969d392b6f1b0a471fc943273c%2F0_0_1755_2711%2F1755.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azelle%20Rodney%20shooting%3A%20police%20marksman%20cleared%20of%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fpolice-marksman-anthony-long-cleared-azelle-rodney-murder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azelle%20Rodney%20shooting%3A%20police%20marksman%20cleared%20of%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fpolice-marksman-anthony-long-cleared-azelle-rodney-murder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0b3f382a10931969d392b6f1b0a471fc943273c%2F0_0_1755_2711%2F1755.jpg>
 Azelle Rodney, who was shot and killed in 2005. Photograph: Family handout/PA 
An official inquiry previously rejected Long’s account and found he had 
unlawfully killed Rodney. It also found flaws in theMetropolitan police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> operation that led to the 
killing.

Rodney was killed in Edgware after police forced a car he was travelling in to 
stop. Officers said they had intelligence that Rodney was part of a gang, 
possibly armed with automatic weapons, on its way to rob a Colombian drug gang.

His mother, Susan Alexander, said her son should have been arrested rather 
than shot, and said the Metropolitan police had still not learned lessons. “He 
did not deserve to die and we do not have a death penalty in this country,” she 
said.

Long’s acquittal takes the pressure off police chiefs who would have faced a 
potential rebellion from armed officers if he had become the first police 
marksman to be convicted of murdering a suspect.

The jury deliberated for just over 12 hours before announcing that, by a 
majority, they were not convinced of the prosecution case.

Long, standing in the dock in a grey suit and blue tie, nodded his thanks to 
the seven women and five men. Sitting nearby, Alexander showed no emotion. Both 
of them have endured a complaints and criminal justice system that has taken a 
decade to reach this point.

After the verdict, Long said: “It has been very difficult facing trial for 
something that happened 10 years ago when I had acted to protect the lives of 
others as a part of my job and based on my training and experience.

“Police firearms officers do not go out intending to shoot people and, like me 
in this case, have to make split-second life or death decisions based on the 
information available to them at the time.”

Long told the jury that as his unmarked police car pulled alongside a silver 
Golf containing three suspects, Rodney ducked down in the rear seat and came 
back up. He said Rodney’s movement “seemed a totally unnatural movement to me”, 
adding: “I have never seen a suspect behave in such a distinct way.”

Long said: “All I had was seconds to make the decision whether I was going to 
let my colleagues be shot by someone with a submachine gun or whether I was 
going to take life. I chose to take his life. That was the decision I made and 
I stand by it.”

Long fired eight times from two metres away. His first two shots missed. Six 
hit Rodney, who died almost instantly.

Forensic and ballistic tests suggest five bullets hit Rodney as he was 
falling, appearing to contradict Long’s account that he continued to fire 
because the suspect remained upright and posed a threat.

The audio track of a video recording of the incident, made by an officer in 
another car, as well as other data, showed that for Long’s statement to be 
correct, within two seconds he must have seen Rodney, witnessed all the 
movements he said the suspect made, assessed that the suspect was about to 
shoot, decided himself to open fire, and fired eight times. “Mr Long cannot 
have seen what he claimed,” said the prosecutor Max Hill QC.

Weapons were recovered from the silver Golf but there were no machine guns. 
One weapon, covered by yellow plastic on the rear seat, could not fire.

A pistol was recovered from the rear footwell, containing four rounds. In the 
same bag was a keyfob gun containing two rounds of ammunition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fpolice-marksman-anthony-long-cleared-azelle-rodney-murder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F238c1ea598aa1cb413620ee27d579e93d8869c04%2F0_1154_1417_849%2F1417.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azelle%20Rodney%20shooting%3A%20police%20marksman%20cleared%20of%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fpolice-marksman-anthony-long-cleared-azelle-rodney-murder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azelle%20Rodney%20shooting%3A%20police%20marksman%20cleared%20of%20murder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2015%2Fjul%2F03%2Fpolice-marksman-anthony-long-cleared-azelle-rodney-murder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F238c1ea598aa1cb413620ee27d579e93d8869c04%2F0_1154_1417_849%2F1417.jpg>
 2005 photo of police forensics team searching the scene where armed police 
shot Azelle Rodney. Photograph: Edmond Terakopian/PA 
During the trial, the judge, Mr Justice Sweeney ruled that Long was entitled 
to rely on intelligence, whether it was right or wrong.

In three recent high-profile cases, police marksmen shot suspects after they 
went into situations with intelligence and briefings from senior officers that 
they should expect to face mortal danger.

The two officers who shot Jean Charles de Menezes in 2005, after mistaking him 
for a suicide bomber, claimed his movements convinced them he was going to 
detonate a device on aLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
Underground train. They were not charged.

The marksman who shot dead Mark Duggan in 2011, an incident that triggered 
riots across England, was found by an inquest jury to have imagined Duggan had 
a gun in his hand. But because of his honest belief that the suspect was 
preparing to open fire, the officer was found to have acted lawfully.

The officers were protected from a murder charge by arguing that they had an 
honest belief their life or those of others were in imminent danger.

In Long’s career he has been commended for bravery, disciplined, picked for 
prestigious firearms teaching roles, insulted by a senior officer and plucked 
from retirement to face trial.

In the 1980s he shot dead two men in an operation and wounded two other 
suspects. In 2006 Long won compensation from Scotland Yard after he met the 
then deputy assistant commissioner Sue Akers at a police leaving drinks. As the 
pair were introduced, Akers joked: “I’ve always wanted to meet the Met’s very 
own serial killer.”

The firearms officer threatened to sue for defamation. Scotland Yard settled 
out of court and he was paid £5,000 for what the force admitted were 
“inappropriate remarks”.

Rodney’s family fought a 10-year battle, first for a full and public inquiry 
and then for a murder prosecution. The authorities had previously tried to 
block an inquiry, claiming the intelligence used by law enforcement came from 
intercepts, disclosure of which they said was unlawful.

The two other men in the car 10 years ago, Wesley Lovell and Frank Graham, 
were later convicted of firearms offences. They have since been released from 
jail.

Alexander said of the pair: “They have walked away from the car with their 
lives and my son has not.”

She said she was not anti-police – they had a job to do “to serve and protect 
the public” – and that her decade-long fight had damaged her employment, health 
and even seen community members shun her because of the serious criminal 
allegations surrounding her dead son.






 