
Azerbaijan’s oil riches have turned its capital, Baku, into a gaudy showcase 
city. Three skyscrapers shaped like flames dominate the skyline, lighting up 
with flickering Azerbaijani flags at night. The waterfront promenade on the 
Caspian Sea offers a “mini Venice” complete with canals and ersatz gondolas. 
Ultra-luxury malls feature boutiques including Valentino, Givenchy and 
Alexander McQueen.

But as global oil prices have dropped, Baku’s facade has started to crumble. 
Showy parks are being left untended and the floodlights illuminating Baku’s 
historic centre are noticeably dimmed. A striking number of ambitious 
construction projects lie dormant, half-finished.

Farid Guliyev, a political analyst sitting in Baku’s first Starbucks, says: 
“Walk around the city. It doesn’t give you the feeling of being in a luxury, 
oil-boom town any more.”

As F1 roars into Baku, activists tell drivers: help our fight for human rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/18/baku-formula-one-grand-prix-azerbaijan-human-rights>
Amid this decline, citizens last week went to the polls in a referendum 
<http://www.rferl.org/a/azerbaijan-referendums-constitutional-changes-aliyev/28012681.html>
 designed to strengthen President Ilham Aliyev’s grip on power. Election 
officials announced that turnout had been 70%, and an overwhelming majority 
approved extending the presidential term limit from five to seven years and 
making it easier for the state to seize private property.

The plebiscite is the latest in a series of aggressive political responses to 
the economic crisis that threatens to undermine a government which has long 
staked its authority on being able to provide material benefits, if not civil 
rights, to its population.

Before the vote the government stepped up its harassment of independent 
journalists and dissidents to the point that Azerbaijan’s civil society was 
described as “paralysed” and facing “the worst situation” since the country’s 
independence in 1991, the UN human rights rapporteurMichel Forst said during a 
recent visit 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=20554>. 

Reports of increasing repression are not surprising in Azerbaijan, long one of 
the former Soviet Union’s most authoritarian states. But what makes this 
crackdown especially striking is that, for much of this year, the news from
Azerbaijan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> seemed to be getting 
better.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-dissidents-warn-west-baku-friendly-facade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F068ef078f4709bb1cd6c7f1c938a4f79d7f9594d%2F0_258_5239_3144%2F5239.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azerbaijan%20dissidents%20warn%20the%20west%20not%20to%20fall%20for%20Baku's%20flashy%20facade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-dissidents-warn-west-baku-friendly-facade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azerbaijan%20dissidents%20warn%20the%20west%20not%20to%20fall%20for%20Baku%27s%20flashy%20facade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-dissidents-warn-west-baku-friendly-facade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F068ef078f4709bb1cd6c7f1c938a4f79d7f9594d%2F0_258_5239_3144%2F5239.jpg>
 The Formula 1 Grand Prix racing through Baku in June. Photograph: Mark 
Thompson/Getty Images 
This spring the government released more than a dozen 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/03/azerbaijan-pocs-release/> of 
the most prominent political prisoners, and state media and senior officials 
conspicuously ceased their criticisms of the west.

Altay Goyushov, a historian and one of Azerbaijan’s leading public 
intellectuals 
<http://foreignpolicy.com/2014/12/06/the-two-faces-of-azerbaijans-government/> 
says he had been beginning to feel safer. “A year ago I was afraid to say 
certain things because I knew there would be punishment. Now, I see there’s no 
point in punishing me, they don’t want to arrest a high-profile man and have 
additional troubles. It’s changing.”


But Goyushov and others agree that the political changes feel cosmetic, merely 
a tactical shift aimed at securing concessions from the west.

They say that whatever political retreat the Azerbaijani state has made is the 
result of the economic crisis. For the last 15 years, soaring oil prices and 
substantial Caspian Sea deposits had bankrolled a massive government spending 
spree, a windfall that helped Azerbaijan pull itself out of the catastrophe it 
suffered in the 1990s after the fall of the Soviet Union.

The government thoroughly rearmed the military, held high-profile 
international events such as the Eurovision song contest and the first European 
Games, and invested in architectural prestige projects,such as the $250m Zaha 
Hadid 
<http://www.rferl.org/a/azerbaijan-baku-heydar-aliyev-center-fire/24651102.html>
 building in the shape of the signature of the former president, Aliyev’s 
father.

But the recent oil price collapse has inflicted serious damage. Over the last 
year and a half the currency, the manat, has lost half its value. Baku is 
reportedlyangling for loans and bailouts from the World Bank and the 
International Monetary Fund 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-01-28/imf-starts-talks-with-azerbaijan-on-possible-financial-aid>
.


According to Khadija Ismayilova, an investigative reporter and the best-known 
of the political prisoners released this spring, the Azerbaijani government 
“needs money … and western institutions that can give it will probably do it 
conditionally” – by demanding transparency and the rights of private groups to 
monitor them.

“This is why the government is now trying to give more space to NGOs, but it’s 
all an imitation. They release people but they don’t let the NGOs operate,” she 
said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-dissidents-warn-west-baku-friendly-facade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1008d5c70890e7207a37239d67d3556d18c3ac9e%2F0_196_3400_2040%2F3400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azerbaijan%20dissidents%20warn%20the%20west%20not%20to%20fall%20for%20Baku's%20flashy%20facade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-dissidents-warn-west-baku-friendly-facade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azerbaijan%20dissidents%20warn%20the%20west%20not%20to%20fall%20for%20Baku%27s%20flashy%20facade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-dissidents-warn-west-baku-friendly-facade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1008d5c70890e7207a37239d67d3556d18c3ac9e%2F0_196_3400_2040%2F3400.jpg>
 Khadija Ismayilova, who was released on probation in May. Photograph: Pacific 
Press v/REX/Shutterstock 
Ismayilova, who had produced explosive investigative reports exposing 
high-level corruption in the Azerbaijani government,was arrested in 2014 on 
charges of “inciting suicide” 
<https://freedomhouse.org/article/azerbaijan-quash-conviction-journalist-khadija-ismayilova>
, embezzlement, tax evasion, and other charges widely seen as political. 
Shortly before she was released,she wrote a piece for the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/president-obama-hold-the-azeri-president-accountable-for-political-prisoners/2016/03/31/91720c50-f68f-11e5-9804-537defcc3cf6_story.html?utm_term=.82fe60625511>
 urging western leaders not to let Azerbaijan’s government use political 
prisoners as “bargaining chips”.

But that’s exactly what happened, she says. “This imitation works. You see 
that western governments are believing in some sort of softening. Diplomats 
whom I’ve talked to speak about it openly, they say they see signs of 
softening, and I always warn them that it’s an imitation.”

I’m afraid that Europe’s defence of human rights is just words than deeds. The 
political prisoners are part of this game
Hilal Mamedov 
That view is shared by another of the released prisoners, Hilal Mamedov. The 
mathematics professor, a member of the Talysh minority (a Persian-speaking 
group that lives along Azerbaijan’s border with Iran), is an advocate for 
Talysh rights and the editor of a Talysh-language newspaper. He was arrested 
afterposting a video on YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M9RcdLCJkw4> 
featuring some Talysh men in a meyhane, a kind of Caucasus rap battle.

After the video became an unlikely viral hit in the Russian-speaking world, 
gaining more than 20m views, Mamedov joked on Facebook that while the 
government had spent millions to hold Eurovision, he made Azerbaijan famous for 
free. Days later he was arrested and charged with heroin possession. After 
nearly four years in prison, he was released this spring.

“The leadership of the country thinks that they need to be a little more 
cautious with the US and Europe,” he says. “For example, if before we often 
heard criticisms against the US, today you almost never hear that.”

But he, too, fears that he is being used as a bargaining chip when there is 
little hope of real change. “I’m afraid that … Europe’s defence of human rights 
is more in words than deeds,” he said. “The political prisoners are part of 
this game, we’re just tools in the hands of these powers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-dissidents-warn-west-baku-friendly-facade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F936b9459ebdfeea11307864eb2bf422097a235d8%2F0_16_3614_2169%2F3614.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Azerbaijan%20dissidents%20warn%20the%20west%20not%20to%20fall%20for%20Baku's%20flashy%20facade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-dissidents-warn-west-baku-friendly-facade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Azerbaijan%20dissidents%20warn%20the%20west%20not%20to%20fall%20for%20Baku%27s%20flashy%20facade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fazerbaijan-dissidents-warn-west-baku-friendly-facade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F936b9459ebdfeea11307864eb2bf422097a235d8%2F0_16_3614_2169%2F3614.jpg>
 The US secretary of state, John Kerry, shakes hands with Ilham Aliyev before 
their meeting at the State Department in Washington in March. Photograph: Susan 
Walsh/AP 
One illustrative incident took place in March, when Aliyev visited Washington 
for the nuclear security summit, two weeks after freeing 15 of the political 
prisoners. In DC,he got a photo with Barack Obama 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2016/03/31/readout-vice-president-bidens-meeting-president-ilham-aliyev-azerbaijan>
 and a meeting with his vice-president, Joe Biden. These kinds of appearances 
are a valuable currency for leaders of dubious legitimacy such as Aliyev, eager 
to show their populace that they are big players on the international scene; in 
a statement, Biden “welcomed the recent releases from prison of human rights 
and civil society activists and encouraged continued progress”.

That Aliyev managed to get a meeting with Biden demonstrated “the 
commodification of political prisoners — especially the rock stars like Khadija 
[Ismayilova] ,” said Richard Kauzlarich, a former US ambassador to Baku and now 
a professor at George Mason University.

The fact that the US is so easily swayed by cosmetic reforms demonstrates that 
their interest in Azerbaijan becoming more democratic is also cosmetic, 
Goyushev says. Western policymakers have long seen Azerbaijan primarily in 
geopolitical terms, as a pro-western outpost wedged between Russia and Iran, 
and providing oil and natural gas. “In the short term, it’s not important [to 
the west] that Azerbaijan be democratic,” Goyushev says.

Freed journalist Khadija Ismayilova: 'They didn't succeed in silencing me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/31/freed-journalist-khadija-ismayilova-azerbaijan-interview>
Now, Baku seems to be trying to push the limits of what it can get away with, 
and the pendulum may be swinging the other way. The constitutional referendum 
was a surprise move.Critics have interpreted it as a power grab by Aliyev 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/od-russia/dominika-bychawska-siniarska/azerbaijan-s-unconstitutional-future>
.

The US offered a feeble statement on the referendum, suggesting  
<http://www.contact.az/docs/2016/Politics/092800169949en.htm?91#.V-53qpN96SM> 
that “Azerbaijan is not unique in terms of the presence of heads of state 
ruling for a long time.”

Rashadat Akhundov, a young activist who spent three years in prison for 
organising protests about poor conditions in the military, before being 
released this spring, said he feels there has been less international criticism 
of the government in recent months. “I can’t be sure but maybe there’s an 
agreement behind the curtain,” he said.

This reporting was made possible by a grant from the Pulitzer Center on Crisis 
Reporting.




 