
Too many sustainability campaigns start with the word stop! They tell you all 
the things you shouldn't be doing if you want to take care of the environment.

Worried that this was proving uninspiring, the Prince of Wales spearheaded a 
public campaign to focus on what people can do to make a real difference – 
appropriately called start.

B&Q was a headline sponsor for the start scheme but took it one stage further 
by using it to launch its biggest ever staff engagement programme, the "one 
planet home" competition.

Building on the company's already widely praised campaign 
<http://www.diy.com/diy/jsp/bq/templates/content_lookup.jsp?content=/content/marketing/one_planet_home/index.jsp&menu=eco>
 to help customers achieve more sustainable homes, it aimed to get as many of 
its 30,000 staff as possible to start sharing their own ideas, with each other 
and with customers, about how they could make a difference.

The three-month competition kicked off in the autumn to coincide with the 
public start campaign. The idea was to help employees green up their homes 
spurred on by incentives such as large discounts and giveaways on eco-friendly 
products.

Prizes were also on offer, as was the chance to be named one of B&Q's eco 
heroes, winning £300 and an invitation to the company's best of the best 
ceremony.

To avoid creating unnecessary extra materials, every existing channel of 
communication was used to get the idea across, including payslips, the staff 
magazine, emails, the blog and stands at regional staff road shows.

Take up was very good. Some 20% of staff shared their ideas; many more got 
involved by voting for their favourite ideas and heroes. Nearly 6,000 free 
energy saving packs were requested by staff and 3,500 bought loft insulation 
specially reduced to 3p a triple roll.

The scheme was enormously successful in delivering the sustainability message 
in a highly interactive way. It carried a public campaign into the homes of B&Q 
staff who could in turn talk to B&Q customers with greater authority about how 
to start making a difference.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 