
‘None of them wants to be original. And I think that’s quite healthy’

Grayson Perry visits Chelsea College of Arts, UAL 
<http://www.arts.ac.uk/chelsea/>, the art school that turned him down

You can’t be an artist without going to art school. It’s impossible. Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/artanddesign> school’s like being 
plunged into a sheep dip that inoculates you against cliches. It gives you a 
sensibility you need to get into the art world. I didn’t go to a posh London 
art school, though. I went to Portsmouth Polytechnic. Then I applied to Chelsea 
for a masters – and got turned down for being “too much of an artist”. It was 
one of the greatest things that could have happened to me. I was forced to go 
out there and get on with it, not bugger about trying to get another 
qualification that nobody would ever have asked about.

I took a bit of acid at the time of my degree show but it didn't help

At art school, I started out making things that were very much in the spirit 
of what I’m looking at here, wandering round the Chelsea degree show: rough and 
ready and lashed up out of whatever I could find in a skip. By the time of my 
degree show, however, I was interested in highly crafted art. Someone had told 
mecraft was dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/12/are-computers-killing-off-craft-not-a-chance>
 – which immediately made me love craft. And all the artists being hailed at 
the time, people like Anselm Keifer and Georg Baselitz, were a bit 
bish-bash-bosh. I think I reacted against that and that’s what gave me my 
aesthetic: being a bit pernickety and suburban.

My showpiece was a big table made out of old railway sleepers I found in the 
bushes. They were all rotting and nicely weathered and I used them as a plinth 
for sculptures of things like a bronze Bible and a helmet, all a bit gothic. 
I’d taken a bit of acid round that time – but, to be honest, it didn’t help.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F365d5fc18df8d29a34407bac82da28bec47e21c9%2F11_742_6530_3918%2F6530.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow's%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow%27s%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F365d5fc18df8d29a34407bac82da28bec47e21c9%2F11_742_6530_3918%2F6530.jpg>
 Molly Smisko immerses Grayson Perry in her work, Assimilation. Photograph: 
Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
It used to be that each generation had a “thing” that was trendy to do, but 
I’m struck by how Chelsea students seem to do a bit of everything. No one seems 
able to commit to one single form. I guess, because of the internet and their 
economic situation, it’s about contingency, but it means there’s a 
non-committal quality to the show. It might be fear, or maybe just be the 
nature of contemporary culture, where everything’s going on at once, and it 
does make me wonder about the future. Fifty years down the line, instead of 
dashing off watercolours in the village art club, little old ladies will be 
sitting around doing conceptual art.

Another thing that strikes me is the fact that nobody really talks about being 
original. None of the students seems remotely concerned about it, which is 
quite healthy I think. It’s an illusive dream to pursue originality as an art 
student. It’s not like learning to play the violin, where you can be 
demonstrably talented at a young age. With art, you really need to find your 
own voice and that takes a while. Actually, it’s a marathon – and if you are 
eventually original, you’re lucky.

Talking to the students is a lot of fun. I’m quite self-serving so, while 
going round a degree show, what I really want to find out is what’s going on in 
the world today, particularly as technology has widened the chasm between 
generations. I’ve long given up the hope of stumbling across someone at a 
degree show and going: “Wow! This person is the genius of the future!” I can 
remember being a young artist myself: there’s an inherited arrogance you have, 
but the work’s all fairly derivative. Students are on a low budget and they 
haven’t got much room.

Chelsea’s lot seem a lot less naïve and probably more middle class than we 
were at Portsmouth Poly – and a lot more people will come to their show. My 
degree show was quite different: it was attended a sad set of seven bewildered 
parents and a couple of local art lovers. And back then we could hitchhike up 
to London, get into a squat and live in the centre of the city with no money 
for several years. There wasn’t a vast amount of competition in the art world 
because of the tiny number of art students and the tiny number of galleries. 
Now everything is inflated – and it’s people like me, artists as the 
stormtroopers of gentrification, who are responsible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F023112d2fc7463aee0e7452a16126aa1b19dc13a%2F0_111_7271_4363%2F7271.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow's%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow%27s%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F023112d2fc7463aee0e7452a16126aa1b19dc13a%2F0_111_7271_4363%2F7271.jpg>
 Courtyard takeover … Sarah Smith’s I Kissed the Blood on Those Soles of Yours 
Perry’s students … Sarah Smith: ‘My family don’t have a clue what I do’ 
Dominating the entire courtyard, Sarah Smith’s degree show work comprises five 
words written across five banners and suspended from various balconies. “KNEEL 
BEFORE ME AND BEG,” it reads.Grayson Perry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/grayson-perry> is impressed by its 
simplicity and clarity. “I don’t want to be obfuscated to,” he says. The work, 
called I Kissed the Blood on Those Soles of Yours, is about Smith’s own 
feelings as a northern, working-class woman in a privileged environment like 
Chelsea. “It’s been a big eye-opener for me,” she says, “because my family 
don’t have a clue about art or what I do here.” Perry nods and says: “You only 
become aware of your identity when it’s not working.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf3afe1b2cbecc36fd6ff46b10fe59d19f3492f9%2F0_430_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow's%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow%27s%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf3afe1b2cbecc36fd6ff46b10fe59d19f3492f9%2F0_430_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Looking for the perfect man … Rosie Howe’s The Love Machine. 
Rosie Howe: ‘I’d quite like a boyfriend’ 
Rosie Howe leans on the arcade game she designed to track down the perfect man 
and says: “We were talking about what we wanted when we left university. And I 
forgot about my degree and thought I’d quite like a boyfriend for a change.” 
Called The Love Machine, the work flashes up symbols of everything from beards 
to cats and bicycles. You select your favourites and, if your interests match 
with Howe’s enough, you win a prize: a slip of paper with her phone number on 
it. “Brilliant!” says Perry, running through his own interests. “Football? No. 
Bicycles? Yes. Books? Yes. Laughter? Yes, definitely. Tomato ketchup? Yes.” 
Does he win the prize? Nope.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc921f0f0401b1491393100d60c8b5fdb5667ad43%2F0_95_7360_4817%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow's%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow%27s%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc921f0f0401b1491393100d60c8b5fdb5667ad43%2F0_95_7360_4817%2F7360.jpg>
 Goo for it … Elizabeth Prentis with It’s Time to Slime. 
Elizabeth Prentis: ‘My falling goo fountain? It’s an experiment’ 
Elizabeth Prentis calls herself The Slime Queen, which makes sense the moment 
you see her work. Part sculpture, part performance, It’s Time to Slime features 
450kg of handmade slime, held in tarpaulin, ready to be lifted 10ft into the 
air, and tipped out to create a “slime fountain”. For Prentis, whether the 
fountain works or not is unimportant: there’s no such thing as failure. “It’s 
an experiment really,” she says. “I’m not sure, at this stage, how I will know 
if I’ve succeeded.” Perry is interested in the practicalities of the work and 
Prentis’s battle against things like rules and regulations. “Maybe the artists 
of today aren’t rebelling against the previous generation of artists,” he says. 
“They’re rebelling against health and safety.”

• Grayson Perrry is chancellor of University of the Arts London – see more on 
theUAL Summer Shows here <http://www.arts.ac.uk/study-at-ual/summer-shows/>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd747c98097e8823fc30c6b940760771db03c5d02%2F883_767_6477_3887%2F6477.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow's%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow%27s%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd747c98097e8823fc30c6b940760771db03c5d02%2F883_767_6477_3887%2F6477.jpg>
 Gillian Wearing examines degree show work at Goldsmiths. Photograph: Linda 
Nylind for the Guardian 
‘When I was here, you’d see people crying, shouting and screaming’

Gillian Wearing goes back to Goldsmiths <http://www.gold.ac.uk/> college – and 
recalls the prank she played in the library

I thought it would feel odd coming back to Goldsmiths. It’s only the second 
time I’ve been back since graduating. I was even a bit nervous on the bus here. 
But walking around now, it all seems normal – only the degree show venue has 
changed. When I was a student, this building was still a swimming pool and we 
exhibited in the gym. One student I’ve been talking to even has the same tutor 
I had, back in the late 1980s.

I worked as a secretary before I went to Goldsmiths. I was 24 when I enrolled. 
It felt like the most mature of all the art schools: the average age was 28. 
You had people in their 40s and someone in their 50s. It helped make it a 
really serious course. You don’t waste time if you come to things a bit later. 
I’d given up a job that was quite nicely paid so couldn’t waste a day.


By the time I got there, the Freeze group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2008/jun/01/art> – people like Damien 
Hirst <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/damienhirst> and Michael Landy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/michael-landy> [Wearing’s husband] – 
had already worked stuff out. My year was quite envious: what they were doing 
just seemed so organised. They painted the walls, they got the private views 
organised, they sent the cards out. All that takes time and effort. It got 
misinterpreted as an overly commercialised thing.


Everyone I meet is doing what we were doing: trying to understand art

The big difference today is space: it’s shrinking. We had 300 square foot 
each, which is massive. At one art school I know of, people only get desks – 
they actually have to request studio time. Everyone I meet here is doing the 
same thing we were doing: trying to understand art. It takes a few years to 
work out all the history and how to use different mediums. At Goldsmiths, you 
could do anything. I did sculpture, painting, performance – for one project, we 
covered up all the books in the library so people couldn’t get their hands on 
them – and then filmed people trying.

Originality comes later <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=36WUgFMDY-M>, but you 
do want to be unique. I remember cutting up books (I had a problem with 
language so it felt very innate) and thinking: “Gosh, this is it!” Then I found 
out the artist John Latham had done it already. That was upsetting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F087c0908ef9ea686c2699afc616ce84d88e518f7%2F0_92_1439_1078%2F1439.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow's%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow%27s%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F087c0908ef9ea686c2699afc616ce84d88e518f7%2F0_92_1439_1078%2F1439.jpg>
 ‘I remember cutting up books and thinking: Gosh, this is it!’ … Gillian 
Wearing at Goldsmiths in 1989. 
I think I needed to be outside of college to realise what I was really 
interested in. It happened almost instantly after graduation. I borrowed a 
friend’s camera and started doing vox-pops on the street. There was no YouTube 
then, or anywhere to put work online, but I was aware that technology was 
changing, that people were getting camcorders and filming themselves in 
private. I thought: “I’m going to go outside and turn all this into a public 
performance.”

A lot of the degree show work I see at Goldsmiths references social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media>. I don’t use it – I don’t need 
to. But a lot of young artists probably do. It’s an important way for people to 
see their work. At the same time, I am interested in how people create their 
identities through it. What I saw even early on with MySpace was young women 
using Photoshop on their faces: that craze of chasing your idealised self. It 
can result in something that’s not unique at all, but a very particular kind of 
archetype, moulded by the media around you.

I had my first solo show in an old betting shop. My heart was beating so fast 
I couldn't talk

In my generation, we had to go out and find disused office spaces to show our 
work. There were more empty shops in those days, too. The first solo show I had 
was atCity Racing <https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2001/jan/28/1>, a 
gallery run by a group of friends in a former betting shop. On opening night, I 
couldn’t talk. Someone asked me to explain my work and my heart was beating so 
fast. I just didn’t know how to act with so many people milling around. I’ve 
got better at it since.

I considered film school after Goldsmiths. But I realised it would take away 
all that openness I’d found. At art school, you have to think on your feet and 
find a language – nobody is going to tell you what to do. My course wasn’t 
structured: it was all about talking to like-minded people, having space, 
interacting – and also those moments of not being able to do anything. If you 
sat at home doing nothing, you’d feel it wasn’t right. Some people struggled 
with that, even at college. There was depression, anxiety, arguments. There 
used to be shouting and screaming and people running out the door crying.

When we emerged from Goldsmiths, there was a recession on. But things are even 
tougher for these artists today. Your degree show is both an end and a 
beginning, a mix of optimism and melancholy. It’s hard to make three years of 
experience coherent. I knew it wasn’t the ultimate place to exhibit, just a 
stepping stone. In our first year at Goldsmiths, we were given a talk: they 
told us most people who go to art school won’t end up as practising artists. I 
still feel very fortunate to have been able to carry on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ea6c61f3d16d1d98ed689aa3ada62cf2be96733%2F0_338_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow's%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow%27s%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ea6c61f3d16d1d98ed689aa3ada62cf2be96733%2F0_338_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Up close and personal … Andrea Williamson’s She Thrives in Poor Soils. 
Wearing’s students … Andrea Williamson: ‘I really can do this’ 
Light bounces off the oval mirrors and cascades on to a pair of frilly 
knickers draped over a bathtub. “It’s really nice to see people spending time 
with your work,” says Andrea Williamson as visitors get up close and personal 
with her installation, She Thrives in Poor Soils. “It makes you think, ‘I 
really can do this.’” Next up for her is an exhibition in Berlin organised by 
students from Goldsmiths’ curating course, which didn’t exist in Gillian 
Wearing’s day. Williamson has rented a studio just over the road from 
Goldsmiths and Wearing is keen to know how she will fund it. “My first choice 
would be getting a job in art,” says Williamson. “But if that’s too 
competitive, I’ll serve in a restaurant.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc549c4a333696f2659bced297392b500a5cb06%2F0_528_7056_4235%2F7056.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow's%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow%27s%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc549c4a333696f2659bced297392b500a5cb06%2F0_528_7056_4235%2F7056.jpg>
 Upside down in the basement … Josefina Labourt. 
Josefina Labourt: ‘I’m lucky to study here’ 
“I’m not sure people know I’m down here,” says Josefina Labourt, in the 
Goldsmiths basement. Her work spans painting, sculpture, projection – and 
performance. Tonight she will be reading a text about body and matter, pleasure 
and disgust, all while standing on her head. When she applied to Goldsmiths 
after doing a BA in art in her native Argentina, she wasn’t aware of its 
radical reputation. “The first thing my friends said was, ‘The YBAs!’ I now 
know how lucky I am to study here.” Wearing flinches. “I don’t like that media 
tag at all. The country was very bleak then – it’s even bleaker now – and I got 
optimism from the energy of my peers: this feeling that we don’t have to wait 
for permission, let’s just try things out. That’s Goldsmiths. No one held your 
hand.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6764b47d5bca5d32ca90722426f854502d2956eb%2F0_247_6628_3977%2F6628.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow's%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Back%20to%20art%20school%3A%20Grayson%20Perry%20and%20Gillian%20Wearing%20meet%20tomorrow%27s%20stars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F08%2Fback-to-art-school-grayson-perry-and-gillian-wearing-visit-degree-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6764b47d5bca5d32ca90722426f854502d2956eb%2F0_247_6628_3977%2F6628.jpg>
 Big data in the dock … Helen Knowles with The Trial of Superdebthunterbot 
Helen Knowles: ‘I got Southwark court to let us prosecute an algorithm’ 
Helen Knowles’s video work started out as a performance, in which she put a 
computer algorithm on trial in a courtroom. “I found two lawyers to write the 
prosecution and defence,” she says. “Then I got Southwark Crown Court to let us 
film there, though the judge is played by an actor.” The work, called The Trial 
of Superdebthunterbot, interrogates big data and drone warfare. Wearing is 
impressed. “You’ve put a drone on one of the juror’s heads too,” she says. 
“That moment when the testimony gets technical and the jury starts to wane felt 
very real.” A mother of two, Knowles commutes from Manchester and stays three 
days a week, but insists it’s worth it. “London is the art capital, not just of 
Britain, but of the world.” The biggest challenge is funding. “I have a job 
running an art collection at the University of Salford, but I couldn’t do this 
without child tax credits. Artists are always going to be on the margins of 
society, always skint – apart from a lucky few.”


• Interviews by Hannah Ellis-Petersen and Nancy Groves

 