
Baftas 2016: full list of winners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/14/baftas-2016-full-list-of-winners> 
As expected, this was a night for The Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant>, based loosely on the true 
story of a 19th-century trapper who endures an ordeal of survival and revenge. 
It’s a film of sensual and immersive power, with a staggering visual sense, 
capable of plunging you into an alien and disturbing world. This wins the best 
film prize; Alejandro González Iñárritu was quite rightly rewarded with best 
director, and recognised too was Emmanuel Lubezki’s superb cinematography – and 
of course there was Leonardo DiCaprio as the grizzled, agonised, wounded 
frontiersman himself. This was a real above-the-title performance, a star turn, 
with that radioactive quality, that crackle of madness. It was justly rewarded 
with the best actor prize.

DiCaprio’s performance was well rewarded: this was his year, and none of his 
competitors – Eddie Redmayne, Bryan Cranston, Matt Damon and Michael Fassbender 
– had offered anything as forthright or distinctive. His performance has been 
derided as mere machismo, but I can’t agree. DiCaprio’s beady-eyed resentment 
and jutting-jawed aggression are just right for a role which required him to 
become something close to an animal, and to leave his humanity behind. This 
film and this performance have to be seen on the big screen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F724476adbb3278f7c9f874e1c15f1ee6149b0827%2F427_0_3336_2820%2F3336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baftas%202016%3A%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio's%20animal%20power%20wins%20out%20at%20satisfying%20awards%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baftas%202016%3A%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio%27s%20animal%20power%20wins%20out%20at%20satisfying%20awards%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F724476adbb3278f7c9f874e1c15f1ee6149b0827%2F427_0_3336_2820%2F3336.jpg>
 Colin Gibson, the production designer for Mad Max: Fury Road. Photograph: Ian 
Gavan/Getty Images 
Brie Larson wins best actress (while missing out on the Rising Star award) for 
her quietly superb performance in Lenny Abrahamson’sRoom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/room-review-brie-larson-shines-in-a-dark-dungeon>
, the quasi-Fritzl drama of a young woman forced to raise her young son in 
horrendous captivity. I was disappointed that this prize didn’t go to Saoirse 
Ronan or indeed Cate Blanchett but there is no doubting the sensitivity, 
intelligence and technique that lay behind this performance, which has 
inexorably grown in my mind since I saw it. I would love to sit down and watch 
this movie – and this performance – again.


Baftas 2016: the best quotes of the night
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/14/baftas-2016-best-quotes-stephen-fry-julie-walters>
As for George Miller’s Mad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>, that was an enjoyable 
film which does not grow in the mind but rather instead sort of vanishes. This 
wins four Baftas – for production design, costume design, makeup and hair, and 
editing – placing it just behind The Revenant’s five (which included sound). 
All of these are plausible enough, and I enjoyed this movie a great deal – 
though I am still baffled at the solemn reverence with which it has been 
received at this awards season, and great though it always is to see Charlize 
Theron in anything at all, the idea that this new Mad Max film has some sort of 
“feminist” impact is an example of awards-season overexcitement.

The victory for Brooklyn in the “best British film” category will be a 
crowd-pleasing award. This warm and richly sympathetic picture really has won 
moviegoers’ hearts – although there has been much irritation online that such 
an obviously Irish movie, with Irish themes, is described as British and 
co-opted into a display of British prestige. Of course, we are talking about 
the niceties of national production, and Bafta got itself into a pickle in 2014 
by declaring that for its purposes the intensely American space-drama Gravity 
was a British film. Brooklyn is a very good movie, and its apparently simple 
effects are the result of very intelligent work from a director (John Crowley) 
and screenwriter (Nick Hornby, adapting theColm Tóibín novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/09/colm-toibin-brooklyn>) who make 
it all look easy. In my view – and insofar as these comparisons are meaningful –
45 Years <https://www.theguardian.com/film/45-years> was marginally the 
worthier winner of this prize, and for my money, the really great thing about 
Brooklyn was the wonderfully assured and transparent central performance from 
Saoirse Ronan.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd23cff5a3d3a6187125a9ddf3dc107de7be1059f%2F626_230_4814_3610%2F4814.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baftas%202016%3A%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio's%20animal%20power%20wins%20out%20at%20satisfying%20awards%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baftas%202016%3A%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio%27s%20animal%20power%20wins%20out%20at%20satisfying%20awards%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd23cff5a3d3a6187125a9ddf3dc107de7be1059f%2F626_230_4814_3610%2F4814.jpg>
 Asif Kapadia, the director of Amy, with the prize for best documentary. 
Photograph: Joel Ryan/Invision/AP 
Nobody expected any other result in the documentary section: Asif Kapadia’s Amy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amy> is an overwhelmingly powerful picture 
which comes as close as any such film could to giving direct and unmediated 
access to the heart and mind of Amy Winehouse. Kapadia had a treasure trove of 
home-video material – footage that did what it said on the tin, as they say. 
Over and over again, it just delivered Amy – Amy, Amy, Amy. Her presence and 
that great, passionate, tortured, equine face loomed hugely out of the screen, 
and Kapadia knew how to control and moderate her intensity with the shrewd 
commentary of her friends and contemporaries. It was tough on her father, 
Mitch, who was no fan of the film, but it put his flaws into the context of 
Amy’s own flaws.

Baftas 2016: Peter Bradshaw predicts the winners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/12/baftas-2016-peter-bradshaw-predicts-the-winners>
For me, the big disappointment was the award of best adapted screenplay to The 
Big Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/13/the-big-short-review-ryan-gosling-brad-pitt>
, the story of the super-smart financial mavericks who did well out of the 2008 
crash by contriving to bet on the subprime mortgage bonds going under. I must 
honestly say that I think every other contender in this category did a more 
interesting job – Emma Donoghue for Room, Phyllis Nagy for Carol, Nick Hornby 
for Brooklyn and Aaron Sorkin for Steve Jobs.

I am a great fan of Adam McKay’s comedies – and comedy is hard – but I find 
The Big Short the most overrated movie of this awards season: a laborious, smug 
and self-admiring film, talking down to its audience with its excruciating 
fourth-wall celebrity “lectures”, designed to make viewers feel intellectually 
as well as morally superior on the subject of the 2008 crash, while at the same 
time swooning over these investors’ predatory cleverness and somehow leaving 
the audience with the impression that bankers’ iniquities are an unreformable 
fact of life. This is a minority critical view – and expressing it has revealed 
to me that there are commenters whose belief in diversity of opinion exists in 
theory only.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bdbfbd1c5f02d879043818dba01da81a1e4a137%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baftas%202016%3A%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio's%20animal%20power%20wins%20out%20at%20satisfying%20awards%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baftas%202016%3A%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio%27s%20animal%20power%20wins%20out%20at%20satisfying%20awards%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bdbfbd1c5f02d879043818dba01da81a1e4a137%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Tom Hanks, foreground, and Mark Rylance in Bridge of Spies. Photograph: Jaap 
Buitendijk/AP 
As for the original screenplay, I (along with many others) had tipped the 
winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/12/baftas-2016-peter-bradshaw-predicts-the-winners>
 – although I also had expressed a personal preference for Quentin Tarantino’s
The Hateful Eight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hateful-eight>. The award 
went to Josh Singer and Tom McCarthy’s script forSpotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/spotlight>, the true story of the Boston 
Globe’s team of investigative reporters who in 2002 exposed a cover-up of child 
abuse by Catholic priests – and in so doing revealed a city-wide complicity of 
silence in which the paper itself had once played a part. It’s a terrifically 
engaged, driven piece of writing, providing continuous, measured propulsive 
force.

Mark Rylance’s triumph in the best supporting actor category, for his 
performance as the convicted spy Rudolf Abel inBridge of Spies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/05/bridge-of-spies-film-review-tom-hanks-steven-spielberg-cold-war-gary-powers-u2>
, is a testament to this actor’s vast prestige. He has a kind of awards-season 
capital and prototypical national treasure clout that is fast approaching that 
of Judi Dench or Alan Bennett. Rylance’s cool inscrutability and sing-song 
vocal delicacy insolently drew the eye away from the film’s star, Tom Hanks. 
This was a supporting turn in which the star was incessantly finding himself in 
the subordinate role – and, of course, Rylance is part of a long Hollywood 
tradition of the scene-stealing British thesp. Some say that there is something 
a little unsubtle in the subtlety of his performance, and that Benicio del 
Toro’s portrayal of the agonised intelligence liaison in Sicario was no less 
intelligent but less showy. But I have to say that there was something utterly 
hypnotic in Rylance’s performance – a real triumph. At the same time, Idris 
Elba could have won it; arguably, he could have been nominated in the best 
actor category – having given what amounted to a lead performance in Beasts of 
No Nation – and won that too.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPNe8Gs1V6Lw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPNe8Gs1V6Lw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPNe8Gs1V6Lw&media=>
 Rebel Wilson: ‘I’ve been practising my transgender face’ so I can win Baftas 
Kate Winslet <https://www.theguardian.com/film/katewinslet> wins best 
supporting actress with a comically self-aware and droll performance as Joanna 
Hoffman, Steve Jobs’s long-suffering, loyal but personally unimpressed 
colleague. It’s an amusing turn from a star who has the rare ability, at this 
stage of her career, to play the lead or the character support. But I have to 
admit I was hoping that this might go to Jennifer Jason Leigh – a chancier, 
riskier performance in The Hateful Eight – or indeed to the more obviously 
cockle-warming serio-comic performance given by Julie Walters as the dyspeptic 
landlady Mrs Kehoe in Brooklyn.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9080c41c94651af38980b052daa7695ea1f84ea3%2F0_0_3216_2253%2F3216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baftas%202016%3A%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio's%20animal%20power%20wins%20out%20at%20satisfying%20awards%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baftas%202016%3A%20Leonardo%20DiCaprio%27s%20animal%20power%20wins%20out%20at%20satisfying%20awards%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F14%2Fbaftas-2016-leonardo-dicaprio-the-revenant-brooklyn-amy-kate-winslet-mark-rylance%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9080c41c94651af38980b052daa7695ea1f84ea3%2F0_0_3216_2253%2F3216.jpg>
 Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet leave the ceremony with their awards. 
Photograph: David Fisher/Rex shutterstock 
As for Tarantino’s The Hateful Eight, Ennio Morricone’s Bafta for best music 
is hugely deserved for a sinuous, gleefully catchy and disquieting theme that 
comes out of nowhere and utterly meshes with the menacing, intimately sinister 
mood the director needed for his movie. It is remarkable that Morricone is 
doing some of his very best work in his 80s.

For animation, no other Bafta was possible. Pete Docter’s Inside Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/inside-out> is a lovely film, which – though 
perhaps not the out-and-out masterpiece some have been claiming – is a 
brilliant piece of work and a promise that the Pixar golden age of animation, 
thought to be over, could in fact be on the verge of a revival.
 