
Bali has a reputation as an tropical island that offers something for 
everyone, from the all-night raves of the legendary Ku De Ta nightclub, to 
traditional dance performances in ancient temples, from simple family homestays 
to luxury villas. But nothing quite prepared me for the full-on assault on the 
senses at Pretty Poison, which opened last summer and is the hottest 
underground address on the island for tattoos – and a lot more. I arrive just 
before midnight on a steamy Thursday night and follow a narrow lane named Jalan 
Short Cut that zigzags precariously through the paddy fields surrounding the 
bohemian beach resort of Canggu.

Pretty Poison is easy to find, with hundreds of buzzing scooters, clubbers, 
skateboarders, performance and visual artists swarming around the place each 
night. There are show-off barmen, resident DJs and a packed dancefloor, live 
bands, indie movie screenings, regular exhibitions by young local artists and a 
salon staffed by four fearsome-looking tattoo artists who will create a 
permanent souvenir for £15.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbali-bar-skatepark-pretty-poison-tattoos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fc148165afe1a49d8812d4925146a16cad1e399%2F0_196_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bali%E2%80%99s%20new%20bar%20and%20skatepark%3A%20get%20some%20ink%20where%20you%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbali-bar-skatepark-pretty-poison-tattoos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bali%E2%80%99s%20new%20bar%20and%20skatepark%3A%20get%20some%20ink%20where%20you%20drink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Fbali-bar-skatepark-pretty-poison-tattoos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fc148165afe1a49d8812d4925146a16cad1e399%2F0_196_1536_922%2F1536.jpg>
But what marks out Pretty Poison is what looks at first like an old, empty 
swimming pool. It is actually a skateboard bowl, built like the rest of club 
from scratch last year by owner Maree Sutejaa, a longtime Bali resident from 
Bondi Beach, who has tapped into a vibrant underground skateboard culture where 
locals mix with expat kids and curious tourists. Although the average age seems 
to be around 18, Maree assures me that the secret of the club’s success is that 
respect for the culture of skateboarding means it attracts all ages, Balinese 
and foreigners.

• prettypoisonbar.com <http://prettypoisonbar.com/>, open everyday, free 
entry, beer £1.30, cocktail £3.20
 