
More is known about rivers in the Amazon than Europe’s last wild waterways in 
the Balkans. But these unique ecosystems in south-eastEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> could soon be gone, along with 
endangered species such as the balkan lynx, if plans for over 2,000 dams go 
ahead, conservationists warn.

Western financial institutions have ploughed hundreds of millions of dollars 
into building dams in the region, arguing that hydropower is a green energy 
source that offers poor countries a way out of energy insecurity.

The Guardian has learned that the European Bank of Reconstruction and 
Development (EBRD) is on the verge of cancelling one €65m (£48m) showcase 
project in Macedonia’s Mavrovo national park, after sustained environmental 
criticism centred on the potential extinction of the Balkan lynx.

But other projects are still in the pipeline, even if much of the energy they 
produce is destined for export.

On past trends, deforestation and soil erosion will follow, along with 
irrevocable changes to the course and character of untamed rivers, a quarter of 
which lie in pristine national parks and protected areas, according to new 
analysis byRiverWatch <http://riverwatch.eu/> and Euronatur 
<http://www.euronatur.org/>.

“What we have here in the Balkans at the moment is a gold rush on the rivers,” 
says Ulrich Eichelmann, the director of RiverWatch, an Austria-based NGO. “I 
sometimes think the western countries that are financially supporting this 
degradation process have no idea what they are destroying. There is nothing in 
Europe remotely like this river system.”

From the mountains of Greece where it is known as the Aoös, the Vjosa flows 
for 270km to the Adriatic Sea, reaching a girth of 2.3km at its widest, its 
course and shape changing with the seasons and rainfalls.

“Scientifically we know more about some rivers in the Amazon than about the 
Vjosa,” Professor Fritz Schiemer of the University of Vienna told the Guardian. 
“We have very little knowledge about the biodiversity of the river ecosystem, 
and its ecological processes like sediment transport.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424258129314%2Ff10d8207-6b48-4489-8088-c14ac651ff8f-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424258129314%2Ff10d8207-6b48-4489-8088-c14ac651ff8f-1360x2040.jpeg>
 The critically endangered Balkan lynx. Photograph: Ljubo Stefanov 
But eight sites are being sized up for dam development along the Vjosa by 
foreign companies. The new Albanian government is privately resisting their 
approaches.

Edi Rama, Albania’s prime minister, told the Guardian that in his first six 
months in office, “I didn’t pass one day at work without someone calling or 
emailing me fromAlbania <https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania>, Europe, or 
America, with this line: ‘We are interested in a hydropower plant development’.”

“Damian [Gjiknuri, the country’s energy minister] was overwhelmed. He said 
‘What is this? Everyone wants to build a hydropower plant in our country. It 
looks as if we will repeat the great harm done by building illegal houses with 
hydropower plants everywhere and in the end we’ll have no water for 
irrigation’.”

Last year, foreign investment in extraction and privatisations across 
Albania’s hydropower sector made upalmost 10% of the country’s GDP 
<http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/pdf/key_documents/2014/20141008-albania-progress-report_en.pdf>
.

Across the Balkans, RiverWatch says it has evidence of 435 dams planned in 
Albania, 400 inMacedonia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/macedonia> and 
Bulgaria each, 700 in Serbia, more than 100 in Bosnia and Hungary apiece, 70 in 
Montenegro and more than 50 in Slovenia.

In Albania, dam licenses already issued have an investment value of over 
£1.8bn, according to documents seen by the Guardian.

A quarter of the 646 larger hydropower plants that RiverWatch has analysed are 
in national parks and protected areas, or gold standard environmental sites 
covered by Natura 2000, Emerald, World Heritage, Ramsar and Biosphere.

Twenty-two of these are still slated for Mavrovo, Macedonia’s oldest and 
largest national park, a stunning 730 sq km wilderness of birch and pine 
forests, gorges, waterfalls, peat lands, and the country’s highest mountains.

Slate-coloured cliffs jut skywards until they disappear in mist. The air is 
alpine fresh. Snow-capped peaks and frosted pines tower above the remnants of 
avalanches on the park’s snaking roads. Beneath them, the raging ice blue Mala 
Reka river smashes itself upon rock clumps, churning up foam.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424272953895%2F589b5f32-752a-4d1f-98ae-cfde561baea6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424272953895%2F589b5f32-752a-4d1f-98ae-cfde561baea6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mala Reka river, Macedonia. Photograph: Arthur Neslen 
Mavrovo houses more than 1,000 plant species, and provides a sanctuary for 
bears, wolves, golden eagles and critically endangered species such as the 
balkan lynx, less than 50 of which are still thought to be alive.

But conservationists say that the planned dams will bring roads, transmission 
lines, noise, industrial disturbance and an influx of human activity, likely to 
scare animals from the park – making them easy prey for poachers.

“The lynx is a charismatic and very secretive animal,” says Alexander 
Stojanov, a project coordinator with the Balkan Lynx Recovery Project. “It 
prefers untouched wilderness areas where there are no disturbances. 
Construction would chase away the lynx’s prey and it will have to go outside 
the protected area – where there is no protection – and face the fate of being 
poached. There will definitely be a risk of extinction.”

The lynx is a beloved icon in Macedonia, etched into coins, stamps, and the 
national football team’s shirts. “It is our symbol in the world,” said Shuip 
Marku, a former farmer in nearby Debar town. “It is our lion.”

Despite that, poachers are active even inside the park and are believed to 
have killed one lynx that Stojanov’s team had fitted with a GPS collar. After 
an EBRD report denied that any lynx were present in the park, Macedonia’s 
environment ministry refused the Lynx Recovery Project permission to set any 
more photo traps, and the last feline pictures were taken in 2013.

The EBRD was later forced to retract that claim but its impact assessment for 
the dam was widely criticised for another suggestion that dams would help 
otters by increasing their access to food.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424349955145%2Fb1273adc-525d-4ecd-9e63-84d5e4eebc64-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424349955145%2Fb1273adc-525d-4ecd-9e63-84d5e4eebc64-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Mavrovo National Park, Macedonia. Photograph: Mihai Popa/Alamy 
The International Union for the Conservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> of Nature (IUCN) 
complained of a “superficial, incomplete and misleading” assessment that showed 
an “absence of basic understanding of otter behaviour as well as the 
functioning of river ecosystems”.

In a letter to the EBRD seen by the Guardian, the IUCN’s director, Julia 
Marton-Lefèvre urged the EBRD to halt its funding for a hydropower project at 
Boškov Most in Mavrovo, saying it presented “direct threats to critical species 
and habitats present in the area”.

Almost 100,000 people signed a petition against the project 
<https://www.rainforest-rescue.org/mailalert/947/the-lynx-does-not-want-a-dam>, 
119 environmental scientistsprotested 
<http://balkanrivers.net/en/news/macedonia’s-mavrovo-national-park-threatened-hydropower-projects>
, and in December, the standing committee of the Bern Convention added to the 
pressure,open 
<http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/cultureheritage/nature/bern/institutions/Documents/2014/Misc_2014_34eCP_EN_final_adopted%20(2).pdf>
ing 
<http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/cultureheritage/nature/bern/institutions/Documents/2014/Misc_2014_34eCP_EN_final_adopted%20(2).pdf>
 an inquiry 
<http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/cultureheritage/nature/bern/institutions/Documents/2014/Misc_2014_34eCP_EN_final_adopted%20(2).pdf>
 into the levees.



An EBRD spokeswoman told the Guardian that no funds had yet been disbursed for 
Boškov Most and the project is currently suspended . “At the moment, there is a 
[new] environmental assessment going on. Until it is finished, nothing is going 
to go ahead,” she said.

A bank source added: “There’s a lot of anger from conservationists and that 
makes work on the ground for our staffers very difficult. It is very likely 
that we will have to turn around and walk away from it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424350989642%2Facf6ae8a-b828-463d-b2f5-395891e3ae87-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424350989642%2Facf6ae8a-b828-463d-b2f5-395891e3ae87-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dam under construction on the Langarica, a tributary to the Vjosa, in Fir of 
Hotova national park. Photograph: Arthur Neslen 
The World Bank, however, is still planning a €70m loan to build another large 
dam in Mavrovo at Lukovo Pole, in a border area with Kosovo, where the national 
dividing lines were recently changed in a way that fortuitously allowed the 
dam’s construction.

Across the Mavrovo region, dam proposals also have an ethnic dimension, 
sparking fury from local ethnic Albanian communities – a minority in Macedonia 
– who say that they would divert waters from their villages, which already 
suffer water shortages in summer, and destroy local agriculture, as well as 
‘slow food’ culinary traditions.

“It is a big problem,” Marku said. “People believe that these projects are 
intended to steal the water and force Albanian people off their land.”

Thousands of ethnic Albanians have already emigrated from Debar, staging 
anti-dam demonstrations in countries such as Italy that mirror protests in 
Debar, although these are often staged in defiance of what Marku and others say 
is official intimidation.

In Albania about a third of energy is imported but the rest comes from 
hydropower, which is classified by the InternationalEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Agency thinktank as renewable. 
The country is regularly hit by blackouts all the same.



Some environmentalists question whether hydro should be classed as a clean 
energy. “It is not renewable as neither the landscape nor its biodiversity are 
renewable,” Eichelmann said. “When they are gone, they are gone.”

WWF is more supportive of hydro but says that stringent environmental criteria 
are needed 
<http://d2ouvy59p0dg6k.cloudfront.net/downloads/wwf_guide_water_for_life_web.pdf>
.

“The siting of hydro in protected areas is a real problem in south-east 
Europe,” said Jason Anderson, WWF Europe’s head of climate and energy. 
“Sometimes a location is absolutely not appropriate, and we fight against that. 
But there are also adequate sites that can be found, when countries cannot meet 
their energy needs in other ways.”

Albania views new hydro plants as a source of energy independence and “a good 
source of hard energy for export”, according Gjiknuri. But around42% of the 
country’s electricity supplies 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2014/08/08/world-bank-negotiates-usd-150-million-energy-sector-recovery-program-for-albania>
 are lost in distribution, often due to theft from electricity lines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424349416346%2F3c5a76a8-5a8a-4090-9ae4-14871d46677a-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424349416346%2F3c5a76a8-5a8a-4090-9ae4-14871d46677a-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fishermen cast their lines in Vjosa river, near the city of Përmet, Albania. 
Photograph: Arben Celi/Corbis 
The government claims great advances in curbing power piracy but many 
Albanians expect this to be reversed as price hikes from privatised hydro 
projects are rapidly passed on by foreign firms looking to recoup investment 
costs.

“The local people will not get energy for free for sure,” said Gilberto Yaceh, 
the mayor of Përmet, a picturesque town on the Vjosa. “They will pay for it. 
The dams bring nothing good for the local people.”

Albania’s energy ministry has put dozens of projects authorised in the last 
year on hold, but says that its hands are tied by fears of warding off foreign 
investment.


More than 200 Sali Berisha-era projects have been cancelled, which Edi Rama 
links to “a kind of black market of corruption... a madness”. But Albania walks 
a thin line between preserving its beauty and economic needs, he added.

What’s so unique about the Vjosa is not just that the river itself is intact 
but that its tributaries are too
Ulrich Eichelmann 




Rama is a former artist, who painted Tirana’s stalinist-era buildings in 
kaleidoscopic colours 
<http://gadling.com/2007/10/25/the-bizarre-painted-buildings-of-tirana-albania/>
when he was the city’s mayor. Environmentalists view him as a natural ally but 
he gives the impression of lacking the full power to roll back an environment 
free-for-all he disdains.


“The international financiers have not generally been as careful as they would 
have been if these things were being built in their courtyards,” he noted. “It 
is the curse of poor countries.” The Albanian prime minister says that he asked 
the EBRD to finance small-scale agricultural production instead, but “they were 
more interested in hydro”.

One dam, in Kalivac, reached an advanced stage before controversy stalled its 
progress, leaving a concrete hulk on the river’s banks. “The trees along the 
river and on higher ground above it have been deforested since the beginning of 
the work,” Astrit Taka, a forestry worker in Kalivac told the Guardian. 
“Fifty-six hectares of plane and poplar trees in the river region have been cut 
down.”

The rivers of the Balkans inspire a deep attachment among the people who live 
near them – and songs too, like Poni’s 2010 Albanian hit ‘Vjosa (Lumi I 
Kenges)’, which still booms from bars along the riverside. .
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6tw1KPezao&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6tw1KPezao>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ6tw1KPezao&media=>
 Poni’s Vjosa (Lumi I Kenges) 
“What’s so unique about the Vjosa eco system is not just that the river itself 
is completely intact but that its tributaries are too,” Eichelmann says. “They 
have their flood plains and the sediments they transport to the sea in a 
balanced system that’s almost impossible to find anywhere else in Europe. We 
all grew up with rivers more or less damaged, regulated and dammed. This makes 
the Vjosa extraordinarily important as a model for the rivers we need to 
restore across the EU.”

By 2027, Europe’s water framework directive will require all countries’ bodies 
of water to be of a good ecological status. Ironically, for Macedonia and 
Albania to fulfil their aspirations of EU accession, they may need to roll back 
the effects of a hydropower boom that the EU’s investment banks have foisted 
upon them.

The EU’s 2014 progress report on Macedonia’s accession bid 
<http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/pdf/key_documents/2014/20141008-the-former-yugoslav-republic-of-macedonia-progress-report_en.pdf>
 said that the two big hydropower plants in Mavrovo raised “concerns about the 
potentially detrimental effect on the environment”.

Albanian hopes of EU membership by 2020 fared little better 
<http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/pdf/key_documents/2014/20141008-albania-progress-report_en.pdf>
 with the EU chiding it for a fragile power sector that is not very advanced in 
preparation for accession. An “almost exclusive reliance on hydropower exposes 
Albania to large fluctuations in power generation, resulting in large 
electricity imports in low-rainfall years,” the EU found.

Commission sources acknowledge effects that the planned dams are likely to 
have on the Balkans’ 69 fish species, but also the problems that new members 
often have with meeting the union’s environmental rules.

Balkan leaders such as Edi Rama say that a “huge investment” is needed to 
protect the region’s rivers from environmental degradation. But of late, EU 
officials have been more keen to push Tirana into clamping down on illegal 
cannabis growing than protecting its waterways.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424262717027%2F99988615-4fee-4f0b-8802-97a42f70d143-2060x1871.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balkan%20dam%20boom%20threatens%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20last%20wild%20waterways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F20%2Fbalkan-dam-boom-threatens-europes-last-wild-waterways%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F18%2F1424262717027%2F99988615-4fee-4f0b-8802-97a42f70d143-2060x1871.jpeg>
 Edi Rama, prime minister of Albania. Photograph: Arthur Neslen 
“I don’t want to talk more about how EU money is planned,” Rama said. “It is 
to enter into a kingdom of wishful thinking. I have no illusions about it.”

“I understand we need to have prisons, courts, rule of law, all this,” he went 
on. “But just by improving the repressive side of the state you don’t improve 
the quality of life. Albania is rich in water, oil, minerals and presumably 
rich in gas but the biggest asset we have is beauty and the worst thing we’ve 
done in 20 years has been to draw scars on our country’s beautiful body.”

Environmentalists fear that these wounds could fester as flood plains 
disappear and water flows are channelled into narrower courses that are deeper, 
higher and move at faster speeds. Soil erosion caused by dam-related 
deforestation accentuates the process, adding to water volumes at flood peaks, 
which can only be controlled by opening sluice gates and letting out a torrent 
of water.

Albania may have received a taste of things to come earlier this month when it 
was buffeted bythe second worst floods in its history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/feb/05/albania-declares-state-of-emergency-over-historic-floods>
.

“If the Kalivac dam construction is finished and the water level rises in a 
flood, they would have to open the sluice gates next time so the flood would be 
greater,” said Servet Boni, a forestry engineer in Tepelena on the Vjosa’s 
banks.

“There will be an ecological catastrophe,” added Philip Deman, a forestry 
worker from the same town. “Not only for biodiversity but for the landscape. 
All this beauty will be lost.”
 