
Barack Obama has weighed in on the alleged feud between Nicki Minaj and Mariah 
Carey on the set of the TV showAmerican Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>, divulging that he 
thinks they will "sort it out". With Americans heading to the polls in less 
than a month, the president expressed his belief in hope and reconciliation for 
pop stars as well as ordinary Americans.

"I'm all about bringing people together, working for the same cause," Obama 
said in an interview with Y100 radio, in Miami (via the Wrap 
<http://www.thewrap.com/tv/column-post/obama-stupidly-weighs-mariah-minaj-dispute-audio-60696>
). "I think that they are going to be able to sort it out. I am confident."

Carey and Minaj are judges on the new series of American Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>, which is currently in 
production. Earlier this month, footage appeared online showingthe two in a 
fierce row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/oct/03/nicki-minaj-mariah-carey-american-idol>
. "I'm not fucking putting up with her fucking highness over there," Minaj is 
alleged to have said. Carey later told the TV presenter Barbara Walters that
Minaj had threatened to shoot her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/oct/05/nicki-minaj-mariah-carey-american-idol>
, and the rapper unleashed a flurry of taunting tweets.

Carey's husband, Nick Cannon, has criticised American Idol's showrunners for 
using the dust-up to fuel ratings. "To make it about something it's not kind of 
shows that the producers, and the network, are losing their foot a little bit," 
he told Access Hollywood. "It's taking away from the quality of what Idol is 
all about." Cee Lo Green, a judge on Idol rival The Voice, has suggested the 
enmity has been faked.

As for Obama, he seems optimistic that Minaj and Carey will end up on top. "I 
think both outstanding artists are going to be able to make sure that they're 
moving forward and not going backwards," he said. Nevertheless, Minaj is his 
favourite. "She's actually done some [campaign] events for us," he said. "I've 
got [Nicki] on my iPod."

American Idol's 12th series, the first with Carey, Minaj and country singer 
Keith Urban as judges, premieres in January.
 