
Antony Jenkins <https://www.theguardian.com/business/antony-jenkins> has 
sought to defend the bonus culture at Barclays as the bank prepares to hand him 
up to £1m in shares to sidestep the bonus cap.

In the wake of the furore caused by a decision to increase bonuses by 10%, 
following a 32% fall in profits, the Barclays boss told the Daily Telegraph he 
wasattempting to avoid a "death spiral" 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/banksandfinance/10676908/Barclays-We-paid-bonuses-to-avoid-death-spiral.html>
 after an increase in the number of staff leaving.

When the bank publishes its annual report – possibly as soon as Wednesday – it 
will also reveal that is has paid more than £1m to more staff in 2013 than the 
428 who received at least that sum in 2012.

As he criticised demands from regulators and the parliamentary commission on 
banking standards to defer bonuses for up to 10 years, Jenkins said the cutback 
in bonuses the previous year had left the bank in "a situation where the 
business begins to contract".

"People are less attracted to come to you, both clients and employees," he 
said. "You get into something of a death spiral. Your brand deteriorates, and 
you can move very quickly from being a first tier player to one in the second 
or third tier if you don't protect the franchise."

As many as 700 staff are believed to have walked out of the group's US 
investment bank, and the rate of resignations among senior directors doubled to 
nearly 10%.

Details of millions of pounds of share awards to top bankers are to be 
revealed soon, as the banks attempt to prevent pay falling as a result of the 
bonus cap. This limits bonuses to 100% of salary, or 200% if shareholders 
approve. All the banks are preparing to ask shareholders to back bonuses up to 
200% of salaries.

Bailed-out Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> is also expected to 
admit on Wednesday that its boss Antonio Horta-Osorio will receive an 
additional tranche of shares on top of a £1m salary and £1.7m bonus for 2013.

The move follows the decision by HSBC to hand its chief executive the 
equivalent of £32,000 extra per week – some £1.7m a year – although his overall 
potential paypacket will fall.

By awarding a similar "allowance" to Horta-Osorio, Lloyds will be giving the 
impression that the government is endorsing such ways to sidestep the bonus 
cap, as the bank is 33% owned by the taxpayer.

Such moves have infuriated Philippe Lamberts, the Belgian MEP who helped 
devise the bonus cap, who iscalling on the European Commission to sue the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/04/bankers-bonus-cap-architect-says-sue-uk-government>
 for breaches of the directive covering the bonus cap.

Royal Bank of Scotland is also thought likely to follow the moves by rivals – 
further inflaming the controversy, as it is 81% taxpayer-owned.

When Jenkins was appointed to take over Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> from Bob Diamond, following the 
June 2012 fine for rigging Libor, he promised to cut back bonuses and a give 
greater share of revenues to shareholders.

"We were faced with a very difficult decision for me personally as chief 
executive and for the board because we are absolutely committed to driving the 
level of compensation down in the investment bank," Jenkins said.

Chancellor of the exchequer George Osborne has already begun legal action 
against the cap because he fears it will increase risks in the banking system, 
and a spokesperson for the commission on banking standards insisted it is too 
soon to know if the directive had been breached.

Jenkins waived his own bonus for 2013, which could have been as much as £2.7m, 
after the bank tapped shareholders for £5.8m last year.
 