
Sir David and Frederick Barclay have been named the richest people in media in 
Britain with a £2.3bn fortune, while tough times at Richard Desmond's Northern 
& Shell business has seen his wealth slashed by almost £150m.

The 78-year-old Barclay twins, owners of the Daily Telegraph and Sunday 
Telegraph <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sunday-telegraph>, have been named 
at the top of the 2013 Sunday Times Rich List of people in publishing, PR and 
advertising in Britain.

The brothers, who also own assets including the Ritz Hotel, where Lady 
Thatcher was staying at the time of her death, increased their wealth by £100m
compared with last year's rich list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/apr/25/barclay-brothers-sunday-times-rich-publishing>
.

But it was a bad year for Northern & Shell owner Richard Desmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/richard-desmond> who dropped from second to 
third place as his £1bn fortune dipped by £140m, according to the Sunday 
Times's calculations.

The view of the compilers of the list was that Desmond's media assets – which 
include Channel 5, OK! magazine and theDaily Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress>, Sunday Express, Daily Star 
and Daily Star Sunday – are "generally underperforming".

Viscount Rothermere <https://www.theguardian.com/media/viscount-rothermere> 
and family, controlling shareholder of Daily Mail and Metro publisher Daily 
Mail & General Trust, slipped back £40m to £720m – fourth on the media rich 
list.

Elisabeth Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/elisabeth-murdoch> and 
Matthew Freud made their first appearance in the media list – although not the 
overall rich list where they rank 315th – as they derive some of their wealth 
from PR.

The power couple ranked 12th in the UK media list with a £255m combined 
fortune.

Lord Heseltine and family, owners of Haymarket Publishing 
<http://www.haymarket.com/brands.aspx>, the company behind titles including 
Campaign, re-entered the list for the first time since 2010 with a ranking of 
11th and a fortune of £264m.

Questions over the state of Heseltine's finances – which included putting up 
assets includinghis 18th century mansion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/24/rupert-heseltine-haymarket-media-group>
 and 55-acre estate in Thenford, Northamptonshire, as security in debt 
restructuring negotations with RBS – meant he has been kept out of the list for 
two years.

The 25-strong media rich list also includes Sir Martin Sorrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-martin-sorrell>, founder of advertising 
group WPP, at 14th with a £36m boost taking his estimated personal wealth to 
£210m.

Lord (Maurice) and Charles Saatchi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/charles-saatchi>, co-founders of M&C 
Saatchi, increased their fortune slightly to £135m.

Despite the shaky state of regional press Sir Ray Tindle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sir-ray-tindle>, owner of newspaper 
publisher Tindle Press Holdings, slightly increased his fortune to £130m.

Alan Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker>, the founder and 
chairman of City PR firm Brunswick, boosted his fortune by £9m to hit £104m and 
secure 23rd on the media list.

Sunday Times Rich List – top 25 in publishing, advertising and PR

Wealth in 2013 (2012 figure in brackets):

1. Sir David and Sir Frederick Barclay: £2.35bn (£2.25bn)

2. The Thomson family: £1.1bn (£700m)

3. Richard Desmond: £860m (£1,000)

4. Viscount Rothermere and family: £720m (£760m)

5. Mark Getty and family: £650m (£330m)

6. Felix Dennis: £500m (£500m)

7. Paddy McNally £440m: (£515m)

8. Cristina Stenbeck: £405m (£369m)

9. Viscount Cowdray and the Pearson family: £400m (£500m)

10. Mike Danson: £376m (£310m)

11. Lord Heseltine and family: £264m (-)

12. Elisabeth Murdoch and Matthew Freud: £255m (£251m)

13. Lord Iliffe and family: £245m (£266m)

14. Sir Martin Sorrell: £210m (£174m)

15. Jonathan Klein: £200m (-)

16. Neil Hutchinson: £178m (£123m)

17= Mike Luckwell: £135m (£135m)

17= Lord and Charles Saatchi: £135m (£135m)

19. Philip and Patricia Brown: £132m (£132m)

20. Sir Ray Tindle: £130m (£125m)

21. Gregory Nasmyth and family: £115m (£85m)

22. Nick Forman Hardy and family: £105m (£102m)

23. Alan Parker: £104m (£95m)

24. Sir John Madejski: £100m (£150m)

25. Martyn Rose: £75m (£72m)

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 