
Jes Staley begins his first day as chief executive of Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> with a loss of almost £300,000 
on the shares he bought last month to show his commitment to the role.

The American banker, who spent much of his career at JP Morgan, paid 233p for 
each of the 2.8m shares he bought on 4 November and is now facing a 10p loss on 
each share as they closed on Monday at 223p. He spent £6.4m buying the shares.

He formally becomes chief executive on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/28/barclays-appoints-jes-staley-new-chief-executive>
, the same day that Barclays receivesthe results of stress tests imposed on the 
UK’s major lenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/29/britains-biggest-lenders-await-bank-of-englands-verdict-on-health-checks>
 to test their resilience to a shock in the global markets and prolonged 
deflation.

Staley, who stands to receive £10m in his first year, replaces Antony Jenkins, 
who was ousted in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/08/barclays-fires-chief-executive-antony-jenkins>
 to put a new emphasis on growth at the bank which has been scrambling to 
repair its reputationin the wake of the 2012 Libor rigging scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/27/barclays-chief-bob-diamond-bonus-fine>
.

 Once the outcome of the stress test is known, Staley will have the task of 
setting a strategy for the bank that bolsters returns to shareholders but also 
satisfies regulators’ requirement for it to ringfence its high street business 
from its riskier investment banking operations.


Ian Gordon, a banks analyst at Investec, said the key to improving returns was 
focusing on cutting costs rather than aiming for dramatic increases in revenue. 
“Revenues fell 5% in 2013, 8% in 2014 and we forecast a 3% decline in 2015,” 
said Gordon. His forecasts for revenue growth in 2016 and 2017 respectively are 
2% and 3%.

Staley has already told staff that he wants to turn Barclays into a bank that 
is “successful, admired and well regarded by all”. Last week, Jenkinspredicted 
that the banking industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/25/banking-facing-uber-moment-says-former-barclays-boss>
 could see a 50% cut in jobs over the next 10 years as a result of 
technological advances.
 