
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> has made a loss of 
£500m on the sale of its Spanish banking division as it follows plans to shed 
unprofitable businesses.

The British bank has sold its retail banking, wealth, investment management 
and corporate banking business inSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>
 to Caixa Bank for €800m (£632m).

Caixa Bank, Spain's third-largest lender, will take on 262 branches, 2,400 
employees and 550,000 customers once the deal is completed this year. Barclays, 
however, will keep its investment banking operations and credit card business 
in Spain.

The sale is part of the turnaround strategy of chief executive Antony Jenkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antony-jenkins>, who wants to restore 
profitability by selling off some of its struggling European divisions and 
cutting costs.

"We were clear that this business, while not central to Barclays' strategy, 
could be attractive to another owner and today's announcement reflects that 
perspective," Jenkins said. "We remain on track to rebalance Barclays as part 
of our strategy to deliver sustainable returns for our shareholders."

Barclays confirmed it had also sold its UAE retail banking business to Abu 
Dhabi Islamic Bank. On this deal, Barclays is making a pre-tax gain of £119m on 
the sale of a portfolio of mortgages, unsecured credit and deposits.

Barclays will make a loss of £500m on the Caixa deal; £400m will be booked in 
the third quarter of 2014 and £100m in the final quarter.

Barclays expanded rapidly into Spain in the early part of the last decade, 
buying Banco Zaragozano for €1.1bn in 2003. The banks operated under a Barclays 
brand name but ran into problems when the Spanish housing market collapsed, 
prompting the deep recession.

According to Reuters, Barclays shut or sold 161 branches in Spain last year 
and cut around a third of its workforce in the country.

In May, Barclays announced it was cutting 19,000 jobs worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/08/barclays-to-cut-19000-jobs-scale-back-investment-bank-antony-jenkins>
, including a dramatic reduction in its investment banking arm, to focus on 
areas where it had a competitive advantage.
 