
Barclays has further stoked the row over bankers' pay by handing out shares 
worth almost £32m to its management team, including the under-fire chief 
executiveAntony Jenkins <https://www.theguardian.com/business/antony-jenkins>.

Jenkins – who has insisted the bank had to pay higher bonuses to avoid a 
"death spiral" caused by a mass walkout of key staff – received shares worth 
almost £3.8m from bonuses handed to him up to three years ago. But the highest 
reward to one of the 12-strong executive committee was £8.8m for Skip McGee, 
who joined Barclays in New York when it took over the Wall Street operations of 
Lehman Brothers. McGee is running Barclays America and his pay is being 
disclosed for the first time. He is one of the threeBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> investment bankers whose pay is 
being published following the departure of Rich Ricci, who was handed £17.6m a 
year ago.

Comparisons with a year ago – when the bank incensed politicians by announcing 
£39.5m of bonuses on budget day – 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/mar/20/barclays-bonuses-budget-day> 
are difficult, as the composition of the management team has changed 
dramatically and the share price has fallen from 308p to 232p.

But the Robin Hood tax campaign for a tax on financial transactions said the 
payments "turn the stomach". "It's a reminder we live in two-tier Britain where 
bankers pocket huge rewards come rain or shine and the rest of us pay to clear 
up their mess," said a spokesman for the campaign.

The payments to the executive committee relate to vested bonuses that are now 
due. A total of 13.6m shares – more than the 12.7m last year – were released to 
the 12 members of the executive committee, which a year ago had nine members.

Since Ricci's departure the investment bank has been run by two co-heads in 
London, Eric Bommensath and Tom King, who were handed £8.6m and £3.8m 
respectively.

Their long-term future at the bank is uncertain as a review of Barclays' 
investment banking operation is already under way, with Jenkins under pressure 
from shareholders to cut costs and stick to his pledge to reduce the proportion 
of revenues paid out to bankers.

Investors will vote on the pay policies at next month's annual meeting and 
debate is already raging about whether to back the rewards, which Jenkins has 
argued are needed to retain top investment bankers. investment officer at Royal 
London Asset Management, has warned that the backlash against high pay could 
make it difficult for UK investment banks to survive in competition with the 
big US banks.

This year's payments also include the first tranches of new role-based pay, 
introduced to get around the EU bonus cap that restricts bonuses to 100% of 
salary, or 200% with shareholder approval. The so-called allowances were 
described by EU financial services commissioner Michel Barnier yesterday as "a 
new category of invented revenue" designed to "sidestep" the cap.

Promoted to the top job in 2012 after Bob Diamond was forced out in the wake 
of the Libor-rigging scandal, Jenkins is on track to get £950,000 a year in 
role-based allowances 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/05/lloyds-bank-boss-shares-eu-bonus-cap>
. But, along with the new finance director, Tushar Morzaria, who received £1m 
of shares, he will have to wait until shareholders have voted on the allowances 
next month.

Jenkins waived his bonus for 2013, when the bank raised £5.8bn in a cash call 
to bolster its balance sheet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jul/30/barclays-cash-call-6bn-capital-gap>
. But in addition to the latest release of £3.8m of shares, the bank's annual 
report published earlier this month said he also cashed in £5.2m of previous 
share awards and was awarded a further £4m that could pay out in the years 
ahead.

All the directors sold enough shares to pay their tax liabilities. The head of 
risk, Robert Le Blanc, sold slightly more than this.
 