
Barry Bonds and Roger Clemens have again been snubbed by the Baseball Hall of 
Fame, but pitchers Greg Maddux and Tom Glavine and slugger Frank Thomas were 
elected by theBaseball <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball> Writers' 
Association of America. 

The three were elected in their first year of eligibility after waiting the 
required five years after their retirement. The results were in stark contrast 
to last year, when no players received the required votes for induction as 
first-timers Barry Bonds and Roger Clemens were snubbed in the first real test 
of players from the steroids era. 

MLB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/mlb> home run king Bonds, a seven-time 
MVP, and seven-time Cy Young winner Clemens lost ground from last year's 
voting, once again shunned over suspicions they had used performance enhancing 
drugs. Clemens was named on 35.4 percent of ballots, and Bonds on 34.7 percent. 

In contrast, Thomas has been a vocal opponent of steroid use and remains one 
of the few MLB players to work with investigators on the Mitchell Report. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/12/15/sports/baseball/15talk.html?_r=0> 

Thomas, who spent most of his career with the Chicago White Sox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/chicago-white-sox>, became the first 
inductee to have played most of his games as a designated hitter after blasting 
521 home runs with a career batting average over .300. Nicknamed "The Big 
Hurt", Thomas was named on 83.7 percent of the ballots cast. 

Right-hander Maddux, who won four consecutive Cy Young awards from 1992, 
received 97.2 percent of the 571 ballots cast. He fell just shy of the record 
total received by former Mets pitching ace Tom Seaver, who was elected with 
98.84 percent of the vote in 1992. 

Lefthander Glavine, who was a Braves teammate of Maddux and was a 20-game 
winner five times, was named on 91.9 percent of the ballots. 

It marked the first time three players were voted into the same Cooperstown 
class since George Brett, Nolan Ryan and Robin Yount in 1999. Just missing the 
75 percent of the ballots cast (429) required for election was Craig Biggio of 
the Houston Astros, who fell two votes shy of election with 74.8 percent in the 
balloting. 

The inductees will be joined in this summer's July 26 induction ceremony by 
former managers Bobby Cox, Tony La Russa and Joe Torre. 

Cox, La Russa and Torre rank third, fourth and fifth in managerial victories 
in Major League history, each winning more than 2,000 games, and were 
previously voted in by a special committee.
 