
A fan has died after falling from the upper deck into the lower-level stands 
at Turner Field in Atlanta during a game between the Atlanta Braves and theNew 
York Yankees <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/new-york-yankees>.

The man was in his early 60s and was pronounced dead at Grady memorial 
hospital following the fall in the seventh inning, said Lieut Charles Hampton 
of theAtlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta> police department.

There was no immediate word on his identity pending notification of his next 
of kin. Hampton said police did not suspect foul play at this point.

The man fell close to the area where players’ wives and families sit. Stadium 
medical personnel treated him for about 10 minutes, applying CPR. As they 
worked in a circle around the man, security officers cleared the area. The fan 
was taken from the seating area on a backboard.

After Saturday night’s fall, some fans in the family section were escorted to 
a room near the Braves’ clubhouse, and many were upset. Braves outfielder 
Cameron Maybin’s son was crying. A woman went to the Braves dugout and told 
catcher AJ Pierzynski about what had occurred.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fbaseball-fan-dies-after-falling-from-upper-deck-at-turner-field-during-braves-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c3e6b318f47fef1dc8835449c41974650654227%2F0_231_2377_1427%2F2377.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Baseball%20fan%20dies%20after%20falling%20from%20upper%20deck%20at%20Turner%20Field%20during%20Braves%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fbaseball-fan-dies-after-falling-from-upper-deck-at-turner-field-during-braves-game%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Baseball%20fan%20dies%20after%20falling%20from%20upper%20deck%20at%20Turner%20Field%20during%20Braves%20game&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Faug%2F30%2Fbaseball-fan-dies-after-falling-from-upper-deck-at-turner-field-during-braves-game%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c3e6b318f47fef1dc8835449c41974650654227%2F0_231_2377_1427%2F2377.jpg>
 Rescue workers carry the fan from the stands at Turner Field. Photograph: John 
Bazemore/AP 
A security guard at the room where the family members went said witnesses saw 
the man trying to hang on to a wire that runs from the protective net behind 
the plate to under the media box. The man then fell the rest of the way on to 
the seats. Police blocked off about 10 rows of seats in section 201.

On 12 August 2013, a fan died at Turner Field after falling 26 metres (85ft) 
from a walkway on the fourth level of the stadium. Investigators from the 
Fulton county medical examiner’s office later ruled the death of Ronald Lee 
Homer Jr, 30, was a suicide.

Fickle fortunes in Los Angeles as Dodgers and Angels fight twin slumps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/aug/28/fickle-fortunes-in-los-angeles-as-dodgers-and-angels-fight-twin-slumps>
Police said Homer, of Conyers, Georgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/state-of-georgia>, landed in the players’ 
parking lot after a rain delay during a game between the Braves and 
Philadelphia.

Two fans died at major league games in 2011. In Texas, a man fell about six 
metres (20ft) to the ground beyond the outfield fence trying to catch a 
baseball tossed his way by Rangers outfielder Josh Hamilton. Shannon Stone – a 
39-year-old firefighter from Brownwood, Texas – was attending the Rangers game 
with his young son.

Earlier that year, a 27-year-old man died after falling about six metres 
(20ft) and striking his head on concrete during a Colorado Rockies home game. 
Witnesses told police the man was trying to slide down a staircase railing at 
Coors Field and lost his balance.
 