
I’m not much of a fan of the original 1988 Alan Moore/Brian Bolland graphic 
novel The Killing Joke 
<http://www.hoodedutilitarian.com/2013/09/the-joker-and-the-jokers-wife/>. But 
I was blown away by just how wretchedly awfulthe cartoon remake 
<http://www.cinemablend.com/news/1537570/we-saw-batman-the-killing-joke-heres-our-reaction>
 – previewed at Comic-Con and with a limited cinema release on Monday – is.

Director Sam Liu 
<https://twitter.com/_samliu_?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 and writerBrian Azzarello <http://www.dccomics.com/talent/brian-azzarello> 
have added a half hour of new story on to the beginning of the narrative, in 
which they methodically turn Batgirl into a clumsy agglomeration of misogynist 
tropes. Pursued by a creepy stalker mafia tough-guy villain, Batgirl makes 
amateurish mistake after amateurish mistake, prompting Batman to sneer to her 
face that the bad guy “led you like a lap dog”.

In response, Batgirl whines that Batman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/batman> doesn’t trust her, has impulsive 
sex with him, and then indulges in a series of violent emotional tantrums 
before deciding to retire her Batgirl identity on the grounds that the stress 
is too much for her.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSnTSqgJPVl8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSnTSqgJPVl8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSnTSqgJPVl8&media=>
As a bonus, Batman hypocritically lectures her on the dangers of 
objectification while the bad guy compulsively and smarmily sexualizes her, and 
the cartoon lingers on a closeup image of her butt when she jogs. Girls aren’t 
emotionally or mentally tough enough to be heroes, is the message; they’re just 
too darn emotional. But hey, they look good in those tight costumes, right?

Batman's Killing Joke, and its 'edgy' rape storyline, is not a comeback I want 
to see
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/15/batmans-killing-joke-and-its-edgy-storyline-comeback-alan-moore>
It wasn’t supposed to be this way. In theory, the additional Batgirl material 
was supposed to provide a counterweight to the casual misogyny in The Killing 
Joke. In Alan Moore’s version, Barbara Gordon, aka Batgirl, is casually shot by 
the Joker and crippled as a way of tormenting Batman and Barbara’s dad, 
Commissioner Gordon. Harming women to advance the emotional development of some 
dude is a wearisomecomic-book plot staple 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Women_in_Refrigerators>, and producer Bruce 
Timms promised that the cartoon wouldn’t follow that same old script.

“We thought if we were going to expand this to feature length, we didn’t want 
to just pad out the original story,” Timmssaid 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/the-killing-joke-movie-is-a-disaster-right-down-to-its-1784176711>
. “So we took that opportunity to basically tell a Batgirl story, which we 
don’t often get a chance to do these days. And it was great, because we could 
spend more time with her as a character and get to understand what she’s all 
about and how she’s similar to Batman in some ways, and really different in 
others.”

Comic-Con 2016: the good, the bad and the unbearable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/25/comic-con-2016-san-diego-good-bad>
Perhaps different creators could have managed to craft a non-misogynist 
Batgirl story, especially if those creators were women. But a big part of the 
problem is, simply, that this is a Killing Joke adaptation. Superheroes just 
about never get point-blank shot, the way Barbara does in The Killing Joke. 
They dodge; they move superfast, they anticipate, they win. The Batgirl in The 
Killing Joke isn’t a hero, but a victim – and so, Azzarello and Timms follow 
along with the original material, and create a costumed hero who shouldn’t 
really be a hero at all. What kind of superhero would just let herself be shot? 
An overly emotional, unprepared, semi-incompetent hero, the cartoon creators 
chorus. Input a misogynist comic, add unimaginative creators – and presto! A 
misogynist cartoon.

The Killing Joke’s failure was predictable. But it’s still instructive. When 
critics and fans ask for ablack James Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/may/20/idris-elba-must-be-james-bond-tom-hiddleston-daniel-craig>
 or cheer on thefemale Ghostbusters reboot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/10/ghostbusters-review-paul-feigs-female-reboot-melissa-mccarthy-kristen-wiig>
, they’re asking for Hollywood to challenge default racism and sexism. All 
heroes everywhere aren’t white guys, and the stories we tell should reflect 
that.

But if you’re retelling a racist, sexist story, it’s not always so easy to get 
that racism and sexism out of the formula. You can see that in the Ghostbusters 
reboot. As novelistNK Jemisin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/27/nk-jemisin-interview-fantasy-science-fiction-writing-racism-sexism>
 pointed out in a private Facebook post (quoted with permission), the 
Ghostbusters are all super-smart scientists … except for the one black 
character, Patty (Leslie Jones),who is a street-savvy subway worker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/26/ghostbusters-black-women-scientists-leslie-jones>
. “Jones’s character contributed to the team, but she was never fully a part of 
it,” Jemisin says. And, she adds, with feeling: “She should’ve been a 
motherfucking scientist.”

In part, the fact that Jones was not allowed to be a scientist is indicative 
of broad cultural racism; because of longstanding stereotypes, black women are 
rarely presented as brilliant engineers or physicists. But Ghostbusters also 
limits Patty’s role because it’s based specifically onthe original Ghostbusters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/13/ghostbusters-firehouse-new-york-renovation-women-bathroom>
. In the 1984 film, the one black man who becomes a Ghostbuster, Winston (Ernie 
Hudson), is thrown into the team as an afterthought halfway through the film. 
Winston is a hired hand; the three white Ghostbusters are the core team. Patty 
isn’t a real Ghostbuster for the same reason that Barbara isn’t a real hero. 
The original stories were sexist and/or racist, and so the remakes are sexist 
and/or racist as a way of being true to the franchise.

Rebooting stories that are racist and sexist is one way that racist and sexist 
narratives and ideas get replicated and perpetuated. You can sometimes change 
the story and make it better – and then, sometimes, you can’t. The Killing Joke 
didn’t have to be as wretched in cartoon form as it turned out to be, but 
remaking it was always going to be a bad idea.

Instead, maybe, DC could have done an animated Birds of Prey – a series in 
which numerous female superheroes, not least Barbara Gordon, fight crime 
together without having to ask Batman for permission. Rather than another 
white-focused 80s reboot, maybe Hollywood could finally get its act together 
and put outThe Last Dragon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/16/vanity-denise-katrina-matthews-the-last-dragon-prince>
remake 
<http://www.thelastdragontribute.com/are-samuel-l-jackson-dallas-jackson-holding-the-last-dragon-remake-movie-poster-in-this-picture/>
 they’ve been promising us. Or possibly, at some point, studios could even hire 
writers, directors and producers who aren’t white men to tell entirely new 
stories. I know that’s considered risky. But as The Killing Joke demonstrates, 
retelling mediocre, sexist stories badly doesn’t always work out so well either.
 