
Just days before he was shot and killed, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jul/17/baton-rouge-police-officers-shooting-louisiana>
 a Baton Rouge police officer posted a Facebook message saying he was 
“physically and emotionally” tired and expressing how difficult it was to be 
both a police officer and a black man.

“I swear to God I love this city but I wonder if this city loves me,” Montrell 
Jackson wrote.

Baton Rouge: man suspected of killing three police officers 'was former 
marine' – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jul/17/baton-rouge-police-officers-shooting-louisiana>
Friends and family of Jackson were mourning the 10-year-veteran of the police 
force that relatives described as a “gentle giant” and a “protector” after he 
and another two law enforcement officers were shot and killed Sunday morning by 
a gunman.

In the Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> posting 
Jackson said while in uniform he gets nasty looks and out of uniform some 
consider him a threat.

“I’ve experienced so much in my short life and these last 3 days have tested 
me to the core,” the posting read.

The message was posted on 8 July, just three days after a black man was shot 
and killed by police in Baton Rouge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/alton-sterling-shooting>. That shooting 
was the beginning of an extremely tense week in the country’s fraught history 
of race relations.

Another black man was shot and killed by police the next day in Minnesota, 
with his girlfriend live-streaming the aftermath on Facebook. Then a black 
gunman opened fire during a protest against the police shootings in Dallas, 
killing five police officers.

Jackson does not specifically refer to those events but the posting appears to 
be a reaction to them.
Girls Really Rule. (@girlsreallyrule) 
A post from Facebook 10 days ago by Montrell Jackson, a police officer, who 
lost his life today in#BatonRouge 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/BatonRouge?src=hash>. pic.twitter.com/kdZUvXZL7d 
<https://t.co/kdZUvXZL7d>
 <https://twitter.com/girlsreallyrule/status/754806221010378752> July 17, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/girlsreallyrule/status/754806221010378752> 
Erika Green told Associated Press on Sunday that she is friends with the 
family of Jackson, one of three Baton Rouge law enforcement officers who were 
killed on Sunday morning. She said she saw the message on his Facebook page.

In the message, Jackson says he is physically and emotionally tired.

“These are trying times. Please don’t let hate infect your heart,” Jackson 
wrote.

If you see me and need a hug or want to say a prayer, I got you.”

A screenshot of the image has been widely circulating on the internet but is 
no longer on Jackson’s Facebook page.

Jackson’s family was mourning the officer on Sunday afternoon.

Kedrick Pitts, the 24-year-old younger half brother of Montrell Jackson, said 
he was very close to his older brother.

“With him it was God, family and the police force,” Pitts said outside his 
mother’s house in Baton Rouge, where family was gathered Sunday. “He went above 
and beyond ... He was a protector.”

He said his brother had been on the force for 10 years, having joined in 2006 
and had risen to the rank of corporal.

Pitts said he woke up on Sunday to find his mother crying as news broke about 
the shooting involving police. He drove his mother to the hospital and it was 
there that they discovered that Jackson had been shot. He said Jackson leaves 
behind a wife and a four-month-old son named Mason.

Pitts described Jackson as a person with a humorous streak but a serious side. 
He said his brother was a big fan of the New Orleans Pelicans and the Dallas 
Cowboys.

Gavin Long, named as Baton Rouge gunman, was marine with online alias
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/17/baton-rouge-gunman-gavin-e-long-cosmo-setepenra-marines>
He called Jackson a hard-working police officer who often worked seven days a 
week.

In the rural Livingston Parish, the family of Jackson’s wife was also mourning 
their loss.

Lonnie Jordan, Jackson’s father-in-law, spoke to reporters on the front lawn 
of Jackson’s house. Jordan said he heard about Jackson’s death while at church 
on Sunday morning when he received a text message.

Jordan described his son-in-law as a “gentle giant” – tall and stout and 
formidable looking, but with a peaceful disposition, saying he was “always 
about peace.”

Jordan said his son-in-law had been working long hours since the death of 
Alton Sterling and the resulting protests. But Jordan said if the work was a 
strain, Jackson didn’t let it show.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fobama-condemns-killing-of-three-police-officers-in-baton-rouge-shooting-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20condemns%20killing%20of%20three%20police%20officers%20in%20Baton%20Rouge%20shooting%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fobama-condemns-killing-of-three-police-officers-in-baton-rouge-shooting-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20condemns%20killing%20of%20three%20police%20officers%20in%20Baton%20Rouge%20shooting%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F18%2Fobama-condemns-killing-of-three-police-officers-in-baton-rouge-shooting-video&media=>
Obama condemns killing of three police officers in Baton Rouge shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/18/obama-condemns-killing-of-three-police-officers-in-baton-rouge-shooting-video> 