
With under six weeks to go, time is getting tight. The good news is that my 
training is picking up pace again.

On Saturday, I ran seven miles (on a treadmill, mind, as I'm still practising 
landing my feet correctly at the physio's insistence). Four other days in the 
week, I was able to run 40 minutes a pop. And, so far, the injured knee hasn't 
given me any more problems (touch wood). Not bad for someone who couldn't walk 
without wincing less than a month ago.

But emerging from the shadow of the knee brought back an old problem, one I 
remember facing back in my uninjured days in December: what on Earth should you 
think about while you're running?

I'll admit that this running lark isn't half as evil as I thought it would be. 
It feels good (honestly). You get better satisfyingly quickly. And there's 
always that feeling of some achievement after a long run.

But getting better means running for longer. And running for longer is 
mind-crushingly boring. After half an hour, you begin to question your own 
motives. Why am I carrying on with this slow suffering? This is really boring. 
Why not just stop now?

An hour in, your brain starts to play tricks. Each second elongates 
inexorably. You convince yourself that the lamp-post you're running towards is 
moving away from you.

At its worst, your mind will declare war on your body. Fortunately, you're not 
fighting alone.

Some people will only run with others. There are two benefits here: talking 
your way through a long run is a good way to make sure you're not going too 
hard. Being alongside someone else who is suffering also helps.

Others listen to music. I love this idea but, alas, it is impractical for me 
as long as Apple makes iPods that crash with the merest hint of movement. I've 
spent too long trying to revive a crashed music player mid-stride. It's just 
not cricket.

The best solution is to go all Zen. Experienced runners tell me that they get 
into their stride in the first few moments of a run and then just stop 
thinking. This is harder than it sounds; for those starting on this method, the 
merest hint of noise or an annoying dog in your path can put you off. But when 
it works, it's a wonderful thing. Ignore the pain and think about blue skies - 
or, even better, nothing at all.

Â· Alok is running the London marathon this year
 