
1. Battle of the Bastards, Game of Thrones

Anyone who watches Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones> knows what to expect 
from a season’s penultimate episode. It’s given us notorious executions, the 
Red Wedding and the Battle of Blackwater Bay to name a few. Even forearmed with 
this expectation of greatness, Battle of the Bastards was a stone-cold classic, 
setting a new high-water mark in what is possible for television to achieve. 
Dany mounting her dragon and laying waste to the Masters’ fleet in Meereen – in 
an air-punchingly triumphant sequence which would in itself have been a 
satisfactorily epic set piece – was but one of two displays of wanton 
badassery. The best was yet to come.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtsFeIVJfKsA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtsFeIVJfKsA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtsFeIVJfKsA&media=>
After Rickon died in a senseless display of Darwinism (if you don’t zigzag 
when someone’s shooting at you then you don’t deserve to procreate) came the 
cacophonous, blood-spurting battle for Winterfell. It was epic, brutal, 
exciting and technically sublime, with one particular shot, following Jon Snow 
on foot fighting his way through swaths of soldiers and cavalry, being up there 
with the best battle scenes ever filmed, on TV or otherwise.LH

2. San Junipero, Black Mirror

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj184FPzAzeE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj184FPzAzeE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dj184FPzAzeE&media=>
Who could have known that, amid the hacker-led paedophile hunt and the mass 
murder by social media, Black Mirror would be the home of the year’s most 
beautiful and touching love story? Charlie Brooker left cynicism at the door 
for the best episode of the new run, which saw romance crossing time and 
realities to endure against all odds. It was written, Brooker claims, to 
confront expectations: for those who said Black Mirror’s new Netflix home would 
make it too American, he gave it the most Californian California setting; for 
those who thought it “was written by the fucking Unabomber”, he filled the 
episode with hope.


Optimism is what carries this to its conclusion, full of warmth and joy. 
Yorkie and Kelly’s romance isn’t easy or straightforward, not least because it 
takes place largely in a simulated afterlife where shoulderpads reign supreme. 
There are obstacles of obligations, of what is earned, of what is deserved. But 
ultimately, with a killer soundtrack and a big, kind heart, it leaves you 
believing in the power of love to fight pain and loneliness, and to make the 
world a better place. And really, what could be more appropriate this year than 
that?RN

3. B.A.N., Atlanta
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz5PwJEeBFLY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz5PwJEeBFLY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dz5PwJEeBFLY&media=>
Using the classic Cam’ron and Dame Dash interview with Bill O’Reilly as 
inspiration, the writing team behind this mid-season episode of Donald Glover’s
Atlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/atlanta> managed to comment 
on everything from liberal assumptions about minorities to transracialism. 
Politically incorrect rapper Paper Boi is booked to appear on a Charlie 
Rose-style talkshow alongside an academic who isn’t a million miles away from 
Judith Butler. During the discussion taboos are challenged, assumptions are 
interrogated and the idea of inviting a rapper on a TV show to debate topical 
issues with an intellectual is wrung out for every last drop of lols.

The transracial segment, where a young black man named Antwan believes he is 
actually a middle-aged white man called Harrison, could have come straight from 
Brass Eye. It’s pointed, painfully well observed and will make anyone who 
watches it consider their position on Rachel Dolezal. There are also the 
made-up adverts that air in between the discussion. The Dodge Charger is 
reimagined as the muscle cars for people with massive insecurities; Swisher 
cigars become the blunt receptacle of choice for weed smokers; and a cereal 
advert morphs into an allegory about police violence. All that makes it 
pound-for-pound one of the best 30 minutes of TV produced in 2016.LB

4. Separation, The Girlfriend Experience
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI40Z6pp8-30&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI40Z6pp8-30>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DI40Z6pp8-30&media=>
So much of this underappreciated small-screen take on Steven Soderbergh’s 2009 
drama was about confounding expectations, from the sinister atmosphere to the 
cold apathy of the central character. It therefore made sense that the season 
finale would operate in the same unconventional manner. Throughout the season, 
we followed law student Christine, played with icy conviction by a Golden 
Globe-nominated Riley Keough, as she found a new career as a high-class escort. 
A spare script and a tightly controlled performance meant that we were never 
entirely sure who Christine really is and what, if anything, makes her happy.


The final episode shows us that she’s no longer questioning which road to 
follow but she’s still testing how far she can physically and mentally push 
herself and the episode climaxes in an ambitious, unsettling role play exercise 
with two men. It’s a brave, initially confusing sequence but it haunts and, for 
a show of such staggering high quality, it leaves us content to see no more. A 
second season is on the way but will wisely focus on a new character. Christine 
went to the edge and took us with her and this episode showed that there’s 
nowhere left for her to take us.BL

5. Episode three, Horace & Pete
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0J0NXz-_dWA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0J0NXz-_dWA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0J0NXz-_dWA&media=>
Being completely self-funded, streaming on a relatively small website and 
winning Emmy nominations in both drama and comedy: these were just three of the 
things that set Louis CK’s Horace & Pete apart in 2016. One of those 
nominations was for Laurie Metcalf, who got a nod in the best guest appearance 
by an actress in a limited series category. On a show already packed with 
unique and brilliant performances from the likes of Steve Buscemi, Jessica 
Lange, Edie Falco and Alan Alda, Metcalf’s appearance in the third episode as 
Horace’s estranged wife was more stunning than any of them. The episode is 
essentially a 40-minute monologue about an affair. One camera is trained on 
her, as she tearfully tells the story of how she – inexplicably – managed to 
have a dalliance with her new husband’s elderly father while visiting him at 
his lakeside summer home.


It’s a blow-by-blow account as cringeworthy as it is intriguing, with Metcalf 
drawing the viewer in with a mix of gallows humor and pained recollections of 
her own actions.Louis CK <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/louis-ck> as 
Horace sits there in bewilderment, as more details are divulged, and together 
they begin to reconcile their own differences and issues with their children. 
It’s the moment in the series when it stopped being a not-so-cost-effective 
curio and started to become essential viewing for anyone who wanted to watch 
the best, and most surprising television of the so-called “golden age”.LB

6. The Bicameral Mind, Westworld
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIuS5huqOND4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIuS5huqOND4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIuS5huqOND4&media=>
Westworld <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/westworld> was a drama all 
about signs and signifiers, from the discreet clues left for viewers to the 
legend of “the maze”. But unlike its cinematic predecessor the series wasn’t 
much interested in creating memorable visual signs of its own. There were grand 
vistas and ginormous crowd scenes, but few single shots that made you think. 
The finale bucked that trend, however. An intimate exchange between android 
hosts Dolores and Teddy, about their future, their dreams and fears, all of a 
sudden came to halt. Dolores and Teddy held each other like Vivien Leigh and 
Clark Gable but to their side stood giant lighting rigs. This wasn’t an 
intimate moment for two artificially intelligent androids learning how to feel 
but a scene played out for a human audience. A visual distillation of the 
issues of freedom and predetermination that this drama sought to grapple with, 
it brought a thematic resolution to the drama, even as the plot galloped on.PM


7. Marcia, Marcia, Marcia, The People v OJ Simpson
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4vQn-j1flkQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4vQn-j1flkQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4vQn-j1flkQ&media=>
Race and celebrity understandably underpinned Ryan Murphy’s fine dramatization 
of OJ Simpson’s arrest and trial. Yet it’s testament to the breadth of this 
show that so much else was covered within its 10 hours. The series highlight 
looked at the inherent sexism in the treatment of prosecutor Marcia Clark, 
denounced and demeaned over everything from her appearance to her position as a 
single mother. Sarah Paulson did a remarkable job in conveying Clark’s 
frustration and helplessness in the face of such rampant double standards (even 
her attempts to freshen up her appearance result in disaster), while the show’s 
unflinching gaze makes us viewers feel complicit in her humiliation. Horrible, 
compelling television.GM


8. Exciting and New, Transparent
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbest-tv-episode-2016-game-of-thrones-black-mirror-westworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F960db7932e68bc87cd411df377d8688f13040b25%2F0_43_1988_1193%2F1988.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Battle%20of%20the%20Bastards%20to%20San%20Junipero%3A%20what%20was%20the%20best%20TV%20episode%20of%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbest-tv-episode-2016-game-of-thrones-black-mirror-westworld%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Battle%20of%20the%20Bastards%20to%20San%20Junipero%3A%20what%20was%20the%20best%20TV%20episode%20of%202016%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fbest-tv-episode-2016-game-of-thrones-black-mirror-westworld%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F960db7932e68bc87cd411df377d8688f13040b25%2F0_43_1988_1193%2F1988.jpg>
 To Shell and Back … the euphoric, optimistic feeling Transparent chose to bow 
out on. Photograph: Amazon 
From transgenderism to S&M fixation, the structural quirks of the synagogue to 
radical feminism, Jill Soloway’s Transparent has never been afraid to tackle 
niche experience. But its other major theme is far more conventional. 
Throughout, the ghost of a long-dissolved nuclear family – mum Shelley, dad 
Mort and children Ali, Josh and Sarah – haunts the narrative. For all its focus 
on the new frontiers of identity, it’s also a show about a distant father, an 
anxious mother, and the three children who have been both neglected and spoilt 
by them.

It was this theme that the show returned to for its season three climax. 
Reuniting the family and isolating them in classic sitcom style, it saw all the 
Pfeffermans go on a cruise together. The five arrive as a fractured unit, 
restless and uncomfortable in each other’s company. Yet the episode ends with a 
vision of almost transcendental togetherness as they watch Shelly perform her 
show To Shell And Back, comprising a cruiseship rendition of Alanis 
Morissette’s Hand In My Pocket, merged with an ambiguous retelling of the 
sexual abuse she suffered as a teenager. As the rest of the family finally pay 
attention to their mocked and sidelined matriarch, it becomes clear this isn’t 
really a show about the intricacies of identity politics culture, but about the 
basic idea of respect and recognising the value of other people – and it’s the 
euphoric, optimistic feeling of this realisation that the show bows out on. 
It’s not a perfect ending – Josh is conspicuously absent – but it does make you 
feel, as Alanis herself might have it, that everything’s gonna be fine, fine, 
fine.RA

9. eps2.8h1dden-pr0cess.axx, Mr Robot
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS5oaEey-krE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS5oaEey-krE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DS5oaEey-krE&media=>
From Wonder Woman to mapping world politics: what was the best book you read 
in 2016?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/19/open-thread-best-book-you-read-in-2016-wonder-woman-mapping-world-politics-development>
Mr Robot <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mr-robot> can sometimes be 
confusing, perhaps a little overwrought, and there are points where even the 
show’s biggest fan might ask themselves: where are they going with this? By 
they, I mean creator, writer, director, producer Sam Esmail and perhaps the 
downside of having an auteur at the helm of a drama is that it doesn’t always 
hit the beats you’re expecting. The upsides, however, are the delights that 
catch you unawares. The number of perfectly composed frames were a pleasure in 
themselves. The inner monologue of unreliable narrator Elliott had an ability 
to hit you like a good piece of beat poetry. And there were massive, dramatic, 
suspenseful scenes galore. These didn’t always fall nearly into episodic 
chunks, but as the best example of Mr Robot’s depths I’d recommend the 10th 
part of this second season and its climax – which contrasts the long-awaited 
romantic coming together of the leads with a bloody execution in a Hopper-esque 
diner.PM

 