
Bauer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer> Media is to cease publication 
of the controversial magazine, Der Landser, which has been accused of honouring 
pro-Nazi troops who fought in the second world war.

The Hamburg-based company made the announcement while reiterating its denials 
that the magazine glorified Waffen-SS soldiers.

In a short statement, Bauer Media explained that in July the Simon Wiesenthal 
centre published an open letter in which it made allegations about Der Landser 
editorial stance.

It said the group took the allegations "extremely seriously" and commissioned 
a neutral party - "the renowned" German lawyer, Otmar Kury - to conduct a 
review of the content.

Bauer said that he came to the conclusion that Der Landser "complies fully 
with the stringent legislation applicable inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and that it neither glorifies nor 
trivialises National Socialism."

After receiving his report, however, Bauer said its board took the occasion 
"to evaluate the publication in the context of the group's portfolio strategy 
and has decided to cease publishing the series."

It has published Der Landser for 43 years.

But Bauer does not mention the fact that it has been subject to complaints to 
the British communications regulatorOfcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> about its fitness to own radio 
stations.

They followed the company's acquisition of Absolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> (formerly Virgin Radio) to 
add to its UK broadcasting stable, which includes Kiss FM, 4 Music, Smash Hits 
radio and the Manchester-based Magic station.

Media banker and analyst Bruce Fireman contended that Ofcom should refuse 
permission for Bauer's takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/aug/08/ofcom-bauer>on the 
grounds that the company is not a fit and proper person, under terms of the 
broadcasting acts, to hold a broadcasting licence.

His reasons were set out in an online article, "Nazi sympathisers allowed to 
run UK radio stations?" 
<http://www.opendemocracy.net/ourkingdom/bruce-fireman/nazi-sympathisers-allowed-to-run-uk-radio-stations>
 on the openDemocracy site.

He accused Der Landser of honouring 24 Waffen-SS members who served in units 
that participated in war crimes. Weeks later,Lord (Monroe) Palmer also 
complained to Ofcom. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/sep/02/bauer-ofcom>

On hearing the news of Bauer's decision to cease publication, Fireman said 
that "the purport of my complaint to Ofcom is confirmed" and repeated his view 
that Ofcom should reconsider Bauer's broadcasting licences in Britain. He said:

"Bauer took every possible step to make it lawful to publish Der Landser in 
Germany, by ensuring that the magazine never mentioned the crimes of those it 
honoured. Such a company is not fit and proper to hold a United Kingdom radio 
licence.

These licences permit the use of public assets, radio frequencies, and Ofcom 
has a duty to ensure that those licensed to use them have a corporate culture 
which will ensure their proper use.

Bauer studiously complied with the letter of German law, as it now confirms, 
while defiantly ignoring its spirit and continued to profit from publishing a 
magazine which glorified the indefensible.

"Faced with the loss of its UK radio licences, and not being allowed to 
acquire others, it has hypocritically closed Der Landser despite still 
insisting that its publication of the title was proper."

Bauer also publishes other military magazines accused of legitimising Nazism 
and glorifying Adolf Hitler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/aug/09/bauer-adolf-hitler>, 
such as Geschichte & Wissen (History & Knowledge) and Milit√§r & Geschichte 
(Military & History).

Along with Der Landser, they were cited in a letter sent in February to the 
German government by Abraham Foxman, director of the US Anti-Defamation League.

In asking why the publishers were not prosecuted for the propagation of 
Nazism, Foxman wrote: "The Bauer Media Group's publications may be within the 
letter of German law, but they may also be seen as legitimising the Nazi 
regime."
 