
Bauer Media, home to some of Britain's biggest selling magazines, has acquired 
Absolute Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> in a deal 
believed to be worth close to £22m.

The deal ends months of talks with the station, which started life as Virgin 
Radio, the upstart rock station made famous by Chris Evans.

The station was first put up for sale in 2011 by its owners, Times of India, 
which acquired Virgin Radio for £53m four years earlier.

The former Virgin Radio chief John Pearson pulled out of the race to buy the 
ailing station in January this year – he reportedly valued the Absolute Radio 
business at between £10m and £15m.

Bauer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer> is best known in the UK for 
its magazines including Heat, Grazia and Bella, but is also owner of a string 
of radio stations, including Kiss and Magic.

The deal marks further consolidation in the radio sector and a strengthening 
of Bauer's share of the UK radio market. It already accounts for a 26.5% share 
of the commercial radio market with its stations which include Kiss, Magic, 
Kerrang and local stations, such as Key 103 and Radio City.

Earlier this year, the company acquired Planet Rock, the digital service which 
includes shows by Alice Cooper and Bernard Doherty, PR to the Rolling Stones.

Paul Keenan, chief executive of Bauer Media UK, said he was "excited about 
welcoming this complementary music radio business with renowned digital assets 
into Bauer".

He said the "acquisition will be an opportunity to learn and share" across the 
businesses.

Donnach O'Driscoll, CEO of Absolute Radio, said, "The Absolute Radio business 
has never been in better shape as we approach our fifth birthday. Bauer Media 
UK is a business that really cares about building famous media and 
entertainment brands and music radio in particular. This brand will continue to 
thrive as part of the Bauer group".

Absolute Radio DJs include Christian O'Connell, Frank Skinner and Ian Wright.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 