
Bauer Media's bid to buy Absolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> is understood to have 
stalled at the 11th hour with the future of the music station still uncertain.

The German-owned private radio and magazine company emerged as the favourite 
to buy Absolute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/15/bauer-media-buy-absolute-radio>, 
owned by the Times of India parent company Bennett, Coleman & Co, after a rival 
consortium fronted by former Virgin Radio chief executive John Pearson pulled 
out.

But talks between Bauer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/20/bauer-media-closer-grazia-kiss>, 
home to the Kiss and Magic networks, and the Absolute owner have fallen 
through, according to industry sources.

It remains to be seen whether this paves the way for the return to the 
negotiating table ofPearson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/pearson> or 
TalkSport owner UTV Media, which has also expressed interest in the station, or 
whether the Bauer bid can be resurrected.

Pearson, who had the support of Time Out backer Peter Dubens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/dec/18/absolute-radio-virgin-time-out-purchase>
, came close to buying the station on two occasions and was understood to have 
tabled a £15m bid.

Absolute Radio's chief operating officer Clive Dickens announced last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/16/absolute-radio-chief-leave-clive-dickens>
 he was leaving the station to join Australian broadcaster Southern Cross 
Austereo.

His responsibilities at Absolute were split between chief executive Donnach 
O'Driscoll and chief financial officer Adrian Robinson, with content director 
Tony Moorey taking greater responsibility for programming.

Absolute Radio declined to comment. A Bauer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer> Media spokesman said: "We do not 
comment on speculation around commercial matters."

Bennett, Coleman & Co is understood to be looking for bids in excess of £20m 
for the station which it bought for £53.2m from SMG (now renamed STV) in 2008, 
when it was still called Virgin Radio.

Although audiences for the main Absolute Radio station tumbled after its 
rebrand to Absolute, the broadcaster has launched a number of spin-off digital 
stations, now totalling six, with the most popular Absolute 80s, listened to by 
nearly 900,000 people per week on average.

The station reported a rise in listeners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/31/rajars-absolute-radio> in the 
latest official Rajar figures, with a weekly reach of 1.77 million people 
tuning into Absolute Radio in the final three months of last year, up 10.8% 
year on year and nearly 15% on the previous quarter.

Breakfast host Christian O'Connell also saw his audience grow, possibly 
picking up older listeners from Radio 1, where Nick Grimshaw replaced Chris 
Moyles on breakfast.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 