
Former Virgin Radio chief executive John Pearson has pulled out of the race to 
buyAbsolute Radio <https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio>, leaving 
Bauer Media the favourite to buy the loss-making music station.

Pearson, whose bid had the support of Time Out backer Peter Dubens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/dec/18/absolute-radio-virgin-time-out-purchase>
, is understood to have been close to a deal but baulked at the asking price 
being asked by Absolute parent company, Times of India owner Bennett, Coleman & 
Co.

His exit means Bauer <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bauer>, owner of the 
Kiss and Magic radio networks, is in pole position to buy the station.

Bauer, a German-owned private company which is home to a stable of magazines 
including Grazia and FHM, isalso the frontrunner to buy Malcolm Bluemel's 
Planet Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jan/11/bauer-media-planet-rock?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

It is believed Bauer would then look to rebrand Absolute Radio as Planet Rock, 
including its valuable London FM licence.

Pearson, who left Virgin Radio in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2004/oct/12/citynews.radio?INTCMP=SRCH> and 
is now chairman of mobile entertainment firm Shazam, said: "I can confirm we 
have withdrawn from the process on a valuation basis.

"This would have been too good an opportunity to turn down to buy back the 
station for a reasonable price. We would have taken the fight back to the BBC 
and put it back on the map."

Pearson and his backers have been in discussion with Absolute's owners since 
the station was first put up for sale in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/apr/06/absolute-radio-review-sell-off?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

He remained the leading contender to buy the station when it went back on the 
market at the end of last year.

Pearson is thought to have valued the Absolute Radio business at between £10m 
and £15m. Absolute's owner is believed to be looking for in excess of £20m.

Bauer's interest in Absolute Radio and Planet Rock comes after it failed in 
its late bid to buy Smooth Radio owner GMG Radio, which wasbought by Ashley 
Tabor's Global Radio for £70m last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/jun/25/gmg-radio-sold-global-50m?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

The media company is the second biggest UK commercial radio player, some way 
behind Global which is home to Capital, Heart, Classic FM and talk station LBC.

TalkSport parent UTV Media may also still be in the running to buy Absolute, 
despite suggestions last week that it was no longer interested.

The Times of India parent company paid £53.2m for the station, then called 
Virgin Radio, in 2008.

But its audience plummeted following its rebrand as Absolute Radio and has 
never recovered. It had an average weekly audience of 1.5 million listeners in 
the third quarter of 2012 – the latest for which Rajar audience figures are 
available – compared to Virgin Radio's swansong of 2.4 million.

Absolute management, led by chief operating officer Clive Dickens and chief 
executive Donnach O'Driscoll, looked to expand its appeal with a stable of new 
decade-themed digital stations, the most popular of which Absolute 80s has 
nearly 900,000 weekly listeners.

But three of the new stations have fewer than 200,000 weekly listeners each.

Absolute also took the radical step in 2010 of buying up live Premier League 
football rights, broadcasting 32 games a season on Saturday afternoons.

A Bauer Media spokesman said: "We do not comment on speculation around 
commercial matters."

A spokeswoman for Absolute Radio said: "We do not comment on speculation about 
our business."

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 