
Commercial radio rivals Magic owner Bauer and TalkSport parent UTV Media have 
joined forces in a bid tosucceed where Channel 4 failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/oct/13/channel4-radio-digital> with a 
joint application to run the second national digital radio multiplex.

The radio groups have teamed up with transmission business Arqiva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> for their application for the 
licence to run the second nationwide digital audio broadcasting (DAB) platform, 
which will be home to around 10 new national radio services.

Arqiva owns the only national DAB multiplex to launch to date, Digital One, 
which is full to capacity with 14 stations, including five from Bauer – 
Absolute Radio and its spin-offs Absolute 80s and Absolute Radio 90s, Planet 
Rock and Kiss – and UTV’sTalkSport <https://www.theguardian.com/media/talksport>
.

The second wave of national DAB stations has been a long time coming after 
Channel 4, whichled a consortium that won the right to launch a string of new 
digital stations <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/jul/06/channel4.radio>
, pulled the plug on its radio ambitions in 2008.

The licence, which was advertised by media regulator Ofcom earlier this month, 
is expected to be awarded next year.

It remains to be seen what services the consortium will propose and how many 
will be run by its shareholders. UTV, for instance, hadproposed a TalkSport 
spin-off station, Talk Radio, as part of the doomed Channel 4 bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/mar/28/channel4.radio1>.

The switch from analogue to digital, including DAB, online and digital TV, has 
not progressed as quickly as many had forecast, with a digital radio switchover 
– once mooted for as early as 2015 –now not likely to happen until at least 2020
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/16/digital-radio-switchover-2020-ed-vaizey>
, according to the government. The launch of Channel 4 Radio had been expected 
to give the platform a big lift.

Bauer Radio, part of Bauer Media which also includes Grazia and Empire 
magazines, hasbeen on the acquisition trail in the last 18 months, buying up 
both Absolute and Planet Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/jul/29/bauer-media-buys-absolute-radio>.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 