
BBC2 is entering the Saturday night ratings battle, taking on The X Factor, 
Strictly and Casualty with poetry, dance andAlan Bennett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanbennett>.

The channel said from autumn it would replace the jumble of repeats normally 
shown at that time with programmes dedicated to arts and culture.

Patrick Holland, the editor of BBC2, said arts were central to the channel’s 
mission. “I wantBBC2 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc2> to be the most 
creative channel on TV,” he said.

“It is a place where the audience comes to find out about the world. It 
doesn’t shy away from complexity, it revels in specialism and detail, but it 
also speaks to broader audiences.”

There will be documentaries and performances, but Jonty Claypole, the director 
ofBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> Arts, admitted that the arts 
magazine and review programmes of yesteryear had probably had their day.

“The thing that has really damaged those sorts of shows is on demand viewing,” 
he said. Being able to come home and watch an episode ofStranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/15/stranger-things-review-a-shot-of-80s-nostalgia-right-to-your-heart-winona-ryder>
 or House of Cards “has really damaged the ability to get audiences to watch 
magazine roundup shows,” Claypole said.

BBC2’s Saturday night season will begin on 1 October with an evening of poetry 
and spoken word-themed programmes.

It will include the performance artist Kate Tempest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/kate-tempest>, who merges hip-hop, poetry 
and theatre, giving a live rendition of her album, Let Them Eat Chaos, at the 
Rivoli Ballroom in Brockley, south London.

There will also be a contemporary twist on WH Auden and Benjamin Britten’s 
Night Mail, with a documentary featuring six British poets. Sabrina Mahfouz, 
Michael Symmons Roberts, Liz Berry, Andrew McMillan, Imtiaz Dharker and Sean 
O’Brien have been filmed observing and interpreting the human stories they saw 
on a train from London to Glasgow.

Poems by Jackie Kay, Lemn Sissay and Ian Duhig will feature in BBC2 idents on 
1 October.

Elsewhere in the season, Michael Palin will meet the travel writer and 
historian Jan Morris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/06/caitlin-jenner-trans-pioneer-jan-morris>
, while Julie Walters will interview Willy Russell, the writer of Shirley 
Valentine and Blood Brothers.

Other commissions include a first full-length feature film by dance company 
BalletBoyz <http://www.balletboyz.com/>, telling the stories of young soldiers, 
a programme about the Adrian Mole creator, Sue Townsend, and a 
behind-the-scenes film about auction house Christie’s, which celebrates its 
250th anniversary this year.

The season will continue until Christmas, when Alan Bennett’s Diaries, a 
programme following the 82-year-old writer around over the course of a year, 
will be shown.

Inspired by his diaries, the programme goes with Bennett to New York as he 
accepts an award from the city’s public library, and to his local community run 
library in Primrose Hill, which, he despairs, some would rather see turned into 
a Pizza Hut.

The BBC said Bennett would speak about his relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/31/alan-bennett-lady-in-the-van-film-interview>
 with his long-term partner, Rupert Thomas, and say he has always wanted to 
keep a donkey.

Mark Bell, the BBC’s commissioning editor for arts, said: “They are not all 
going to be back of the net ratings-wise, we’re not expecting that. We’re 
expecting to feel we have put together an exciting, sometimes challenging, 
schedule of cultural output … I hope it is all rather inspiring for people.”

Bell said the change aimed to make BBC2 “a cultural destination” on Saturday 
nights, an alternative to the light entertainment battle between BBC1 and ITV.

The poetry night broadcast will be the first in a series of programmes called 
Performance Live,a two-year project 
<http://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/news/bbc-commission-live-performance-projects>
 in partnership with Battersea Arts Centre and Arts Council England, in which 
artists and arts organisations will produce their own TV programmes.

There will also be three Saturday nights in October devoted to books and 
reading, including profiles, interviews and documentaries around the2016 Man 
Booker prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/27/man-booker-prize-2016-longlist-jm-coetzee>
.

But Claypole said there were no plans for a book review show, as such shows 
work far better on radio than TV.

“When we look through the BBC archive, the things that have real value are 
documentaries and author profiles. I would never look at a books discussion 
review show from 1974, it has no archival value. What does are the Omnibuses, 
Arenas and Monitors,” he said.

 