
The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> apologised today for the 
"grossly offensive" prank calls that its presentersRussell Brand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/russell-brand> and Jonathan Ross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jonathan-ross> made to the actor Andrew 
Sachs.

In a short statement broadcast on Radio 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/radio-2> at 10am, the time at which Ross's 
show would usually begin, it apologised for invading the privacy of the former 
Fawlty Towers star and that of his granddaughter Georgina Bailie.

The spokeswoman said: "The conversation [between Brand and Ross] was grossly 
offensive and an unacceptable intrusion into the private lives of both Mr Sachs 
and Ms Baillie.

"It was a serious breach of editorial standards, and should never have been 
recorded or broadcast.

"The BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> would like to apologise 
unreservedly to Mr Sachs, Ms Baillie and to our audiences as licence fee 
payers."

The programme, and media coverage of it, generated some 42,000 complaints. 
Brand, who had had a short relationship with Baillie, resigned from the BBC and 
Ross, the corporation's star presenter, was suspended without pay for 12 weeks. 
Richard Allinson, who has been atRadio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/radio> 2 for more than 10 years, was 
standing in for Ross this morning.

It emerged yesterday that a second BBC Radio 2 executive had stood down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/nov/07/bbc-russell-brand> in the wake 
of the affair.

The resignation of Dave Barber, the head of specialist music and compliance, 
was announced in an internal email from the station's acting controller, Lewis 
Carnie. It came after the Radio 2 controller, Lesley Douglas, resigned last 
week.

This morning's apology, which was ordered by the BBC Trust, will be broadcast 
again at 9pm, when Brand's former show would normally air.
 