
The BBC and other broadcasters are planning to slash their investment in the 
YouView <https://www.theguardian.com/media/youview> set-top box, leaving BT and 
TalkTalk as the major shareholders and dealing a blow to a platform which was 
originally created to safeguard the future of British free-to-air television.

YouView's colourful history has involved repeated delays, more than £100m of 
costs and stand-up rows between Five owner Richard Desmond and former chairman 
Lord Sugar.

Featuring digital video recording and catchup services from all the 
broadcasting partners, YouView was originally billed as the internet-connected, 
on-demand version of the hugely successful Freeview service, which receives 
free-to-air channels via rooftop aerials. With BT and TalkTalk's backing, it 
has become the fastest growing television service in the UK. However, thanks to 
content sharing agreements, TalkTalk customers now have access to a wide range 
of Sky programmes, including all its sports channels.

It is jointly owned by the BBC, ITV, Channel 4, Five, mast company Arqiva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> and the telecoms groups BT and 
TalkTalk. But the licence fee-funded technology has largely benefited the 
pay-television offerings of the two telecoms companies.

Of the more than 1m homes with YouView, just 3% are estimated to have bought 
one direct from a retailer. The unsubsidised box costs £229 and the vast 
majority of homes have received one bundled free with a BT or TalkTalk pay-TV 
subscription.

According to YouView partners who spoke off the record, the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is withdrawing its support due to 
concerns about the use of public money to pay the development costs for private 
companies.

The decision comes as the corporation is facing questions in parliament over 
the Digital Media Initiative, which cost £100m of licence fee money.

When the corporation's involvement in YouView was originally approved 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/assets/files/pdf/our_work/canvas/canvas_conclusions.pdf>
 by BBC trustees, it was on condition that "there should be no subsidising by 
the BBC of joint venture partners". This was to ensure the BBC's involvement, 
as a publicly funded organisation, complied with state aid and competition law.

An industry expert commented: "YouView was meant to be the champion of the 
next generation of free to air but the involvement of the internet service 
providers means that it has become a pay platform. YouView isn't the champion 
of the free; it's the home of the pay."

The seven partners were given equal 14.3% shares in the platform when the 
YouView company was created in July 2010, and have until now borne an equal 
share of the costs, with broadcasters paying in free airtime as well as hard 
cash. It is understood that from April, the BBC, Channel 4, Five, ITV and 
Arqiva will all scale back their financial contribution, while remaining on the 
list of shareholders.

A spokesman for the BBC said: "We are committed to YouView and are confident 
of finalising the renewed shareholders agreement by the end of March." All of 
the other partners declined to comment.

A spokeswoman for YouView said: "All seven shareholders remain committed to 
YouView and are confident of finalising the renewed shareholders agreement by 
the end March."

Originated within the BBC as project Canvas, YouView would not have been 
created without the corporation's startup backing.

Negotiations to secure the platform's future are still under way, with a 
decision expected by 31 March. The BBC and other broadcasters are now expected 
to concentrate on promoting Freeview, which delivers television via the aerial, 
and Freesat, which offers satellite TV for those who do not want the expense of 
a Sky subscription. Freesat is now in talks with manufacturers to install its 
Freetime software – which serves programming over the internet – in smart 
televisions.

Freeview, which is backed by Sky, Arqiva, Channel 4, the BBC and ITV, is now 
broadcasting to 11m homes. Freesat, which has just the BBC and ITV as backers, 
has more than 1.8m homes.

A succession of chief executives and chairmen have passed through YouView's 
revolving door, including Sugar and Carphone Warehouse co-founder Sir Charles 
Dunstone, and its launch was repeatedly delayed due to technical glitches and 
disagreement between the partners.

Last March, Desmond and Sugar were reported to have chased each other around 
the boardroom table during a row, with Desmond borrowing Sugar's catchphrase 
from The Apprentice television show and shouting: "You're fired".

A former YouView executive said: "BT and TalkTalk both got a lot from YouView 
because their broadband proposition looks better with a pay TV offer. For the 
broadcasters the strategic rationale was to protect the platform on which they 
had a big viewing share. I'm not sure that's delivered for them."
 