
I first learned to construct nomadic huts with my grandmother in the summer 
holidays – spent, whether I liked or not, living in Dayniile, nearMogadishu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/24/insider-guide-mogadishu-somalia-life-peace>
. Being a Mogadishu girl, living in a comfortable villa, I hated it at first so 
my father sent, as a surprise, a tiny battery-run TV, which transformed our 
evenings at the nomadic camp.

Although we never planned to live like that, later, as it happened, we became 
refugees and ended up internally displaced in what would have otherwise seemed 
like barren landscapes. But thanks to my childhood experiences we were able to 
construct houses on our own.

It is eminently uplifting to construct your home as a way of dealing with loss

We knew where to source the material, get water and even medicinal flora: we 
made mats of fibre and used dried and shaped acacia roots to serve as pillars. 
This was before aid arrived and plastic tents invaded the region. Unlike the 
plastic tents, which are hot during the day and cold at night, the nomadic huts 
are suited to the arid and hot climate: they are cool during the day and warm 
during the night, thanks to their natural ventilation system. It is eminently 
uplifting to construct your home as a way of dealing with loss in the emergency 
of war.

Along with the ongoing conflict, Somalis also face an environmental emergency 
thanks to deforestation. People are consuming their future by burning the same 
acacia trees they need for their homes into charcoal for the international 
trade. These trees take years to regenerate. Soon, it might be that people 
won’t have any other option than to wait for plastic tents from Europe.

I feel proud that the nomadic hut is, in its entirety, a result of female 
ingenuity and collective effort. It is a common practice that women support 
each other through thick and thin. But making the house is fun. Women sing and 
recite poems during its construction. A bride-to-be making her marital hut 
invites female friends and relatives and, as a reward for their hard work, 
offers food and drinks; but if she fails to do so they will sing about her 
laziness or, even worse, her stinginess.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsomali-buildings-nomadic-huts-somalia-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F13%2F1442151461398%2Fcdfbca16-df24-4f6b-9165-2c5f8fce5a60-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beautiful%20Somali%20buildings%20are%20rising%20up%20in%20a%20former%20war%20zone.%20It%20gives%20me%20hope%20%7C%20Sada%20Mire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsomali-buildings-nomadic-huts-somalia-heritage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beautiful%20Somali%20buildings%20are%20rising%20up%20in%20a%20former%20war%20zone.%20It%20gives%20me%20hope%20%7C%20Sada%20Mire&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsomali-buildings-nomadic-huts-somalia-heritage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F13%2F1442151461398%2Fcdfbca16-df24-4f6b-9165-2c5f8fce5a60-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A new residential house in Hargeisa. Photograph: Photograph: Sada Mire 
One of my favourite objects happens to be the interior mat of the hut, the 
kebed, an insulating and decorative mat. A mother might help her daughter weave 
her bridalkebed and she may also weave a secret message to her daughter and her 
son-in-law through a combination of intricate patterns and colours.

The experience of building huts has helped me appreciate Somali architecture. 
Through my archaeological work, I have come across all sorts of human 
dwellings, everything from rock shelters inhabited thousands of years ago, 
often adorned with the most spectacular paintings, to dry-stone towns on the 
Somali coast, and to the modern architecture in cities like Hargeisa. Mogadishu 
features the Shirazi Persian architecture of the Swahili houses and mosques.

However, the ongoing war has caused a lot of destruction. The beautiful 
Islamic buildings with minarets, arches and domes, including Omani, Egyptian 
and Ottoman architecture, need protection and preservation. In Berbera, 
Somaliland, one can still enjoy some beautiful Ottoman architecture. During the 
European colonial era, impressive structures were erected too. Mogadishu has a 
cathedral built during Italian times, and hosts a number of art deco houses.

The insider's cultural guide to Hargeisa: 'the mother of Somali arts'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/27/insider-cultural-guide-hargeisa-somalia-arts-east-africa>
There is what could be called anti-colonial architecture too. My grandmother 
used to talk aboutSayyid Mohammed Abdullah Hassan 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mohammed_Abdullah_Hassan>, the Somali liberation 
hero of theDaraawiish (Dervish) movement; she used to recite his poetry to my 
siblings and me. What I didn’t know as a child, though, was that the place she 
called Taleh, the sheikh’s residence, was a significant maze-like fortress. The 
colonial British were unable to penetrate it and had to resort to air 
bombardment.

Somalis seem to be experts in resurrection through time. After decades of peace
Hargeisa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/jul/27/insider-cultural-guide-hargeisa-somalia-arts-east-africa>
, in Somaliland, is expanding and its modern architecture is booming. As I 
write, I am sitting admiring the hotel near my house in the city. It is 
inspired by the Arabian style of curvy angles and arches and big courtyards. I 
can’t believe that this beautiful hotel and many more have risen out of the war 
zone I saw just two decades ago. I also can’t believe that the ambitious owner 
of the hotel actually converted what was a barren hill into a lovely garden.

Seeing towns like Hargeisa gives me hope for places like Mogadishu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2014/feb/28/mogadishu-somalia-photography-city-exposures>
 which, in times of relative calm, is enjoying new construction and 
reconstruction projects. What will be the future for Somali architectural 
heritage? Only time will tell.
 