
Cropped tops

Have you noticed how celebrities with newly cropped hair often make the news 
(well, when I say "news", I mean the kind of stuff you find in the 
fashion/gossip pages)? Think Emma Watson a while back, and more recently Anne 
Hathaway and Charlize Theron, the latter two having had their heads shaved for 
film roles. Cropped hair makes a statement. It's what people remember Mia 
Farrow, Twiggy and Audrey Hepburn for. It's what madeAgyness Deyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/agyness-deyn> memorable on the catwalk, 
separating her from the long line of poker-straight-haired models. And it's 
what makes me remember that I once used to be much better at making decisions.

I got all my hair cut off on a family holiday to New York, deciding on the 
plane that I wanted to look like Winona Ryder (this was circaGirl, Interrupted 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/82506/girl.interrupted>). I'd previously 
been one of those anonymous teenagers with perfectly straight hair but I've 
never looked back. I'm a massive short hair advocate, telling anyone who'll 
listen how wonderful it is to only take a minute with the hairdryer in the 
morning and never worry about straighteners. A hair brush? I haven't had one 
for 13 years! I always keep an eye out for others with short hair and there are 
plenty of us around in real life, all looking at each others' dos and comparing 
them to our own.

But there has never been much inspiration for us pixie-haired folk among the 
magazines or catwalks. Michelle Williams and Ginnifer Goodwin (pictured above) 
often get rolled out as examples in cropped hair stories, and both do wear it 
well in that classic Jean Seberg-esque way. Then there are those which are a 
bit more adventurous – Emeli Sandé's modern half-shaved half-quiffed crop suits 
her style wonderfully. Hathaway's is more of a boyish, outgrown shaved do, so 
it will be interesting to see what that direction that takes. And Theron hasn't 
even revealed her head from beneath a series of hats, so who knows what's 
happening under there. Is it only me who gets excited about others with short 
styles? If you had gone for the chop you'd understand.

Tan about town
 Staycation Photograph: St Tropez 
First there was vacation, then there was staycation and now…. Spraycation, of 
course! If you're not familiar with the term (and why would you be – it's made 
up), let me explain. Over the next few weeks,St Tropez 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/fashion-blog/2012/apr/10/brief-history-of-st-tropez>
 will be taking theirSpraycation tour around the major shopping centres of the 
country – a pop-up spray tan salon, which offers complimentary consultations 
and tans to anyone who signs up. After starting in London last weekend, the 
team will journey over the next four weeks to Birmingham, Manchester, Dublin 
and Glasgow. Why go on a sunny holiday when you can get a tan in the middle of 
your local shopping centre? Visitwww.facebook.com/sttropeztanuk 
<http://www.facebook.com/sttropeztanuk/app_306702326083496> for more details.

Makeup and macaroons
 Harvey Nichols Photograph: Harvey Nichols 
If you happen to find yourself in Harvey Nichols 
<http://www.harveynichols.com/> this month (as one often does, of course), then 
keep an eye out forEstée Lauder 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/fashion/fashion-blog/2012/feb/06/brief-history-of-estee-lauder>
'sBrasil Dreams collection. It's a small range of pinky delights designed to 
look great on darker and tanned skin. And in the London branch, if you buy two 
items from the collection you receive a specially made cocktail and a trio of 
macaroons in the swanky Fifth Floor bar. Yes, the possibility of London, Harvey 
Nicks and new purchases all happening together might be remote, but you never 
know. There are worse things to spend your cash on than a combination of new 
makeup, cocktails and sweet treats.
 