
John Gaden has played Lear three times, once with Geoffrey Rush  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/geoffrey-rush>as the Fool. He talks to Nancy 
Groves.

All my Lears have been in Adelaide, all 21 years apart. And the first time 
they asked me, I was just 27. I wore a grey wig, which Margery Irwin had worn 
in the play before me (it was that kind of theatre) and about 10 miles of 
curtain material, so heavy it almost killed me. Look, I was way too young.

Geoffrey Rush on playing King Lear: 'What's to like? His parenting skills are 
appalling!'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/23/geoffrey-rush-on-playing-king-lear-whats-to-like-his-parenting-skills-are-appalling>
It was a travesty in a way but I remember a few things I never did better 
because I had the energy and the contact with the anger to do it.

The second time was opposite Geoffrey [Rush] as my Fool. And I remember the 
last time I did it, somehow you get more empathy as you get older. I almost 
dried up doing the curse to Goneril, I found it so repellent. If she’s going to 
have kids, let them be dismembered, disnatured torments?

It’s really hard to invest those lines with your full conviction. It’s a total 
rejection of your child and your child’s child. As a grandfather, I found that 
almost impossible to come to terms with.
 John Gaden as King Lear. ‘Somehow you get more empathy as you get older.’ 
Photograph: State Theatre Company of South Australia 
Where do you start with Lear? The language. It’s such wonderful language. and 
if you’ve got a squillionth of an actor’s notion in your body, you respond to 
it. It’s the journey of an old man’s life encapsulated into three hours.

In a sense, liking and not being liked is an irrelevant question when it comes 
to Lear. By the end of the play he has been through such an enormous amount of 
extreme rage, jealousy, neediness, madness – real madness, the total 
unbalancing of a mind – through sleep into this moment (before Cordelia is 
bumped off), this wonderful little world of worlds.

John Gaden is in Orlando at the Sydney Opera House until 19 December. Geoffrey 
Rush is playingKing Lear 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2015/king-lear?gclid=CPP1kfOUpMkCFYSWvAodI4YFEw>
, opening on Friday at the Sydney Theatre Company’s Roslyn Packer theatre, 
until 9 January. 



 