
The mother of the disgraced wellness blogger Belle Gibson has declared people 
are allowed to “tell little porky pies” as she attempted a reconciliation with 
her daughter and grandson.

Natalie Dal-Bello defended Gibson just two months after giving a magazine 
interview, saying she was“deeply hurt and incredibly upset” 
<http://www.aww.com.au/latest-news/real-life/belle-gibsons-mother-speaks-out-21129>
 by her daughter’s behaviour.

Her mother has now characterised Gibson’s alleged deception over claims she 
had cancer and used a healthy diet to cure it as a “white lie”.

“Belle told a white lie, aged 23-and-a-half. So what?” she told the Herald Sun 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/victoria/mum-of-disgraced-health-blogger-belle-gibson-says-cancer-con-was-white-lie/story-fnpp4dl6-1227457088613?login=1>
.

'None of it’s true': wellness blogger Belle Gibson admits she never had cancer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/22/none-of-its-true-wellness-blogger-belle-gibson-admits-she-never-had-cancer>
“Belle is allowed to tell little porky pies. Who the hell doesn’t tell a lie 
in their life? Nobody complained about Belle when she was helping people and 
now they want to put her under the microscope.”

Gibson ran an app called the Whole Pantry and published a book under the same 
name which contained recipes and advice on how to lead a healthy lifestyle. 
Gibson claimed she had treated terminal brain cancer, among other cancers, by 
overhauling her lifestyle and using a health diet and alternative therapies.

The Australian published revelations Gibson had never suffered cancer earlier 
in the year and she has not produced proof of her alleged diagnosis though she 
has maintained she did have cancer while also saying she was lied to about 
having it.

Her book has been pulped and the app removed from the Apple store. Consumer 
AffairsVictoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> is 
investigating the claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/03/belle-gibson-court-asked-to-compel-her-to-assist-with-consumer-affairs-inquiry>
 but Victoria police have ruled out charging her.

Dal-Bello, who said she was prompted to speak out after Gibson’s 60 minutes 
interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/29/belle-gibson-tells-60-minutes-she-was-the-victim-after-her-lies-were-exposed>
, said people had wanted to eat her daughter alive after turning on her like 
piranhas.

Pseudoscience and strawberries: ‘wellness’ gurus should carry a health warning 
| Hadley Freeman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/22/wellness-gurus-belle-gibson-pseudoscience>
“It is time everyone moves on from this and allows Belle to grow and be a 
mother to her little boy. She should be left alone so she can get her life back 
on track,” she said.

Dal-Bello likened Gibson agreeing to do an interview with 60 Minutes with 
suicide and she had been shown to be an “absolute fool” in it.

Gibson told Australian Women’s Weekly in April that none of the claims about 
her cancer were true 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/22/none-of-its-true-wellness-blogger-belle-gibson-admits-she-never-had-cancer>
 but said on 60 Minutesshe was one of the people deceived 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/29/belle-gibson-tells-60-minutes-she-was-the-victim-after-her-lies-were-exposed>
.

“Once I received the definite, ‘No, you do not have cancer,’ that was 
something I had to come to terms with and it was really traumatising and I was 
feeling a huge amount of grief,” she told reporter Tara Brown.

“What, that you didn’t have cancer?” Brown asked.

“No, that I had been lied to, that I felt like I had been taken for a ride,” 
Gibson said.
 