
Belle (2014)
Director: Amma Asante
Entertainment grade: B+
History grade: B

Admiral Sir John Lindsay was a British naval officer and MP in the 18th 
century. He served briefly as the first captain ofHMS Victory 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HMS_Victory>, later Lord Nelson's ship at the 
Battle of Trafalgar. He had three illegitimate children, one of whom – Dido 
Elizabeth Belle – was born to an African slave he captured from a Spanish ship 
in the West Indies.

Slavery

The film begins in 1769, with Sir John Lindsay (Matthew Goode) delivering his 
little mixed-race daughter into the care of his uncle William Murray, Earl of 
Mansfield (Tom Wilkinson). Contrary to popular belief, there was a substantial 
and long-established non-white presence in London in the 18th century 
– estimates go up to 20,000 people, almost 3% of the city's population – and 
many werewell-integrated free men and women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/oct/17/slavery-black-history-month>
. But for one such person to be in the care of Mansfield seems, in cinematic 
terms, too good to be true. As Lord Chief Justice, Mansfield presided overtwo 
of the most important cases in the history of the abolition of slavery in 
Britain 
<http://www.historytoday.com/stephen-usherwood/black-must-be-discharged-abolitionists-debt-lord-mansfield>
: the Somersett case of 1772 and the Zong case of 1782. Yet it is true. You can 
see why someone thought this story would make a great film pitch.

Status

Dido (Gugu Mbatha-Raw) is brought up as an aristocratic lady, though within 
limits: for example, she is not allowed to dine formally with guests. Though 
all the evidence suggests she was indeed part of the family in real life, the 
film has subtly elevated her position: it does not show that she was also 
responsible for the relatively menial tasks of looking after the household 
dairy and poultry. A visitor to the house – the American loyalist politician
Thomas Hutchinson <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Hutchinson_(governor)> 
– was appalled to see her mixing sociably with her white family. He noted, 
sleazily, that: "She is neither handsome nor genteel – pert enough." Hutchinson 
isn't in the film, but his obnoxious views have been transferred to fictional 
aristo James Ashford (Tom Felton, doing a grown-up version of his earlier 
performance as Draco Malfoy).

Wealth
 Key facts … the film subtly elevates the real Dido Belle's social status. 
Photograph: Fox Searchlight Pictures/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 

Dido's father dies, leaving her a whacking great inheritance of £2,000 a year. 
In today's terms, that would be around £250,000 a year, compared by historical 
standard of living equivalence; much moreby some other measures 
<http://www.measuringworth.com/ukcompare/>. In real life, Admiral Lindsay left 
a one-off sum of £1,000 to each of his other children, and not a bean to Dido. 
Lord Mansfield left her £500 in his will and an annuity of £100 (equivalent to 
around £12,000). Better than a slap in the face, but not what the 18th century 
would have considered serious fortune-hunter bait. To help its plot along and 
bring in those gold-diggers, the movie makes her rich.

Romance

Enter fictional gold-digger Oliver (James Norton), who has a mild case of 
racism but proposes to Dido anyway. Betrothal rings were unusual in the 18th 
century, and the scene in the film of Oliver getting one out from a little box 
during a proposal belongs to the 20th century. Dido is torn between Oliver's 
aristocratic status and her burgeoning desire for earnest lefty lawyer and 
anti-slavery campaigner John Davinier (Sam Reid). The film has poshed Davinier 
up too: in real life, he was merely a servant.

Politics

Belle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/belle> starts out as a pleasant enough 
watch with good intentions and some rather clunky expositional dialogue, but it 
cranks up a gear when Mansfield takes on the Zong case (into which the 
filmmakers have folded aspects of the Somersett case). When the question of 
slavery is discussed over the Mansfield breakfast table, Dido begins her 
political awakening. In historical terms, the storyline is a little creative 
regarding what Dido actually did. Dramatically, though, it works very well 
– thanks to increasingly sharp scripting as the pace picks up, and a flat-out 
fantastic performance by Mbatha-Raw.

More politics
 Walk to freedom … Dido's political awakening and radical views are quite 
plausible. Photograph: Fox Searchlight Pictures/Sportsphoto Ltd/Allstar 

"We women are but the property of gentlemen," Dido says, considering the 
liberty her wealth has given her. "I have been blessed with freedom twice over. 
As a negro and as a woman." We can't know if the real Dido had radical ideas or 
not, but critics who assume her black liberation and feminist lines must be a 
21st century imposition by the filmmakers are mistaken. There were prominent
black <http://www.blackhistorymonth.org.uk/olaudah-equiano/4566968129> and 
female 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/empire_seapower/wollstonecraft_01.shtml> 
voices expressing just such views at the time. It is not beyond historical 
possibility that these thoughts have been given to Dido, who was an educated 
woman in an unusually well-read household; and doing so allows Belle to present 
the position of women and of the slave trade's by-blows in the 18th century 
accurately and movingly.

Verdict

A fine, affecting portrait of a black British life in the 18th century, 
distinguished by a terrific and zingily written lead performance.
 