
Belle Gibson, the wellness blogger who reportedly faked brain cancer to her 
hundreds of thousands of followers, is facing legal action in Australia over 
“deceptive conduct” after an investigation by a consumer watchdog.

Gibson, who lives in Melbourne, launched a recipe and lifestyle app, The Whole 
Pantry, on the back of her claim that she had been able to cure her terminal 
illness through diet and lifestyle changes. She also published a book of 
recipes by Penguin.

In March last year doubts were cast on her cancer diagnosis in 1999 at the age 
of 20 after it emerged that she had been born in October 1991.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fbelle-gibson-interview-60-minutes-wellness-blogger-cancer-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435276293193%2FBelle-Gibson-60-Minutes-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Disgraced%20wellness%20blogger%20Belle%20Gibson%20fronts%20cameras%20on%20Australia%E2%80%99s%2060%20Minutes%20program%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fbelle-gibson-interview-60-minutes-wellness-blogger-cancer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Disgraced%20wellness%20blogger%20Belle%20Gibson%20fronts%20cameras%20on%20Australia%E2%80%99s%2060%20Minutes%20program%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fbelle-gibson-interview-60-minutes-wellness-blogger-cancer-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435276293193%2FBelle-Gibson-60-Minutes-001.jpg>
Disgraced wellness blogger Belle Gibson fronts cameras on Australia’s 60 
Minutes program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2015/jun/26/belle-gibson-interview-60-minutes-wellness-blogger-cancer-video>
Belle Gibson's book publisher never verified cancer survivor's health claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/11/belle-gibson-book-publisher-never-verified-cancer-survivor-health-claims>
Questions were also raised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/10/health-app-founder-and-alternative-cancer-treatment-advocate-investigated-over-charity-donations>
 about thousands of dollars in charity donations promised by Gibson off the 
back of funds raised through the book and app. The Whole Pantry admitted in 
March it had “cashflow problems” and that the donations had never been made.

Her career unravelled quickly and publicly, with a spokesperson for Penguin 
admitting the book had been “published in good faith” and Gibson’s claims had 
not been fact-checked.

Consumer Affairs Victoria <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria>
 confirmed on Friday afternoon that it was commencing legal proceedings against 
her for “misleading and deceptive conduct”. It is also preparing to take legal 
action against her company, Inkerman Road Nominees Pty Ltd (formerly known as 
Belle Gibson Pty Ltd), of which she is the sole director.

The action comes after an in-depth investigation into Gibson’s alleged 
breaches of federal and state consumer law, wrapping in both her diagnosis with 
terminal brain cancer, her rejection of conventional cancer treatments, and the 
charitable donation of proceeds.

As Inkerman Road Nominees Pty Ltd is in liquidation, owing almost $140,000, 
including an $83,500 tax bill, Consumer Affairs Victoria’s director, Simon 
Cohen, has applied to the federal court for leave to commence proceedings 
against the company.

Belle Gibson on 60 Minutes: no remorse and the lies kept coming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/29/belle-gibson-tells-60-minutes-she-was-the-victim-after-her-lies-were-exposed>
If leave is granted, Cohen will start proceedings against both Gibson and her 
company. Pecuniary penalties total up to $1.1m for companies and $220,000 for 
individuals.

In a separate action, Penguin Publishing will have to pay the Victorian 
consumer law fund $30,000 for failing to fact-check Gibson’s book.

It will also have to include a “prominent warning notice” on all books that 
contain claims about natural therapies in future, as well as “enhance its 
compliance, education and training program” with a view to ensuring that claims 
about medical conditions are substantiated.

Cohen said the publisher had willingly cooperated with the investigation and 
agreed to the enforceable undertaking.

“This is an important step in ensuring that consumers receive only verified 
information and are not deceived, particularly where serious matters of health 
and medical treatment are concerned.”

Penguin has been asked for comment.

After the extent of Gibson’s deception was made public, Penguin pulled The 
Whole Pantry from circulation in Australia, and its US publisher scrapped its 
April launch.

Apple had worked closely with Gibson on The Whole Pantry app, one of the first 
to be made available on Apple Watch, even paying for her to fly to the United 
States.

But the app was later pulled from Apple’s Australian and US app stores.

In April Gibson told the Australian Women’s Weekly <>: “None of it’s true.

“I don’t want forgiveness. I just think [speaking out] was the responsible 
thing to do. Above anything, I would like people to say, ‘OK, she’s human.’ ”

Women’s Weekly reported that Gibson said she was “passionate about avoiding 
gluten, dairy and coffee, but [didn’t] really understand how cancer works”.

Belle Gibson still insists she believed she had cancer, says Channel Nine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/25/belle-gibson-still-insists-she-believed-she-had-cancer-says-channel-nine>
Despite these admissions, Gibson continued to maintain her innocence, claiming 
in a TV interview in June that she was not “trying to get away with anything”.

She said she had believed she had terminal brain cancer, and the discovery 
that she did not was “really traumatising”.

“I was feeling a huge amount of grief ... that I had been lied to, that I felt 
like I had been taken for a ride.”

She told 60 Minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/29/belle-gibson-tells-60-minutes-she-was-the-victim-after-her-lies-were-exposed>
 she had intended to tell her followers that she was well and had never been 
sick once she was “strong enough”.

Later, Gibson’s mother defended her deception 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/26/belle-gibson-wellness-bloggers-mum-says-cancer-story-was-just-a-white-lie>
 as a “little porky pie” to the Herald Sun in Melbourne.

“Belle told a white lie, aged 23-and-a-half. So what?”
 