
The buzz outside the Walter Kerr theatre was palpable. The reason: a new 
production of Arthur Miller’s beloved witch trial dramaThe Crucible, directed 
by Ivo van Hove – fresh from David Bowie’sLazarus – scored by Philip Glass, and 
starring Saoirse Ronan alongside exciting new British import Ben Whishaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/commentisfree/2015/oct/25/ben-whishaw-impish-star-steals-the-show-from-james-bond>
, as doomed farmer John Proctor.

Not just another night on Broadway <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/broadway>
 but casting that seems to point in a new direction for a role that’s 
traditionally played by actors with a heavier, more overtly masculine presence. 
Whishaw, theatregoers said, represents an exciting change in the description of 
the leading man.

Tom Rob Smith on London Spy: 'I was surprised that sex scene shocked anyone'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/17/tom-rob-smith-london-spy-i-was-surprised-that-sex-scene-shocked-anyone>
“He’s exciting – part of an emerging ideal for male leads – androgynous, 
malleable, sensitive,” offered New York audience member Chris Hoppus. “He’s 
nothing like the classic male leads, the Cary Grants or George Clooneys. It’s a 
new thing – people want to see emotional range from leading men.”

Whishaw’s arrival in Manhattan has been loudly proclaimed. A lengthy story in 
theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/04/fashion/ben-whishaw-crucible.html?_r=0> 
announced him as “one of the most celebrated stage actors of his generation”, 
adding that “his calling card is a soulful fragility, all faun-like bearing and 
saucer eyes, with a teenager’s unruly mop mane”.

Well-known to British audiences, Whishaw remains relatively unknown in the US. 
His civil partner is Mark Bradshaw, an Australian composer, but it is his 
acting style more than his sexual identity that marks a change. Along with 
actors such as Eddie Redmayne and Ansel Elgort, Whishaw represents a new 
dimension of leading men who are finding their place just as Hollywood is 
attempting to challenge the cliches of typecasting.

The recent controversy over the lack of racial diversity in Hollywood films is 
only one aspect of the changes taking place across film and theatre. One of 
those is to do with leading men, say casting directors, and what audiences want 
to see in them.

For Whishaw to play Proctor, said theatregoer Terrence Anderson, was a casting 
choice that runs against type. “The part is usually portrayed by a sturdy, 
solid man. Liam Neeson was in the previous adaptation, Daniel Day Lewis in the 
film.Ben Whishaw <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/ben-whishaw> could not be 
more opposite.”

The emergence of actors like Whishaw, who played the lovelorn John Keats in 
Jane Campion’sBright Star, Sebastian Flyte in the 2008 adaptation of Brideshead 
Revisited, and appeared in the BBC series London Spy, poses a dilemma for 
film-makers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fben-whishaw-soulful-brit-who-charmed-new-york-the-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa789ae512fd70fa9974a7b3097530b4fcff98f9%2F28_0_2949_1770%2F2949.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Whishaw%20leads%20the%20soulful%20shift%20in%20what%20it%20means%20to%20be%20a%20leading%20man&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fben-whishaw-soulful-brit-who-charmed-new-york-the-crucible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Whishaw%20leads%20the%20soulful%20shift%20in%20what%20it%20means%20to%20be%20a%20leading%20man&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F13%2Fben-whishaw-soulful-brit-who-charmed-new-york-the-crucible%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa789ae512fd70fa9974a7b3097530b4fcff98f9%2F28_0_2949_1770%2F2949.jpg>
 Ben Whishaw as Q in Skyfall. Photograph: Sony Pictures/Allstar 
With recent discussion about who might play the post-Daniel Craig James Bond 
focusing on the required components of masculinity, sexual orientation and 
ethnicity, Whishaw has already blown through the long-running franchise, 
playing Q in the last two movies,Skyfall and Spectre. “He’s utterly charming 
and vulnerable, yet he’s the smart one who will figure everything out,” says 
Hoppus. “James Bond definitely stepped up his global profile.”

While the sensitive leading man is not unique in Hollywood – Gregory Peck, 
Henry Fonda and James Stewart come to mind – casting directors say they are 
being asked to present more choices to directors and producers.

“Times have changed. We’re no longer just looking for the typical handsome 
leading man,” says New York agent Liz Lewis. “People want more character and 
life behind the eyes, and not just a pretty face without a lot of depth.” But 
that’s just one aspect of the changes. At the other extreme, says Lewis, are 
ultra-males like Chris Hemsworth and Chris Pratt who find their parts in comic 
book action films. “The male hunk is still the male hunk, but instead of 
looking for pretty faces we’re looking for range and depth. People are open to 
much more diversity and they want something new and different.”

The diversity crisis at the Academy Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/26/academy-clarifies-oscar-rule-changes-following-diversity-row>
 last month has acted as a wake-up call for the industry, Lewis says. Over the 
past month, a slew of diverse stories and what are now called “colour-blind 
castings” have increased, among them the young Barack Obama movie,Barry, and 
Disney’s immigrant storyDr Q. Kathryn Bigelow is set to make a film set during 
the1967 Detroit riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/29/detroit-race-riots-drama-kathryn-bigelow-mark-boal-hurt-locker-zero-dark-thirty>
; Fox Studios is makingHidden Figures, a film about the female African American 
mathematicians who helped Nasa launch its first space missions.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBxbJq2x0D-w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBxbJq2x0D-w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBxbJq2x0D-w&media=>
 Bright Star trailer 
In other instances, non-white actors have been cast in roles written for white 
actors, among them Idris Elba, who is set to star in the romantic dramaThe 
Mountain Between Us that once looked to be going to Charlie Hunnam. Puerto 
Rican actor Lin-Manuel Miranda will play the Dick Van Dyke role in a sequel to
Mary Poppins, while black actor Michael B Jordan will take the lead role in 
MGM’s remake ofThe Thomas Crown Affair, previously played by Steve McQueen and 
Pierce Brosnan.

Casting directors say they are expecting a huge shift in the range of actors 
they are being asked to present to directors and producers. “The Oscars 
controversy was a wake-up call to examine our role in expanding opportunities,”
Star Wars director JJ Abrams told the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/oscarssowhite-spurs-diversity-casting-boom-872005>
 last week. “It’s good for audiences, and it’s good for the bottom line.”

The shift is not merely to do with colour or questions of masculinity. Gender, 
too, is up for grabs. Casting directors point to the astonishing casting of 
comedian Louie Anderson as a midwestern housewife in the television comedy
Baskets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/21/louis-ck-zach-galifianakis-baskets-clown-tv-fx>
.

Times have changed. People want more character and life behind the eyes now, 
not just a pretty face
Liz Lewis, New York agent 
“Three years ago the Casting Society of America had a meeting about what we 
could do to make casting more diverse,” recalls New York casting director 
Allison Twardziak. “We talked about casting people with physical disabilities, 
and different body types, age. So we’ve been looking at what can we do and 
trying to come up with other ideas.”

At the same time, it has been widely noted, the push for diversity could be 
leaving American actors out in the cold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/05/us-rallies-to-stop-uk-taking-hollywood-by-storm>
. In a widely circulated article inThe Atlantic last year, The Decline of the 
American Actor 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/07/decline-american-actor/395291/>
, Terrence Rafferty asked if it was time for US actors to take a hard look in 
the mirror because they are routinely losing out to British and other 
non-American actors. Michael Douglas, Rafferty noted, had described “a little 
crisis going on among our young actors”.

“There’s no such thing as an American male lead actor,” said one theatregoer. 
“Even the ones who you think are American are probably Canadian.”

In its profile of Whishaw, the New York Times noted how, as an actor, he 
rejects the idea of type and has a “slippery way of inhabiting heroes and 
antiheroes alike, of seducing women and men on screen and on stage with equal 
ease”.

At The Crucible performance, audience members said they were struck by how 
questions of sexuality are now almost unremarkable.

“Things have changed so much in the last five or 10 years,” said Hoppus’s 
partner, Craig Stekeur. “It’s gone from being freakish and career-killing to 
something people don’t even bat an eye about. Now, it’s oh, OK. That’s great …”

Of course, acting on Broadway in New York is different from Hollywood. Given 
the recent controversy over the possible casting of a black Bond, a gay Bond is 
hardly likely either. But what about a bisexual or sensitive Bond? Twelve years 
ago, Rupert Everett was asked if he’d play Bond. “It won’t happen because Bond 
fans would burn down MGM if the studios got a gay actor to play James Bond. 
There was never going to be an alternative gay Bond either.” Possibly it’s 
still too soon, but the casting of Whishaw as the all-American John Proctor is 
a significant advance. “He’s beautiful and he seems very sensitive,” said 
Anderson. “There’s a new male lead and it’s a reflection of the times.”
 