
Chairmen of the Federal Reserve tend to stick around. In the 75 years since 
1934 there have been only nine men at the helm of America's central bank, 
against 13 occupants of the White House.

There have been times in the past three-and-a-half years when Bernanke looked 
likely to buck the trend and be a one-term chairman. Hereplaced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2006/feb/01/useconomy.interestrates> Alan 
Greenspan, whose reputation had never been higher following the US recovery 
from the dotcom recession. Greenspan, in the title of a book by Bob Woodward, 
was "the maestro" and there were doubts about whether the donnish Bernanke 
could fill his shoes.

For the past two years, Bernanke has been dealing with the mess his 
predecessor left behind. The financial crisis and the economic crash of thepast 
two years have tarnished Greenspan's reputation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/21/economics.greenspan>. He is 
blamed for using cheap money to fuel the asset-price bubble that disguised 
structural problems in the US economy and the global financial system. 
Greenspan's critics now bracket him with the two undistinguished Fed chairmen 
of the 1970s, Arthur Burns and Bill Miller, blamed for taking permissive an 
approach to inflation.

Burns had been appointed by Richard Nixon after the 19-year term of William 
McChesney Martin, who famously said it was the job of the Fed to "take away the 
punchbowl just as the party gets going". Nixon blamed Martin for costing him 
the 1960 election and made it clear to Burns he wanted credit to stay cheap 
ahead of the 1972 presidential race.

By the end of the 1970s, concern in the Jimmy Carter administration that 
inflation was too high led to the appointment of Paul Volcker as Fed chairman. 
Volcker embarked on a draconian tightening of monetary policy that saw interest 
rates briefly rise above 20% and the US economy plunge into its deepest 
recession since the 1930s.

Bernanke's task has been the opposite â€“ to prevent slump leading to deflation. 
Opinion is divided on the prospects for his second term. One school says the US 
is on course for a strong and sustainable recovery. Another believes a 
double-dip recession is imminent. A third says Bernanke has ignored the risk of 
inflation and a dose of the Volcker medicine will eventually be needed.
 