
Wallabies coach Michael Cheika has indicated he will switch up some of his 
personnel for the final Test against England in Sydney, with an enforced change 
to the squad coming after No8 Ben McCalman was ruled out with a shoulder injury.

Eddie Jones and England at home in Sydney as they plot whitewash
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/20/england-australia-eddie-jones-third-test-sydney>
Reserve backrower McCalman came off the bench for the final half hour of the 
second Test in Melbourne, hurting himself soon after his introduction but still 
playing through to the final siren. He will take no further part in the series 
after the Wallabies confirmed on Tuesday he had fractured his right scapula.

The Western Force player will also miss the remainder of the Super Rugby 
season, although he is expected to make a recovery in time for the Wallabies’ 
Rugby Championship campaign in late August.

Leroy Houston, who recently signed for the Queensland Reds, has been called 
into the squad in his place. Houston is yet to be capped by Australia and, 
along with Wycliff Palu, is the only specialist No8 in the squad.

Australia conceded the series with the 23-7 loss at AAMI Park last weekend, 
but Cheika has been keen to stress he considers the final match at Allianz 
Stadium this Saturday as anything but a dead rubber.

“There’s plenty at stake for us and when I say at stake, in an opportunity, 
positive way,” Cheika said on Tuesday. “The third game is worth everything. If 
you’re going to improve where do you start to improve? You’ve only got to start 
at the next game.”

He said he would make a few switches as the Wallabies look to avoid the 
whitewash Eddie Jones has urged his England side to inflict on their hosts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/eddie-jones-england-australia-whitewash-3-0-series>
.

“I’ll probably make a couple of changes, I would have always thought I might 
make a couple each game to have a look at guys who are vying for spots,” Cheika 
said. “I’m looking more to get better performances out of an individual here, 
an individual there, or give someone an opportunity perhaps.”

Israel Folau will not be subjected to any of the changes though, with Cheika 
insisting he is happy with the role the NSW Waratahs star has been fulfilling 
so far in the series.

“He’s been flicking between the two [fullback and outside centre] anyway, 
we’re quite happy with the way he’s playing,” Cheika said. “He’s certainly not 
anyone we’re going to play around with.”
 