
Considered by many critics to be one of Britain's most significant young 
directors, Essex-born Ben Wheatley's career began when his short films went 
viral. After directing comedy seriesModern Toss 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/modern-toss> for Channel 4, he wrote, 
produced and directed his first feature film,Down Terrace 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2010/aug/01/down-terrace-film-review> (2009), 
shot it in eight days, and won numerous awards. Following his horror filmKill 
List <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2011/sep/04/kill-list-review> (2011), 
Wheatley directedSightseers 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/dec/02/sightseers-film-review> (2012), a 
dark comedy about a couple on a caravan trip, which enjoyed international 
critical acclaim. His fourth film,A Field in England, will be released this 
summer.

Technology: Spotify 
<https://www.spotify.com/uk/video-splash/?utm_source=spotify&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=start>

 Spotify 
I use Spotify tons, it's totally opened my mind to music. I've always thought 
that music was expensive; back in the days of CDs I'd buy maybe one a year and 
feel very resentful about it. But now, through the wonders of Spotify, I can 
listen to whatever I want. It makes a massive difference to how we put the 
films together, because I make these big playlists. I've even started buyingThe 
Wire magazine so I can think about things to search on Spotify – I mainly look 
at obscure stuff. Now, if you get even the slightest tip about someone worth 
listening to you can go on Spotify and hear them. Recently, I've been listening 
to all the albums ofBroadcast <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zw5ztuhEat4> [a 
Birmingham band], and I came to them through the filmBerberian Sound Studio 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/sep/02/berberian-sound-studio-review-french>
. Then I ended up buying those albums, so it makes a big difference. And it's 
legal, too, which is nice.

Television: Adventure Time <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TRbLicNOvzY>
 Adventure Time 
This is a kids' show on Cartoon Network, but I've got a nine-year-old son who 
watches it. To me, it's like his generation'sRen & Stimpy – it's so funny, 
brilliantly written and anarchic. It's the best thing on television by a mile. 
I'm happy that they're making something that is so – literally – adventurous 
for children; it's really twisting their minds around. All the narratives are 
really strange, and the references are all over the place – it's great that 
they're not underestimating their audience at all. It's just terrific, and I 
think that was the entry-level drug for him to start reading comics.

Film: Japanese cinema
 Onibaba. Photograph: The Ronald Grant Archive 
I've seen a lot of Japanese stuff, but my viewing hadn't gone beyond Kurosawa 
and Miike. I got put on toOnibaba 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/104859/onibaba> by [producer] Andy Stark: 
it's a 1960s horror set in a swamp. Then I sawKwaidan 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/89581/kwaidan>, and since then I've been 
starting to buy up all of Eureka's back catalogue of Japanese stuff, so my wife 
[Amy Jump, the co-writer ofKill List] and I are making our way through that at 
the moment. As research for the next script we're writing we buy tons of DVDs 
all the time, and that's the current thing – that and lots ofDogme 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/2012/nov/25/how-dogme-built-denmark> stuff. 
We've been watchingFesten <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/77262/festen> 
andThe Idiots <http://www.guardian.co.uk/film/movie/76436/idiots> and catching 
up with Lars von Trier – we've seen them before, but we're redigesting them.

Book: Invincible, by Robert Kirkman
 Invincible 
Kirkman wrote two comic books: The Walking Dead 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Robert+Kirkman+The+Walking+Dead&hl=en&client=safari&rls=en&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=SF9IUdPhKvKa0QWSsYCwDQ&ved=0CDcQsAQ&biw=1369&bih=992>
, which was turned into a TV series, andInvincible, which is a big superhero 
book, the bubble-gum yin toThe Walking Dead's crushing yang, I think. The 
Walking Dead is miserable and full of death – which I really enjoy, obviously – 
butInvincible is really fun. And I can see how Kirkman spends his month writing 
this horrible misery intoThe Walking Dead and then jumping out of it and 
writing about people wearing their pants on top of their trousers. I get really 
excited when a newInvincible book comes out – it's a monthly comic.

Art: Mick McMahon
 Mick McMahon 
I'm a sculpture graduate and I go to galleries a lot, but what I've really 
liked recently is Mick McMahon. He drew the originalJudge Dredd 
<http://www.2000adonline.com/> comics, and I was such a big fan of his when I 
was a kid, he really inspired me. Recently, I've been working with him on 
storyboards for a film we've been developing: I send him my crappy drawings and 
then he draws them really beautifully and emails them back to me as storyboards 
– it's like Christmas every day! The pleasure of that is massive.

Music: Blanck Mass 
<http://www.youtube.com/results?search_query=blanck+mass&oq=Blanck+Mass&gs_l=youtube.3.0.0l10.2282.5416.0.9856.11.8.0.3.3.0.46.275.8.8.0...0.0...1ac.1.lviVKgNVUFo>

 Blanck Mass 
Andy Stark [my producer] was championing them, and when I had a listen I'd 
never heard anything that sounded so euphoric. We're using them for our next 
film,A Field in England – it's the only bit of licensed music we'll be using 
for the soundtrack (the rest is done by Jim Williams, who's done all our other 
soundtracks). It was one of those moments where we put their music on the film 
and we knew we could never replace it. I think their music was used in the 
London Olympics opening ceremony as the flag went up, but Andy was into them 
before that, so when he heard them he was worried they were going to be 
massive. As far as I'm concerned, the whole film hangs on this piece of music.
 