
My friend Benedict Read 
<http://www.cityandguildsartschool.ac.uk/benedict-read/>, who has died aged 72, 
was an art historian whose role in rehabilitating the status of Victorian 
sculpture is difficult to overestimate. He became the world’s leading authority 
on the subject.

Ben was born in Beaconsfield, Buckinghamshire, but grew up in the village of 
Stonegrave, North Yorkshire. He was the youngest son of the art theoristHerbert 
Read <https://www.britannica.com/biography/Herbert-Read-British-art-critic> and 
the viola playerMargaret Ludwig 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-margaret-read-1343208.html>. 
After attending Ampleforth College, Ben went on to study English literature at 
Queen’s College, Oxford, although he was, in his own estimation, a poor 
student, preferring his own reading matter to that of the syllabus. Despite 
this, he gained a place to study art history at theCourtauld Institute 
<http://courtauld.ac.uk> and was later appointed deputy Witt librarian there. 
In 1990 he was made director of sculpture studies at Leeds University, holding 
this post until his retirement in 2010.

Ben’s research interests were varied, but his speciality was always Victorian 
sculpture. His keybook on the subject 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Victorian-Sculpture-Benedict-Read/dp/B000S6JJ30> was 
published by Yale in 1982 and has remained an important text ever since. In 
1991 he co-organised, with Joanna Barnes, the groundbreaking exhibition 
Pre-Raphaelite Sculpture atBirmingham Museum and Art Gallery 
<http://www.birminghammuseums.org.uk/bmag> and he advised on restoration 
programmes at the Palace of Westminster, the Albert Memorial and Salisbury 
Cathedral. It was this work, together with his teaching career, that helped 
establish the legitimacy of Victorian sculpture studies within the art history 
world.

He enjoyed gossip and liked to tell tales from his childhood of accompanying 
his father to see figures such as the art collector Peggy Guggenheim 
<http://www.guggenheim-venice.it/inglese/default.html> in Venice and Carl Jung 
in Küsnacht, Switzerland. He also enjoyed sharing snippets of scandal from 
current university life. All this was done without motive or malice, and Ben 
was widely liked, not only for his kindness, but his willingness to share his 
prodigious knowledge of art.

He was keenly sought after to serve on committees, ranging from the Public 
Monuments and Sculpture Association <http://www.pmsa.org.uk/> to the Leeds 
Diocesan committee on historic churches, and the Leeds Art Fund. On these, his 
knowledge, good humour and methodical approach were warmly welcomed.

He is survived by his brother, Piers Paul, and sister, Sophie.
 