
Benedict Andrews “misses terribly” the actors he has worked with in Australia. 
The 43-year-old Adelaide-born director and writer is now based in Reykjavik, 
with his partner, the Icelandic choreographer Margrét Bjarnadóttir.

So he is pleased that Marta Dusseldorp, who he directed as Queen Margaret in 
The War of the Roses for SydneyTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Company in 2009, sought the lead in 
his latest play, Gloria, which will open at Sydney’s Griffin theatre in 2016.

True to form, no Andrews story is ever straightforward. He is currently in 
London, editing his feature film directorial debut,Blackbird 
<http://benedictandrews.com/index.php/blackbird-2/>, written by David Harrower 
and starring Rooney Mara and Ben Mendelsohn, which has just wrapped shooting in 
the UK. “I’m absolutely loving it,” he says.

Benedict Andrews directs Chekhov: 'My actors cannot hide'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/sep/10/benedict-andrews-chekhov-three-sisters>
Andrews has flitted across Europe for years, immersing himself in the 
confronting dynamism of Berlin’sSchaubühne 
<http://www.google.com.au/url?q=https://www.schaubuehne.de/&sa=U&ved=0CBoQFjAAahUKEwiGoOy6qs3HAhWh2qYKHZn7CDY&usg=AFQjCNGcayvpHVYyukG8TbRg4IBsAlsEmg>
 theatre, where he directed Blackbird as a play, and fellow expat Barrie 
Kosky’s Komische Oper.

But it’s his recent years in Iceland’s harsh isolation that have led him to 
grow his beard long, “like a viking”, he laughs.

Gloria will premiere with an eight-strong cast directed by Griffin artistic 
director Lee Lewis. Dusseldorp, a “very brave and captivating and muscular 
actress”, plays a fading actor aloft in a penthouse as a civil war breaks out 
in the street below. The location is unspecified, with actors changing roles, 
says Andrews, in a kaleidoscopic rather than linear narrative.

Lewis insists Gloria is more than yet another meta play about theatre: for 
her, it’s an allegory for Australia’s “widening gap between the haves and 
have-nots”, and the potential of any society to tip into authoritarian control.

Andrews is less interested in binary debates or fashions for directors’ 
theatre versus writers’ theatre – Griffin hews to the latter, with its focus on 
exclusively Australian writing – aspiring instead to theatre that gives actors 
the chance to do “extreme and interesting” new work.

“I don’t write well-made, easily digestible plays,” he says. “All my plays 
have a kind of proposition about the theatre. The play will demand or suggest 
or invite with big questions from the people making it.”

I don’t write well-made, easily digestible plays
Benedict Andrews 
Case in point: Every Breath <http://belvoir.com.au/news/every-breath/>, a 
structurally odd tale of rich kids exploiting a gender-ambiguous security 
guard, which Andrews wrote and directed for Belvoir in 2012, and on to which 
criticspoured a bucket of bile 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/theatre/bad-bad-belvoir-20120329-1vzxs.html>
. Yet that play still made a respectable $329,000 at the box office across its 
41 performances.

Does Andrews understand the dumping on Every Breath? “I don’t read reviews. I 
literally got on the plane next day to Paris to direct [Sydney Theatre 
Company’s]Gross und Klein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/15/big-small-gross-klein-review>, 
but I kind of heard from people, there’s all this going on,” he says.

“I know where [Every Breath] stands in relationship to my other plays: they 
don’t spoon-feed audiences, and they have very different cracks and sinkholes 
within the structures, quite deliberately. Looking back, I think it’s good the 
play ruffled feathers and started a conversation.”

Why premiere Gloria at the roughly 105-seat Griffin and not in bigger theatres 
such as Belvoir or STC’s Roslyn Packer?

“It’s been read by different companies. I think it’s important the play stand 
on its own two feet, so I don’t want to direct it in the first instance. I had 
conversations with other directors who really loved it, but Lee had a great 
passion for it and we both agreed the extreme intimacy of Griffin could offer 
wonderful things to the play.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fbenedict-andrews-returns-to-australia-with-new-play-gloria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2a443c61a84b04513649852c8c102c4c299ebc4%2F0_163_3579_2150%2F3579.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benedict%20Andrews%20returns%20to%20Australia%20with%20new%20play%20Gloria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fbenedict-andrews-returns-to-australia-with-new-play-gloria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benedict%20Andrews%20returns%20to%20Australia%20with%20new%20play%20Gloria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F01%2Fbenedict-andrews-returns-to-australia-with-new-play-gloria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2a443c61a84b04513649852c8c102c4c299ebc4%2F0_163_3579_2150%2F3579.jpg>
 Gillian Anderson as Blanche DuBois in A Streetcar Named Desire. Photograph: 
Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
Andrews directed the critically acclaimed production of A Streetcar Named 
Desire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/03/gillian-anderson-compelling-streetcar-named-desire-observer-review>
 starring Gillian Anderson for London’s Young Vic. He wasn’t responsible for 
directing the cameras that later relayed one of the performances into cinemas, 
but there was filmic talk involved.

A Streetcar Named Desire review – Gillian Anderson gives stellar performance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/29/streetcar-named-desire-gillian-anderson-young-vic-review>
“When we made the revolve, we did talk about it as putting the audience into 
the position of a tracking shot in the theatre. I’ve been very influenced by 
the grammar and ideas of cinema for a long time.”

As he edits Blackbird, has making his first feature film been everything 
Andrews expected? “Ah, yes,” he laughs. “It’s everything I thought it would 
have been in terms of absolute intensity and the roller-coaster.”

By year’s end, he’ll be back at base, in Reykjavik, with his partner. How has 
Iceland changed him? “Iceland is a very special, magical place. Maybe it’s 
given me a deeper sense of meditation because of the great natural beauty. That 
sense of isolation and extreme weather makes things precious that maybe we take 
for granted in Australia, where we have amazing weather.

“There’s something there that toughens people’s spirit, and makes them have to 
live close to each other in a generous way. I value and enjoy that.”
 