
I’ve been thinking about sisters on International Women’s Day. Who are the 
best sisters in picture books and stories for older children?

Love them or hate them, sisters for both girls and boys are very important in 
childhood – and sticking together when the going gets tough is one of the first 
rules of survival in family life.

Sisterhoods, where there are a family of girls, as in Louisa M Alcott’s Little 
Women <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/little-women-24.html>, Cathy Cassidy’s 
Chocolate Box Girls 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/chocolate-box-girls-sweet-honey-252182.html> 
series which includes Cherry Crush and Marshmallow Sky or Hilary Mackay’s 
Casson family series includingSaffy’s Angel  
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/saffy-s-angel.html>and Indigo’s Star 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/indigo-s-star.html> provide a brilliant 
opportunity for showing that girls do not have to be stereotyped into behaving 
in particular kinds of way.

Jacqueline Wilson is also excellent on sisters and what they can offer each 
other in way of support. InThe Illustrated Mum 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/illustrated-mum.html> Dol and Star react 
completely differently to the unpredictable and complicated behaviour of their 
mum Marigold, but the most important thing for both of them is to protect each 
other and to keep interfering adults away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbest-sisters-in-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425896533174%2Feab1a332-ab9b-47d1-95a2-4dfe118b7b0c-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20sisters%20in%20children's%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbest-sisters-in-childrens-books%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20sisters%20in%20children%27s%20books&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fmar%2F09%2Fbest-sisters-in-childrens-books%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F9%2F1425896533174%2Feab1a332-ab9b-47d1-95a2-4dfe118b7b0c-1020x612.jpeg>
 Sisterly love: Anna and Elsa from Disney’s Frozen, based on the classic 
fairytale The Snow Queen, which doesn’t have a sister relationship in it. 
Photograph: Allstar/DISNEY/Sportsphoto Ltd 
The appeal of sisters and the importance of love between them is beautifully 
protrayed the Disney film Frozen. Drawing on the classic fairy story The Snow 
Queen, which doesn’t have a sister relationship in it, it changes the emphasis 
and it is the relationship between the sisters Elsa and Anna that is of most 
importance. Always mutually dependant, Anna is prepared to give up life itself 
to save her sister.

One of the strongest older sisters in fiction is Dicey Tillerman in Cynthia 
Voigt’sHomecoming <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homecoming_%28novel%29> and the 
subsequent stories in the Tillerman cycle. The oldest of four children, Dicey 
has to take charge when their mother abandons them in the car park of a 
shopping mall. Strong and brave but also thoughtful and caring, Dicey leads her 
family across America to the home of an aunt who she hopes will take them in.

Dicey acting as the leader – she has younger brothers and a younger sister – 
is in contrast to CS Lewis’s Pevensie children in the Lion, the Witch and the 
Wardrobe 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/lion-the-witch-and-the-wardrobe-9.html>, 
written when tradition dictated that boys led and girls followed, it is the a 
boy who is the oldest and therefore the leader with the girls playing important 
but distinctly submissive roles.


There are good sister-stories for young readers, too. The best-selling 
American author Beverly Cleary created herRamona series 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/unstoppable-ramona-and-beezus.html> about 
Ramona and her older sister Beezus after she realised from her earlier novels 
the importance of siblings. “Someone should have a sibling,” she wrote, “so I 
tossed in a little sister to explain Beezus’s nickname. When it came time to 
name the sister, I overheard a neighbor call out to another whose name was 
Ramona. I wrote in ‘Ramona,’ made several references to her, gave her one brief 
scene, and thought that was the end of her. Little did I dream, to use a trite 
expression from books of my childhood, that she would take over books of her 
own.”

Ramona is usually the narrator in her own stories but Beezus gets to tell 
their stories from her side in Beezus and Ramona.


In Jenny Valentine’s Iggy and Me 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/iggy-and-me.html>, it is also the older-sister 
who captures the stories of the younger as Flo benignly narrates the stories 
about her younger sister Flo.

But sister-love is not only represented as older girls caring for young 
siblings. One of the trickiest but most loveable sisters is Charlie’s younger 
sister Lola in Lauren Child’s Charlie and Lola titles including I Will Not Ever 
Never Eat a Tomato 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-will-not-ever-eat-a-tomato.html> and I’m Not 
Sleepy I Will Not Go to Bed. 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/i-am-not-sleepy-and-i-will-not-go-to-bed.html> 
With the older brother caring for the younger sister, Lauren Child turns all 
stereotypes on their head; sisters matter – and brothers can care too.


Do you have a question for the Book Doctor? Email 
childrens.books@theguardian.com <mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com> or 
pose it on Twitter@GdnchildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks>, using 
#BookDoctor. If you are under 18 and not a member of the Guardian children’s 
books sitejoin here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
, we’re packed full of book recommendations and ideas.
 