
The release of Justin Kurzel’s Macbeth, starring Michael Fassbender and Marion 
Cotillard, has sent critics into a frenzy. Peter Bradshaw praised the movie’s “
operatic verve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/23/macbeth-review-fassbender-and-cotillard-full-of-sound-and-fury-in-significant-shakespeare-adaptation>
”; Variety called it “fearsomely visceral 
<http://variety.com/2015/film/festivals/macbeth-review-michael-fassbender-marion-cotillard-1201500514/>
”. Awarding the film five stars, the Telegraph asked: “Is this as good as 
Shakespeare on film gets? <http://www.telegraph.co.uk/film/macbeth/review/>” 


Are these the 10 best Shakespeare screen adaptations?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/09/10-best-shakespeare-screen-adaptations>
As Mark Lawson pointed out recently, the answer to that last is the same one 
that greets most questions that crop up in headlines: probably not. He then 
suggested a top 10 of Bardic films, which put the new Macbeth in at No 5 – 
above Ralph Fiennes (Coriolanus) and Marlon Brando (Julius Caesar), but trumped 
by Baz Luhrmann and Kenneth Branagh. Controversially, Olivier didn’t even make 
the cut.

All 10 movies were in the English language, with a heavy bias towards the 
Anglo-American canon. I’ve spent the last five years working on a book about
Shakespeare gone global <http://worldselsewhere.com/> and encountered numerous 
movie versions on my travels, from aMacbeth banned by the Thai government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/05/thailands-toul-and-trouble-over-divisive-shakespeare-film>
 (hard to imagine Fassbender suffering that) to akung fu Hamlet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MrS6_3zEyjk> in the mould of Crouching Tiger, 
Hidden Dragon. Very few of them, needless to say, were in the playwright’s own 
language.


So here is a top five of world cinema Shakespeares. I’ve followed the same 
rules: no director represented more than once, but this time I’ve resisted 
putting them in order. I’d be fascinated to hear what you think.


Angoor (Gulzar, 1982)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL2dI4IVhfuc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL2dI4IVhfuc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL2dI4IVhfuc&media=>
There are estimated to be more Shakespearean adaptations in Indian film than 
anywhere else on the globe, dating back to the earliest days of cinema. One of 
the biggest is this much-loved comedy about two sets of twins who end up in the 
same town by mistake, with predictably outlandish results. The play is – you 
guessed it – The Comedy of Errors, directed with broad strokes by revered 
lyricist-director Gulzar, best known in the west forhis involvement with 
Slumdog Millionaire 
<http://www.thehindu.com/features/cinema/cinema-columns/angoor-1982/article5922084.ece>
. In true mass-market Hindi movie style, it’s migrainously colourful, but is 
infectiously enjoyable nonetheless, and Sanjeev Kumar is delightfully 
lugubrious as two of the four twins. A Bollywood lost-and-found movie with 
impeccable literary credentials.

Hamlet (Sven Gade, 1921)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSqHtkY9jllM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSqHtkY9jllM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSqHtkY9jllM&media=>
There’s a rich history of Shakespeare in silent cinema, nearly all of it shot 
outside the UK (the oldest surviving American feature, recently rediscovered, 
is a 1912 version of Richard III).Perhaps the finest of the bunch is this 
beguiling reimagining of Hamlet 
<http://thebioscope.net/2007/09/01/asta-nielsens-hamlet/>, with the great Asta 
Nielsen in the lead. The movie’s premise – that Hamlet’s true female identity 
has been hidden from the Danish court by a machinating Gertrude – is eccentric, 
but Nielsen plays it to the hilt, offering a delectably offbeat, gamine, funny, 
possibly bisexual hero(ine) in the mould of groundbreaking 19th-century stars 
such as Charlotte Cushman and Sarah Bernhardt. Nielsen crams more meaning into 
the sardonic elevation of one pencil-thin eyebrow than some British Hamlets 
manage during the entire play.

King Lear (Grigori Kozintsev, 1971)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqH8fVqbUToc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqH8fVqbUToc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqH8fVqbUToc&media=>
In a twinning that might have amused Shakespeare, just as Peter Brook and Paul 
Scofield were shivering inJutland making their King Lear 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nwysi0MMX54>, across the iron curtain in 
Estonia the great Russian directorGrigori Kozintsev was filming exactly the 
same drama <http://king-lear.org/king_lear_film_-_kozintsev> in Boris 
Pasternak’s translation. It indicates the depth of Shakespeare’s texts that 
they emerged with utterly different stories – Brook’s film suffocatingly 
intimate, Kozintsev’s epic but no less powerful, the tragedy of an entire 
people rather than just one man. His biblical opening sequence, in which
hundreds of peasants shuffle and totter towards Lear’s castle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aVZirl-TPFs>, is breathtaking; and in the 
tormented eyes of the diminutive Estonian actor Juri Jarvet as Lear, you sense 
how much a country can lose when a ruler’s grip on power falters.


Omkara (Vishal Bhardwaj, 2006)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D17YglmoE45w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D17YglmoE45w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D17YglmoE45w&media=>
A different breed of Bollywood movie to Angoor, savvier and more slickly 
self-aware, Vishal Bhardwaj’s remake of Othello was his second Shakespeare 
adaptation after his surprise hit Maqbool, a 2003 Godfather-style version of
Macbeth, relocated to modern Mumbai 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/entertainment/hindi/bollywood/news/Vishal-Bhardwajs-Maqbool-Omkara-and-Haider-being-made-into-books/articleshow/42539206.cms>
. More lavishly shot than the older movie, set in the wild west of rural Uttar 
Pradesh, Omkara nonetheless finds the play’s pulse, the ravening jealousy that 
destroys the relationship between a hard-man, mixed-race gang leader (Ajay 
Devgn) and his fair-skinned wife Dolly (Kareena Kapoor). The ethnic tensions 
make powerful sense in caste- and class-obsessed India, and in Saif Ali Khan’s 
smirking, cold-eyed Langda, it has an Iago up there with the best. Bhardwaj’s 
recent Haider (2014), a Hamlet set in a violence-rivenKashmir that resembles 
the OK Corral <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-29502393>, is also 
superb.

Throne of Blood (Akira Kurosawa, 1957)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPoYzsDVyFRU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPoYzsDVyFRU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPoYzsDVyFRU&media=>
Kurosawa was fascinated by Shakespeare, and returned to the works repeatedly. 
The Bad Sleep Well (1960) 
<https://www.criterion.com/films/765-the-bad-sleep-well>, a salaryman Hamlet 
set in a morose, postwar Japanese society, is extremely fine, but the 
masterwork is surely Kumonosu-Jo, an eerie and suspenseful Macbeth glowering 
with atmosphere, and where the horror is all in the shadows. Toshiro Mifune 
plays a gruff, hard-bitten warrior battling his way through 15th-century Japan 
towards the Castle of the Spider’s Web; Isuzu Yamada is hisvindictive, 
witch-like wife <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Throne_of_Blood>. There’s not a 
single line of Shakespeare’s script, but the poetry’s all there in the 
burnished black-and-silver of the photography, the razor-sharp editing, the 
subtle shifts of tonality and mood, its expressive shifts between stillness and 
crazed violence. A rare instance of a genuinely original film-maker taking on 
the greatest writer in the canon, and the most perfect Shakespearean movie ever 
made?
• Andrew Dickson’s Worlds Elsewhere: Journeys Around Shakespeare’s Globe 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/336062/> is published 
by Bodley Head.
 