
I'm not much of a football <https://www.theguardian.com/football> fan. I grew 
up feeling ambivalent towards the beautiful game and, needless to say, I wasn't 
the first to be picked for the school team. My relationship with football 
wasn't helped when the 1966 final was announced for the same day as my 
barmitzvah. Of the 75 people invited, only 15 turned up.

Although I'm no expert on the game, I'd like to think I know a bit more about 
advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/advertising> – and with 
theWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-2014> around the 
corner, there is a lot of typically ambitious and creative work doing the 
rounds.

Tournaments like this always bring out the big guns and there's no escaping 
commercials from sport juggernauts such asNike 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3XviR7esUvo> and Adidas 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jR1XQsCiAKE>. Both are truly spectacular, full 
of energy and laden with superstars. An absolute feast for the eyes; I can see 
why the younger generation love them.

However, what makes a standout ad beyond the striking visuals, music, big 
ideas and Ronaldo, are the relatable stories with a basis in real life. What 
makes a greatWorld Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football>
 commercial is the way that it highlights the human condition around the game 
and focuses on the shared experience.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FX1GYG409v6M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FX1GYG409v6M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FX1GYG409v6M%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Carlsberg has put the game in the background 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X1GYG409v6M> and focuses on the collective 
drama and humour in the pub. It uses its celebrities for their charisma and 
personality instead of their star power – Ian Wright, he's just like a bloke 
down the pub, one of the lads.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhQDEjLU1HXk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhQDEjLU1HXk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FhQDEjLU1HXk%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The Currys/PC World campaign <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hQDEjLU1HXk> 
provides a fresh perspective on the football ad and its audience. The 
relationships between the couples are at the heart of the story as the guy 
tries to convince his partner of the need for a massive new TV. He fails badly 
at trying to deflect her attention away from the screamingly obvious fact that 
it's for him to watch the football.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXKQPUAkCe7c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXKQPUAkCe7c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FXKQPUAkCe7c%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
The BBC trades on football nostalgia 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XKQPUAkCe7c> with Subbuteo style figures. 
Again, the story is the main appeal of this ad, which promises to unfold in an 
interesting way. A fun commercial with a family feel.

These ads veer away from the epic qualities of the major sports brands but 
they effectively raise a knowing smile and add fuel to a palpable sense of 
collective expectation. They have a warmth and a sense of inclusion, which is 
where the advertisers' craft comes to the fore.

One thing I have always understood about football is its emotional value. It's 
our passion that unites us; in the park, in the pub and around the globe – and 
curiously, not being a fan only serves to highlight that. Out of all the work 
I've seen, Carlsberg's Fan Squad humorously captures this sentiment the best. 
I'm sure we'll remember the ad, especially if the referee in an England match 
needs to consult with the fourth official via his headset, only to award a 
penalty against us. I wouldn't want to be Ian Wright then.

Paul Weiland is the founder and executive creative director at Contagious 
London <http://www.contagiouslondon.com/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox, sign up free forMedia Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> content 
is editorially independent except for pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. 
Find out morehere <https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 