
It takes a few episodes of Better Things 
<http://www.fxnetworks.com/shows/better-things/about?gclid=Cj0KEQjw0rm-BRCn85bm8uS-zK0BEiQAHo4vrKlCDkkGt8Yo_F3eIxdAVrtR2jcwbotMvWNzno9ylsYaAiu98P8HAQ>
, the new FX comedy about an actor raising her three daughters in LA, to 
realize that there aren’t really any men in the series. Something similar dawns 
on you watchingAtlanta 
<http://www.fxnetworks.com/shows/atlanta/about?gclid=Cj0KEQjw0rm-BRCn85bm8uS-zK0BEiQAHo4vrKg823oV3wiFGJtjvsJCa5q64PWbqF8XSRxB6xPfvA8aAoJw8P8HAQ>
, another new FX comedy about two cousins trying to make it in the southern 
entertainment Mecca’s hip-hop scene – except instead of men being absent it is 
white characters. Once you notice that these mainstays of traditional TV 
sitcoms aren’t here – as extinct as the dodo orRyan Lochte’s endorsement deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/ryan-lochte-rio-robbery-gas-station-apology-olympics>
 – you also realize that you don’t much miss them.

The definitive guide to fall TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ng-interactive/2016/sep/06/fall-tv-2016-guide-atlanta-designated-survivor-westworld-divorce>
There are some men in Better Things, of course, but they are relegated to the 
minor roles usually reserved for women in comedy’s boys’ club: romantic 
interests and co-workers, shopkeepers and other such functionaries. To make the 
contrast even starker, the main character, Sam (Pamela Adlon), and her three 
daughters, Max (Mikey Madison), Frankie (Hannah Alligood) and Duke (Olivia 
Edward), all have dudes’ names.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9MRLMAsSHyE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9MRLMAsSHyE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9MRLMAsSHyE&media=>
The white people in Atlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/atlanta> 
– and there are even fewer of them than there are men in Better Things – serve 
the same purpose that black actors do on other comedies. That is, they serve to 
make a point about race in America, before disappearing. For instance, a white 
colleague is seen to use the n-word around the main character, Earnest (Donald 
Glover), but not around his much more physically imposing cousin Paper Boi 
(Brian Tyree Henry) or their gonzo friend Darius (Keith Stanfield).

The lack of such characters allows these new, fresh voices to be heard – and 
in both shows, they’re vibrant and engrossing. Better Things is a product of 
the partnership between Adlon and Louis CK – Adlon served as both a writer and 
co-star onLouie <http://www.fxnetworks.com/shows/louie/about> for several 
seasons and as CK’s wife on the ill-fated HBO comedyLucky Louie 
<http://splitsider.com/2013/04/right-before-the-sainting-of-louis-c-k-there-was-lucky-louie/>
. They created this show together (both serve as either writer or director of 
many of the episodes) and it shares lots in its DNA with CK’s signature 
creation. Not only is Better Things about an entertainer trying to raise a 
group of daughters; it’s also an occasionally meandering, philosophical series 
of vignettes.

Adlon’s character, Sam, is much more sympathetic and down-to-earth than the 
Pamela we met on Louie. Just as CK isfamous for his riff about how his kids are 
assholes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fOaIFgse4Hw>, Sam has the same sort 
of antagonistic relationship with her children, scoffing at her oldest daughter 
when she asks her to score pot but then stealing the condom she finds under her 
daughter’s nightstand for an assignation with a married man.

While there are some rah-rah moments of feminism, like Sam’s speech at a women 
and girls’ empowerment seminar at her daughter’s school, Better Things is 
searching for a deeper meaning in how to navigate the world as a woman at all 
stages of life, both the good and the bad. ImagineInside Amy Schumer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/14/jessi-klein-inside-amy-schumer-the-nonsense-of-being-female>
 were it half as didactic and twice as melancholy. While it sometimes can veer 
into familiar territories of sitcom schmaltz, Better Things offers essential 
fresh takes on motherhood, Hollywood and the vagaries of teenage life.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRENJ6WaRA3o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRENJ6WaRA3o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRENJ6WaRA3o&media=>
Atlanta is as concerned with race as Better Things is about gender. In the 
show’s second episode, when Earnest finds himself in jail (not to be confused 
withErnest Goes to Jail <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0099512/>), he sees an 
inmate who is clearly mentally ill. When the cops say the inmate is imprisoned 
every week, Earnest wonders why they keep locking him up instead of getting him 
help. The cops treat him gently until he drinks toilet water and spits it at 
them; then they viciously beat him. It’s comical, harrowing, audacious and 
sobering all at the same time.

That is what makes Atlanta an even better show than Better Things – in fact, 
one of the best new shows on television in quite some time. Glover is the star 
and creator of what feels a little bit like a hip-hop Girls. Earnest is barely 
employed, broke, and “technically homeless” as he pursues his dreams of being a 
rap manager while trying to raise his daughter. LikeLena Dunham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/lena-dunham>, Glover is obviously playing 
a much less successful and ambitious version of himself.

While Atlanta’s observations are as keen as those in Better Things, the show 
is much more consistent in its laughs and tone. Atlanta also tackles a variety 
of subjects almost effortlessly, whether it’s homophobia and transphobia, the 
cycle of poverty, or the fraught relationship between law enforcement and the 
black community. Just as in real life, these issues can creep up anywhere and 
at any time, and Atlanta always has smart things to say about them.

Everything about this program seems new and vital, stylishly shot in hues that 
make the projects of Atlanta look like they were washed over with honeycomb and 
steeped in sunlight. The same is true of Better Things. This is a great step 
for FX, whose recent comedy duds, such asBaskets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/21/louis-ck-zach-galifianakis-baskets-clown-tv-fx>
 andSex&Drugs&Rock&Roll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/16/sexdrugsrockroll-tv-show-about-a-washed-up-rocker-is-a-played-out-tune>
, deliver the same angsty straight-guy schtick that is pervasive in the world 
of so-called cutting-edge comedy. Though these new shows share little more than 
a network, they are also united in their desire to lend a voice to stories that 
are often ignored or marginalized. They’re both so darn good, audiences might 
start demanding fewer white guys in just about everything.

 * Atlanta premieres on FX on Tuesday 6 September at 10pm ET. Better Things 
premieres on FX on Thursday 8 September at 9pm ET. 
 