
 I've just been reading my Guardian cuttings from the late 80s, and am 
astonished to discover that I wrote of Kabul as "delightful". Distance must 
lend disenchantment to the view, for I now think of the Afghan capital as the 
nastiest, saddest, place I have ever been obliged to visit.

I was there just twice, each time for a couple of weeks. The first time, in 
1988, was during the Soviet occupation, and Afghanistan had a notionally 
communist notional government. It controlled maybe 10% of the country. The rest 
was in the hands of perpetually squabbling, dithering, conspiring guerrilla 
groups collectively known as the mohajedin, the holy warriors.

They weren't holy, and they weren't much cop as warriors, either. But they did 
have $600m a year in military aid from Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher, and 
good deal of misty-eyed support from far-right ideologues prepared to fight the 
cold war to the last drop of some other poor beggar's blood.

While they - and the Russians - blasted the country back to the middle ages, 
Kabul festered and decayed. By the time I first saw it, there was little left 
of the charm which had drawn a generation of backpackers to the Afghan capital 
in the 60s and 70s, before the communist coup. But it was still possible to 
haggle for rugs and lapis lazuli jewellery in the bazars, as well as Russian 
bayonets and bits of uniform. You could exchange a few dollars for a bag full 
of Afghanis in the bizarre money bazar, which dealt in any currency known to 
man. You could buy Stolichnaya vodka from the Uzbek traders of Chicken Street, 
and the finest caviar for less than Â£2 for a 100g jar. Maybe that's why I 
described Kabul as "delightful".

The second time I went was in April and May of 1992, when the remnants of the 
miserable communist regime were swept into history, and replaced by utter 
anarchy.

It happened over a weekend. On Friday, bands of mohajedin guerrillas closed in 
on the capital. On Saturday morning, they rushed to take over key buildings, 
with little or no bloodshed. On Saturday evening they marked their triumph by 
firing millions of bullets into the air for hour after hour, in an insane 
celebration which, we discovered the next morning, killed dozens of people. 
(People who think that firing live ammunition into the air is fun are much too 
halfwitted to realise that bullets which go up also come down). On the Sunday 
morning, before the cordite stink of that barbarous celebration cleared, they'd 
started a new war.

For the next few days, the international press corps rushed hither and yon, 
trying to impose a rational language on the new anarchy. 'Hardline 
fundamentalist forces' were said to be challenging 'the new government'. It was 
all nonsense: the country had simply reverted to a medieval melange of 
warlordism, sectarian strife and ethnic rivalry.

Within hours of the mohajedin takeover, Afghan women vanished from the 
streets. I did not see a single one in my last week there. Chicken Street 
closed its shutters, as did the money bazar. The men no longer gathered for 
cockfights at the tomb of Babar, the first and greatest Moghul emperor. The 
streets shook and trembled with incoming artillery fire and random missile 
attacks.

It's still going on. The mohajedin factions are still splitting and coalescing 
in the treacherous time-dishonoured way they always have. The strongest group 
calls itself the Taliban, and has imposed a kind of calm on Kabul; the kind 
that goes with despotism and utter intolerance. The rest of the country has 
dissolved.

To this day, I believe that Afghanistan is not a country, just a lump of Asia 
with a border and nothing much recognisable within it. There are romantic souls 
who prattle of a civilisation which has never been conquered, which prides 
itself on its warrior code, and which guards its precious traditions in the 
grandeur of the Hindu Kush and what John Buchan once described as "the wild 
tangle of the Pamirs."

I don't buy it. I saw only savagery and ignorance, the ultimate cynicism of a 
superpower war fought by proxy, and the destruction of a country.
 