
I have been watching Lemonade, the visual component to Beyoncé’s new album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/26/beyonce-lemonade-jay-z-becky-pop-culture>
, and wondering wistfully why most mainstream movies released nowadays aren’t 
as interesting as this: part music video, part multimedia 
happening-slash-confessional. Crazy, audacious, exciting and mad.

No big-screen superhero is as scary as the superheroine of Lemonade, 
incidentally venting her genuine social anger: an aria on the theme of racism 
and injustice. I like the disturbing scenes where Beyoncé takes a baseball bat 
to various cars, wielding her own kind of counter-phallic rage, angry at the
reported infidelity of her husband, Jay-Z 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/04/24/beyonce-calls-out-jay-z-s-cheating-in-lemonade-a-stunning-celebration-of-black-girl-magic.html>
. Has she forgiven him? Conditionally?

How Beyoncé's Lemonade became a pop culture phenomenon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/26/beyonce-lemonade-jay-z-becky-pop-culture>
Is the fact her album is streaming on Tidal – Jay-Z’s own subscription service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/feb/22/tidal-rihanna-kanye-west-jay-z>
 – evidence that the whole thing is a stitch-up? I have no idea, but the 
contorted marital-commercial dynamic only makes it more intriguing; and 
co-ownership of the delirious Lemonade adventure just reminds Jay-Z of how very 
much he has to lose in a divorce.

If it’s starry and self-indulgent, well, I’m reminded of how my teenage self 
felt on hearing the Clash’s ferocious singleComplete Control in 1977 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7TcKiC2yB0s&list=RD7TcKiC2yB0s#t=52>: a whinge 
about how they were treated by their label – but nevertheless, fantastically 
exciting.

And as for the title, I guess it means life has handed Beyoncé the lemon of 
marital pain, from which she has made the lemonade of music. It also reminds me 
of Lemonade, the title of the fictional children’s story written by the hero of 
Ian McEwan’s novel The Child in Time – intimately disturbing and violent. I 
think I have just become a member of theBeyhive 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Beyhive>.

A tunnel vision for London


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fbeyonce-lemonade-beyhive-the-clash-ian-mcewan-jay-z%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F177b3f8f32112c99de4c5b1328add646eeb1184f%2F0_0_2387_2485%2F2387.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beyonc%C3%A9%E2%80%99s%20Lemonade%20has%20made%20me%20want%20to%20join%20the%20Beyhive%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fbeyonce-lemonade-beyhive-the-clash-ian-mcewan-jay-z%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beyonc%C3%A9%E2%80%99s%20Lemonade%20has%20made%20me%20want%20to%20join%20the%20Beyhive%20%7C%20Peter%20Bradshaw&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F27%2Fbeyonce-lemonade-beyhive-the-clash-ian-mcewan-jay-z%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F177b3f8f32112c99de4c5b1328add646eeb1184f%2F0_0_2387_2485%2F2387.jpg>
 Anish Kapoor and Carsten Höller at the Arcelor Mittal Orbit tower to review 
progress on the slide. Photograph: Lauren Hurley/PA 
In 2004 the author AN Wilson wrote a book on the capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/mar/21/historybooks.features>, in which 
he devoted a chapter to “Silly London”: the way the city in the new century 
became a home to political and architectural follies such as theMillennium Dome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2000/nov/10/dome.guardianleaders> (since 
repurposed as the O2 Arena).

Perhaps the chapter will have to be rewritten to encompass the history of the 
Arcelor Mittal Orbit tower in the Olympic park. Anish Kapoor, the Turner 
prizewinner who designed the tower, has revealed that London’s mayor,Boris 
Johnson, has been pressuring him to include a feature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/26/anish-kapoor-addition-artwork-foisted-on-him-boris-johnson>
 to maximise visitor revenue: a 178-metre tunnel slide designed by the 
experimental artist Carsten Höller, like those at children’s soft-play centres, 
and like the slides Höller designed for Tate Modern’s Turbine Hall and the 
Hayward Gallery. It does sound very silly.

And yet maybe the secret of the tower’s future success is to embrace its 
Disneyland silliness and consider it a place for childish – or childlike – fun.

The great American lingo-off 

Days after President Obama entered the Brexit debate Ted Cruz, who hopes to 
replace him, has countered by saying that if he were in the White House “
Britain would be at the front of the queue 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2016/04/27/ted-cruz-brexit-uk-front-trade-queue/83583530/>
” for a US trade deal – even if we vote to leave the European Union.

Cruz is entitled to his view, but his use of our word “queue”, like the 
president’s, is slightly heartsinking. We use American words more 
unselfconsciously: the super-British TV show Bake-Off smoothly appropriated the 
American “-off” phrase, meaning contest, and now it’s as if the term has always 
tripped off the tongues of Britons of every age.

I don’t think Obama’s use of our word “queue” means the script was written by 
No 10. It’s just that Barack and Ted, like many Americans of a certain age, 
take a delight in their ability to speak our quaint lingo, like someone 
repeatedly and mystifyingly talking about the “bobbies” he saw at 
Stratford-upon-Avon.
 