
We humans love things we can’t explain. Witness the vast array of outlandish 
claims made about Stonehenge, from ancient calendar to alien stargate, when in 
all likelihood it was just a big clock or an early marketplace, a neolithic 
branch of Tesco.


When the unknown is also alien, the mystery only grows more magnetic. Think of 
thaticonic opening to Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ypEaGQb6dJk>: a family of apes wake one 
morning to find a black monolith looming over them; that had its origins in
Arthur C Clarke’s short story The Sentinel 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Sentinel_(short_story)>. Did some 
super-advanced civilisation intercede in the early evolution of intelligent 
life on earth? Or was the monolith just filming a very special edition of Life 
on Earth?

We don’t know, and never find out. But this shiny, looming thing is just one 
of many Big Dumb Objects that have turned up in science fiction over the 
decades.

A term coined by critic Roz Kaveney and later popularised by the Encyclopedia 
of Science Fiction, the Big Dumb Object (BDO) is a unique selling point of the 
sci-fi genre. It can be a broad term – usually, they’re alien architectures, 
ranging from the man-sized to the planetary. BDOs either look extreme or 
unusual, and can often do extreme or unusual things: everything from lurking on 
a horizon to creating worlds. Usually, BDOs are plonked into plots to awe us 
with their majesty and mystery – really, they’re science fiction’s equivalent 
of aMacGuffin <http://www.screenonline.org.uk/tours/hitch/tour6.html>.

No other kind of storytelling goes in for spectacle quite so big, or quite so 
dumb as science fiction. But which is the biggest, dumbest object of them all?

No self-respecting galactic civilisation can call itself advanced until it can 
build its own worlds, right? Pick a convenient star system, select a goldilocks 
zone at the right distance for your species of life, and construct a ribbon of 
land in a ring around the whole system: boom, you have the mother of all BDOs – 
a ringworld.
 The cover of Ringworld by Larry Niven (1970) Photograph: Ballantine Books 
For many readers, Larry Niven’s Ringworld is the definition of all that is 
biggest and dumbest in sci-fi. About a quest to the edges of known space to 
explore a lost ringworld, the novel is arguably better known today as 
inspiration for the titular Halo of the hit video-game franchise. The much 
missed Iain M Banks also wrote about ringworlds, with mini-versions called 
“orbitals” being forged by the utopian future society in his Culture series. 
Banks created many other BDOs, such as his General Systems Vehicles, 
artificially intelligent spacecraft that are kilometres long, or his GSV 
Sleeper Service: a gargantuan version that slowly wanders the universe.

The Dyson sphere <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dyson_sphere> may be the most 
famous BDO of all: take the technology of ringworld and spin it out to create a 
sphere entirely enclosing a star. Now you have the ultimate solar cell, a near 
infinite energy resource that can power entire civilisations. (Although the 
trope is popularly named after astrophysicist Freeman Dyson’s 1960 paper, 
others have traced it back toOlaf Stapledon 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Olaf_Stapledon>’s 1937 novel, Star Maker 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star_Maker>.) a great thought experiment that 
has popped up in many sci-fi stories, includingHouse of Suns by Alastair 
Reynolds <http://www.alastairreynolds.com/release/house-of-suns-2008/>, The 
Rise of Endymion by Dan Simmons 
<https://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/reviews/books/0-553-57298-9.html> and Ann 
Leckie’s Imperial Radch trilogy <http://www.annleckie.com/books/>.

Reaching for the stars: a brief history of sci-fi space travel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/13/sci-fi-space-travel-earthsearch-aurora-ansible>
But for sheer inventiveness, no author has ever come close to Douglas Adams’s 
BDO in The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy.Magrathea 
<http://hitchhikers.wikia.com/wiki/Magrathea> is one of Hitchhiker’s 
highlights: a world where bespoke planetoids are designed for the galactic 1%, 
which has left the galaxy littered with half-finished construction projects 
backed by shadowy investors (rather like the London skyline today).

Sci-fi gives us a gateway through which we can experience the wonder of our 
universe, and Big Dumb Objects are one key to opening that gateway. But while 
they can add spice to great sci-fi, too often authors use them as “idea crack”, 
exploiting the fact that there are infinite possibilites in speculative fiction 
to avoid explaining. Some can be fascinating to fans, but alienating – pun 
intended – to the majority of readers, for whom clinical descriptions of alien 
architecture rate low on the list of earthly pleasures. But wait, isn’t earth a 
giant computer commissioned by mice to find the question to the answer that is 
42 … is it possible that we’re living every day on the biggest, dumbest object 
of them all?
 