Starlight express 
 Ever fancied a sleepover in the countryside under the stars, rather than in 
your garden surrounded by spilt baked beans and scavenging foxes? If so, head 
to the Forest Adventure Outdoor Centre in the Forest of Dean. Sign up for the 
night hike and you can spend the evening in a cave (so long as a responsible 
adult is roped in to come too). Other activities include canoeing, rock 
climbing, abseiling and more. Children must be over eight years old. All 
activities are led by qualified guides.
forestadventure.co.uk <http://www.forestadventure.co.uk>

Boy's own adventure
 Just4Parents offers a Father and Son bonding weekend in the New Forest. The 
main idea is either to build team-work skills (by building rafts) or showing 
off (by climbing trees better than your old man).

just4parents.co.uk <http://www.just4parents.co.uk>

Ghostbusters
 Petrify the little ones by taking them on a ghost walk through London, for a 
truly "ghoulish" experience that cannot be beaten! Follow in the footsteps of 
Jack the Ripper on this trail of terror - as you tread his old haunts, tour 
guide Richard Jones will recreate some eerie psychic phenomena to leave you 
quaking in your boots.

london-ghost-walk.co.uk <http://www.london-ghost-walk.co.uk>

Another day in paradise?
 Mill on the Brue Activity Farm in Somerset is a children's paradise. The only 
dilemma? What to try first! Take your pick from grass tobogganing, the climbing 
wall or the "zuper" zip wire.

millonthebrue.co.uk <http://www.millonthebrue.co.uk>

King of the jungle
 Go Ape is an award-winning high-wire forest adventure course of rope bridges, 
Tarzan swings and zip slides up to 12 metres up in the trees. Going ape 
obviously appeals to a wide age range. Customers are fitted with a climbing 
harness, given instructions, and then trek from tree to tree high above the 
forest floor. It now has 12 courses around the UK.

goape.co.uk <http://www.goape.co.uk>

No iDeer? 
 Always wanted to know what reindeer eat, or whether they're all called Dasher 
and Dancer, Donna or Blitzen? Then head to the Cairngorm Reindeer Centre in 
Glenmore, Scotland, home to Britain's only herd of reindeer, where herders will 
take you to meet some of the festive animals.

reindeer-company.demon.co.uk <http://reindeer-company.demon.co.uk>

Brock around the clock
 Thanks to CBBC's Bodger and Badger, you might assume badgers were messy 
creatures who only eat mashed potato. Luckily, the Devon Badger Watch is 
helping to bring the truth to bear, offering children open evenings where they 
can visit a hide and watch the animals in their natural habitat. Children must 
be over seven years old.

devonbadgerwatch.co.uk <http://www.devonbadgerwatch.co.uk>

Bush-cracking
 If your idol is survival expert Ray Mears, then this is the adventure for 
you. Learn bush craft and star-craft navigation as you build your own habitat 
in an expedition-style camp. Young people aged 13-17 should head for the wilds 
of Cumbria and sign up for the Junior Woodlander course.

woodsmoke.uk.com/p/v/Courses/Junior+Woodlander 
<http://woodsmoke.uk.com/p/v/Courses/Junior+Woodlander>

Splat on the back
 The Essex Paintball Games Centre offers special paintball courses for 
under-16s, with "Young Gunz" days held every second week of the month. The 
perfect level of split for splat for kids' birthdays.

essex-paintball-games.com/junior-paintball.php 
<http://essex-paintball-games.com/junior-paintball.php> 

White-knuckle ride
 Element - Extreme Sports Courses & Experiences offers a white-water rafting 
experience for kids for £45. Qualified instructors ride up front in every boat, 
and they will steer you and your fellow rafters down various white-water runs 
of fun! Locations include Northampton, Northants (minimum age 14) and 
Pitlochry, Perthshire (minimum 12). Dare you brave the elements?

exelement.co.uk/juniors/kids-white-water-rafting-experience-33.php <>

Rockin' Rookin House
 Argo Cats are awesome. They're huge eight-wheeled vehicles that can drive 
over hard terrain and through huge puddles; they also happen to be one of the 
activities on offer at Rookin House Equestrian and Activity Centre in the Lake 
District. The daring among you can also try your hand at archery, have a go on 
an assault course or mini quad-bike, or partake in a game of human bowling. For 
less hardcore activities, try horse riding or fishing. Children must be over 
eight years old for most activities.

rookinhouse.co.uk/kidsactvity.php <http://www.rookinhouse.co.uk/kidsactivity>

Monsters Inc
 Kayaking for Kids at Monster Activity Days. Basic strokes will be taught at 
your local harbour before you head out to explore the coastline. Open seven 
days a week throughout the year. Kids must be 8-15 years old. No experience 
necessary.

monsteractivitydays.co.uk <http://www.monsteractivitydays.co.uk>

Coasteer and coast there
 Coasteering for Kids provides an excellent opportunity to wear your kids out! 
They must be between eight and 15 years old and have a good level of fitness. 
Coasteering takes place in Haverfordwest and Pembrokeshire.

experiencemad.co.uk/coasteering <http://www.experiencemad.co.uk/coasteering>

Mad to miss out
 Climbing and Abseiling for Kids. The course starts with straightforward 
routes for beginners before building up to more challenging ascents. Kids must 
be older than eight years to participate.

experiencemad.co.uk <http://www.experiencemad.co.uk>

Ride 'em cowboy
 Kids Cowboy Adventure, New Forest, Hampshire. Activities at this Wild West 
ranch include riding lessons, a chance to try out lassoing skills, horseshoe 
throwing, and sizzling steak, the cowboy cuisine of choice. A perfect 
experience for kids who have never been on a horse before, or those who want to 
be John Wayne when they grow up, of course.

intotheblue.co.uk <http://www.intotheblue.co.uk>

Porpoise-built
 Sealife Adventures provides whale- and wildlife-watching trips on board the 
purpose-built Porpoise II, for the whole family to enjoy. Based near Oban, 
Scotland. Kids can draw pictures or write stories about their favourite animal 
to win a small prize from the captain!

sealife-adventures.com/kids.html <http://www.sealife-adventures.com>

Ahoy there!
 Dinghy sailing courses for kids are a great way to introduce them to the 
sport. The course is ideal for teenagers with little or no sailing experience. 
The RYA (Royal Yachting Association) ensures teaching is of a very high 
standard. At Poole Harbour, Dorset (minimum age 14) and Brighton Marina, East 
Sussex (minimum age 16).

intotheblue.co.uk <http://www.intotheblue.co.uk>

Life buoy or girl
 The Children's Rookie Lifesaving Course encourages kids to develop survival 
skills in the water, increases swimming ability and teaches basic life-saving 
skills. The Royal Life Saving Society programme is designed for kids aged 
beween eight and 13 years old.

sportrec.soton.ac.uk <http://sportrec.soton.ac.uk>

Surf's Up
 O'Neill's kids-only surf school in Watergate welcomes surfers of all 
abilities: perfect for kids who just love the water. Each session is £14. For 
kids aged six to 12 years old.

oneillsurfacademy.co.uk/oneill-surf-academy/kids-only-surf-school.php 
<http://www.oneillsurfacademy.co.uk/oneill-surf-academy/kids-only-surf-school.php>

Survival of the fittest
 Trueways Survival school is an adventure that can be experienced by the whole 
family. Learn how to eat safely in the wild, be a safe and reliable 
fire-starter and build a shelter, then get some signalling and navigation 
coaching from the experts. Kids must be over seven years; all under-16s must be 
accompanied by an adult. Regular courses are held throughout the UK including 
Surrey, North Yorkshire and the Scottish Borders.

08700 493410, survival-school.org <http://www.survival-school.org>

Just dive in
 Just Diving Ltd is a friendly diving school in Leicester. Kids aged 12 years 
or older can complete the Junior Open Water Course while those aged between 
eight and 10 years can complete a Padi Bubblemaker course.

0797 9000 982 or 07850 790 781, www.info@justscubadiving.co.uk 
<http://www.info@justscubadiving.co.uk>

Dilly Dally Llama
 National Forest Llama Treks welcome families and children's parties. Kids can 
enjoy a day out at the national forest while the llamas carry tables, chairs 
and lunch!

01283 711702, nationalforest.org <http://http://www.nationalforest.org>

Hook, line and sinker
 Enjoy fly fishing with the whole family at Assynt Sporting Co, situated in 
the north-west of the Scottish Highlands. Here there are hundreds of lochs and 
rivers full of brown trout. The beautiful location also provides anglers with 
the opportunity to spot a wide range of wildlife including red deer, otters, 
eagles and buzzards.

all4kids.uk.com/search_result/nokeyword/allareas/Fishing_Tuition 
<http://all4kids.uk.com/search_result/nokeyword/allareas/Fishing_Tuition>

Cool as ...
 Ice climbing is available for teenagers at Ice Factor, the National Ice 
Climbing Centre in Lochaber, Scotland. It's got the biggest indoor ice wall in 
the world. Each session is run by qualified instructors and all equipment is 
provided. Have you got what it takes to drag yourself up a wall of frozen water?

ice-factor.co.uk <http://www.ice-factor.co.uk>

Up the faraway tree
 Bewilderwood is "a curious treehouse adventure" ideal for kids. Situated in 
Wroxham, children can explore the tree houses, zip wires, boat trips, marsh 
walks, jungle bridges and more, then recover in the Yummy Yurt for afters.

01603 783900, bewilderwood.co.uk <http://www.bewilderwood.co.uk>

Go acrobatty
 The London Youth Circus (LYC) has a world-class training space where students 
of all levels can practise juggling, tight wire, static or flying trapeze, and 
acrobatics. The course helps with creativity, coordination and critical 
thinking. A range of activities are available for all ages. Additional site in 
Brighton.

thecircusspace.co.uk <>

Icecapades
 Xscape has indoor snow slopes for skiers and snowboarders to enjoy. There are 
apres-school sessions for both kids and parents to participate in. Beginners 
and advanced skiers are welcomed. Extensive lesson programmes are available 
from group lessons or private tuition. Xscape has three centres: Castleford in 
Leeds, Milton Keynes and Braehead, Glasgow.

xscape.co.uk <http://www.xscape.co.uk>

Blades of glory
 Kids' rollerblading is a great way to keep your child entertained by an 
outdoor sporting hobby. The Londonskaters provide kids' skating lessons with a 
specialised instructor to teach the simple skills like turning and stopping.

londonskaters.com <http://www.londonskaters.com>

Way out West
 West Wales Wind Surf and Sailing offers children's courses as part of the RYA 
Junior scheme. Downsized windsurf boards and sails are provided for kids of 
eight years and up, and the skills are taught with a fun-and-games approach. 
Located in Dale, Pembrokeshire - one of the best locations in the UK for water 
sports.

surfdale.co.uk <http://www.surfdale.co.uk>

Wahey epee!
 The Musketeers Club is perfect for London kids who want to learn to fence, 
and enjoy being mentally and physically challenged. The sessions cater for two 
age groups: six to eight-year-olds, and nine to 11-year-olds.

musketeersclub.co.uk <http://www.musketeersclub.co.uk>

Find the Tiger in you
 Stokesley Golf Range has become a YMG Junior golf academy. The programme is 
designed to develop youngsters' interest in golf by teaching them to develop 
their knowledge and skill of the game. And for the less serious golfer, there's 
always the crazy golf course! Also offers birthday parties.

stokesleygolfrange.co.uk <http://www.stokesleygolfrange.co.uk>

Jungle Gym
 Dartmoor Treetop Adventure offers kids the opportunity to swing between trees 
with the greatest of ease - on rope bridges, airy platforms, zip slides, and 
swings. No experience necessary, and trained guides are on hand to help. 
Located at the Rock Centre in Chudleigh, Devon.

dartmoortreetopadventures.co.uk <http://www.dartmoortreetopadventures.co.uk>

Isca blast!
 Isca Outdoor in Devon allows teenagers to experience the adventures of caving 
and cave-leader training, climbing, abseiling, hill walking and navigation 
training. A great exercise to encourage team building in young adults, and 
great fun all around.

iscaoutdoor.co.uk <http://www.iscaoutdoor.co.uk>

Action Stations
 The Action Centre at Lyncombe Lodge in Churchill, Bristol, is a 
multi-activity centre for kids. The activities available include riding, 
archery, dry-slope skiing, climbing, abseiling and canoeing. Suitable for six 
to 16 years old.

01934 852335, highaction.co.uk <http://www.highaction.co.uk>

Up, up and away
 Tollymore Mountain Centre in Northern Ireland teaches kids a number of 
activities at introductory level including mountaineering, rock climbing, 
scrambling, and canoe sports. Designed for able-bodied young people aged 14 to 
18.

tollymore.com <http://www.tollymore.com>

Fast and furious
 West Coast Outdoor Adventure in Devon offers children and teenagers the 
amazing opportunity to go speed-sailing (a kind of windsurfer attached to a 
skateboard, which whizzes up and down the beach) and lots of ...#8594; other 
activities. Minimum age eight.

mountainwaterexperience.co.uk <http://www.mountainwaterexperience.co.uk>

Dirt washes off, bruises heal 
 Clive Powell runs Dirty Weekends in the wild Elan Valley in Wales for 
mountain-biking enthusiasts. Minimum age is 12 years old, but all under-18s 
need the permission of a parent or guardian.

clivepowell-mtb.co.uk <http://www.clivepowell-mtb.co.uk>

Live off the land
 Breakaway Survival School in Hereford and Worcester teaches all aspects of 
survival in the wild to teenagers in and around the Brecon Beacons, from 
navigation and water purification to trap-laying to protect against predators! 
For kids who love the great outdoors.

breakawaysurvivalschool.com <http://www.breakawaysurvivalschool.com>

Jump a dump
 An amazing adventure playground set in the hills of Snowdonia, the Centre for 
Alternative Technology is built entirely out of eco-friendly materials. Heaps 
of fun to be had among, erm, heaps of recycled tyres and plastic bottles.

cat.org.uk <>

Spy kids
 Make like Alex "Stormbreaker" Rider or Agent Cody Banks and head to a 
spy-camp retreat to hone your spying skills. Learn to operate bugging devices, 
dodge lasers, crack safes and deactivate bombs against the clock. All this, and 
the courses are taught by an ex-surveillance expert, a real-life Jack Bauer.

Intotheblue.co.uk <http://www.Intotheblue.co.uk>

Rock-it to the nationals
Ever play BenchBall at school? Rock-It-Ball takes playtime games to the next 
level. Five players on each team, five balls on the pitch at all times - and 
the aim? To whack your opponents. It's heaps of fun, and there's no peer 
pressure because there's so much going on at the same time. If your Pee Wees 
and Cadets are really skilled, they could soon find themselves at the National 
Championships! Rock-It-Ball clubs are mainly based in northern England and 
Scotland at present, but will soon be springing up all over.

ribuk.co.uk <http://www.ribuk.co.uk>
 