
Australian opposition leader, Bill Shorten, has accused Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> of “petty 
politics” and of treating former Labor prime minister Kevin Rudd in a “shabby 
fashion” after he refused to endorse him for the United Nations top job.

Australia won’t be nominating  Rudd for UN secretary-general 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/kevin-rudd-malcolm-turnbull-reneged-previous-support-un-job>
 even though he claims Malcolm Turnbull had told him Australia would be “mad” 
not to support him.

The opposition leader echoed comments by senior shadow minister Anthony 
Albanese <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> 
labelling Mr Turnbull’s actions “pathetic”.

Turnbull to make captain's pick on whether to nominate Rudd for UN secretary 
general
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/turnbull-alone-to-decide-whether-to-nominate-rudd-for-un-secretary-general>
“He has squibbed the chance to be a leader for all Australians and all he’s 
trying to do is paper over the divisions in theLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party>,” Shorten told 
reporters in Darwin on Saturday.

“And in the meantime, a distinguished Australian has been treated in a very 
shabby fashion for nothing more than, I think, petty politics. Malcolm 
Turnbull’s actions are pathetic. They’re disappointing.”

The foreign minister, Julie Bishop, and attorney general, George Brandis, are 
understood to have supported Rudd’s nomination, but several conservative 
ministers including the immigration minister, Peter Dutton, and the treasurer, 
Scott Morrison, spoke against it.

Rudd took to Twitter to thank Bishop for her support, saying “unfortunately” 
the prime minister had disagreed. Turnbull said on Friday the government would 
not back the Rudd because he didn’t believe he was suited for the role but 
refused to give details.

Rudd subsequently released three letters he had sent to Turnbull in which he 
refers to the prime minister’s apparent support. In the second letter, Rudd 
said he was “shocked” the prime minister told him he no longer supported his 
bid after, “you had always said to me that the Australian government would be 
‘mad’ not to support my candidature.”

He wrote another letter this week asking for a personal meeting to “simply ask 
for the right to be heard”.

After Turnbull announced his decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/malcolm-turnbull-kevin-rudd-un-secretary-general-nomination>
, Rudd said it was a “pity” the government did not support him and that the 
prime minister would not explain the decision in person, even though they were 
both in Sydney at the same time.

“It would have reflected well on what our nation can offer to the world – as a 
middle power with relationships across the world, including the developing 
world, smaller states, the Commonwealth, our Pacific island friends and of 
course our partners in Asia,” Mr Rudd said in a statement.

But deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce said a person should not be backed for 
a top role just because he was Australian. He told ABC television it was Labor 
who had given poor character assessments of Rudd.

Turnbull said the decision had nothing to do with Rudd being a former Labor 
leader, pointing to former Labor opposition leader Kim Beazley’s appointment as 
US ambassador.

It is possible Australia could back former New Zealand prime minister Helen 
Clark for the UN role.
 