
Bill Shorten’s office has had to clarify a statement from the Labor leader at 
a press conference on Wednesday, after he failed to give unqualified backing to 
his current parliamentary team.


Addressing reporters on Wednesday, the Labor leader was asked about his 
controversial backing of the lawyer Kimberley Kitching to replace Stephen 
Conroy in the Senate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/13/bill-shorten-ally-kimberley-kitching-to-replace-stephen-conroy-in-senate>
, and about turmoil that has erupted in Victorian Labor in the wake of that 
decision.

Shorten responded to the questions on Wednesday by issuing only qualified 
endorsement of Labor’s team, and he told reporters he believed Kitching would 
make “a positive contribution” in the Senate.

Albanese criticises Shorten for parachuting Kimberley Kitching into Senate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/18/albanese-criticises-shorten-for-parachuting-kimberley-kitching-into-senate>
In response to a question about recent threats to the preselections of 
leftwingers including Andrew Giles, Jenny Macklin and Catherine King, Shorten 
replied: “On balance, I am happy with the team I have got in the parliament, 
including some of the people you just mentioned.”

Shorten’s office later qualified the leader’s statement at his press 
conference. “Bill is very happy with his entire team,” a spokesman said.

Guardian Australia reported on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/17/labor-left-try-to-stem-infighting-after-shorten-backs-kimberley-kitching-for-senate>
 that the left caucus convened a special meeting to try and head off a damaging 
bout of infighting in Victoria, and a deputation from the left has asked 
Shorten to intervene to ensure the current ill feeling doesn’t escalate.

On Monday, the Victorian Labor senator Gavin Marshall – a senator closely 
aligned with Carr – signalled publicly that he intended to back a preselection 
challenge to Giles, and the two frontbenchers, Catherine King and Jenny 
Macklin, the threat which triggered the special caucus discussion.

During Wednesday’s press conference, the Labor leader issued a general warning 
about disparaging colleagues. Shorten suggested the current bout of ill 
discipline extended beyond Marshall.

“I don’t want to hurt the feelings of the media but I encourage all my members 
of parliament, including but not limited to Senator Marshall, not to either on 
the record or off the record, disparage colleagues,” the Labor leader said.

The Carr group – which has split from the national left – feels Giles and 
other Victorian leftwingers are aligned withAnthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> and the left 
power structure in New South Wales, and have displayed disloyalty both to the 
faction and to the Labor leader.

Factional fanfare rears its head again within Labor and Liberal parties | 
Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/14/factional-fanfare-on-the-boil-again-within-labor-and-liberal-parties>
Marshall recently lost the support of the majority of the faction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/29/gavin-marshall-pulls-out-of-race-for-senate-role-after-shorten-intervenes>
 to maintain his position of Senate deputy president in the new parliament, and 
stood aside at Shorten’s behest.Carr ultimately remained on the frontbench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/22/kim-carr-to-remain-on-expanded-labor-frontbench-after-right-factions-backing>
 after an intervention from the right faction and Shorten.

On Tuesday Albanese publicly slapped down the insurgency in the Victorian left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/18/albanese-criticises-shorten-for-parachuting-kimberley-kitching-into-senate>
 and delicately criticised Shorten’s captain’s call to put Kitching in the 
Senate. Albanese said ALP members should have input into preselections, which 
was a rebuke about the process installing Kitching.

Shorten on Wednesday agreed with Albanese’s call for more participation from 
the membership. “The process of change is ongoing. I agree we could look at 
improving opportunities for people to participate more in theLabor party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/labor-party>,” he said.
 