
An Edwardian swimming baths in Birmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> and a Yorkshire mansion that is one 
of the largest privately owned houses in Europe have each found a place on a 
list of the world’s most endangered sites, along with an Albanian prison, a 
giant law courts building in Brussels, an earthquake-shattered cemetery in 
Chile and Beirut’s coastal promenade that survived the war in Lebanon but is 
now threatened by hectic redevelopment.

The watch list, published every two years by the World Monuments Fund 
<https://www.wmf.org/>, a New York-based conservation charity, is famously 
eclectic and this year features 50 sites in 36 countries, from prehistoric 
ruins to 20th-century buildings. The shame of inclusion is often softened by 
lavish restoration grants backed by the charity’s partner, American Express.


Nepal begins to assess its cultural losses after earthquake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/01/nepal-begins-to-assess-its-cultural-losses-after-earthquake>
This year’s list includes the cultural heritage sites of an entire country – 
Nepal, following thedevastating earthquakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/12/hundreds-feared-dead-as-another-strong-earthquake-strikes-devastated-nepal>
 earlier this year, which destroyed monuments including temples, monasteries 
and old houses in the heart of the capital Kathmandu, and left thousands of 
people still living in tents.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fbirmingham-baths-yorkshire-mansion-worlds-most-at-risk-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F386875b277d2204b9fec8129fb933399fe79c6e3%2F0_50_3600_2163%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Birmingham%20baths%20and%20Yorkshire%20mansion%20on%20world's%20'most%20at%20risk'%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fbirmingham-baths-yorkshire-mansion-worlds-most-at-risk-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Birmingham%20baths%20and%20Yorkshire%20mansion%20on%20world%27s%20%27most%20at%20risk%27%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fbirmingham-baths-yorkshire-mansion-worlds-most-at-risk-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F386875b277d2204b9fec8129fb933399fe79c6e3%2F0_50_3600_2163%2F3600.jpg>
 The remains of a collapsed temple in the Unesco world heritage site of Patan 
Durbar Square in Lalitpur, in Nepal’s Kathmandu Valley. Photograph: Omar 
Havana/Getty Images 
In a month when more ancient sites in Palmyra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/05/isis-blows-up-another-monument-in-2000-year-old-city-of-palmyra>
 in Syria have been reduced to rubble by Islamic State, one of the listed sites 
does not actually exist, but instead stands for many. Listed as the Unnamed 
Monument, it represents all the sites at risk from war or the threat of war, 
and the looting and neglect that follow.

Looted in Syria – and sold in London: the British antiques shops dealing in 
artefacts smuggled by Isis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/03/antiquities-looted-by-isis-end-up-in-london-shops>
It includes sites such as Abusir el-Melek in Egypt, which is named as a symbol 
of the many looted sites across the Middle East since the Arab spring, but 
there are, the list’s compilers say, “simply too many sites at risk to be 
included individually on the watch, and no immediate hope for resolution”.

Natural disasters, looting, climate change, unsympathetic development, poverty 
and official neglect have brought other sites on to the list.

Bonnie Burnham, the WMF’s president, said she hoped making the list may help 
save many. She said: “The 2016 watch includes many extraordinary places that 
deserve to be celebrated because they represent high moments of human culture. 
Worldwide concern would strengthen our ability to save them.”

In Moscow, the rusting remains of an engineering marvel, the lacy steel 
structure of the Shukhov Tower, designed in 1922 by the engineer Vladimir 
Shukhov, was on the point of demolitionuntil it was reprieved through a campaign
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/19/shukhov-tower-moscow-protected-status-russia>
 by international architects, but it has made the list because its future is 
still uncertain.

Crumbling and abandoned, Spaç prison in Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/albania>, a dreaded place until the fall of 
the communist party, deserves to be preserved as a place of remembrance, along 
with the few remaining second world war concentration camps in Italy, the WMF 
said.

Moscow's historic Shukhov Tower gets reprieve from circling developers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/19/shukhov-tower-moscow-protected-status-russia>
While some of the sites are remote and in poor regions, some are in 
prosperous, highly developed places: the list argues for the preservation of 
early 20th-century urban buildings in Tokyo’s old Tsukiji fish market, at risk 
after a decision to move the market.


The threat to Birmingham’s Moseley Road baths, which opened in 1907, is less 
dramatic than war or earthquake. Although one small pool remains open and in 
use, much of the ornate structure isempty and decaying 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-birmingham-23910854>. The complex is 
Grade II-listed, but the local authority has said it cannot afford to maintain 
it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fbirmingham-baths-yorkshire-mansion-worlds-most-at-risk-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05d2ee0b4d998275a820c994aba300082bc7cc25%2F10_461_4446_2668%2F4446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Birmingham%20baths%20and%20Yorkshire%20mansion%20on%20world's%20'most%20at%20risk'%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fbirmingham-baths-yorkshire-mansion-worlds-most-at-risk-list%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Birmingham%20baths%20and%20Yorkshire%20mansion%20on%20world%27s%20%27most%20at%20risk%27%20list&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Fbirmingham-baths-yorkshire-mansion-worlds-most-at-risk-list%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05d2ee0b4d998275a820c994aba300082bc7cc25%2F10_461_4446_2668%2F4446.jpg>
 Wentworth Woodhouse in south Yorkshire, which is on the list due to its 
serious subsidence problems. Photograph: Alamy 
The other site on the UK list still looks palatial, is Grade I-listed and 
remains open to the public. However,Wentworth Woodhouse 
<http://www.wentworthwoodhouse.co.uk/> near Rotherham in south Yorkshire, a 
mansion that is considerably larger than Buckingham Palace, is up for sale for 
about £8m after its last private owner died. The bargain price is literally 
undermined by the area’s coal mining legacy, with subsidence problems 
contributing to an estimated bill of £42m for urgently needed repairs.
 