
Woman's Own is celebrating its 80th birthday today with this special 72-page 
commemorative issue. It contains an interview with novelist Barbara Taylor 
Bradford, who once worked at the magazine, and a picture feature on Joan 
Collins, who also reaches 80 this year.

The publishers also hired Alison Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/alison-jackson>, creator of 
photographic spoofs, to show lookalikes of the Queen and the Duchesses of 
Cornwall and Cambridge reading Woman's Own while under hairdressing dryers.

The first edition of Woman's Own will be available as a digital magazine to 
view atwww.womansown.co.uk <http://www.womansown.co.uk/>. And readers can also 
browse galleries of the magazine covers from its 80-year history, including 
favourites chosen by the editor and fashion editor. The stylish one here was 
published in 1953.

According to the publishers, IPC Media (and the Wikipedia profile 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woman%27s_Own>), the magazine was launched in 
1932. But that may not be quite correct.

According to the Mag Forum site, <http://www.magforum.com/time.htm> Odhams 
launched Woman's Own in 1931 with a free cover-mounted gift â€“ three skeins of 
wool.

More intriguing still is the fact that a blogger writing on a site called 
Rattling On 
<http://rattlingon.typepad.com/rattling_on/2009/10/1916-and-all-that.html> 
discovered these three covers of a Woman's Own magazine dated 1916. Further 
researches suggest this was a different magazine, founded in 1913, asan adjunct 
in pamphlet form to Horner's Stories <http://www.philsp.com/data/data194.html> 
and was later subsumed by that title entirely.

Anyway, let's raise a glass to the modern incarnation of Woman's Own. At one 
time, it looked as if it would go under altogether. But it still manages to 
sell more than 230,000 copies a week

Sources: IPC Media/Wikipedia <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Woman%27s_Own>/
Rattling On 
<http://rattlingon.typepad.com/rattling_on/2009/10/1916-and-all-that.html>/
Woman's Own website <http://www.womansown.co.uk/>
 