
Activist DeRay Mckesson, a leader of the Black Lives Matter movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement>, is suing the 
city of Baton Rouge following his arrest last month during a demonstration 
against police violence in the city.

The protests followed the shooting death on 5 July of 37-year-old Alton 
Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/protests-in-baton-rouge-after-louisiana-police-shoot-alton-sterling-dead>
 during an encounter with two white police officers. Four days later, Mckesson 
and almost 200 other people were arrested during the height of demonstrations.

Two police killings revive claims of discrimination against black gun owners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/alton-sterling-philando-castile-black-gun-owners>
Mckesson’s class action suit, filed in federal court, accuses police of 
approaching protesters in a “militarized and aggressive manner”, according to 
the Associated Press, while wearing riot gear and using armored vehicles. 
Officers pointed their weapons at protesters, the suit says.

A few days after the mass arrests, the Baton Rouge police announced they would 
not be charging about half of the people arrested, including Mckesson, who is 
an employee at Baltimore public schools. They also defended the military-style 
response to protesters, saying they had uncovered specific threats against 
police.

One was discovered, they said, after a teenage suspect in a pawn shop gun 
heist said the guns were to be used in an attack on police. Within a week, a 
lone gunman in Dallas shot and killed five police officers during a protest, 
and another in Baton Rouge shot and killed police and wounded three others 
outside a beauty supply store. Both shooters apparently operated alone, 
according to police, but had radical black separatist ties.

The shootings of Sterling, of Philando Castile in Minnesota, and of the police 
in Dallas and Baton Rouge roiled cities across the south and elsewhere 
throughout the summer. Demonstrations and counter-demonstrations – 
characterized by slogans such as “Black Lives Matter” and “Blue Lives Matter” – 
sprang up between memorial services for the victims.

The shootings led Barack Obama to call on each side in the conflict to 
understand the grievances of the other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/12/obama-dallas-memorial-five-officers-killed-protest-shooting>
. “We cannot simply turn away and dismiss those in peaceful protest as 
troublemakers or paranoid,” he said at a speech in Dallas. “We can’t simply 
dismiss it as a symptom of political correctness or reverse racism. To have 
your experience denied like that, dismissed by those in authority, dismissed 
perhaps even by your white friends and co-workers and fellow church members 
again and again and again – it hurts.”

Mckesson’s suit argues the police violated the civil rights of protesters who 
were peaceful.

“Defendants used excessive force in attacking, battering, beating and 
assaulting plaintiffs and class members without provocation or the need for 
defense,” according to Mckesson’s lawyers.

The suit names the city of Baton Rouge, East Baton Rouge Parish, the mayor and 
chiefs of the local, parish and state police.

Meanwhile the American Civil Liberties Union of Louisiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/louisiana> and other groups also filed a 
lawsuit last month over the treatment of protesters by police.
 