
“What I miss about old Hollywood,” says Blake Lively, “is that back then you 
got to watch movie stars and imagine theywere that person. Now, we’re inundated 
with stories about people picking up their dog’s poop, or stories that aren’t 
even true. I mean:how many times has Jennifer Aniston been pregnant? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jul/12/jennifer-aniston-pregnancy-rumors-huffington-post-essay>
 Dear God!”

The media is remorseless, Lively continues, and mystery is the victim. “People 
want to know more, and that’s a really dangerous thing. With cinema, it means 
the greater narrative isn’t what you’re seeing on screen, it’s what you’re 
seeing off screen.”

Barack, the Beatles and Bridget Jones's Baby – 40 films to watch in autumn 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/30/barack-the-beatles-and-bridget-joness-baby-40-films-to-watch-in-autumn-2016>
In the flesh, Lively, who is 29, looks pretty much as she does when blown up 
as big as a bus: a first-rank glamour-puss straight off the pages of Playbill. 
She glides into this Cannes hotel at 2pm in stilettos and floor-length gold 
velveteen gown, with drop sapphire earrings and waves of blond hair that would 
make Hitchcock weep.

Lively is the epitome of the palatably popular modern movie star. She is 
married to another of them –Ryan Reynolds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ryan-reynolds> – and, like him, is a big hit 
with both genders. She posts on Instagram (cakes, frocks, lols with the makeup 
lady) but keeps it classy, and ringfences her private life. She commands huge 
advertising contracts (L’Oréal, Gucci), yet somehow makes her commitment to 
even the biggest brands feel organic. Her stock-in-trade is approachable but 
aspirational.

The surprise this season has been that she also happens to be pretty good at 
acting. Having cut her teeth on a six-year TV show (Gossip Girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/dec/11/gossip-girl-box-set>) and 
broken into cinema via 2005 teen productThe Sisterhood of the Travelling Pants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2005/aug/26/2>, Lively long seemed a 
little vanilla. But just as Reynolds turned round his career by showing off his 
chops in a one-person-in-peril movie (Buried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/sep/30/buried-film-review>), so too has 
his wife.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fblake-lively-cafe-society-woody-allen-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c1bd197e4d70265feda0ce1a2cdcc0fc1e9fc3a%2F4_34_4934_2960%2F4934.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blake%20Lively%20on%20sharks%2C%20starlets%20and%20filming%20with%20Woody%20Allen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fblake-lively-cafe-society-woody-allen-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blake%20Lively%20on%20sharks%2C%20starlets%20and%20filming%20with%20Woody%20Allen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fblake-lively-cafe-society-woody-allen-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c1bd197e4d70265feda0ce1a2cdcc0fc1e9fc3a%2F4_34_4934_2960%2F4934.jpg>
 Surprise hit … Blake Lively in The Shallows. Photograph: Rex Shutterstock 
The Shallows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/23/the-shallows-review-blake-lively-shark-thriller-jaume-collet-serra>
 was this summer’s surprise breakout hit, hauling five times its budget and 
showing Lively could carry a film single-handed. She spends almost 90 minutes 
battling a shark, on a remote rock, in a bikini, with just an injured seagull 
for company. She looks fantastic, but that’s not the reason you can’t take your 
eyes off her.

“It was so emotionally demanding,” she says. “With those isolation movies, 
there’s no one to talk to and you’re often not speaking much. You do 16-minute 
takes of going from happy to watching someone die, to screaming, to pain, to 
fighting. So you’re just physically drained at the end of the day.” Plus there 
was all the swimming, “a ton of underwater work”, no stunt double until the 
last two weeks – and then mostly because her second pregnancy was starting to 
show.

She will shortly be appearing in Marc Forster’s new thriller All I See Is You 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt4486986/>, as a blind woman who regains her sight. 
And this Friday sees the release of Café Society,Woody Allen’s latest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/25/woody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon>
, in which she’s out-of-the-blue captivating: breezy, funny and touching as a 
divorcee socialite in 1930s Hollywood who catches the eye ofJesse Eisenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jesse-eisenberg>.

Shooting Café Society <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cafe-society> was like 
a wonderful dream, she says, more like being in a play than a film. “The movie 
you see is often very different from the movie you shoot. The magic comes 
together in post-production. But when you’re on a Woody Allen set, you look 
around and think: ‘We’re making a Woody Allen movie!’ He creates the 
environment around you. If there’s a band playing, it’s not someone turning on 
a boombox. It’s a band playing from the beginning of the take. You have to 
speak loudly.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fblake-lively-cafe-society-woody-allen-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d99cbfcdb7072e52b7f6d50e4c56efd13fd5f07%2F0_235_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Blake%20Lively%20on%20sharks%2C%20starlets%20and%20filming%20with%20Woody%20Allen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fblake-lively-cafe-society-woody-allen-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Blake%20Lively%20on%20sharks%2C%20starlets%20and%20filming%20with%20Woody%20Allen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fblake-lively-cafe-society-woody-allen-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d99cbfcdb7072e52b7f6d50e4c56efd13fd5f07%2F0_235_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Out-of-the-blue captivating … Blake Lively and Jesse Eisenberg in Café 
Society. Photograph: Sabrina Lantos/Warner Bros 
Not that everything about that era was terrific. Hollywood in the 30s “was a 
very domineering industry. They decided who people would date, the movies they 
would do, and they would block people’s careers if they wanted to promote 
someone else.” Plus, women like the one she plays could only be free for a 
certain time before getting shackled to the sink. “It was a very patriarchal 
society and women were meant to stay at home and raise the kids. You hoped to 
find a loving and successful husband, because men were the ones who were able 
to be breadwinners. Now women can exist in both worlds. There’s still a vast 
amount of inequality but it’s better.”

While Allen and Eisenberg share with the film a disdain for name-dropping and 
star worship, Lively, careful to accommodate the average Joe, says encountering 
famous people is something that “geeks me out but I’m also intimidated by it”. 
She tells a tale about being snapped next toBeyoncé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/beyonce> at the Met Ball. “The first thing I 
want to do,” she says, “is find that picture online and say, ‘Beyonce knows my 
name!’”

• Café Society is out in the UK on 2 September.
 