
As the senate debates Federal Reserve chairman Ben Bernanke's reappointment, 
it is striking how the media views blaming Bernanke for theGreat Recession 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Business/wireStory?id=9266823> as being out of bounds. 
Of course Bernake bears much of the blame for America's economic collapse.

He was either in, or next to, the driver's seat for the last seven years. 
Bernanke was a member of the board of governors of the Federal Reserve since 
the summer of 2002. He served a six-month stint as head of President Bush's 
council of economic advisors beginning in the summer of 2005 and then went back 
to chair the Fed in February 2006.

This crisis is not a weather disaster like Hurricane Katrina; it is a man-made 
disaster that was brought about byseriously misguided economic policy 
<http://select.nytimes.com/2006/01/02/opinion/02krugman.html>. And, after Alan 
Greenspan, Bernanke was better positioned than any other person in the country 
to prevent this disaster.

The basic argument is very simple. The US had an enormous housing bubble. This 
bubble drove the economy ever since the last recession in 2001. It propelled 
the economy directly through a building boom that sent housing construction to 
record levels. Indirectly, it led to a consumption boom as people spent money 
based on the $8 trillion in housing equity that was temporarily created by the 
bubble.

When the bubble collapsed it was inevitable that it would lead to the sort of 
disaster that we are now seeing. We lost close to $500bn in annual demand due 
to the collapse of housing construction. The building boom created an enormous 
glut of housing. There will be little need for new construction for several 
years in the future.

The disappearance of trillions of dollars of bubble-generated housing equity 
led to a plunge in consumption. Annual consumption has fallen by close to 
$500bn. If we add in a loss in demand of close to $200bn associated with the 
bursting of a bubble in commercial real estate, the collapse of the bubbles led 
to a fall in annual demand of close to $1.2tn. The Fed has nothing in its bag 
of tricks that allows it quickly replace $1.2tn in demand, which is why the 
country is now mired indouble-digit unemployment 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/economics/2009/11/20/joblessness-across-the-us-unemployment-rates-by-state/>
.

In spite of the heroic efforts at obfuscation by many economists, there is not 
really much to dispute in the above story. Add in the fact that the bubble was 
both recognisable and preventable, and you have a very solid indictment of 
Bernanke.

The bubble was easy to recognise, Bernanke just failed to do it. Nationwide 
house prices had already experienced an unprecedented 30% increase by the 
summer of 2002. Since there was nothing in the fundamentals of the housing 
market tojustify this run-up 
<http://www.cepr.net/index.php/publications/reports/the-run-up-in-home-prices-is-it-real-or-is-it-another-bubble/>
, and no remotely corresponding increase in rents, Bernanke should have already 
been aware of the housing bubble by the time he joined the Fed in 2002.

The Fed has a large arsenal with which to attack a housing bubble, but the 
first weapon is simply talk. If Greenspan and Bernanke had used their platform 
at the Fed to educate Congress, the financial industry, and the public at large 
about the existence of the housing bubble and the risks it posed, this likely 
would have been sufficient to pop it.

This is not about mumbling "irrational exuberance," it's a question of using 
the Fed's full research capacities to document the existence of a housing 
bubble (they actually did the opposite) and then disseminating this research as 
widely as possible. If this proved inadequate, the Fed also had substantial 
regulatory powers to curb the deceptive subprime loans that helped inflate the 
bubble in its later stages.

If talk and regulation failed, then the Fed could have used interest rate 
hikes. A policy of raising interest rates with the explicit target of bursting 
the bubble – for example, a commitment to raise rates until house prices fall, 
– would almost certainly accomplish its goal in fairly short order.

Bernanke and his sidekick, Greenspan, chose to take none of these measures 
<http://www.morganstanley.com/views/gef/archive/2007/20070316-Fri.html#anchore0b0b9cc-419e-11de-a1b3-c771ef8db296>
. Instead they insisted everything was fine the whole time. Things were not 
fine and the country is paying the price. And yes, it is very much Bernanke's 
fault.
 