
It has become a bit of a trend for rock stars to turn their hands to the 
brewery business: Iron Maiden had their Trooper British bitter, Madness 
revealed a Gladness hop and Elbow enjoyed a surprising degree of success with 
their Build a Rocket Boys! bitter.

But Blur's Alex James <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alex-james> seems 
set on becoming the first popstar to turn to, well, pop. And not just any pop: 
the bassist has applied for use of the Britpop trademark in order to brand what 
looks like a forthcoming range of fizzy drinks.

Twenty years after taking on the Gallagher brothers in the charts, James will 
now be taking on a different Oasis on the supermarket shelves.

James, 45, who runs a farm in Oxfordshire and has become an award-winning 
cheese maker, submitted his application for theBritpop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/britpop> trademark in October 2013, which 
was published for consultation by the Intellectual Property Office on Friday.

According to the IPO's site, the application covers non-alcoholic beer, soda 
water and – in what seems a nod to the Britpop scene's fondness for 
drug-fuelled overindulgence – sherbet beverages.

A range of alcopops seems to be in the pipeline too: alcohol containing fruit, 
cream liqueurs and tequila are among other ingredients listed on the trademark 
application.

After Blur <https://www.theguardian.com/music/blur> broke up, James, who once 
said "My 40s are about food", told interviewers he needed to do something 
different and against advice bought a run-down farm in the Cotswolds with his 
wife.

He has since developed a reputation for artisan cheese, which includes Blue 
Monday (named after his favourite New Order song), Figgy Pudding and Little 
Wallop, a soft goat's cheese washed in Somerset cider brandy and wrapped in 
vine leaves.

But his previous ventures into the supermarket have not always been 
successful. A line of cheeses that included off-beat flavours such as ketchup 
and tikka masala were introduced inAsda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> in 2011. By the following summer, 
six of the nine flavours were withdrawn by the supermarket, which suggested 
they were "ahead of their time".

James combines his love of food and music with the Big Feastival, which he 
runs with chef Jamie Oliver, and which last year had performances from artists 
including Basement Jaxx, KT Tunstall, The Feeling and Rizzle Kicks alongside 
chefs including Gizzi Erskine and Valentine Warner, who hosted cooking 
demonstrations and masterclasses.

It is 20 years since Britpop's critical heyday – when Blur and Oasis released 
their best albums, Parklife and Definitely Maybe. But while guitar music is no 
longer in such rude health, the Britpop brand could tap into a wider 1990s 
revival.

When he was criticised for his everyday range of cheese in Asda, James hit 
back in aSun column 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/features/3767979/Blur-star-Alex-Jamess-punks-of-cheese.html>
. He said: "One critic called my ketchup-flavour cheese an abomination without 
even tasting it – just like the crusty establishment figures reacted to punk 
rock when it came out. There is so much snobbery about food. I love everyday 
cheese and I love posh cheese. There's room for everything."
 