
Blur have abandoned their comeback album, according to producer William Orbit. 
After months of "amazing" work,Damon Albarn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/damon-albarn> recently called off the 
group's recording sessions, Orbit has said.

Orbit, who worked on two previous Blur albums, told NME 
<http://www.nme.com/news/blur--2/63943> the band were working on new material 
following their 2009 reunion. "The new stuff sounded amazing," he said. But 
three weeks ago, all that came to an end. "It was all over with Damon, and the 
rest of the band were like, 'Is this it?'"

As recently as January, Orbit was tweeting happily about Blur's recording 
sessions. "Loving the guitars you laid down!" he wrote in a message to Graham 
Coxon. "Vocal session March 3!" But when March came around, Orbit's tone was 
rather more dour: "Blur could have been good,"he tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/williamorbit/statuses/184806855778897922>. "But Damon, 
brilliant and talented tho he is, is kinda a shit to the rest of Blur."

Although there were no guarantees about new Blur albums, there have been hints 
that something is afoot ahead of their appearance at theLondon Olympics closing 
concert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/feb/21/blur-headline-olympics-concert>. 
In February,Parklife producer Stephen Street said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/feb/28/blur-reissue-complete-back-catalogue>
 Blur were working with Orbit on a new single, Under the Westway. "I got the 
impression that they don't want the pressure of having to make a new [LP]," he 
said.

If Orbit's comments about Albarn seem unusually direct, he took a similar tone 
writing about Madonna last week. Orbit was heavily involved with the singer's
commercially disappointing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/11/madonna-second-week-sales-drop> 
new album,MDNA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/mar/22/madonna-mdna-review>. "You won't 
see me exactly jumping up and down with delight over the way that things have 
panned out," he said on Facebook. "We were very pushed for time â€¦ and various 
pressing commitments took up [Madonna's] limited time, such as perfume ranges 
and teen fashion contests and other such endeavours which are beyond my own 
limited understanding of pop star agendas." Orbit later removed the posts, 
apologising on Twitter: "I regret that I said [these things] online. Not fair 
to M."
 