
He is already a renowned bass player, cheesemaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2012/feb/16/alex-james-memoir-cheese>
 and diarist. And nowAlex James <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alex-james>
 has added director to his list of going concerns. TheBlur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/blur> bassist has just unveiled his debut 
short film, named, A Slice of Life. The two-and-a-half-minute film also 
features a new solo track from James, called Superordinator.

Shot in California, where Blur played Coachella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/apr/18/coachella-2013-blur-stone-roses> 
in April, the film shows James waking up in his hotel room and goofing around 
the swimming pool and the streets of LA, while listening to the track on his 
headphones.

Speaking about his foray into directing, James said: "Like everything else, it 
starts with an idea, and as music is so much part of my life, it quickly became 
the focus of the short. I was in LA listening to the track on my headphones. 
The more I listened to it, the more it chimed with the sunshine and the 
atmosphere of the city.

"So I decided to make a film about being carefree and happy, with a punchline 
that brings it all back to Earth – the concept being life is short, but music 
endures. I really enjoyed the whole film-making process, it was very accessible 
and a lot of fun."

The film was not made on a whim, however. James created A Slice of Life to 
help launch theVirgin Media Shorts competition 
<http://www.virginmediashorts.co.uk/>. With the aim of discovering new British 
film-making talent, the contest gives budding directors the chance to get their 
work shown in cinemas, on television and online. The overall winner will be 
given £30,000 to fund their next project.

It also emerged this week that Blur could be on the verge of releasing a new 
studio album in Hong Kong, afterDamon Albarn made a cryptic announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/may/07/blur-hint-new-album> from the 
stage.
 