
It has become something of a trend for rock stars to turn their hands to the 
brewery business:Iron Maiden 
<http://money.cnn.com/2013/03/15/news/companies/iron-maiden-beer/> had their 
Trooper British bitter, Madness revealed aGladness hop 
<http://www.thebeercompany.co.uk/the-beers/growler-brewery-gladness/> and Elbow 
enjoyed surprising success with aBuild a Rocket Boys! 
<http://www.elbowbeer.co.uk/> beer. Today's booze news, however, comes in the 
form of Blur's Alex James, whohas applied 
<http://www.ipo.gov.uk/tmcase/Results/1/UK00003025854> to use the name Britpop 
for a new drink.

The bassist submitted an application for the Britpop trademark in October last 
year, which was published for consultation by the UK's Intellectual Property 
Office last Friday. We're still awaiting confirmation from James's people, but
the IPO's site <http://www.ipo.gov.uk/tmcase/Results/1/UK00003025854> reports 
that the application covers "non-alcoholic beer", "sherbet beverages", "soda 
water", "alcohol containing fruit", "tomato juice", "cream liqueurs" and 
"tequila", among other ingredients.

The Blur <https://www.theguardian.com/music/blur> bassist already owns a 
series of trademarks for his cheeses, such as Little Wallop, Figgy Pudding, 
Farleigh Wallop and Goddess. A range of James's cheeses that were devised for 
the high street supermarket ASDA were withdrawn from sale in 2012 however, with 
flavours including cheddar with salad cream, ketchup, tomato and tikka masala 
deemed too "ahead of their time" by the chain.

Here's hoping his drink venture might be a little more successful than his 
dairy detour. If all else fails, he's still got Tracy Blackjacks, Out of Thyme 
and Essex Hotdogs to fall back on. Suggestions of any other future Blur-related 
food brands are welcomed in the comments below.
 