Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQaTqEqNydMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQaTqEqNydMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FQaTqEqNydMM%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Blur <https://www.theguardian.com/music/blur> will celebrate their 21st 
birthday with a massive 21-disc box set. Reissuing their complete discography, 
the band will also include five and a half hours of unreleased material, plus 
DVDs of concerts from 1994 and 1999.

Due on 30 July, two weeks before what will be "in all likelihood 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/apr/07/blur-concert-last-damon-albarn>
"their final concert, Blur 21: the Box incorporates their seven studio LPs, as 
well as seven CDs of bonus material, four discs of rarities, three DVDs, a book 
and a limited-edition 7in. All have been remastered by engineer Frank 
Arkwright, in collaboration with producer Stephen Street. The rarities albums 
comprise 65 tracks, including demos from Blur's earlier incarnation, Seymour, 
and recordings with Andy Partridge and Bill Laswell. There is also a song 
called Sir Elton John's Cock.

The remastered albums will be available individually, and via download and on 
180-gram vinyl. The DVDs not only bring together clips such as Blur's first TV 
performance, on BBC's Eggs & Baker, and a collaboration with Fran√ßoise Hardy, 
but also two complete gigs: a Parklife-era concert at London's Alexandra 
Palace, from 1994, and a 1999 performance at Wembley arena.

Despite Blur's cornucopia of unreleased material, the new set does not seem to 
include any songs from Blur's most recent sessions. Over the last two years, 
the re-formed band is thought to have worked on a handful of tracks; at least 
one of these,Under the Westway 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/music/2012/apr/07/blur-concert-last-damon-albarn>, 
is apparently ready for release. Although Albarn has said the song will be 
issued as a single this summer, there is no sign of it in their 
21st-anniversary blowout.
 