
“I call it the honeypot or the flypaper approach,” says Patrick Brill, better 
known as the slogan artistBob and Roberta Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/bob-and-roberta-smith>. He’s talking 
about his unique style of canvassing: Smith is standing against Tory MP Michael 
Gove in Surrey Heath at the general election, in protest at what he sees as the 
coalition’s denigration of the arts in education. Rather than knock on doors or 
hector from a soapbox, Smith has been staging artistic happenings in the 
constituency, hoping to attract the curious and then hit them with his serious 
political points.

Last week, he filmed himself in Camberley town centre, where he went for a 
“psychogeographic” walk (it was dictated by an algorithm – second right, second 
right, first left, etc – so he didn’t know where he would end up). Russell 
Brand tweeted the YouTube link to his 8.7m followers, which is ironic given 
Brand’s attitude to voting. And today, Smith and I are off to Bagshot, a town 
that sounds like it was named after a shire-dwelling Tory colonel, where Smith 
plans to do some drawings and watercolours to “highlight the issues”.

Smith thinks the Department for Education’s system of discount codes – which 
give less academic value in secondary schools to art, music, drama and dance 
than to science, technology, maths, English and so on – will have a disastrous 
impact on the nation’s economy and its reputation for creativity, design and 
innovation. “The social value of art in schools is that it gives you a way of 
shaping your world and your way of thinking,” says Smith.Art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> is as valuable as maths or 
computer-coding, he says, when it comes to fostering the entrepreneurial spirit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fbob-roberta-smith-michael-gove-surrey-heath-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426520611687%2F4ff7961d-3721-4cd7-8a91-9fa2338435b5-2060x1374.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bob%20and%20Roberta%20Smith%3A%20on%20a%20mission%20to%20unseat%20Michael%20Gove&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fbob-roberta-smith-michael-gove-surrey-heath-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bob%20and%20Roberta%20Smith%3A%20on%20a%20mission%20to%20unseat%20Michael%20Gove&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fbob-roberta-smith-michael-gove-surrey-heath-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426520611687%2F4ff7961d-3721-4cd7-8a91-9fa2338435b5-2060x1374.jpeg>
 Smith on the campaign trail. Photograph: Alecsandra Raluca Dragoi for the 
Guardian 
What’s more, he says, the founding of free schools in existing buildings 
represents a shirking of governmental responsibility to provide pupils with 
drama studios and pottery kilns, as well as science labs and playing fields. 
Smith – who is also a lecturer and a father to Etta, 19, and Fergal, 14 – 
considers Gove, now chief whip, the chief architect of these destructive 
policies when he was education secretary. He rarely badmouths his rival, but on 
the opening night of his current London exhibition, Why I Am So Angry, he 
flogged 50 prints of his text-artwork Letter toMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> at £100 a pop. This funded 
his campaign.

Today, Smith’s bid to penetrate the blue heart of Surrey Heath is hampered on 
several counts. One, it is Mother’s Day, and even his campaign manager Matthew 
Couper has cried off. Two, it is bitterly cold and drizzly. Three, trains 
aren’t running to Bagshot, so he had to use the replacement bus. A lolloping, 
likable figure in fur hat and bright blue trews, Smith turns this into an 
opportunity to canvass passengers. “Gove is damaging a lot of things,” agrees 
Alex Berry, a primary school teacher. He accepts a badge saying “Vote Bob 4 
more art” and a flier (“Be Bobtimistic!”), but he won’t be voting for Smith – 
he’s not a constituent. He’s just here visiting his mother.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fbob-roberta-smith-michael-gove-surrey-heath-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426525138189%2Fbafa16b7-c157-4522-a578-f5794f915bf9-2060x1953.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bob%20and%20Roberta%20Smith%3A%20on%20a%20mission%20to%20unseat%20Michael%20Gove&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fbob-roberta-smith-michael-gove-surrey-heath-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bob%20and%20Roberta%20Smith%3A%20on%20a%20mission%20to%20unseat%20Michael%20Gove&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fbob-roberta-smith-michael-gove-surrey-heath-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426525138189%2Fbafa16b7-c157-4522-a578-f5794f915bf9-2060x1953.jpeg>
 Some of Smith’s campaign artwork. Photograph: Guardian 
Bagshot does not, at first, look inspiring art-wise, with its acres of 
Brookside-style housing and uncrossable A322. Then we happen upon a Victorian 
viaduct. Smith sits, sets out some brightly coloured placards (“Every school 
should be an art school”) and starts to paint it. Neil Putley pauses with his 
dog Wesley to look and then listen to Smith’s pitch. “I’ll vote Tory,” Putley 
says, “but I think art should be taught in schools. If they’re not given the 
opportunity, you won’t find out what kids are interested in.”

A woman on a bicycle also pulls up and listens. “I don’t think I should be 
standing with you,” she says. “It wouldn’t look good.” She is a Conservative 
councillor and won’t give her name. “I think you are absolutely right in what 
you are saying,” she adds, “though I have the greatest respect for Michael 
Gove.” Keith Adamson, a retired insurance broker, hovers. “I’m not politically 
minded,” he says, when I ask what he thinks of Smith’s agenda, “and I’m 
emigrating to Canada before the election.”

Smith takes a seat on the High Street, opposite the Co-op, the King’s Arms pub 
and the Brook Church, a view he finds appealling. Beneath a signpost dedicated 
to Queen Victoria, he starts to rough out a painting in bold greens and 
purples, with a bruised blue for the steadily darkening sky. His father was the 
landscape painter Frederick Brill, head of Chelsea School of Art and a 
working-class man who benefitted from the access to education that Smith wants 
to preserve. Abu Bakar, owner of the nearby Princess Cottage Indian restaurant, 
approaches, agreeing with Smith’s arguments, even though he plans to stand as a 
Tory councillor this year. “It doesn’t matter what party you are,” he explains.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fbob-roberta-smith-michael-gove-surrey-heath-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426525040381%2F982a4db2-bfbe-4591-8f5e-8171f64868e5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bob%20and%20Roberta%20Smith%3A%20on%20a%20mission%20to%20unseat%20Michael%20Gove&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fbob-roberta-smith-michael-gove-surrey-heath-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bob%20and%20Roberta%20Smith%3A%20on%20a%20mission%20to%20unseat%20Michael%20Gove&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2015%2Fmar%2F16%2Fbob-roberta-smith-michael-gove-surrey-heath-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F16%2F1426525040381%2F982a4db2-bfbe-4591-8f5e-8171f64868e5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Smith on the streets of Bagshot. Photograph: Guardian 
Smith begins to draw a 3D-effect badger, with a view to using it to get Queen 
guitarist Brian May, a local luminary, on side. But now the rain is insistent 
and not conducive to watercolours, so we retreat to the home of Karen Hall, who 
teaches drama in Shepperton. She read about Smith’s campaign on Twitter and 
volunteered to drum up support. “I believe the damage that’s being done to our 
schools is going to take a generation to fix,” she says, as her daughters Echo, 
Eden and Evaly parade around brandishing badges and placards.

In 2010, Gove won with 31,326 votes, representing 57% of those cast. But what 
will happen if Smith wins in 2015? “Oh God, it would be like The Producers,” he 
says. “It’s not about winning, though, it’s about highlighting the issues. But 
in a sense, there’s already been a win: I’ve been on The Daily Politics show, 
debating with Ed Vaizey; I’ve talked to people about something important. And 
at the end, I expect to get a large-scale artwork: my election diary, with 
paintings and films somehow woven together – out of it.”

One thing that counts against Smith is that he does not live in the 
constituency – although, to be fair, neither does Gove. Smith divides his time 
between a house in London and another in Ramsgate. Consequently, Smith is 
registered to vote in Kent. “The awful thing,” he says, “is I am probably going 
to have to vote tactically down there to keep Nigel Farage out. So I might 
actually end up voting Tory.”

• Why I Am So Angry by Bob and Roberta Smith is at Handel St Projects, London 
N1 until 9 May. Details:handelstreetprojects.com  
<http://handelstreetprojects.com>
 