
Bobbi Kristina Brown, daughter of Whitney Houston, dies at the age of 22
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/27/bobbi-kristina-brown-daughter-of-whitney-houston-dies-aged-22>
Bobby Brown said he believes things would have turned out differently for 
Bobbi Kristina Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/27/bobbi-kristina-brown-daughter-of-whitney-houston-dies-aged-22>
 if he had been with his daughter days before she was found unresponsive in her 
home in suburban Atlanta.

Brown was to speak publicly for the first time since Bobbi Kristina’s death in 
July, in an appearance on Fox’s talk show The Real, which airs Monday. He 
became emotional several times while sitting next to his wife Alicia Etheredge 
in video clips of the pretaped interview released in advance.

“If I could have been there two days before, it wouldn’t have went down like 
that,” said Brown, who wore a necklace bearing a photo of him and his daughter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fbobby-brown-whitney-houston-was-ready-for-her-daughter-in-heaven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F348ea35215dbf115f4b59272597a884331bcea27%2F0_83_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bobby%20Brown%3A%20Whitney%20Houston%20was%20ready%20for%20her%20daughter%20'in%20heaven'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fbobby-brown-whitney-houston-was-ready-for-her-daughter-in-heaven%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bobby%20Brown%3A%20Whitney%20Houston%20was%20ready%20for%20her%20daughter%20%27in%20heaven%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F14%2Fbobby-brown-whitney-houston-was-ready-for-her-daughter-in-heaven%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F348ea35215dbf115f4b59272597a884331bcea27%2F0_83_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Bobby Brown (right) with his wife Alicia Etheredge. Photograph: Chris 
Pizzello/Invision/AP 
Twenty-two-year-old Bobbi Kristina died in hospice care on 26 July. She was 
found face-down and unresponsive in a bathtub on 31 January.

Bobbi Kristina was the only daughter of Brown and the late Whitney Houston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/mar/22/whitney-houston-death-ruled-accidental-drowning>
. Brown says he thinks Houston was ready for their daughter to be with the 
singer “in heaven”.

The ballad of Bobbi Kristina Brown: born of pop royalty and plagued by tragedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/may/06/bobbi-kristina-brown-whitney-houston>
Brown said he held out hope for months that Bobbi Kristina would survive.

“We prayed and hoped for six months, you know, for something better to 
happen,” he said. “But when God calls you, he calls you.”

His daughter was buried in New Jersey next to Houston.

“I’m pretty sure her mother was ... had a part with like, ‘Come on, let’s get 
her up here’,” he said. “[Houston] was not comfortable by herself, I guess. She 
just called my daughter with her.”

Houston died in a similar fashion. She was found face-down in a foot of water 
in her bathtub at the Beverly Hilton hotel just before the 2012 Grammy awards. 
Authorities found prescription drugs in the suite and evidence of heart disease 
and cocaine in her body but determined her death was an accidental drowning.

Bobbi Kristina was found in the home she shared with Nick Gordon, an orphan 
three years older than her, whom Houston had raised as her own. Bobbi Kristina 
referred to him as her husband.

A police report earlier this year described the incident as a drowning and 
authorities are investigating her death.
 