
Boeing <https://www.theguardian.com/business/boeing> is reportedly preparing 
to cut 10% of its workforce – up to 8,000 workers – in Washington state as 
global competition in the aviation industry intensifies.

The demise of the Boeing 747 is a sign of changing flight patterns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/29/demise-of-boeing-747-sign-of-changing-flight-patterns>
The aerospace company said it would reduce the headcount in its commercial 
airlines division by 4,000, with around one-third through voluntary layoffs and 
the rest by leaving positions unfilled, a spokesman said.

“While there is no employment reduction target, the more we can control costs 
as a whole the less impact there will be to employment,” Doug Alder said.

The job cuts would include hundreds of executives and managers, but would not 
done through forced layoffs, he said.

However, the Seattle Times 
<http://www.seattletimes.com/business/boeing-aerospace/boeing-job-cuts-this-year-could-reach-10-percent/>
 reported that the company, which has dominated the global airline business for 
decades, was aiming for a 10% overall cut – which would mean about 8,000 
positions in Washington.

In February, Ray Conner, chief executive of Boeing’s airplane business, warned 
employees that job cuts were necessary to “win in the market, fund our growth 
and operate as a healthy business”.


The American company, maker of the famed Jumbo jet, has been overtaken as the 
world number one in terms of future orders by the European companyAirbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus>. 


In January, Airbus claimed had 57% of the market  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/airbus-overtakes-boeing-in-aircraft-orders>
overall by units ordered, with the 1,036 orders in 2015 making its cumulative 
order book more than $1tn (£693bn). its fuel-efficientA320neo family 
<http://www.airbus.com/aircraftfamilies/passengeraircraft/a320family/> of 
planes had given it a dominant position in the market for smaller, short-haul 
aircraft, it said, although Boeing was selling more wide-body aircraft. Boeing 
delivered 762 planes in 2015 for revenues of $125.bn compared with Airbus’s 635 
aircraft, earning $91.6bn.
 