
News Corp has refused to confirm reports 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/tv-and-radio/breakfast/andrew-bolts-channel-ten-show-the-bolt-report-reportedly-cancelled-by-network-20160118-gm7xcm.html>
 that Andrew Bolt’s Sunday morning TV program, which it finances to the tune of 
$2m a year, will not be broadcast on Ten this year.

Guardian Australia understands the decision on the future of the the Bolt 
Report has been delayed ahead of a News Corp board meeting next month.

Malcolm Turnbull's coup against Abbott sets off 'civil war' in News Corp 
Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/22/malcolm-turnbulls-coup-against-abbott-set-off-civil-war-in-news-corp-australia>
Sources said Ten was charging News about $2m a year for using its facilities 
to produce and broadcast the one-hour weekly program.

When Lachlan Murdoch was chairman at Ten he arranged for News to pay for the 
now defunct Meet the Press and the Bolt Report, which were proving too 
expensive for the ailing network.

The program has never enjoyed high ratings or attracted lucrative advertising 
revenue. It is consistently beaten in the ratings by Insiders on the ABC.

The News Corp columnist wrote on his blog on Monday 
<http://blogs.news.com.au/heraldsun/andrewbolt/index.php/heraldsun/comments/the_bolt_report_and_my_future/>
 that a report saying his Sunday morning TV show was no longer wanted by Ten 
were incorrect. But Bolt also said he was going to be very busy filming his2017 
ABC TV show, I Can Change Your Mind About Recognition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/08/andrew-bolt-corporation-columnist-to-take-part-in-abc-documentary>
, this year and no longer wanted to work seven days a week.


The ABC doesn't need Andrew Bolt to debate Indigenous recognition | Paul Daley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/postcolonial-blog/2015/dec/09/the-abc-doesnt-need-andrew-bolt-to-debate-indigenous-recognition>
“The issue is that my show is produced by News Corp, and several options are 
being considered which I can’t discuss and which I am thinking about,” Bolt 
wrote. “If anything, they involve doing more TV, not less.

“My preference meanwhile is to stop working seven days a week, as I have done 
for the past five years. Enough with that. Just what I will end up doing and in 
what form is something I am thinking about at long leisure as I saunter around 
the country filming a documentary for the ABC, something which has turned out 
to be such fun that I wouldn’t mind more of the same.

“One liberating factor is that I now don’t feel so much that I have a dog in 
the next election fight. I can do other things without feeling I am deserting. 
Or am I wrong? One more thing to ponder up here in Arnhem Land. Meanwhile, back 
to my copy of Enemies of Promise.”

A spokesman for Bolt said there would be no comment on the future of the Bolt 
Report.
 