
Andrew Bolt claims his freedom of speech is under attack again. “Two of my own 
articles were banned by the federal court for being too upsetting,” the Herald 
Sun columnistwrote on Saturday 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/opinion/andrew-bolt/andrew-bolt-were-mad-as-hell-and-its-time-to-speak-out/news-story/4d97f76a0b8d4716c67e450b64c55349>
 of the federal court decision in 2011 that he had breached section 18C of the 
the Racial Discrimination Act. “And now ‘diversity’ officials in the ABC are 
actually trying to stifle diversity by demanding the ABC not screen a 
documentary it commissioned in which Aboriginal MP Linda Burney and I politely 
debate the government’s plan to change our constitution to divide us by race.

“These officials, including the ABC’s Bonner committee of Aboriginal 
representatives, insist the ABC should not give me a platform to put the 
argument against this constitutional change. They claim I am a ‘racist’ for 
opposing things like that. They demand, therefore, that I not be heard in case 
viewers are influenced or angered.”

Andrew Bolt demands Turnbull resign as conservatives turn on each other after 
election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/02/andrew-bolt-demands-turnbull-resign-as-conservatives-turn-on-each-other-after-election>
Well Andrew, we are here to calm your fears about your free speech being 
curtailed. We can reveal the contentious one-off ABC TV documentary
“Recognition: Yes or No” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/08/andrew-bolt-corporation-columnist-to-take-part-in-abc-documentary>
, originally slated for 2017, will screen on the ABC on Tuesday 20 September. 
The ABC has confirmed the program was discussed by the broadcaster’sBonner 
committee 
<http://about.abc.net.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/ABCRAPReport20162018.pdf> – 
which has responsibility for monitoring the ABC’s progress in advancing the 
status of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities. However, despite 
internal objections, it was never going to be banned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fbolts-revolt-short-lived-as-abc-votes-in-favour-of-recognition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2442699091f4651d1b215c8efbe2f9f7c36c5415%2F0_0_640_360%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bolt's%20revolt%20short-lived%20as%20ABC%20votes%20in%20favour%20of%20Recognition%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fbolts-revolt-short-lived-as-abc-votes-in-favour-of-recognition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bolt%27s%20revolt%20short-lived%20as%20ABC%20votes%20in%20favour%20of%20Recognition%20%7C%20Amanda%20Meade&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F18%2Fbolts-revolt-short-lived-as-abc-votes-in-favour-of-recognition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2442699091f4651d1b215c8efbe2f9f7c36c5415%2F0_0_640_360%2F640.jpg>
 A scene from the ABC’s Recognition Yes or No. Photograph: ABC 
“Recognition: Yes or No is designed to generate discussion about this 
important national issue,” an ABC spokesman told Weekly Beast. “The ABC’s 
Bonner committee has seen the program and discussed it with the director of 
television [Richard Finlayson]. While members of the committee have strong 
views about the program, at no stage did the committee discuss trying to stop 
the program going to air.”

‘Gray Lady’ examines Fairfax’s blues

Fairfax Media’s woes have received some unwanted international attention from 
none other than the New York Times. Amajor feature has lamented the decline of 
the company’s historic mastheads 
<http://mobile.nytimes.com/2016/08/18/business/international/australia-media-fairfax-smh.html?smid=tw-share&amp;_r=0&amp;referer=>
, saying they “face a diminished future, with company executives even 
discussing whether to stop printing the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age on 
weekdays”.

Strikes, lay-offs, tabloidisation and financial strife have plagued the 
company that once held governments to account, the article says. “The Saturday 
edition has now shrunk [from 600] to around 200 pages. Fairfax has cut more 
than 500 jobs at city newspapers over the last five years, including 100 in 
April, according to Australia’s union for journalists. And last year the 
Herald’s cherished printing presses were sold for $34m.”

The feature argues that some of Fairfax’s wounds are self-inflicted – for 
example, when executives split the newsroom between the tabloid website and the 
highbrow newspaper back in the 1990s.The former Fairfax executive and ex-ABC 
boss Mark Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/02/former-abc-head-mark-scott-to-run-state-education-department>
 is quoted saying the Herald’s strength had always been its “great quality, 
broadsheet traditions”. SMH investigative reporter Kate McClymont tells the NYT 
it will be bad for democracy “if this voice is diminished in any way”.

News Corp telegraphs future

On the same day as Fairfax’s retreat from print was being highlighted, News 
Corp’s chief executive, Robert Thomson, addressed staff on the newsroom floor 
at the Daily Telegraph.According to the Australian 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/news-corp-ceo-robert-thomson-print-is-here-to-stay/news-story/7a3cf3a61cee40f8ce3d02601b79e4b4>
, Thomson underscored the importance of the printed newspaper at a time of 
“much upheaval” when “lesser media companies are contemplating” an exit from 
print.

Thomson said: “There is a vast cauldron of crap content out there. It’s ladled 
out liberally by distributors and recyclists who are not environmentally sound 
but are the news equivalent of strip miners. That is why we have to work so 
hard to protect our intellectual property and assert ... our values and the 
primacy of acts of creation.”

Kennedys doctrine challenged

On Friday night journalists frocked up to attend the Kennedy awards for 
excellence in journalism at Royal Randwick, set up in honour of the late Daily 
Telegraph crime reporter Les Kennedy. But many of the nominees for a Kennedy 
work for News Corp, which placed them in a difficult position as News Corp 
chose the same night to hold its annual News Awards.

News Corp posts 28% decline in global earnings despite real estate boost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/09/news-corp-posts-28-decline-in-global-earnings-despite-real-estate-boost>
The Australian’s crime reporter Dan Box – who won two Kennedys for his 
brilliant podcast, Bowraville, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/23/australias-serial-dan-box-on-the-making-of-true-podcast-bowraville>
 chronicling the investigation into Australia’s least-known serial killings – 
couldn’t be there to pick it up because he also picked up the top gong at the 
News awards.

So how did this happen? We understand the clash of calendars came about 
because News chose an earlier date this year to coincide with a visit to Sydney 
by Rupert Murdoch. (The invitations to the event were from Rupert himself.) 
This was too bad for the Kennedys, which always hold its event close to the 
death of Kennedy and whose plans were locked in. As it turned out Murdoch Sr 
was a no show and was replaced by son Lachlan and Robert Thomson.

Entrenching the rights of Bill

The focus of the News Awards evening was on Bill Leak, who not only won 
cartoonist of the year but whosehighly criticised cartoon of an Indigenous 
father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/05/bill-leak-defends-racist-cartoon-amid-widespread-criticism>
 was hailed by speakers as an example of shining a light on difficult issues 
and not bowing to political correctness. The Australian’s editor-in-chief, Paul 
Whittaker, paid tribute to Leak, a man “beloved by our readers but apparently 
the most hated man in Australia in social media circles for the past couple of 
weeks because of a searing cartoon that was confronting and uncomfortable but 
that cut to the quick of an unpalatable truth in a way thousands of words of 
reporting and analysis had failed to do”.

Thomson also spoke of Leak’s cartoon, saying News would always defend the 
right to “articulate artfully”. He said: “Social networks do not have an 
editorial tradition but they are starting to create a tradition of censorship, 
silencing those who dare to differ, those who fail to kowtow to contemporary 
conventional wisdom.”

 Whittaker, who picked up newspaper of the year, said in his acceptance speech 
that free speech and a free press were “under assault everywhere” by special 
interest groups “seeking to suppress discussion”.
 