
Director: Anthony Kimmins
Entertainment grade: D–
History grade: C

In 1745, Bonnie Prince Charlie, grandson and heir of the deposed King James II 
of England and VII of Scotland, arrived inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to attempt to reclaim the throne.

Production
 Veteran Scots actor Finlay Currie reads a proclamation: somebody should have 
read the Riot Act to the director. Photograph: Moviestore collection Ltd/Alamy 
"Bonnie Prince Charlie was one of those huge florid extravaganzas that reek of 
disaster from the start," star David Niven admitted. Halfway through the 
nine-month shoot, Niven cabled producer Sam Goldwyn: "I have now worked every 
day for five months on this picture and nobody can tell me how the story ends 
stop advise." Goldwyn couldn't help: according to Niven's biographer, Sheridan 
Morley, he thought the movie was called "Charlie Bonnie", and was "apparently 
under the mistaken impression that it was to be the story of a lovable Scots 
terrier". Next year, Peter Capaldi willreportedly direct a film 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/home-news/mcgregor-and-capaldi-team-up-for-film-of-scotlands-biggest-ever-movie-flop.19381716>
 – entitled Born to be King and starringEwan McGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ewanmcgregor> – about Bonnie Prince Charlie's 
disastrous shoot.

Claimants
 David Niven as Prince Charles Edward Stuart with Henry Oscar as his father, 
the Old Pretender. Photograph: Rex Features 
In Rome, the Old Pretender, James Stuart, and his son Charlie (Niven) plot 
their return. The Old Pretender is wearing a massive grey wig and 
rhinestone-encrusted frock coat; his son is in a white wig and dazzling jacket. 
If you remember how Sir Elton John and his husbanddressed for the singer's 50th 
birthday party 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/standard-pictures/elton-johns-millions-7372043.html?action=gallery&ino=6>
, that's the look. The Young Pretender sails for Scotland ("Look! Look over 
there! Scotland!" he cries from the deck of his ship, in case you haven't been 
following). Ashore, he meets a shepherd dressed less glitzily in some mud. "I 
do ken it!" the shepherd burbles in the film's hammy attempt at Scots dialect. 
"You're your father's son! I bid ye welcome!" He bursts into patriotic tears. 
Hooray for toffs.

Culture

The clan chiefs assemble, all competing for the most extravagant Scottish 
accent. The Marquess of Tullibardine wins, rolling his Rs so fiercely one fears 
his head might fall off. Charlie puts on the charm, and soon they're all up for 
a war. Another of the film's patronisingly twee peasants appears. This one's 
kind of a wizard. "Blind Jimmie can see into the morrow as easy as a lass can 
look into a glass," trills the shepherd. Blind Jimmie turns to Charlie. "Ye 
have yellow hair," he intones, mystically. Uncanny. Then, just when you think 
things can't get worse, he starts to sing.

War
 A bonnie victory for the Jacobites, but wait … Photograph: BFI 
Charlie hits on Clementina Walkinshaw 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clementina_Walkinshaw> (Judy Campbell), who in 
real life would go on to bear him a daughter during the course of a 
relationship more abusive than romantic. Meanwhile, Lord George Murray (Jack 
Hawkins, sporting an enormous rolled hairdo that appears to be inspired byThe 
Ugly Duchess <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Ugly_Duchess>) keeps him away 
from the fighting. "Am I to sleep through the campaign?" Charlie wails. "Why 
not, sir?" snaps Murray. "So long as you find the crown of Great Britain on 
your head when you awake." By this point, the audience may also be considering 
sleeping through the campaign, and the film's dismal attempt to liven itself up 
with Charlie's victory at Prestonpans doesn't help. The Highlanders' surprise 
attack on the Hanoverian forces is filmed in the dark, which is historically 
accurate but makes things quite hard to see.

Escape
 We're doomed … John Laurie as Blind Jimmie foresees a box-office disaster, 
while Charlie and Flora hole up in a cave to avoid reading the reviews. 
Photograph: Archive Photos/Getty Images 
Worse yet, when it gets to Culloden, the film misses out the battle entirely – 
cutting straight to everyone already dead or half-dead, slumped on a 
battlefield set up in a very small studio. Someone just off-camera is ruffling 
the gorse with a hairdryer to make it look like windswept Culloden Moor. 
Perhaps Mr Goldwyn had stopped sending the cheques. Left with almost an hour of 
its bloated runtime to fill, the film stretches beyond any possible interest 
the story of Charlie's escape withFlora MacDonald 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flora_MacDonald> (Margaret Leighton). This could 
have been quite jolly, given that the Young Pretender dressed as a woman and 
called himself Betty Burke. Instead, the film wheels Blind Jimmie back on to do 
some more singing'n'soothsaying, and half-heartedly contrives a romance between 
Charlie and Flora. "Dear Flora! I wish I could give you a kingdom," Charlie 
says, before heroically scuttling off back to the continent to spend the rest 
of his life getting drunk and having affairs.

Verdict

Maybe they should just have made that movie about the lovable Scots terrier.
 