
On Tuesday during a meeting with a Senate subcommittee on Capitol Hill, Bono 
suggested that comedians should be sent to counter Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/13/bono-send-amy-schumer-chris-rock-fight-islamic-state-isis>
. Stressing he was serious numerous times, the U2 frontman explained: “Don’t 
laugh. I think comedy should be deployed. It’s like, you speak violence, you 
speak their language. But you laugh at them, when they’re goose-stepping down 
the street, and it takes away their power. So, I’m suggesting that the Senate 
send in Amy Schumer and Chris Rock and Sacha Baron Cohen, thank you.”

The response to Bono’s comments has ranged the gamut from “Is he serious?” to 
“Is he freaking serious?” Yet the singer was adamant that sending in famous 
comics would be a solid alternative to airstrikes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fbono-comedy-fight-isis-amy-schumer-chris-rock-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bono%3A%20comedy%20can%20help%20fight%20Isis%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fbono-comedy-fight-isis-amy-schumer-chris-rock-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bono%3A%20comedy%20can%20help%20fight%20Isis%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fbono-comedy-fight-isis-amy-schumer-chris-rock-video&media=>
Of course this wouldn’t be the craziest idea that has emanated from U2 (see: 
their iTunes album snafu 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/bono-apologizes-for-forcing-u2s-songs-of-innocence-on-itunes-users-20141015>
), but it begs to be discussed. After all, Bono has often used his massive 
success to promote the causes he’s cared about.

Yet this statement seems, if he is indeed serious, remarkably naive. The goons 
in Isis are so far removed from reality, how could they possibly even 
understand the concepts of humor and joy in general? (A question Joyce Carol 
Oates recently posed, to much mockery.) 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/11/24/books/joyce-carol-oates-celebratory-joyous-islamic-state-twitter.html?_r=0>

Bono: send Amy Schumer and Chris Rock to fight Islamic State
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/13/bono-send-amy-schumer-chris-rock-fight-islamic-state-isis>
Bono’s modest proposal only demonstrates how showbusiness has consumed his 
entire way of thinking. A case in point is the fact that he cited some of the 
hottest comedians of today, as if Isis cares about who’s “in” right now. I 
don’t want to go out on a limb, but I highly doubt they peruse the Hollywood 
Reporter to see the latest box office returns. (Isis fighter: “Oh, Chris Rock! 
He was hilarious on the Oscars. Yeah, let’s see what he has to say.”)

Bono’s idea wasn’t an offhand comment he made while getting drinks with a 
buddy. It’s like when you’re tipsy at a bar and start setting the world to 
rights. At a certain point you’re so drunk that simple logic doesn’t really 
play into it, but it sure makes you feel good to get your grand pronouncements 
out there. YetBono <https://www.theguardian.com/music/bono> actually flew to 
Washington DC and was speaking to the very people that make these kind of 
decisions, expecting to be taken seriously. It adds a whole new level of not 
only weirdness, but total arrogance.

Aside from all of that, wouldn’t it be nice to live in a world where one of 
Schumer’s relatable sex jokes would actually disarm these guys and make them 
think: “Hey, we’re actually all the same. We never realized this. Call off the 
torturing!” Let’s pretend for a moment that Isis does indeed love comedy. Maybe 
a member of Isis was actually a scorned standup who was heckled and finally 
said: “You know what, comedy’s not my thing. I’m going to try to bring down 
western civilization instead.” Unfortunately for all of us, that’s probably not 
the case.

Bono’s thoughts also illustrate the way comedy is often regarded – 
particularly among privileged liberals – as a kind of magic pill with which you 
can disarm people with extreme ideas. Yetas Trevor Noah recently pointed out in 
the Guardian, in response to criticism of his stewardship of the Daily Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/02/trevor-noah-on-replacing-jon-stewart-and-changing-the-daily-show>
, laughs are a poor substitute for action. “In South Africa the youth rose up, 
the people rose up,” he adds. “You didn’t tweet about the thing, you didn’t 
watch TV shows about the thing, you made something happen yourself. Satire was 
seen as an additional tool or a weapon in that arsenal.”

In response to Bono’s idea, New Hampshire senator Jeanne Shaheen responded in 
the most diplomatic way possible, noting that it was “not the first time I’ve 
heard experts on how do we counter violent extremism talk about that,” later 
adding: “It’s one of the things we’re looking at.” Either Shaheen was smitten 
by the fact that the guy who sings Beautiful Day was standing before her in 
full pompadour, or the US government was actually toying with the idea of 
staging a few standup shows amid the bloodshed as opposed to, I don’t know, 
figuring out how to rescue kidnapped women and children.

Of course Schumer herself summed up Bono’s comments best, delivering a classic 
two-word response via Twitter: “Holy shit.”
 