
The Casual Vacancy by JK Rowling 

The death of councillor Barry Fairbrother sends the town of Pagford into 
shock, sparking an election "fraught with passion, duplicity and unexpected 
revelations" for his seat on the council. Even those who scornedHarry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/harrypotter> are going to be curious about 
what his creator comes up with when she turns to adult fiction.27 September, 
Little Brown

Patrick Leigh Fermor: An Adventure by Artemis Cooper 

Patrick Leigh Fermor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/jun/10/patrick-leigh-fermor-obituary>
, who died last year at the age of 96, was one of the travel-writing greats, a 
war hero who related his journeys as a young man through Europe in classics 
such as A Time of Gifts and Between the Woods and the Water.Artemis Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/dec/09/biography.johncunningham> draws 
on years of interviews with the author and his friends in this much-anticipated 
biography.11 October, John Murray

Back to Blood by Tom Wolfe 

The author of The Bonfire of the Vanities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/10/bonfire-of-vanities-tom-wolfe> 
sets his new novel in Miami, with characters ranging from the city's Cuban 
mayor to a nest of shady Russians and a psychiatrist who treats sex addiction. 
Wolfe's previous novel I Am Charlotte Simmonswon him the Bad Sex in fiction 
prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/dec/14/awardsandprizes.badsexaward1>, 
but his publisher is promising a "hilarious reckoning with our times".
25 October, Cape

Dear Life by Alice Munro 

A new collection from Canadian short story writer Munro is a reason to 
rejoice. Set in the countryside and towns around Lake Huron, a landscape she 
returns to again and again, these stories are about "the moment a life is 
shaped". Munrowon the Man Booker international prize in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/27/alice-munro-man-booker-international-prize>
, when her work was described as "practically perfect".1 November, Chatto & 
Windus

Standing in Another Man's Grave by Ian Rankin 

John Rebus ostensibly retired in 2007's Exit Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/sep/08/crime.fiction>, but the 
detective is back in this new novel from the Scottish author, "as stubborn and 
anarchic as ever". Rebus will be running into Rankin's new detective Malcolm 
Fox and causing problems for his protegee Siobhan Clarke as he investigates a 
series of apparently unconnected disappearances.8 November, Orion
 