
Bookmakers believe Catholic church abuse drama Spotlight will beat western The 
Revenant to the best film prize at this year’s Academy Awards, but expect
Leonardo DiCaprio <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio> to take 
home his first Oscar for his role in the latter.

The Revenant, from the Mexican director Alejandro González Iñárritu, leads the 
charge with 12 nominations, ahead of science fiction effortsMad Max: Fury Road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/mad-max-fury-road>, with 10, and The Martian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/04/the-martian-review-matt-damon-shines-stranded-astronaut>
, with seven, followingthe announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/oscar-nominations-2016-the-revenant-leads-field-mad-max-in-second-place>
 of the shortlists on 14 January. But overall nominations, which include large 
numbers of lesser technical categories, are routinely misleading during awards 
season and most bookmakers believe other challengers will punch above their 
weight for the major prizes.

Oscar nominations 2016: The Revenant leads field, Mad Max in second place
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/oscar-nominations-2016-the-revenant-leads-field-mad-max-in-second-place>
William Hill has Spotlight at 4/5 to win best picture, with The Revenant 
second-placed at 13/8. Paddy Power has similar odds: Spotlight at 5/6 and The 
Revenant at 13/8. The aggregatoroddschecker.com <http://www.oddschecker.com/> 
also has Tom McCarthy’s film out ahead, with The Revenant second-placed andThe 
Big Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/13/the-big-short-review-ryan-gosling-brad-pitt>
, The Martian and Fury Road rounding out the top five.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fthe-revenant-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F14%2F1452791360720%2FKP_1372117_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Revenant%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fthe-revenant-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Revenant%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fthe-revenant-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F14%2F1452791360720%2FKP_1372117_crop_640x360.jpg>
Iñárritu looks set to take the best director prize for the second year 
running, however. William Hill has the film-maker, who also won forBirdman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/25/birdman-unexpected-virtue-of-ignorance-film-review>
 in 2015, at 4/7 to repeat his success, against 3/1 for McCarthy, while Paddy 
Power has Iñárritu at 4/6, with McCarthy at 5/2. Aggregator oddschecker.com 
places Iñárritu as favourite, followed by McCarthy, Adam McKay (The Big Short), 
George Miller (Fury Road) and Lenny Abrahamson (Room).

In the best actor category, DiCaprio appears a huge favourite to buck an 
unfortunate personal trend after picking up four previous acting nominations 
but each time failing to go on to win. TheTitanic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interactive/2013/aug/24/philip-french-titanic-review>
 star is 1/7 or 1/8 with most bookmakers after winning the Golden Globe for 
best actor in a drama, withSteve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/steve-jobs>’s Michael Fassbender 
second-placed at between 5/1 and 8/1. Likewise, Room’s Brie Larson is a big 
favourite to win best actress (at around 1/3) ahead of Brooklyn’s Saoirse Ronan 
and Carol’s Cate Blanchett.

Academy president 'disappointed' with all-white Oscar nominees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/15/academy-president-calls-for-change-after-all-white-oscar-nominees>
Best supporting actor looks likely to go to Sylvester Stallone for Creed, 
according to bookmakers, ahead of Bridge of Spies’ Mark Rylance. And Carol’s 
Rooney Mara is the favourite for supporting actress, ahead of Alicia Vikander 
for The Danish Girl and Kate Winslet for Steve Jobs.

Spotlight, written by McCarthy and Josh Singer, looks odds on to win the best 
original screenplay prize, at around 1/4, with Pixar animationInside Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/18/inside-out-review-cannes-film-festival-pixar>
 its nearest challenger. Few bookmakers are listing the best adapted screenplay 
prize, for which Adam McKay and Charles Randolph’s script for financial crisis 
drama The Big Short is expected to be a frontrunner.

Inside Out, meanwhile, is roundly 1/10 to win best animated feature, with its 
nearest challenger expected to beCharlie Kaufman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/charlie-kaufman>’s stop motion treat 
Anomalisa at about 6/1.

This year’s Academy Awards ceremony will take place on 28 February at the 
Dolby theatre in Hollywood, Los Angeles, with Chris Rock due to host for the 
second time.

 