
An anti-censorship group in America has reported a flurry of attempted book 
bannings in the last quarter of the year and has said there are increasing 
numbers of books being taken off school shelves that deal with race or 
sexuality or are written by "minority" authors.

The Kids' Right to Read Project <http://www.ncac.org/Kids-Right-to-Read> 
(KRRP) is part of theNational Coalition Against Censorship 
<http://www.ncac.org/> (NCAC) and says in November alone they dealt with three 
times the average number of incidents. To date in 2013, KRRP investigated 49 
book bannings or removals from shelves in 29 states, a 53% increase in activity 
from last year. In the last half of the year the project challenged 31 
incidents compared to 14 in the same period last year.

Acacia O'Connor of the KRRP said, "Whether or not patterns like this are the 
result of co-ordination between would-be censors across the country is 
impossible to say. But there are moments, when a half-dozen or so challenges 
regarding race or LGBT content hit within a couple weeks, where you just have 
to ask 'what is going on out there?'"

Among the books which have been complained about were Ralph Ellison's 
Invisible Man 
<http://blogs.wsj.com/speakeasy/2013/09/25/ralph-ellisons-invisible-man-banned-by-schools-fights-for-visibility/>
, Toni Morrison'sThe Bluest Eye 
<http://www.policymic.com/articles/60609/bluest-eye-banned-why-parents-want-toni-morrison-s-book-out-of-schools>
, Alice Walker's The Color Purple, Sherman Alexie's The Absolutely True Diary 
of a Part-Time Indian, Isabel Allende's The House of the Spirits and Rudolfo 
Anaya's Bless Me, Ultima.

Most of the challengers were parents of district students or library patrons, 
though a handful were local or state government officials. Of the more than two 
dozen incidents KRRP faced from September to December, the majority involved 
materials used in classroom instruction.

"It has been a sprint since the beginning of the school year," said O'Connor. 
"We would settle one issue and wake up the next morning to find out another 
book was on the chopping block."

However, the KRRP says it has also seen an increase in "challenged" books 
being returned to the shelves following the body's involvement. This month saw 
two major victories: Rudolfo Anaya's Bless Me, Ultima was returned to English 
classrooms in Driggs, Idaho, and a ban on Isabel Allende's The House of the 
Spirits was lifted at Watauga County Schools in Boone, North Carolina.

Among the other successes the KRRP counts was the situation involving the 
urban fantasy novel Neverwhere by Neil Gaiman, which wasremoved from the shelves
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/11/neil-gaiman-novel-banned-new-mexico-school>
 at schools in Alamogordo, New Mexico, following a single complaint by a 
parent. The school board later reinstated the book.

Neil Gaiman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/neilgaiman> said today: "I'm 
just glad that organisations like the Kids' Right to Read Project exist, and 
that so many of these challenges have successful outcomes â€“ it's obvious that 
without them, the people who do not want their children, or other people's, 
exposed to ideas, would be much more successful at making books vanish from the 
shelves."

KRRP, co-founded by the NCAC and the American Booksellers Foundation for Free 
Expression and supported by the Association of American Publishers and the 
Comic Book Legal Defense Fund, says it is difficult to estimate exactly how 
many books are challenged or removed as many incidents go unreported.

The KRRP also successfully tackled 
<http://ncacblog.wordpress.com/2013/12/02/kids-right-to-read-top-banned-books-of-2013-help-support-our-fight/>
 the proposed banning of The Diary of Anne Frank from schools in Northville, 
Michigan, where one parent complained that passages detailing Anne's 
descriptions of her own body were "pornographic", and Sherman Alexie'sThe 
Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/oct/04/teenage.sherman.alexie>, which 
was branded "anti-Christian". The KRRP and NCAC "went to bat for [this book] 
more than any other work in 2013, facing challenges in Montana, New York, and 
two new cases in New Jersey and West Virginia."

Sherman Alexie said censors are "punishing the imagination. That's why we're 
fighting them."
 