
One of Us <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/one-of-us-264656.html>, an account 
of Anders Breivik’s murder of 77 people in 2011, has been described by its 
author Åsne Seierstad as “a book about Norway. What could go so wrong in such a 
peaceful and harmonious country?” There was a lesser question confronting 
reviewers, too: why would anybody want to read 500 pages about such disturbing 
and traumatic events? “By page five, I was already wishing I didn’t have to 
carry on reading this horribly upsetting book,” wroteCraig Brown 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/home/event/article-2970411/CRAIG-BROWN-Anders-Breivik-s-childhood-unloved-friendless-cruel.html>
 in the Mail on Sunday. “I put it down with relief, freed at last from the grip 
of such evil, and such sadness.”Andrew Anthony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/mar/08/one-of-us-review-compelling-anders-breivik>
, in the Observer, found it “almost unbearable”. Most critics agreed that 
Seierstad had avoided the obvious trap of elevating Breivik and marginalising 
his victims. ForOliver Poole 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/one-of-us-by-asne-seierstad-book-review-breivik-the-man-behind-the-mass-killings-10104595.html>
, in the Independent on Sunday, it was “a brilliant if unrelenting piece of 
reportage, one that cements Seierstad among the foremost journalists of our 
time.”John Burnside, writing in the New Statesman, judged it to be an 
“extraordinary, almost spellbinding account”, but hardly the average reader’s 
idea of a good time. “So we have to believe that this account of murdered 
innocents will teach us something. But what?… Perhaps we hope to discover 
something about ourselves or about that abstract thing, the human soul.”

Tears of the Rajas <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/tears-of-the-rajas.html>, 
Ferdinand Mount’s exploration of his ancestors’ role in India, looked at 
atrocities of a more historical kind. The book “might easily have proven an 
exercise in exoneration,” wroteTarquin Hall 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/culture/books/non_fiction/article1529285.ece>
 in the Sunday Times. “Equally, Mount could have been snared by Raj nostalgia, 
for which the British seem to have an insatiable appetite. But in this epic and 
remarkable family saga … Mount doesn’t shirk from describing the murderous acts 
perpetrated by his ancestors that, he acknowledges, ‘would have attracted the 
attention of any war-crimes tribunal today’.” He though the book was “a 
perceptive antidote to nationalistic prejudicial thinking, and an opportunity 
for a greater understanding of the aftereffects of British imperialism in some 
of the world’s most troubled regions.”Ben Wilson 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/arts/books/non-fiction/article4377994.ece>, in 
the Times, agreed that it was a “dazzling” and “humane” work, but he also 
unearthed a little light relief. “A day in the life of the royal court was like 
an episode ofShameless set in Xanadu,” he remarked, recounting with some glee 
(and at some length) the dissolute life of one Indian royal, Nasir-ud-din.

Light relief is not the name of the game for the bright hope of the literary 
avant garde Tom McCarthy, whose new novelSatin Island 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/satin-island.html> delighted and baffled 
reviewers in equal measure. “If you want a sympathetic main character, a plot 
and a few epiphanies, then you are a contemptible ‘middlebrow’ and McCarthy 
doesn’t want you anyway,” explainedTheo Tait 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/culture/books/fiction/article1529226.ece> 
in the Sunday Times. “YetSatin Island [see page 5] is an undeniably dazzling 
piece of writing” for “those who like that sort of thing”.Paul Dunn, writing in 
the Times, evidently did not fall into that category. “This is a tale 
signifying nothing,” he fumed. “Rather than steering the novel into new waters,
Satin Island steers it up a narrow creek, runs it aground and leaves it 
stranded.” In contrast, the Telegraph’sDuncan White 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/bookreviews/11436670/Satin-Island-by-Tom-McCarthy-review-induces-mania.html>
 might as well have put on a polo neck and booked himself on to the next flight 
to Paris. “On finishing it you will have the powerful urge to throw it across 
the room then the powerful urge to pick it up to read again,” he wrote. “And 
that’s what’s so brilliant.”
 