
From the grey (OK, only some days), air-conditioned comfort of Guardian 
Towers, we want to hear about your summer reading list – and see it, in its 
holiday context. Perhaps you're packing some of thebest holiday reads of the 
year as recommended by top authors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jul/12/best-holiday-reads-2014-writers-critics-recommendations>
? Or perhaps you're taking this as a chance to catch up on your piles of "to be 
read" books.

We’ve seen your shelfies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2013/dec/17/forget-selfies-we-want-to-see-your-shelfies>
, and now we’re after your sand-filled pages – and your travelling books in 
front of foreign cityscapes, jungles, mountains, nearby beaches – or wherever 
your summer is taking you, even if it's just the tube.


We’re also interested in your packing logistics. How frustrating that when you 
willfinally get the time to read The Goldfinch, you can't carry it unless 
you’re ready to come home with a hernia. Indeed, some of the more obviously 
summery novels tend to be mammoth volumes hard to carry around in a bag … Have 
you switched to a digital format to save space, as some of our readersdiscussed 
recently <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/35007926>?

Perhaps you’re not able to travel this time around. We’re also after your 
stories of where summer books took you. Some of the regulars of ourTips, links 
and suggestions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/series/tips-links-and-suggestions-books> 
blog already started sharing their fondest holiday reading memories –JournoKaty 
said <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/37759326>: 

I was one of those kids who had to be kicked out of the door to enjoy the sun 
and play with friends, as I would much rather be curled up with a good book. 
However, the Scottish weather usually ended up on my side and I had many a day 
indoors as the rain battered the windows. And back then it was Nancy Drew, Enid 
Blyton, Goosebumps, Beverly Cleary, so many different books.

VelmaNebraska <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/37860125>:

I read Love in the Time of Cholera during a holiday in Antigua many years ago, 
especially during torrential downpours, and the experience has never left me. 
If you have the opportunity to start it during a summer rain storm, preferably 
with doors open (I'm assuming you'd be inside somewhere), I'd really recommend 
it!

Or SnowyJohn <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/37774057>: 

Tom Jones, I read on the beach in Spain on holiday, and it always reminds me 
of sun and sand. It helps that my copy is smeared with suncream. I memorised 
big chunks of John Donne's poetry on my tea breaks whilst working in a fish 
factory, and can still smell the smoked salmon when I think of him. I read 
Marlowe's complete plays in between serving pints in a pub one summer. The 
essays of Addison and Steele are inextricably linked to interrailing around 
Eastern Europe. etc.

There are two ways of sharing here: if you prefer to just write, you can of 
course use the comment thread below. For pictures or longer stories, share them 
by clicking on one of the blue "contribute" buttons or, if you’re out and 
about, you can use theGuardianWitness app <https://witness.theguardian.com/apps>
 on your smartphone – or search in the Guardian app forGuardianWitness 
assignments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/series/guardianwitness-assignments>. 
We'll include the best submissions in a gallery on the Guardian site at the end 
of the summer.


 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of 
user-generated content on the Guardian. Contribute your video, pictures and 
stories, and browse news, reviews and creations submitted by others. Posts will 
be reviewed prior to publication on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will 
feature on the Guardian site.
 