
The Australian Bureau of Statistics’ latest breakdown of Australia’s population
 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/3235.0Main+Features12014?OpenDocument>
 shows that the stereotypes hold true. Baby boomers still dominate the coastal 
seachange towns; the inner city is still flooded with young singles.

Intergenerational report: pressure from ageing population, and jobs fudge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/05/intergenerational-report-points-to-pressure-from-ageing-population>
In the mining areas of Western Australia we find the greatest number of men 
compared to women; and (perhaps counterintuitively) the ACT provides the suburb 
with the greatest number of women compared to men.

The figures for 2014 of Australia’s population show that of the 23.49 million 
of us, half are under the age of 37 years and three months, 50.3% are female, 
and 66.5% live in capital city areas.

Within those averages are a great many differences. Even at the state level 
things are quite different.

South Australians and Tasmanians, for example, are on average much older than 
their fellow Australians: 36.3% of South Australians and 38.7% of Tasmanians 
are over 50 years of age, compared to 32.8% of the nation:

Queensland is the youngest state, with just 31.9% of its residents above 50 
years of age, but the two territories are the truly young populations. 
Respectively, just 22.6% and 28.6% of those living in Northern Territory and 
the ACT are over 50 years old.

How old you are does appear to have bearing on where you live. 73% percent of 
those aged between 25 and 29, for example, live in the capital cities, compared 
to 60% of those aged 70 to 79:

This tendency for retirees to leave the capital cities and find peace on the 
coast is certainly reflected by the data. The areas which have the highest 
concentration of people over the age of 70 are places likeTuncurry 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/108011154?opendocument&navpos=220>
 on the NSW mid-north coast, which has the highest concentration of people over 
70 with 30.2% - well above the national average of 9.9%.

Similarly Hawk’s Nest 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/106031124?opendocument&navpos=220>
, just an hour or so south of Tuncurry, has 28.6% of its population over 70, 
whileVictor Harbor 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/407011148?opendocument&navpos=220>
 in South Australia lives up to its title in that state as “God’s waiting room” 
with 26.9% of its residents past their seventh decade.

The breakdown of Victor Harbor’s population gives a good snapshot of such 
locales:

Victor Harbor has fewer people of every age bracket younger than 50-54 years 
than anywhere else. Once over that age, it become more concentrated than the 
rest of Australia.

Similarly, while the ABS notes that “the majority (63%) of baby boomers lived 
in Australia’s capital cities in 2014” they too will be found in greater 
concentration “located around larger urban centres in regional Australia or 
along the coast”.

The areas featuring the highest concentration of baby boomers (which the ABS 
defines as those born between 1946 and 1966) is theBenalla Region 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/204021064?opendocument&navpos=220>
 in between Shepparton and Wangaratta. In 2014, 39.5% of its population were 
boomers – well above the 22.9% national average.

Other areas highly populated with boomers includes the Bega-Eden 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/101041020?opendocument&navpos=220>
 hinterland with 38.8% concentration;Castlemaine 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/202021027?opendocument&navpos=220>
, just south of Bendigo in regional Victoria, with 38.5%; andMagnetic Island 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/318021483?opendocument&navpos=220>
 just off of Townsville in Queensland, of whom 37.8% of its 2,412 residents are 
baby boomers.

Castlemaine is fairly typical of such areas: not as low concentration of 
children as in the retirees areas, but a drop off in the concentration of those 
in the early 20s to 30s, and a huge “boom” in numbers of those ages 50 to 70:

For the areas with the higher numbers of non-boomers we need to split them up 
into two groups.

The first are those with the high concentration of young families, often found 
in the suburbs. Places likeWakerly 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/301031019?opendocument&navpos=220>
 in Brisbane’s suburbs,Parklea 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/116021310?opendocument&navpos=220>
 in Sydney’s outer suburbs and Forde in the ACT north have both high 
concentration of Generation X residents – those aged in the mid 30s to late 40s 
– and also a high concentration of children under 14.

Forde, a new suburb in the ACT founded around five years ago, has the highest 
concentration of young and Gen Xers in the nation: 60% of residents are either 
under 14 or between 35 and 49 years of age, compared to the national average of 
39.1%:

But the Gen X’s younger cohort, Gen Y (which the ABS counts as including those 
born up to 1986) and that even younger group generally referred to as the 
“millennial”, are not to be found in high concentration in the outer suburbs, 
but in the inner city.

You can also find them living and working in mining areas like East Pilbara 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/508061219?opendocument&navpos=220>
 in Western Australia, andAshburton 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/508061218?opendocument&navpos=220>
.

But Fortitude Valley 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/305011106?opendocument&navpos=220>
 in inner Brisbane,Darlinghurst 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/117031329?opendocument&navpos=220>
 andSurry Hills 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/117031336?opendocument&navpos=220>
 in Sydney and St Kilda and Southbank in Melbourne are much more representative 
of the types of places where high amounts of young singles or couples without 
kids live.

In Surry Hills, for example, 47% of residents are aged 20 to 34 compared to 
just 21.8% for the entire nation. Kids are almost absent. Only 5.3% of Surry 
Hills residents are under 14, compared to 18.8% nationwide:

Finally, the data also shows us where there are highest imbalances of men and 
women. Obviously, men aged 20 to 65 are in the mining areas.

In East Pilbara, for example, there are 413 men for every 100 women – compared 
to the national average of 99.6 men per 100 women:

One of the few areas with a high concentration of men not associated with 
mining isCampbell 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/801051052?opendocument&navpos=220>
 in the ACT, home to the Australian Defence Force Academy and Royal Military 
College Duntroon. Again, not a surprise.

The ACT is also home to the area with the highest concentration of women: the 
suburbs ofHackett 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/801051056?opendocument&navpos=220>
,Cook 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/801011005?opendocument&navpos=220>
 andStirling 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/801011005?opendocument&navpos=220>
. In Hackett, there are just 75 men for every 100 women:

There appears to be a correlation between such high ratios of women to men 
with higher-than-average numbers of single parent families. In 82% of such 
families, the parent is a woman.

The so-called welfare problem is by and large an ageing population problem
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2014/jan/23/welfare-problem-an-ageing-population-problem>
But while, for example, in the area of Manoora 
<http://www.censusdata.abs.gov.au/census_services/getproduct/census/2011/quickstat/306021151?opendocument&navpos=220>
 in Cairns 39.3% of households are single parents compared to the national 
average of 15.9%, only 13.6% of Hackett households are single parent ones.

The stereotypes about the places we live are sometimes borne out by the 
numbers. Whether they are or not, the data always tells an interesting story 
about the people in your neighbourhood.
 