
Boots is axing 700 jobs in the UK as it implements a cost-cutting plan after 
its merger with the US drugstore chain Walgreens.

The retailer said 700 “non-store based roles” would go as part of a $1.5bn 
(£1bn) cost-cutting plan set out in April. Some workers will be made redundant, 
while other jobs will be shed by not replacing people who leave or retire.

Around 400 jobs are to go at a support office in Nottingham, while the rest 
are in other UK regions. The company was unable to say how many staff would be 
made redundant.

The job losses are the most tangible impact of the £9bn takeover by Walgreens. 
The US drugstore chain announced last year it was buying the 55% part of
Alliance Boots <https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> it did not 
already own, having taken a 45% stake in 2012.

Acting chief executive Stefano Pessina, who made £4.45bn from the merger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/06/italian-billionaire-stefano-pessina-richer-boots-walgreens-merger>
, is looking to cut costs as he upgrades Walgreens stores, which are perceived 
as more old-fashioned than Boots.

In April, Walgreens announced it planned to make $1.5bn in cost savings by the 
end of 2017, up from an earlier estimate of $1bn.

So far the cuts have fallen more heavily on the US-side of the business. 
Walgreens is closing 200 of its 8,000 stores and has frozen salaries for some 
of its top US executives.


Walgreens had hoped to make even bigger savings by moving its headquarters to 
Europe, but wasforced to drop the idea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/06/walgreens-buys-alliance-boots-9bn-pounds>
 amid a political outcry in the US when President Barack Obama attacked 
“corporate deserters”.


Boots said it was “simplifying the structure of support functions in order to 
provide a better level of service … and allow for a more focused investment in 
key areas to drive future growth. This will involve a reduction of around 700 
non-store-based roles.”

When the takeover was announced in August, company sources had said Boots did 
not plan job losses and would keep its headquarters in Nottingham.


Boots employs about 70,000 people at its 2,511 UK stores and traces its roots 
back to John Boot’s herbalist store opened at Goose Gate, Nottingham in 1848.


Simon Roberts, president of Boots, said the high-street chemist remained 
“fully committed to our presence in Nottingham, which has been the home of 
Boots since the very beginning”.

“We have not taken these decisions lightly and understand the impact that 
today’s announcement may have on our colleagues. We are fully committed to 
doing everything we can to support all our people as we transform Boots and 
strive to be even better for our customers and patients.”
 