
Boots is to cut up to 350 jobs in the UK as the pharmacy chain looks to reduce 
costs in its larger stores.

This is the second round of job cuts at Boots in the last seven months, after 
an announcement in June last year that the company would cut 700 jobs in 
offices around the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/08/boots-plans-700-non-store-job-losses-walgreens>
. In the latest round of redundancies, the company plans to cut between 300 and 
350 assistant store managers at its biggest stores.

Boots is now part of Walgreens Boots Alliance, one of the biggest retailers in 
the world, after the merger of Walgreens andAlliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> in 2014.

The company employs 60,000 people in the UK and Stefano Pessina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/02/stefano-pessina-walgreens-alliance-boots>
, the chief executive of Walgreens Boots Alliance, has pledged that Boots will 
remain committed to the UK despite themega-merger. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/06/boots-walgreens-takeover-bid-us-2012-deal>



The latest reduction in the workforce will be achieved through a “combination 
of natural attrition, redeployment, retraining and redundancy”, Boots said. The 
cuts are part of a drive to simplify the management structure within stores.

Boots <https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> also announced that 
400 employees working on its customer helplines will move to Teleperformance, 
which runs customer help centres for companies. The employees will continue to 
be based at Boots’ head offices in Nottingham and retain their pay and benefits.


The retailer also plans to invest in new training academies so staff can offer 
beauty advice to customers and will increase the base pay for its workforce. 
The starting pay for customer assistants outside London will rise from £7.20 an 
hour to £7.70, while the rate in London will rise from £8.77 to £9.07.

Simon Roberts, the president of Boots, said: “Everything we do at Boots is 
about helping people feel good. So many of our colleagues deliver amazing care 
for our patients, customers and communities everyday and we are actively 
working to make sure our people are rewarded for the great work they continue 
to do.

“I believe our plans will enable us to build an even better Boots and drive 
future growth.”
 