
A quick burst of 9 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Red October attackers shutting down C&C infrastructure >> threatpost 
<https://threatpost.com/en_us/blogs/red-october-attackers-shutting-down-cc-infrastructure-011813>

It appears that the attackers behind the Red October cyberespionage campaign 
are taking their ball and going home. Since the attack came to light on Monday, 
the attackers have begun shutting down their infrastructure and the hosting 
providers and registrars involved with some of the command-and-control domains 
are shutting those down, as well.

 The Red October campaign 
<https://www.securelist.com/en/blog/785/The_Red_October_Campaign_An_Advanced_Cyber_Espionage_Network_Targeting_Diplomatic_and_Government_Agencies>
 has been ongoing for more than five years and the as-yet-unknown attackers 
behind it have been focusing their attention on a variety of targets, including 
embassies, research facilities, military facilities and other high-value 
institutions.

Aaron Swartz and the corrupt practice of plea bargaining >> Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/timothylee/2013/01/17/aaron-swartz-and-the-corrupt-practice-of-plea-bargaining/>

All in the US justice system's methods: 

The Supreme Court would never allow a judge to impose a stiffer sentence on a 
defendant because he took the Fifth Amendment, asked to confront his accuser, 
or hired an attorney. But none of these rights matter if the defendant never 
gets to trial. And thanks to the legal fiction that plea bargaining is a 
voluntary negotiation between the prosecutor and defendant, our justice system 
effectively gives people dramatically longer sentences for exercising the right 
to have a trial at all.

 Thanks in part to this kind of coercion, more than 90 percent of defendants 
waive their right to a jury trial. For the majority of defendants, then, the 
plea bargaining process is the justice system. As a result, prosecutors wield 
an immense amount of power with very little accountability.

What does Google need from Android? >> Benedict Evans 
<http://ben-evans.com/benedictevans/2013/1/20/what-does-google-need-from-android>

[With Google Now,] Google <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google> is 
giving you useful titbits, but it is also mining far more data than it would 
get from a PC user - data to improve search relevance and advertising relevance.

 In other words, Android, like Plus, allows Google to tie searches and 
advertising to individual people and places. In the long term, the data that 
Google gets from Android users is probably just as important as Pagerank in 
understanding intent and relevance in search.

 Hence, the real structural benefit to Google from Android now comes from the 
understanding it gives of actual users, and the threat comes from devices that 
do not provide this data - even if, like the iPhone, they do provide plenty of 
search traffic.

 Obviously, Google's access to this data on non-Android platforms is pretty 
partial, but the problem also applies to significant parts of the Android base. 
In China the problem is near-absolute. Google services are mostly blocked 
anyway, almost all Android phones ship with no Google services installed (i.e. 
they are based on the open source AOSP version of Android) and hence Google 
gets close to zero practical benefit from the explosive growth of Android 
there...

 To put that another way, Google's penetration of Android is as important as 
Android's penetration of the handset market.

A fun and beautiful way to animate your photos >Cinemagr.am 
<http://cinemagr.am/>

A fun and beautiful way to animate your photos.

 From February 2012 - does for animated GIFs what Instagram did for photos. 
Some Nokia Lumia handsets now offer the same function built in.

An early tale of the internet >> NYTimes.com 
<http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/12/26/an-early-tale-of-the-internet/>

Peter Hart: 

SRI International, where I was the director of the AI Center, was periodically 
visited by US government auditors. One day I got a call from an internal 
contracts administrator telling me to expect such a visit- in other words, I 
was supposed to be on my best behavior.

 The government auditor soon appeared in my office, armed with a no-nonsense 
demeanor and a bulging briefcase. He pulled up a chair, pulled a file from his 
briefcase, and without preamble said in an authoritarian tone of voice, "Dr. 
Hart, it says here that you've received 2,493,786,916 packets of bits. Is that 
correct?"

 I certainly hadn't expected that question, but I was on my best behavior, so 
I politely replied, "Well, I'm not sure of the exact number, but that sounds 
about right."

 Now read on.

Ending the infographic plague >> The Atlantic 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/business/archive/2011/12/ending-the-infographic-plague/250474/>

Megan McArdle: 

Now that Obama's dog has won the War on Christmas, or something, it's time to 
get down to a war that really matters: the war on terrible, lying infographics, 
which have become endemic in the blogosphere, and constantly threaten to break 
out into epidemic or even pandemic status.

 The reservoir of this disease of erroneous infographics is internet marketers 
who don't care whether the information in their graphics is right ... just so 
long as you link it. As a Christmas present to, well, everyone, I'm issuing a 
plea to bloggers to help stop this plague in its track.

 You'd hope, right? McArdle points out the errors in a few infographics. 
However this post is from 23 December... 2011.

Empty States >> Tumblr <http://emptystates.tumblr.com/>

What does an app show you when it has nothing to show you?

Google happy to see Acer, Asustek launch inexpensive tablets to hike Android 
penetration, say Taiwan makers >> Digitimes 
<http://www.digitimes.com/news/a20130117PD216.html>

As Acer and Asustek Computer will soon launch 7-inch tablets for sale at about 
US$149, Google, although having cooperated with Asustek to develop the Nexus 7, 
is not worried about the competitive impact of US$149 tablets on sales and 
instead hopes the launches will increase the global market share of Android 
tablets, according to supply chain makers.

 Keen price. Yet they don't seem very ambitious despite the price: Acer's only 
aiming to ship 0.5m tablets in its first quarter, and Asus is aiming at 5m-6m 
for the whole year.

How you turn music Into money in 2012 (spoiler: mostly iTunes) >> The Atlantic 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2012/08/how-you-turn-music-into-money-in-2012-spoiler-mostly-itunes/260678/>

Just taking a first look at these data, it becomes clear that buying music 
from artists directly - through iTunes, Amazon or Bandcamp - is the best thing 
you can do to support their music-making. [The cellist Zoe] Keating made 97% of 
her revenue through people just buying her music, whether through physical 
sales or digital download. Spotify subscribers pay their ten bucks a month for 
the service, and that even feels like a healthy little monthly gift to 
music-making. But it's not nearly as helpful to the artists as buying an album 
or a song from iTunes, Bandcamp or Amazon.

 The comparison of radio income with that from Pandora is surprising too.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>. To suggest a link, either add it below or 
tag it with @gdntech on the freeDelicious <http://www.delicious.com/> service.
 