
Boots has been accused of boosting its profits by forcing staff to abuse an NHS
 <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> scheme intended to help sick 
patients.

Managers at Britain’s biggest pharmacy chain were found to be directing their 
chemists to provide medicine-use reviews (MUR) to customers who didn’t need 
them, in order to claim public money from the NHS.

How Boots went rogue | Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/13/how-boots-went-rogue>
The NHS pays £28 for each MUR, which is carried out by a pharmacist and 
intended to give patients professional advice on health, diet and how best to 
manage their medicines.

However, an investigation by the Guardian has found evidence that Boots 
managers are directing staff to carry out MURs on each other and on patients 
who don’t need them or can’t use them.

One pharmacist in the Midlands said he was directed by his managers to carry 
out an MUR on a man with dementia, and on himself. His manager also began an 
MUR but walked out before completion; the store still entered the review on its 
records.

To prevent any milking of the MUR system, the NHS limits each pharmacy to a 
maximum of 400. The Guardian has found evidence that Boots staff are being told 
to take that number as a target for individual stores to hit. Another Boots 
pharmacist in the north-west of England remembers a recent staff awayday at 
which he and his colleagues were told that, “400 MURs is an expectation now. We 
don’t need to tell you that”.

Pharmacists at Boots are clearly being forced to treat MURs as a profit-making 
scheme
PDA general secretary John Murphy 
If a pharmacy carries out the maximum 400 MURs, it will earn £11,200. Assuming 
each Boots pharmacy churns out 400 MURs a year, that one NHS programme is worth 
an annual £30m to the company.

The Guardian has seen a 2008 email from a senior manager for another region 
that states: “I personally don’t want colleagues to feel ‘brow-beaten’ but we 
do need to deliver our targets of 400 MCUs [medicine check-ups – another name 
for MURs] per store this financial year for two reasons:

 * Delivering 400 MCUs is a measure of Excellent Patient Care 
 * The company can make £28 profit for each MCU, so each one we don’t deliver 
is a lost £28.” 
The Guardian has also seen a recent unpublished survey by the trade union, the 
Pharmacists’ Defence Association (PDA), to which more than 600 Boots chemists – 
more than one in 10 of the entire company’s pharmacists ­– responded. Asked 
“how often do you believe financial cutbacks imposed by your main employer have 
directly impacted upon patient safety”, over 75% of Boots chemists said that 
was true “around half” or more of the time. A number volunteered complaints 
about being “pressurised into conducting MURs whether or not patients are 
eligible to receive the service“ and “Boots keeps asking me for more MURs”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fboots-staff-under-pressure-to-milk-the-nhs-says-pharmacists-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57a90f9e77cb5470f4fd880d4db7b1dc48f208b4%2F0_410_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boots%20staff%20under%20pressure%20to%20milk%20the%20NHS%20for%20cash%2C%20says%20pharmacists'%20union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fboots-staff-under-pressure-to-milk-the-nhs-says-pharmacists-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boots%20staff%20under%20pressure%20to%20milk%20the%20NHS%20for%20cash%2C%20says%20pharmacists%27%20union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fboots-staff-under-pressure-to-milk-the-nhs-says-pharmacists-union%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57a90f9e77cb5470f4fd880d4db7b1dc48f208b4%2F0_410_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
 Boots’ flagship store on Oxford Street, London. Photograph: Felix Clay for the 
Guardian 
“Pharmacists at Boots are clearly being forced to treat MURs as a 
profit-making scheme for the company,” said PDA general secretary John Murphy. 
“Either they stick to their ethical standards and ensure that the right people 
get the service irrespective of their financial targets or they satisfy their 
employer by achieving their profit objectives and keep their job.”

A spokesperson for Boots said: “We make it clear to our colleagues that these 
services should not be undertaken inappropriately.”

But as far back as 2010, the NHS’s own research warned that MURs were being 
used simply to take public money and could be “of limited benefit and cursory 
in nature”. In 2013, theJournal of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society noted 
<http://www.pharmaceutical-journal.com/news-and-analysis/feature/have-medicines-use-reviews-come-to-represent-profit-over-patient-care/11124150.article>
 “some pharmacists face penalties for not meeting the targets, such as no pay 
rise or a possible loss of a bonus”, but it did not mention Boots.

Although it has tweaked the criteria for MURs, the cash-strapped NHS has no 
plans to scrap the system, claiming “they help relieve the pressure on GPs and 
accident and emergency departments, ensure optimal use of medicines, better 
value and better patient outcomes, and contribute to delivering seven-day 
health and care services”.
 