
A quick burst of 8 links for you to chew over, as picked by the Technology team

Sophie [Schmidt] In North Korea 
<https://sites.google.com/site/sophieinnorthkorea/>

Sophie has a famous father: 

Bill Richardson, former Governor, US Ambassador to the UN and backchannel 
freelance diplomat extraordinaire, was planning his 8th trip to Democratic 
People's Republic of (North) Korea. He invited my father Eric, who invited me.

 It's a marvellous travelogue.

Why I'm not trading my Surface RT for a Surface Pro >> ZDNet 
<http://www.zdnet.com/why-im-not-trading-my-surface-rt-for-a-surface-pro-7000010132/>

Mary Jo Foley: 

The Surface Pro - from reports from those who were granted limited hands-on 
time with the device at the Consumer Electronics Show - has a higher-resolution 
display, better magnetic connector for powering up, and, of course, the ability 
to run existing Win32 apps. It also only has half the battery life of a Surface 
RT, so in the five-hour or so range. (From all accounts, it is not going to 
include the lower-power but higher-battery-life-enabling version of Intel's 
core i5 processor, contrary to some reports.)

 It's not the price difference that's going to keep me away from the 
$$899/$999 Surface Pro. It's the fact that it is really a PC in tablet's 
clothing. I am interested in buying a new Windows PC this year. But I want one 
with excellent battery life. (I am totally indifferent if my next PC has a 
touch screen. I don't need one, as long as I have a touch-enabled mouse, like 
the Logitech one I've been testing out lately.)

 Again, for me - and your mileage likely will vary - use of the Surface RT has 
shown me that the lack of Win32 (and even Metro-style) apps is not a big deal. 
I am spending about 99% of my time on the Surface RT in the Metro environment. 
I have found very few Metro-style apps I consider worth downloading. Instead, 
many of the things pinned to my Start Screen are web sites.

 Sounds good. 

This, by the way, is a big problem for Microsoft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft>.

 Oh.

I'm one of the lead devs on the Chrome Windows sandbox... >> Hacker News 
<http://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=4860203>

Justin Schuh says XP is a dog - a dead one - when it comes to security: 

Seriously, I've spent many weeks trying to wring every last bit of security I 
can out of XP, and I really do think that Chrome does the best anyone possibly 
could on that front. But in the end XP is just an OS that's far past its 
security expiration date, and running it at all means taking a big risk.

 Are you still using it? (Via Ed Bott)

Huawei creating 50 jobs in Ireland >> The Sunday Business Post 
<http://www.businesspost.ie/#!story/Home/News/Huawei+to+create+50+R%26D+jobs+in+Cork+and+Dublin/id/19410615-5218-50ed-15f1-e0b6d9091180>

Leading Chinese information and communications technology company Huawei is to 
create 50 high skilled research positions with the opening of a new research 
and development centre spread across two sites in Cork City and Dublin.

 Initially the centre will focus on supporting Irish and international telecom 
operators who use the company's customer experience management product, 
SmartCare. But future expansion at the sites will extend R&D functions to cover 
a wider range of IT software projects, said a statement from IDA Ireland, which 
is supporting the project.

July 2012: Android, Nokia smartphone security toppled by NFC hack >> Ars 
Technica 
<http://arstechnica.com/security/2012/07/android-nokia-smartphone-hack/>

By exploiting multiple security weakness in the industry standard known as 
Near Field Communication, smartphone hacker Charlie Miller can take control of 
handsets made by Samsung and Nokia. The attack works by putting the phone a few 
centimeters away from a quarter-sized chip, or touching it to another 
NFC-enabled phone. Code on the attacker-controlled chip or handset is beamed to 
the target phone over the air, then opens malicious files or webpages that 
exploit known vulnerabilities in a document reader or browser, or in some cases 
in the operating system itself.

 The attack can work against Jelly Bean too, to drive the phone via NFC to a 
specific web page with an exploit. It's a dilemma: have NFC enabled so it's 
convenient, or have it disabled so you have to turn it on to make use of it 
only when you want (which implies having to unlock your phone and drill down 
through the settings to activate it).

The end of ragequitting >> Coding Horror 
<http://www.codinghorror.com/blog/2013/01/the-end-of-ragequitting.html>

Jeff Atwood on Aaron Swartz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz>, activism, and the 
struggle the latter implies.

NEC says two phone screens are better than one with Medias W >> The Verge 
<http://www.theverge.com/2013/1/21/3902140/nec-medias-w-hands-on>

Originally teased close to a year ago 
<http://www.theverge.com/2012/2/22/2816067/nec-global-android-lte>, the Medias 
W is NEC's attempt at a dual-screen folding Android smartphone. It's not an 
entirely new idea -- the Kyocera Echo and Sony Tablet P have done similar 
things to middling results -- but can NEC be the first to get it right?

 Questions to which the answer is 'no', because there's no getting this design 
idea right.

High-definition TV: ne plus ultra >> The Economist 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/babbage/2013/01/high-definition-tv>

So far, only a handful of feature films have been shot with cameras capable of 
4K, including "The Amazing Spider-Man", "Prometheus" and "The Girl With the 
Dragon Tattoo". That is hardly surprising given the amount of work involved. 
Insiders reckon making a full-length digital feature in 4K is equivalent to 
producing six ordinary 2K films.

 Even so, some 17,000 cinemas around the world now have digital projectors 
capable of showing 4K films. So, if and when Hollywood upgrades wholesale to 
the new video standard, cinema-goers will be able to decide whether 4K is worth 
the premium they are bound to be charged.

 The recent flood of 3D films largely failed that test. The lacklustre sales 
of 3D television sets suggest they are now doing the same. Will 4K suffer the 
same fate? It is far too early to say. But, for sure, 4K television--far more 
than 4K cinema--faces some formidable challenges.

 Apart from anything, we all tend to sit too far from the screen to discern 
the difference. An excellent primer on why not to hold your breath for 4K - 
even if it is going to happen.

You can follow Guardian Technology's linkbucket on Pinboard 
<http://pinboard.in/u:guardiantech>. To suggest a link, either add it below or 
tag it with @gdntech on the freeDelicious <http://www.delicious.com/> service.
 