
Boris Johnson has said the NHS will get substantial extra funding after Brexit,
despite Theresa May’s refusal to endorse the leave campaign’s promise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/04/theresa-may-refuses-to-guarantee-brexit-pledges-on-immigration-and-nhs>
of an additional £100m a week.

The foreign secretary strayed from his brief during BBC1’s Andrew Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/andrewmarr> show to sign up the prime 
minister to a cash injection for health services during this parliament.

During the leave campaign, one of Johnson’s central arguments was that leaving 
the EU would allow the UK to pump an extra £350m a week into theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, a figure that was later revised down 
to £100m. However, May declined to back that promise this month when she 
travelled to the G20 in Beijing.

Johnson was pressed on the extra money for the NHS after Andrew Lansley, the 
former health secretary,suggested at least £5bn could be available to the NHS  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37435648>after Brexit. Asked whether the 
government could guarantee a “really substantial” extra amount of money per 
week for the NHS by 2020, Johnson said: “Well, yes, in the sense that clearly 
once we leave, and that isn’t possible until the final moment that of the 
change in our arrangements, and we take back control of the budgets we 
contribute to the EU.

“Once that happens, clearly it will be possible for the UK government to spend 
people’s money on our priorities. And the number one priority for most people 
is the NHS. It sounds to me Andrew Lansley has got it right.”

Johnson also aired his views on when the UK should leave the EU, despite No 10 
sources making clear last week that this was a decision for May alone. He said 
the process should not be allowed to drag on and the UK should be out before 
May 2019 to avoid a new batch of British MEPs being elected to Brussels. That 
would implyarticle 50  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/article-50-brexit-debate-britain-eu>
would have to be triggered before May next year to allow two years of 
negotiations to take place.

“There’s Euro elections coming down the track, and people will be wondering 
whether we will be wanting to send a fresh batch of MEPs to an institution we 
are going to be leaving,” Johnson said.

He was not pressed on whether the UK should pursue a “hard” Brexit outside the 
single market with greater powers to restrict immigration, or “soft” Brexit 
preserving single market access but with fewer migration controls. He accused 
British businesses of being addicted to cheap migrant labour, claiming that for 
25 years they had been “mainlining immigration like drugs” without caring 
enough about training young people from the UK.

The appearance on Marr was the first major interview given by Johnson since he 
became foreign secretary in May’s government, afterpulling out of the contest 
at the last minute when his campaign chief, Michael Gove, decided to challenge 
him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/30/brexit-live-theresa-may-and-boris-johnson-set-to-announce-leadership-bids>
.

The former London mayor has kept a relatively low profile since the 
referendum, leading to speculation that he is being kept on a tight leash by No 
10.

On Sunday, an account of the EU referendum campaign by David Cameron’s former 
communications chief, Craig Oliver, revealed that Johnson was genuinely 
conflicted about whether to back leave or remain until the very last minute and 
accused him of being a “conflicted inner”. The account, in a bookserialised in 
the Mail on Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3805977/How-Theresa-torpedoed-Cameron-Boris-Johnson-said-Leave-LOSE-Explosive-new-book-No10-reveals-inside-story-Brexit.html>
, says Johnson vacillated, sending conflicting text messages to Cameron the day 
before he came out for Brexit.

Oliver wrote: “I ask DC what makes him so sure Boris is wobbling. He reads out 
some parts of the text, including the phrase ‘depression is setting in’, 
followed by a clear sense that he’s reconsidering. Neither of us is left in any 
doubt.”

The following day Cameron received a final text from Johnson saying he would 
be backing leave – just nine minutes before he publicly announced his 
intentions in a chaotic press conference outside his London home.

Oliver said Cameron later phoned him to say Johnson’s final message had been 
clear that he did not expect to win, believing Brexit would be “crushed”. “He 
says Boris is really a ‘confused inner’, and their previous conversations 
confirmed that view to him,” he wrote.
 