
Exhibition of the week

Joseph Beuys
This visionary artist brought his charismatic presence to the Edinburgh 
festival in his lifetime and now returns in spirit with a show based around his 
expressive, mythological drawings.
• Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art 
<https://www.nationalgalleries.org/whatson/on-now-coming-soon/artist-rooms-joseph-beuys-a-language-of-drawing/>
, Edinburgh, 30 July–30 October.

Also showing

Christian Boltanski
Memory and a sense of common humanity are the stuff of Boltanski’s powerful 
art. He has created a new permanent installation for this entrancing sculpture 
park.
• Jupiter Artland <https://www.jupiterartland.org/whats-on/christian-boltanski>
, Edinburgh, 30 July until 25 September.

Olivia Webb
A capella singing is at the heart of this sound work in one of Edinburgh’s 
most beautiful buildings.
• Trinity Apse 
<http://edinburghartfestival.com/whats-on/detail/Olivia-Webb-Voices-Project>, 
Edinburgh, until 28 August.

Graham Fagen
A Neon installation that ponders the history of Edinburgh and touches on the 
sensitive subject of Robert Burns’s plan to become a slave overseer in Jamaica.
• Jacob’s Ladder 
<http://edinburghartfestival.com/whats-on/detail/Graham-Fagen-A-Drama-In-Time>, 
Edinburgh, until 28 August.

Raqib Shaw
Psychedelic reinterpretations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jul/14/raqib-shaw-self-portraits-white-cube-gallery-in-pictures>
 of Renaissance paintings in which east meets west to create a dizzy 
colourist’s delirium.
• White Cube Bermondsey 
<http://whitecube.com/exhibitions/raqib_shaw_bermondsey_2016/>, London, until 
11 September.

Masterpiece of the week
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fart-weekly-best-exhibitions-joseph-beuys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F474e675e266509f03767cc74eb7e8bdf6ba269ba%2F113_101_1627_3292%2F1627.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20blunders%2C%20Renaissance%20cover-ups%20and%20paper%20peepshows%20%E2%80%93%20the%20week%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fart-weekly-best-exhibitions-joseph-beuys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20blunders%2C%20Renaissance%20cover-ups%20and%20paper%20peepshows%20%E2%80%93%20the%20week%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fart-weekly-best-exhibitions-joseph-beuys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F474e675e266509f03767cc74eb7e8bdf6ba269ba%2F113_101_1627_3292%2F1627.jpg>
 ‘Movingly stricken’: detail of a panel from The Trinity Altarpiece by Hugo van 
der Goes (about 1478-1479). Photograph: Scottish National Gallery, Lent by Her 
Majesty the Queen 1931 
This is one of the most extraordinary Renaissance paintings in Britain, not 
least because it was commissioned for Edinburgh’s Chapel of the Holy Trinity – 
a very rare case of a great 15th-century artist getting British patronage. Van 
der Goes was in demand all over Renaissance Europe and his Portinari 
altarpiece, sent to Florence and today in the Uffizi, influenced artists 
including Leonardo da Vinci and Botticelli. This complex painting with its 
movingly stricken Christ, music-playing angels and praying monarchs typifies 
his melancholic, sensitive art. He eventually went mad, a tragedy that morbidly 
fascinated Vincent van Gogh. Trinity Chapel was demolished in the 19th century 
to make space for Waverley Station. Today all that remains of it are this 
painting, and its partial reconstruction as the lovely Trinity Apse.

• Scottish National Gallery 
<https://www.nationalgalleries.org/collection/artists-a-z/g/artist/hugo-van-der-goes/object/the-trinity-altarpiece-ng-1772>
, Edinburgh.


Image of the week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/28/antoine-agoudjian-best-photograph-armenian-man-dances>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fart-weekly-best-exhibitions-joseph-beuys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f20db8a22127286d24dd57bcb51a7e60a85f44a%2F0_0_4891_3330%2F4891.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20blunders%2C%20Renaissance%20cover-ups%20and%20paper%20peepshows%20%E2%80%93%20the%20week%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fart-weekly-best-exhibitions-joseph-beuys%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20blunders%2C%20Renaissance%20cover-ups%20and%20paper%20peepshows%20%E2%80%93%20the%20week%20in%20art&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjul%2F29%2Fart-weekly-best-exhibitions-joseph-beuys%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f20db8a22127286d24dd57bcb51a7e60a85f44a%2F0_0_4891_3330%2F4891.jpg>
 An Armenian man dances for his lost son by Antoine Agoudijan. Photograph: 
Antoine Agoudijan 
Photographer Antoine Agoudijan, the grandchild of Armenian genocide survivors, 
met Ishran in the small town of Aparan, outside Armenia’s capital. “He told me 
his son had died – his pride and joy – and that I looked just like him. I asked 
if he would dance for me … a celebratory resilience in the face of overwhelming 
loss.”

What we learned

Images of East London’s Olympicopolis arts quarter plans have been unveiled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/27/latest-vision-olympic-park-olympicopolis-arts-quarter-east-london>


The Armada portrait of Elizabeth I is staying put after a £7.4m funding drive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/29/armada-portrait-elizabeth-i-bought-britain-heritage-lottery-fund-royal-museums-greenwich>


The Fitzwilliam’s new medieval manuscript show is a five-star triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/28/colour-the-art-and-science-of-illuminated-manuscripts-review-a-rainbow-of-agony-and-ecstasy>


Adam and Eve are naked again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/25/adam-eve-naked-again-after-centuries-old-cover-up-fitzwilliam-museum 
https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/25/adam-eve-naked-again-after-centuries-old-cover-up-fitzwilliam-museum>
 …but why are we still shocked by art nudity? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/jul/25/renaissance-art-nudity-cover-up-sistine-chapel-leonardo-censorship>

Sophia Al-Maria said: “people are titillated by Islam” ahead of her Whitney 
show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/27/sophia-al-maria-video-artist-interview-islam-qatar-us-whitney-museum-black-friday>


What life is really like for war photographers:  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/26/life-and-death-as-a-war-photographer-netflix-series>
‘The camera is not a shield’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/26/life-and-death-as-a-war-photographer-netflix-series>

Yuri Pattison’s has transformed the Chisenhale into an eerie silicon ghost 
office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/27/silicon-nightmare-yuri-pattinson-ghostly-office-user-space-chisenhale-gallery>

Marina Abramović said having children would have been a disaster for her art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/26/marina-abramovic-abortions-children-disaster-work>


Photo España is the place to go to rediscover neglected female photographers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/26/photo-espana-review-beatles-bauhaus-juana-biarnes-lucia-moholy-louise-dahl-wolfe>

Robert Rauschenberg’s goat is galloping across to Tate Modern later this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/28/tate-modern-welcomes-extraordinary-robert-rauschenberg-goat>


Meanwhile, Tate Britain has been ordered to reveal its BP sponsorship in full 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/29/tate-britain-ordered-to-reveal-bp-sponsorship>

Olly Wainwright has rounded up Boris Johnson’s design disasters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2016/jul/27/bikes-buses-bridges-boris-johnsons-biggest-design-blunders>

While Sean O’Hagan opened our eyes to the street photography of Eamonn Doyle
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/26/st-pauls-to-unveil-new-bill-viola-video-work-of-mary-carrying-body-of-jesus>

The V&A has acquired the world’s largest collection of paper peepshows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/25/scientist-retracts-claim-damien-hirst-works-leaked-cancerous-fumes>


A pop-up art show spoke truth to power at the Democratic convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jul/28/truth-power-exhibit-banksy-shephard-fairey-democratic-convention>

We may have forgotten the difference between being a hoarder and collecting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/jul/27/the-keeper-new-york-museum-collecting-hoarding>

Illustrator Camilla Perkins has riffed marvellously on African subcultures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jul/27/camilla-perkins-illustration-african-subcultures>


Ellie Davies’ forest photography reminds us of a lost, near-mythical England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jul/26/ellie-davies-forest-photography-into-the-woods-in-pictures>

There are plans to re-open beautiful Alexandra Palace theatre after 80 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/25/campaign-launches-to-reopen-alexandra-palace-theatre-shut-for-80-years>

And finally … the selfie economy is worth a shedload of money <http://The 
selfie economy is worth a lot of money>

Artist’s video

‘Art cannot explain things but it can expose them – that’s why art here is so 
important and necessary,’says Doris Salcedo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/video/2016/jul/26/artist-doris-salcedo-bogota-forces-work-brutal-video>
 as she takes us on a tour of Bogotá and her studio.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fartist-doris-salcedo-bogota-forces-work-brutal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Artist%20Doris%20Salcedo%20on%20Bogot%C3%A1%3A%20'The%20forces%20at%20work%20here%20are%20brutal'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fartist-doris-salcedo-bogota-forces-work-brutal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Artist%20Doris%20Salcedo%20on%20Bogot%C3%A1%3A%20%27The%20forces%20at%20work%20here%20are%20brutal%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F26%2Fartist-doris-salcedo-bogota-forces-work-brutal-video&media=>
Artist Doris Salcedo on Bogotá: ‘The forces at work here are brutal’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/video/2016/jul/26/artist-doris-salcedo-bogota-forces-work-brutal-video>
Get involved

A-Z of readers’ art – your art on the theme of illumination
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/gallery/2016/jul/01/catching-light-your-art-on-the-theme-of-illuminating>
J is for juxtaposition – share your new artwork now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/community/2016/jul/01/j-is-for-juxtaposition-share-your-artwork-now>


And finally

Follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign 
<https://twitter.com/Gdnartanddesign?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 