
As a junior minister fielded questions on Kashmir, Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> kept his head down and rifled 
through his briefing notes. No joy. He tried reordering them. Still no joy. As 
a last resort, he turned them upside down. Nada. Zilch. When you don’t really 
believe in anything it’s always so hard to know if the papers in front of you 
are entirely accurate or merely clarifying something that isn’t true. There was 
only one thing for it. He would have to wing it. No change there then.

 When in doubt, go to war. With Labour’s Chris Bryant and David Winnick more 
interested in scoring points off Jeremy Corbyn’s equivalence between Russian 
and US involvement in Syria than actually thinking about the realistic options 
of British foreign policy in the Middle East, the foreign secretary was free to 
indulge his enthusiasm for military action at foreign office questions in the 
Commons.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fboris-johnson-fails-to-answer-mps-question-in-italian-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Johnson%20fails%20to%20answer%20MP's%20question%20in%20Italian%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fboris-johnson-fails-to-answer-mps-question-in-italian-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20Johnson%20fails%20to%20answer%20MP%27s%20question%20in%20Italian%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fboris-johnson-fails-to-answer-mps-question-in-italian-video&media=>
Boris Johnson fails to answer MP’s question in Italian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/18/boris-johnson-fails-to-answer-mps-question-in-italian-video>
 Boris had no idea who exactly he was going to attack, how he was going to 
avoid more civilian casualties or how he was going to prevent the west getting 
locked into a third world war. He just wanted his fingers on the trigger. 
Bad-a-boom, bad-a-boom. As long as there is no enthusiasm among any of our 
allies for doing more than trash-talking the Russians, both Theresa May and the 
Labour party are happy to indulge Boris’s gung-ho militarism. Taking the moral 
high ground when there is no chance of being called upon to defend it is always 
a safe space.

 It all got rather trickier when the subject moved on to the EU. Could the 
foreign secretary guarantee that Japanese businesses wouldn’t withdraw 
investment to this country as a result of the referendum? “I can give you a 
cast iron guarantee that everything is going to be absolutely brilliant and 
that the Japanese will be giving us squillions of pounds,” said Boris, 
conveniently hiding the newspaper article he had written saying everything was 
going to be terrible and that the Japanese were going to take their cash 
elsewhere.

 Could the foreign secretary guarantee that Italians would still be welcome in 
this country, enquired Tory Alberto Costa. “Va beh tutti li Itali sonno 
benevenuti a a a alla Londra.” Boris adlibbed in doggi bollockese, confirming 
both that he couldn’t speak the language – if in doubt, shout louder – and that 
Italians wouldn’t be welcome anywhere outside the M25.

Alex Salmond chose to press Johnson on an article he had written after the 
referendum in which he had argued Britain should remain a member of the single 
market. “As far as I know there was only one version of this particular 
article,” he said. “If it was OK for the leader of the Brexiteers to argue for 
full participation in the single marketplace after the referendum, why is it 
not OK for people on this side of the House to try to force that issue to a 
vote in theHouse of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons>?”

 “That’s where you’re wrong,” Boris replied, quickly dashing off another 1,000 
words on the hoof. “See here,” he continued, brandishing the drying ink under 
Salmond’s nose. “I’ve just found something I wrote that contradicts myself and 
I’ve now realised that the first article I wrote was merely clarifying 
something I didn’t believe in after all.”

 Boris appeared disappointed to find so many people doubting him on both his 
own and the opposition benches and when Labour’s Ben Bradshaw drew attention to 
an American chamber of commerce report that suggested the US was planning to 
withhold $600bn of investment from the UK due to uncertainty over the single 
market, Boris had had enough. “All this bremoaning gloomadon popping is getting 
me down,”Pangloss <http://www.thefreedictionary.com/Pangloss> moaned. “Let me 
tell you here and now that everything is going to be absolutely brilliant. Why 
can’t you all just cheer up a bit?” Because they’d all read the foreign 
secretary’s article saying it was all going to be a nightmare. That’s why.

 Sensing that there was nothing his boss could do to fight off the 
Bozzasceptics, junior minister Tobias Ellwood rode to the rescue. “We won and 
you lost,” he snapped. “Brexit is going to happen whether it bankrupts the 
country or not. So get used to it.” First the carrot, then the stick.
 