
There are few more poignant places to stage a play about “star-crossed lovers” 
than in former Yugoslavia, where a rehearsal for a gritty production of 
Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet is under way in Belgrade’s trendy but rundown 
port area of Savamala.

With a cast chosen to reflect the deep divisions that remain in this part of 
the Balkans, Romeo and the Montagues will be played by Kosovan Albanians while 
Juliet and the Capulets will be played by Serbians. The production is seen as a 
chance to push forward dialogue and reconciliation in the region.


“I think this is going to mark the end of the Serbia-Kosovo conflict, 
symbolically,” said Jeton Neziraj, a Kosovan playwright and one of the play’s 
co-producers. The play opens on Sunday at theSerbian National Theatre in 
Belgrade <http://www.narodnopozoriste.rs/en/>, before moving to the National 
Theatre of Kosovo in Pristina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2012/jun/22/unrestricted-views-national-theatre-kosovo>
 next month.

I think this is going to mark the end of the Serbia-Kosovo conflict, 
symbolically
Jeton Neziraj, co-producer 
After years of bloodshed and tension, Kosovo declared itself independent from 
Serbia in 2008. Although the Kosovo war ended in 1999, animosity and political 
difficulties remain, with Serbia refusing to recogniseKosovo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kosovo> and flashpoints between the two 
countries continuing.

“The gap between these two nations is deep,” said Alban Ukaj, the Kosovan 
Albanian actor playing Romeo, sitting in a dressing room one morning before 
rehearsals began.

 Ukaj, 34, was a student in Pristina during the war and experienced the 
bombings first-hand, though he now lives in Sarajevo. “I started to lose faith 
that this story was ever going to end, so it was important for me that we start 
something,” he said.

 The play is a joint production by two theatre organisations, Belgrade-based 
Radionica Integracije and Pristina-based Qendra Multimedia, and is partly aimed 
at showing that Serbians and Kosovans can engage and work together, at least on 
stage.

 “We are doing a play and this process together, that is our statement,” said 
Miki Manojlović, the director. “It is much more profound than saying: ‘I think 
this’. Do something together. If we merely talk about reconciliation it is just 
words.”

The play will be performed in both Serbian and Albanian, depending on which 
character is talking, with scenes involving both families interplaying the 
language. No subtitles will be offered to theatregoers.

 “There are people in Belgrade who don’t speak Albanian but they will 
understand,” said Manojlović. “It is easy to understand why somebody loves 
somebody, or someone hates someone.”

This is not the first attempt to use cultural events to bridge the gap between 
the countries.Polip, a literary festival <https://polipfestival.wordpress.com/> 
in Pristina, first held in 2010, has Serbian writers among those regularly 
invited to participate.

Co-founder Saša Ilić, a Serb, says he set up Polip “because I understood there 
was no cooperation between Pristina and Belgrade in a cultural sense and 
someone had to start that.”

He was also involved in two books published in 2011: From Belgrade with Love, 
an anthology of Serbian literature translated into Albanian and published in 
Pristina, and From Pristina with Love, a volume of Kosovan literature published 
in Serbian in Belgrade.

“The goal is that one day they might become part of the school curriculums,” 
he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fromeo-and-juliet-kosovo-war-shakespeare-serbia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427715658762%2F907caabb-ddab-452e-bddf-f8355662af61-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Borrowing%20Cupid%E2%80%99s%20wings%3A%20Romeo%20and%20Juliet%20helps%20heal%20the%20scars%20of%20Kosovo%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fromeo-and-juliet-kosovo-war-shakespeare-serbia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Borrowing%20Cupid%E2%80%99s%20wings%3A%20Romeo%20and%20Juliet%20helps%20heal%20the%20scars%20of%20Kosovo%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fromeo-and-juliet-kosovo-war-shakespeare-serbia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427715658762%2F907caabb-ddab-452e-bddf-f8355662af61-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Anita Mančić (the Nurse) and Jovana Gavrilović (Juliet) in rehearsal for Romeo 
and Juliet. Photograph: Jelena Stanković 
 “It is like throwing a stone in the sea, with ripples and ripples,” said 
Borka Pavićević, the director of the Centre for Cultural Decontamination in 
Belgrade, discussing the importance of the theatre and arts in rapprochement. 
The centre has put on more than 5,000 events since its founding in January 
1995, at the height of the Bosnian war, many related to addressing or opening 
dialogue around unresolved regional issues.

I went through period of looking at my generation as victims. Seeing yourself 
as a victim doesn’t move you forward
Uliks Fehmiu 
“We have people who get very angry about what we do here, but we also have 
people who support us and say they agree with what we are doing,” she said. 
“This new Romeo and Juliet will also mean a lot as it will create discussions.”

 Ukaj is cautious about how the play will be received locally: “Right now I 
just want to make the best production possible of Romeo and Juliet. How the 
reactions will be, I don’t know.”

 Adding poignancy to this production is the fact that many of the actors have 
first-hand experience of the impact of deep divisions between “feuding 
families”.

 Friar Lawrence is being played by Uliks Fehmiu, a 46-year-old actor based in 
New York. Fehmiu is the son of ethnic Albanian actor Bekim Fehmiu and Serbian 
actor Branka Petrić. In 1987 Bekim Fehmiu walked off stage in the middle of a 
performance in protest at the vitriolic speeches ofSlobodan Milošević, the Serb 
leader later tried for war crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/mar/13/guardianobituaries.warcrimes>. 
Fehmiu never acted or appeared in a public role again, and killed himself in 
2010.

 “My father suffered through this period terribly,” said Fehmiu. “Hatred is 
something that is so dangerous and so contagious. I went through a period of 
looking at myself and my generation as victims. This seeing yourself as a 
victim doesn’t move you forward.”

He added: “What is happening here shouldn’t be an exception, it should be a 
normal mainstream thing. This makes sense. You have to believe, at least a bit, 
that this seed we are planting will continue to grow.”

 The Romeo and Juliet the ensemble has created is set in modern-day Verona but 
clearly channels some of the feelings that come from living in the region.

 “I really want to tell something about hatred, about love, about what kind of 
communication we can make,” says Anita Mančić, a Serbian playing the part of 
the Nurse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fromeo-and-juliet-kosovo-war-shakespeare-serbia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427715745419%2Fa1e37640-28e1-4b4f-9d87-9ebe786d674d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Borrowing%20Cupid%E2%80%99s%20wings%3A%20Romeo%20and%20Juliet%20helps%20heal%20the%20scars%20of%20Kosovo%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fromeo-and-juliet-kosovo-war-shakespeare-serbia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Borrowing%20Cupid%E2%80%99s%20wings%3A%20Romeo%20and%20Juliet%20helps%20heal%20the%20scars%20of%20Kosovo%20war&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F05%2Fromeo-and-juliet-kosovo-war-shakespeare-serbia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F30%2F1427715745419%2Fa1e37640-28e1-4b4f-9d87-9ebe786d674d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Armend Ismaili (playing Montague) in rehearsal. Photograph: Jelena Stanković 
 “If I live with you, I must talk to you,” she added. “We exist in one place, 
why are we not talking with each other? That is the problem. We are living in 
the past.”

 But there are signs that relations between Serbia and Kosovo are starting to 
thaw. On 19 April 2013,Serbia and Kosovo signed an agreement in Brussels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/30/serbia-kosovo-historic-agreement-brussels>
 in an attempt to normalise relations. Last week, Serbia’s foreign affairs 
minister, Ivica Dačić, attended a conference in Pristina, the first official 
visit to the city by a leading Serbian politician since the end of the conflict.

Yugoslavia's hated regime crumbles: from the archive, 6 October 2000
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/06/yugoslavia-milosevic-revolution-2000>
 “Until 2008 there was absolutely no support from governments; they actually 
tried to block things like this,” said Neziraj. “This was really the case until 
last year. The fact that the governments are now communicating and meeting has 
an impact on society. People think: ‘Okay, if our ministers are meeting why 
can’t artists meet?’”

 In fact, according to those involved this will be the first theatre 
production that has been supported by both governments, and there are already 
plans to take it beyond Belgrade and Pristina to perform it elsewhere in the 
region.

 “It isn’t easy to build a bridge,” said Manojlović. “But it is much easier 
for us – we are not making policy, but art. But we are fragile: some politician 
can come in and say goodbye, and this bridge no longer exists. Can you see how 
courageous this step is, and how right?”
 