
On a Tuesday afternoon in downtown Buenos Aires local hairdresser Lorena is 
lathering Botox paste on to a customer’s scalp. In Argentine hair parlance, 
“Botox” actually refers to a mixture of vitamins, caviar oil and collagen 
designed to give your hair some shine. It’s all the rage amongPorteñas – 
natives of the capital.


Another client croons in the background of Lorena’s living room while two 
others wait on the couch. Framed pictures of toddlers grinning toothlessly hang 
above their heads. The four women chat about their children’s schools, 
inflation, and the bizarre world of hair maintenance, but are soon interrupted 
by Lorena’s four-year-old twins, Facu and Sofía, with their pet cat in tow, who 
have come to request their afternoon snack.

Lorena, my hairdresser, works out of her small apartment. The bathroom serves 
as a washing station, the living room as both centre of operations and waiting 
area. The whole business is illegal: it doesn’t have a permit and isn’t 
registered with local tax authorities. But thanks to Argentina’s sprawling 
informal economy – whichcomprises one-third of workers 
<http://www.buenosairesherald.com/article/220453/indec-%E2%80%98almost-1-in-10-are-unemployed%E2%80%99>
 – clandestine hair salons such as Lorena’s are not only managing to survive, 
but are also allowing women, especially mothers, to carve out autonomy for 
themselves in a male-dominated society.

The whole business is illegal: it doesn’t have a permit and isn’t registered 
with local tax authorities

There are many reasons why women choose to open their own businesses en negro 
(under the table) in Argentina: to avoid despotic bosses and getting cheated by 
commission-based salaries, or simply because they’re unable to satisfy the host 
of bureaucratic demands one must meet to legally launch a business. But the 
chief reason for Lorena and her colleagues is motherhood.

“When you have kids, they get sick, and if you’re employed, you have to 
continue working. You have to put in your eight hours a day,” Lorena explains.

Argentine policy allows for three months’ maternity leave 
<http://www.elsalario.com.ar/main/trabajo-decente/maternidad-e-hijos> (two days 
of paternity) and requires employers to reduce new mothers’ working hours. 
However, bosses often don’t comply with these stipulations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbotox-black-market-buenos-aires-hidden-hair-salons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86c440d4c148c28859e697bffcaa03eae7993313%2F0_0_3456_2304%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Botox%20on%20the%20black%20market%3A%20inside%20Buenos%20Aires'%20hidden%20hair%20salons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbotox-black-market-buenos-aires-hidden-hair-salons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Botox%20on%20the%20black%20market%3A%20inside%20Buenos%20Aires%27%20hidden%20hair%20salons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbotox-black-market-buenos-aires-hidden-hair-salons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86c440d4c148c28859e697bffcaa03eae7993313%2F0_0_3456_2304%2F3456.jpg>
 A women gets a manicure in Lorena’s salon. Photograph: Catherine Quiroga 
Lorena had her first child 10 years ago while working full-time in a salon. 
She was a single mother with no help from family or friends. “I fought a lot 
with my boss because I had to leave work at 7pm at the very latest to pick my 
daughter up from daycare. He’d get mad because I couldn’t take on more 
customers,” she says.

Why has 'macho' Latin America elected more female leaders than the US?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/07/macho-latin-america-elected-more-female-leaders-than-us>
So when she became pregnant with twins five years ago, she decided to open her 
apartment to customers. “I can organise my time how I want this way. It’s 
easier.” Thanks to lax law enforcement, she isn’t fearful of being exposed for 
working outside the system.

“Police aren’t concerned with what goes on behind closed doors, they’re more 
worried by more ‘visible’ forms of the black market, likemanteros [street 
pedlars], who are of a different nationality [often Bolivian or Peruvian] and 
who people accuse of coming to Argentina to ‘steal jobs’,” explains economist 
Mercedes D’Alessandro, whose organisationEconomia Femini(s)ta 
<http://w4000416.ferozo.com/> provides economic data and analysis with a view 
on gender.

Since hairdressing is at the service of middle-class consumerism and doesn’t 
“sully” the streets of Buenos Aires, Lorena is safe from scrutiny.

Valeria, a beautician and hair stylist, also began working out of her home to 
play a more active role in her children’s education. “When your kids start 
going to school, there are so many things to do – homework, parent-teacher 
conferences, school plays – and I couldn’t do them working at the salon. Your 
boss doesn’t give you permission to go,” she says.

Argentina’s thriving informal economy 
<http://www.buenosairesherald.com/article/220453/indec-%E2%80%98almost-1-in-10-are-unemployed%E2%80%99>
 comprises 33.4% of the working population, according to the latest government 
figures. Legitimate businesses will often employ a combination of workersen 
blanco (formally) and en negro (under the table) because it’s easier and 
cheaper to do so. But for those working in the underground economy, they are 
not eligible for healthcare, social security or retirement pay.

Lorena and Valeria are covered through their current spouses, and as their own 
bosses and as part of a stable socioeconomic bracket, both are in a more 
privileged position than many other women in the informal economy, who are 
typically paid 40% less than men in the same situation. The genderpay gap 
<http://www.indec.gov.ar/uploads/informesdeprensa/EPH_cont_2trim16.pdf> in the 
formal economy is 27%.

Aside from seeking a better economic foothold, another reason women turn to 
informal work is often less a matter of choice. Valeria explains that an 
ex-partner’s abusive behaviour and threats to take her daughter forced her to 
take refuge inside the house.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbotox-black-market-buenos-aires-hidden-hair-salons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99e182d909b6918a1228d0a0df32c8a3b8095f81%2F0_0_4314_2876%2F4314.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Botox%20on%20the%20black%20market%3A%20inside%20Buenos%20Aires'%20hidden%20hair%20salons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbotox-black-market-buenos-aires-hidden-hair-salons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Botox%20on%20the%20black%20market%3A%20inside%20Buenos%20Aires%27%20hidden%20hair%20salons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbotox-black-market-buenos-aires-hidden-hair-salons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99e182d909b6918a1228d0a0df32c8a3b8095f81%2F0_0_4314_2876%2F4314.jpg>
 Activists march during the commemoration of the International Day for the 
Elimination of Violence Against Women in Buenos Aires on 25 November. 
Photograph: Eitan Abramovich/AFP/Getty 
“I had to give up working downtown in order to protect myself as well as my 
children. Since he knew I worked there, he would come here to the house and be 
violent,” she says. “Honestly, I feel much safer working in my house because I 
feel as though my children are much better protected, and me too.”

Valeria’s experience sheds light on the bleak reality of gender-based violence 
in Argentina. Expressed aspiropos (catcalls) at its most “innocuous”, murder at 
its worst, women across the country have recently mobilised under the rallying 
cry“Ni Una Menos” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/argentina-women-south-america-marches-violence-ni-una-menos>
 (Not One Less) following a string offemicides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jun/08/argentina-murder-women-gender-violence-protest>
.

Florencia Alcaraz, a journalist and Ni Una Menos representative, says the 
movement is increasingly focused on securing women’s financial autonomy to 
fight femicide.

“We need women to be economically independent to get out of these cycles of 
violence. We have a saying here that goes, ‘Women are the face of poverty in
Argentina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina>,’ and it’s a reality,” 
she says.

Generation of hope: the girls challenging misogyny in the heart of rural 
Paraguay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/24/new-generation-girls-rights-education-abortion-paraguay>
Argentina’s economy is currently reeling under harsh austerity measures and 
40% annualinflation 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-argentina-investment-idUSKCN0ZA2TY>. 
According to thelatest government statistics 
<http://www.indec.gov.ar/uploads/informesdeprensa/EPH_cont_2trim16.pdf>, 
national unemployment stands at 9.3%. If you take into account the number of 
“housewives” not getting paid for their work, as D’Alessandro, Alcaraz and most 
Argentine feminists do, unemployment for women in Argentina is almost three 
times that.

But with basic policy changes, women could find firmer footing, says Alcaraz. 
“There should be more of a push toward micro businesses to formalise [women 
working out of their living rooms], because it’s one thing for a woman to be 
her own boss – which is fantastic – but to make it sustainable, there should be 
incentives and some kind of structure provided by the state to help businesses 
grow.”

For the time being, Lorena is weathering the difficult economy remarkably well 
– women haven’t stopped tending to their locks. She hopes to open a formal 
salon one day, but that will have to wait until her children are older. “Maybe 
when they’re 10,” she says. “We’ll see.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 