
Moviegoers drained by the drama of the presidential election sought refuge at 
the movies over the weekend, where ticket sales were robust for just about 
everything.

Doctor Strange review – sharp wit and spiritual popcorn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/30/doctor-strange-observer-reveiw> 
Marvel’s Doctor Strange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/30/doctor-strange-observer-reveiw> 
led the North American box office for the second week with $43m, according to 
studio estimates. That was an especially strong hold for the Benedict 
Cumberbatch-led superhero blockbuster, which is now nearing $500m globally.

Trolls, a musical animated release from 20th Century Fox with Anna Kendrick 
and Justin Timberlake, also held well in its second week with $35.1m, bringing 
its cumulative domestic total to $94m.

Denis Villeneuve’s science-fiction thriller Arrival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/arrival-review-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-science-fiction>
, starring Amy Adams, scored the weekend’s top debut with a 
better-than-expected $24m for Paramount Pictures. Opening in fourth was 
Universal Pictures’ Almost Christmas, the first holiday-themed release to hit 
theaters. The family-gathering comedy, starring Danny Glover and Gabrielle 
Union, debuted with $15.6m.

The weekend box office was up about 47% from last year, according to comScore. 
The Friday holiday, Veteran’s Day, also helped stoke business. Paul 
Dergarabedian, senior media analyst for comScore, said the wide variety of 
releases gave moviegoers plenty of choice for escapism over the post-election 
weekend.

“In the first weekend after the election, I think it’s clear that people find 
being able to go to the movie theater is the perfect antidote to the election 
coverage,” said Dergarabedian. “There’s almost nowhere else that you can unplug 
the way you can when you go to the movie theater.”

Arrival review – Amy Adams has a sublime word with alien visitors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/10/arrival-review-amy-adams-jeremy-renner-science-fiction>
The good showing for Arrival <https://www.theguardian.com/film/arrival>, which 
cost $47m to produce, was a welcome relief for Paramount. The studio has 
endured a string of disappointments, including Ben-Hur and Teenage Mutant Ninja 
Turtles: Out of the Shadows, with a relatively thin slate of releases.

Paramount paid $20m for the film’s domestic distribution rights. The film, in 
which a linguist is tasked by the government to communicate with newly arrived 
aliens, has drawn good reviews.

Ang Lee’s Billy Lynn’s Long Halftime Walk also made its much awaited debut, 
albeit on just two screens. The Sony Pictures release, which opens nationwide 
next week, grossed $120,300 from two theaters (one in New York, one in Los 
Angeles).

The two locations are the only places in North America the film is screening 
in Lee’s innovative 120 frames-per-second version (five times the normal rate), 
in addition to being in 3D and at 4k resolution.
 