
People are demanding more of brands
Thanks to social media, consumer praise and criticism are heard worldwide 
today, and movements for and againstbrands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/brand-marketing> are easily started. 
As stories of good and bad experiences with products and services are shared 
across cultures, more people are demanding that brands fix problems associated 
with the things they sell and that they conduct business sincerely and 
ethically, addressing social and environmental issues related to the production 
and distribution of their goods and services.

Recognising this, brands are rising to social expectations – some more than 
others – by taking on responsibilities typically attributed to citizens. At a 
time when social structures are breaking apart, sustainability of the planet 
and our lifestyles is being questioned, and global communications make it more 
difficult to ignore others in need, some brands are stepping in and using their 
power to unite people around causes to help progress society.

A new model for brand development is emerging
Insights from our ongoing CultureQ research project 
<http://www.onesixtyfourth.com/cultureq/> in the UK and US indicate that this 
cultural shift is leading to a new model for brand development called brand 
citizenship. Brand citizenship is the strategic alignment of marketing, 
reputation management, corporate social responsibility, and social media 
community building efforts.

Assimilating attributes of brand leadership, loyalty and good citizenship 
helps to strengthen reputation, equity, and also to increase the return on 
investment on sustainability activities.

Customers expecting brands to behave better – according to our research, to 
deliver a quality product at fair value, treat employees fairly, develop safe 
supply chains, help the environment and focus on provenance – doesn't mean that 
all citizenship initiatives must be big ticket items. But it does mean efforts 
must ladder up from meeting an individual's needs to enriching people's daily 
lives, improving the communities they care about and, ultimately, bettering 
society and the planet.

Specialist and mainstream brands alike can be good brand citizens
Over the last three years of our research, participants have increasingly 
recognised that specialist and mainstream brands alike can use healthy 
ingredients, adopt sustainable processes and be fair to employees and 
suppliers. Brands such asLush <https://www.lush.co.uk/> and Howies 
<http://www.howies.co.uk/> are touted alongside John Lewis 
<http://www.johnlewis.com/> as bettering their customers' lives and society at 
the same time.

John Lewis is a heritage brand that has had good citizenship embedded in its 
essence almost from the start. It is employee-owned, offering quality products 
and honest, helpful service at fair value, and the partnership is governed by a 
constitution. Consumers, staff, suppliers and the environment alike are seen as 
stakeholders in each of the company's businesses and treated justly.

Embracing all the positive characteristics of an artisan, Lush produces 
effective, yet cruelty-free beauty products. Itsannual £250,000 prize 
<http://www.ethicalconsumer.org/researchservices/thelushprize.aspx> rewards 
people working in the fields of cruelty-free scientific research, it raises 
awareness of and lobbies against animal testing, itsCharity Pot 
<https://www.lush.co.uk/content/view/393> raises money for charities and other 
good causes – Lush empowers consumers to make a difference through their 
purchases.

Howies – the Welsh clothing company known for its organic, recycled and low 
impact clothing – employs another version of brand citizenship. Wanting to stay 
small, the company rewards fans that refer a friend, and the friend they refer, 
with a gift. In-store, its top ten wall guides customers to find brands that 
share their values and also complement Howies' ethical viewpoint.

Brand Citizenship fosters a shared sense of responsibility
John Lewis, Lush and Howies each believe in a shared sense of responsibility. 
As good brand citizens, they enable people to co-create the future through 
choosing to purchase products and services that deliver the sustainability and 
social responsibility initiatives that matter most to them individually.

Whilst brands can't solve all of the world's problems, in the midst of 
continued economic, social and environmental uncertainty, brand citizenship is 
a proposition through which consumers, businesses, society and the environment 
will all mutually benefit. It is a win-win approach.

Anne Bahr Thompson is founding partner of Onesixtyfourth 
<http://www.onesixtyfourth.com/>

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <https://register.theguardian.com/media/> to the Guardian Media 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> – this content is brought 
to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. 
 