
Annabel Pitcher's "practically perfect" first book has won the 30-year-old 
authorthe Branford Boase award 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CFIQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.branfordboaseaward.org.uk%2F&ei=bpr1T9OlHdDX8QPjgZ2BBw&usg=AFQjCNGw5sVwWJYsq7ThSRcf1Mw_i8ajyA>
 for the most outstanding debut novel for children.

With the eye-catching opening, "My sister Rose lives on the mantelpiece. Well, 
some of her does. Three of her fingers, her right elbow and her kneecap are 
buried in a graveyard in London," Pitcher's debutMy Sister Lives on the 
Mantelpiece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/unclassified/9781444001839/my-sister-lives-on-the-mantelpiece>
 has already been shortlisted for the Carnegie medal and the Guardian 
children's fiction prize. The story of a 10-year-old boy coming to terms with 
the death, five years before, of his sister in a terrorist bombing, and the 
subsequent collapse of his family, was on Thursday named winner of the £1,000 
Branford Boase award. The prize is given to an author and an editor "to 
encourage new writers and to highlight the importance of the editor in 
nurturing new talent". Pitcher wins the prize jointly with her editor at Orion, 
Fiona Kennedy.

Chair of judges Julia Eccleshare, Guardian children's books editor, said that 
the judges for the Branford Boase felt that My Sister Lives on the Mantelpiece 
was "a practically perfect" novel.

"It has been an exceptionally strong year for debut novels, and any of the 
seven books on the shortlist would have made a worthy winner," said Eccleshare. 
But Pitcher's novel won over the panel of judges. "The writing is excellent, 
the difficult premise is handled with great skill, and Pitcher absolutely 
captures the voice of 10-year-old Jamie," she said.

Previous winners of the prize include Marcus Sedgwick – also edited by Kennedy 
–Meg Rosoff <https://www.theguardian.com/books/meg-rosoff>, Philip Reeve, 
William Nicholson and Frank Cottrell Boyce. Pitcher said the Branford Boase was 
the award that she "really wanted to win, because it recognises your 
partnership with your editor, which is the whole reason I signed with Orion: 
because I wanted to work with Fiona".

Kennedy said she was "really struck" by the power of Pitcher's debut the 
moment she first read it. She acquired the novel following a major auction 
between publishers – "every publisher in London was after this," she said. "I'm 
always looking for really exciting storytelling, good quality writing and a 
very distinctive voice, and Annabel has that. There's so much poise in her 
writing," said Kennedy, who also edits Horrid Henry author Francesca Simon.

Pitcher began writing her debut when she was 25, while travelling through 
South America with her husband. "I'd always wanted to write, but never had the 
time, then I had this year and I got the idea at the start of the trip in a 
youth hostel in Ecuador," she said. "I wrote in hostels as we travelled around 
the world – it was a blissful 12 months."

Landing a publisher, and then being shortlisted for a host of major prizes, 
was unexpected, as were the adulatory reviews. "Anyone who describes this as an 
outstanding debut children's novel might just as well exclude the word 'debut'. 
The fact that this is Pitcher's first foray into fiction is gobsmacking – and 
she's only 29 – but such a book would deserve equal oxygen if it were a 10th 
novel by a cherished old hand. It's a wonderful piece of writing. Am I gushing? 
I do hope so. Books this good don't come round that often," wrote Philip Ardagh 
in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/may/21/sister-lives-mantelpiece-annabel-pitcher-review>
. "Clear your shelf for the awards, Annabel Pitcher."

"It's been a pinch-yourself kind of year," Pitcher said. "I was amazed when it 
got published – as an aspiring writer, you don't ever expect that to happen. 
And then to be nominated for these prizes as well was just incredible."

Readers are responding, she hopes, to "the combination of the sadness and the 
humour" in the novel. "That's what I really wanted to nail with it – I wanted 
it to be poignant and funny at the same time," she said. "The narrator is a 
10-year-old boy in this terrible situation and is seeing it through a child's 
eyes, which enabled readers to laugh at terrible things."

The prize was set up to commemorate award-winning author Henrietta Branford 
and Wendy Boase, one of the founders of Walker Books, both of whom died of 
cancer in 1999.
 