
Less than a week into May and I am already certain that it will be one of the 
most fraught months of my four years inBrazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brazil>.


This is not so much because of the haywire political situation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/05/brazil-far-right-dilma-rousseff-impeachment>
 and theimpeachment of Dilma Rousseff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/18/dilma-rousseff-congress-impeach-brazilian-president>
, the president, nor the upcoming Olympics in my home city of Rio de Janeiro. 
It is not eventhe Zika epidemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/10/zika-virus-brain-disorders-brazil-study>
, nor theeconomic recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/03/brazil-economy-low-oil-prices-inflation>
.

Instead, my rising level of stress is primarily driven by the impending 
expiration of my journalism visa, which means that for the next few weeks, I 
will be mired in what must surely rank among the most Kafkaesque bureaucracies 
in the world.

This is a country where I once had to provide the names of my father and 
mother, as well as my address, phone number, tax registration code and passport 
details, simply to buy a T-shirt at a small town department store.

100 days until Rio 2016: 'It will be a great party, with a garbage legacy'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/27/rio-2016-olympic-games-100-days-to-go-brazil-controversy-legacy>
To proceed with an online newspaper subscription, I recently had to reveal 
whether I was married and give my parents’ names. Woe betide anyone who cannot 
provide details of their bloodline.

In Brazil, form filling appears to be something of a national pastime. The 
more inquisitive and complex, the better.

That may come as a surprise particularly if you – like me, before I moved here 
– have an image of Brazil as a modern, relaxed, informal, happy-go-lucky kind 
of country. But the reality, at least in terms of paperwork, often turns out to 
be old fashioned, rigid, time consuming, expensive and mindnumbingly 
inefficient. As well as being a headache for individuals, it is a major drag on 
the economy and a huge disincentive for investment.

This was one of the biggest shocks when I first arrived in Rio de Janeiro in 
2012, mistakenly expecting the bureaucracy involved in moving to Brazil to be 
easier than for my previous posting in communist China.

To get a journalism visa in Beijing in 2003 required a letter from my 
employer, proof of identity, an application form, copies of wedding and birth 
certificates for my family, and a health check, including an Aids test. That 
was fiddly, to be sure, but once these were complete, the process was 
surprisingly quick, efficient, inexpensive and good natured.

Easier still, with the help of a good local assistant, was opening a bank 
account, getting a phone line and renting an apartment. I was up and running 
much more quickly than I dared hope. China, I decided early on, was a country 
in a hurry.

Brazil, by comparison, seemed determined to drag things out for as long as 
possible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fbrazil-form-filling-rio-de-janeiro-letter-from-our-correspondent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5208dc0490c2577a56e99c5e69e37e1a85b5a103%2F0_139_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brazil's%20favourite%20pastime%3A%20complex%20and%20inquisitive%20form%20filling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fbrazil-form-filling-rio-de-janeiro-letter-from-our-correspondent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brazil%27s%20favourite%20pastime%3A%20complex%20and%20inquisitive%20form%20filling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fbrazil-form-filling-rio-de-janeiro-letter-from-our-correspondent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5208dc0490c2577a56e99c5e69e37e1a85b5a103%2F0_139_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Brazilians protest against the president, Dilma Rousseff. But they might be 
equally frustrated with the bureaucracy. Photograph: Sebastião Moreira/EPA 
For the 44 years of my life in which I was not based in Brazil, the only time 
I recall using a registry or a notary office was to get married. But in my 
first few months in Rio, I must have been more than two dozen times.

My signature was registered in four cartórios (registry offices) so I could 
validate the documents that I needed to rent a home, own a car, open a bank 
account and import my belongings. I counted more than 100 pages of contracts, 
inventories, powers of attorney and other papers – all of which needed signing, 
stamping (with glued cartório stamps) and, of course, queueing up and paying 
for.

Naturally, I started to hate cartórios. But they were necessary, I was told, 
because in Brazil, documents are assumed to be fake until proven genuine by an 
array of stamps, seals and signatures from the relevant authorities and 
offices. Mistrust, it seems, is part of the institutional furniture. Take my 
bank. Almost every month, I had to provide the manager with a letter explaining 
that cash transferred from the UK was my salary, rather than money I was 
laundering. It was almost the same amount every month, but I still needed a new 
letter each time.

Initially, I tried to view this red tape from a wider and more optimistic 
perspective. Perhaps, I wondered, rigid regulations would mean fewer crimes, 
higher safety standards, better labour conditions and stricter environmental 
protection. But it was quickly obvious that this was not the case. Instead, the 
contrary is often true: excessive bureaucracy is a recipe for inefficiency and 
corruption.

It has certainly been doing the economy no favours. According to the World 
Bank’s2012 Doing Business report 
<http://www.doingbusiness.org/reports/global-reports/~/media/GIAWB/Doing%20Business/Documents/Annual-Reports/English/DB12-Chapters/Country-Tables.pdf>
, Brazil ranked 126th out of 183 countries when it came to the ease of starting 
a company.

I am told that the situation is better than in the past. Regulations have been 
changed, meaning that cartórios, once the inherited monopoly of a handful of 
wealthy families, can theoretically be run by anyone with the relevant 
qualifications. There have also been modest efforts to simplify the processes 
for opening bank accounts, renting property and starting companies. But there 
is a long way to go before Brazil has anything like the flexibility, dynamism 
and competitiveness of China.


Given Brazil’s long list of problems, cutting red tape is unlikely to be high 
on the agenda of the interim government that the vice-president, Michel Temer, 
isexpected to form next week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/03/brazil-michel-temer-dilma-rousseff-impeachment>
 if the senate moves ahead with the impeachment of Rousseff. But in the longer 
run, it will be essential if Latin America’s most populous nation is to recover 
from its current slump.


In the meantime, I have to crack on with my visa renewal. My letter of 
appointment from the Guardian has been printed, legalised, notarised and 
officially translated. But I still have copies to make, queues to join and 
forms to fill in with my details, plus, of course, the names of my mother and 
father.

Probably something, somewhere, will not be quite right, so I will have to 
return again the next day, and perhaps the one after that. I would not be 
surprised if I have to make a trip to the cartório.

May looks set to be a long month.
 