
From John, a student

I'm an animal science student and during our mammogenesis lecture a professor 
brought up the obvious, but seemingly overlooked notion of the size of the 
female human breast. Other species do have obvious teats and great apes have 
breasts, but humans are at the extreme end – obviously not all – but it does 
make one wonder on a selection and genetic level, why?
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies:

The full, plump bosom seen in the human ape is an anomaly. No other primate 
has a permanent breast. During lactation all the ape species develop a full 
breast to store milk. In non-human primates (and other mammal species) a full 
breast is a clear indication the female is suckling young. Not so in humans. In 
addition, females in early adolescence can start developing a breast before 
menarche and females maintain breasts post menopause, so the full breast is not 
a reliable indicator of fertility. Neither is size an indicator of milk 
production – bigger breasts don't necessarily produce more milk. It is the 
symmetry of the breasts that indicates the phenotypic quality and fitness of 
the individual female, not the size.

The sex appeal of rounded female buttocks and plump breasts is both universal 
and unique to the human primate1 
<http://www.amazon.com/Mating-Mind-Sexual-Choice-Evolution/dp/038549517X>. 
Fertile women tend not to store fat around the abdomen, so the waist of a 
fertile female is usually slimmer than her hips. Other female primates do not 
have fat deposited on the rump. For example, the female gorilla has a skinny 
posterior and stores fat on her abdomen, as do human males. So it has been 
widely theorised that the plump buttock and bosom of modern women are sexual 
ornaments, selected for by ancestral males2 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6X2B-4BP3M6S-2&_user=10&_coverDate=05%2F31%2F1995&_alid=1333923133&_rdoc=1&_fmt=high&_orig=search&_cdi=7266&_sort=r&_docanchor=&view=c&_ct=1&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=7f73e605b89e2cbcd44745e2861d8b86>
. Seen from a distance the adult female form, either from behind or from the 
front, can be recognised as distinct from the male of the species. An hourglass 
figure, plus youthfulness, would have attracted male hominids looking for 
mating opportunity3 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6X2B-4T07403-4&_user=10&_coverDate=11%2F30%2F1995&_rdoc=1&_fmt=high&_orig=search&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_searchStrId=1333926397&_rerunOrigin=google&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=63830feb73c5d3bb28bb963fe0d50373>
. The hourglass figure remains attractive to modern males. Over the centuries 
females attempting to increase their mate choice have dressed to exploit this 
shape (corsets, bustles and wonder bras). If ancestral males had not shown a 
preference for the mutation producing symmetrical, plump bosoms, modern women's 
chests would resemble the flat thoraxes of the other apes.

Today, plastic surgery is used by some women, particularly those working in 
the sex industry, to enhance bust size and exploit ancient male programming. 
But the ultimate function of the human breast becomes clear only when an infant 
is born and lactation begins.

1) Miller, G (2000) The Mating Mind: How sexual choice shaped the evolution of 
human nature 
<http://www.amazon.com/Mating-Mind-Sexual-Choice-Evolution/dp/038549517X>. 
Vintage

2) Moller, AP, Soler, M and Thornhill R (1995) Breast asymmetry, sexual 
selection, and human reproductive success 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6X2B-4BP3M6S-2&_user=10&_coverDate=05%2F31%2F1995&_alid=1333923133&_rdoc=1&_fmt=high&_orig=search&_cdi=7266&_sort=r&_docanchor=&view=c&_ct=1&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=7f73e605b89e2cbcd44745e2861d8b86>
. Ethology and Sociobiology. 16 (3): 207-219

3) Singh, D (1995) Female health, attractiveness, and desirability for 
relationships: Role of breast asymmetry and waist-to-hip ratio 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6X2B-4T07403-4&_user=10&_coverDate=11%2F30%2F1995&_rdoc=1&_fmt=high&_orig=search&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_searchStrId=1333926397&_rerunOrigin=google&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=63830feb73c5d3bb28bb963fe0d50373>
. Ethology and Sociobiology. 16 (6): 465-481
 