
There are many shocking things on the internet. I’ve been away from here for 
six months so I thought it best to dive in with a phrase of breathtaking 
blandness, and “It takes all sorts” has started to sound a bit edgy. But there 
are: the porn, the abuse-hurling, the bomb-making instructions, the dark web of 
retail sites for drugs and stolen credit cards, the meeting places for people 
of like-mindlessness. There’s evil and crime all over it, like fat on a chip 
shop wall.

And then there are things that are designed to shock, which I find much more 
irritating than an encrypted webpage that’s simply trying to bring together 
stolen identities and aspirant fraudsters using the same cyber-efficiency with 
which Airbnb unites tourists and bedbugs. There’s an online fashion for saucy, 
ironised amorality – sites which, if thedark web 
<http://www.pcadvisor.co.uk/how-to/internet/what-is-dark-web-how-access-dark-web-deep-joc-3593569/>
 is a carcass-eating rat, are more of an aggressive, yappy terrier in a tartan 
collar: attention-seeking and infantilised.

There are websites that start relationships, why not have one that ends them?

It’s a trend exemplified by Ashley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ashley-madison>, that website for 
people who want to have affairs. People who want that in the abstract. They’re 
not married with kids and have accidentally fallen in love or lust with someone 
else. They’re not seeking to escape unhappy relationships. They don’t want to 
end their relationships, but are trying to organise affairs as well. And for 
some reason they can’t, so they’re using a website. How dull would you have to 
be to find such a leaden, thoughtless and mechanised form of transgression 
interesting? These are people desperately fleeing their own tediousness and 
failing to outrun it.

The launch this month of a new site called The Breakup Shop 
<http://breakupshop.com/> falls into this category too. They’re catching the 
eye by breaking a taboo. The idea is that you pay them to tell whomever you’re 
going out with that you’re not any more. It’s $10 for a text, $20 for a letter 
or $29 for a phone call.

This notion totally works as an idea for a sketch. It has a superficial logic: 
there are websites that start relationships, why not have one that ends them? 
And there are nice jokes: “The Breakup Gift Pack box can also be repurposed as 
a memory oven. Empty the box and stuff it full of your ex’s photos, jewelry 
[sic], underwear, or whatever and set it ablaze.” But thinking of a sketch is 
not the same as coming up with a profitable business plan (as I know from the 
fact that I am not sitting on a megayacht), or at least it wasn’t pre-internet. 
Maybe businesses don’t need to “work” any more – they just have to grab 
attention for long enough to get bought by Facebook.

But it raises the question: “Who’s the target market?” Anyone callous enough 
to use this service would be perfectly capable of doing their own dumping. The 
key reason ending a relationship is considered difficult is that people balk at 
knowingly causing pain, particularly to someone they were recently quite keen 
on. It’s an awkward conversation to have but, the received wisdom is, it’s 
cruel and cowardly to dodge it and send a text instead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdavid-mitchell-break-up-shop-agent-bad-news%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56926e3cdcb37f6d9ab398c70e000119a927c602%2F0_0_1348_878%2F1348.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breaking%20up%20is%20hard%20to%20do%2C%20unless%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20an%20agent%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdavid-mitchell-break-up-shop-agent-bad-news%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breaking%20up%20is%20hard%20to%20do%2C%20unless%20you%E2%80%99ve%20got%20an%20agent%20%7C%20David%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdavid-mitchell-break-up-shop-agent-bad-news%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F56926e3cdcb37f6d9ab398c70e000119a927c602%2F0_0_1348_878%2F1348.jpg>
 Illustration by David Foldvari. 
If, however, you’re cowardly or shitty enough not to mind dodging it, why on 
earth would you pay anyone else to send the text for you? It’s no easier than 
doing it yourself, and will be no more favourably received. If they could 
provide a service where an identical clone of you would make it seem like you’d 
done the decent thing without you actually having to, then they’d have 
something worth patenting.

Then again, does being thoughtfully dumped face-to-face genuinely make it hurt 
less? Perhaps a recently lost love’s solicitude is salt in the wound. Maybe 
wanting to seem like a decent person is a selfish vanity? Is it kinder to dump 
someone in the bluntest way possible so they can start to construct from the 
fragments of their heart the conviction that they’re better off without you? It 
certainly obeys one of the key rules of politeness: avoiding saying to people 
things they do not wish to hear.

Recently I’ve been recording a documentary for Radio 4 about manners – where 
they come from and what they’re for – and the issue of how to broach unwelcome 
subjects without being rude keeps coming up. My solution in professional life, 
I’ve realised, is that, like most actors, writers and comedians, I have an 
agent. Part of her job is to be blunt on my behalf – to say what I’m nervous of 
saying but nevertheless want conveyed: “He can’t make it then”, “He doesn’t 
like the script”, “He wants more money.” Or “Please can he have a job?!”, “Give 
him one more chance!”, “He’ll work for food.” This leaves me free to seem 
modest and obliging “unlike that pushy agent he’s got”.

Breakups are sad. That's exactly why you should have a good laugh at them | 
Sofia Marie Gonzalez
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/19/breakups-are-sad-laugh-at-them>
And it struck me how well society might function if everyone had an agent – 
not just for professional dealings, but for personal and social ones too. So 
that none of us ever had to say anything displeasing on our own behalf – 
someone else would handle it for us, so we could always say what people wanted 
to hear: “I’d love to come to your son’s school play”, “A group trip to 
sing-along-aSound of Music is right up my street”, “I am happy to pay 
completely for the repair of our shared fence”, merely adding “but it would be 
great if you could just check that with my agent”.

This is how David Cameron runs the government. He always delegates the 
unpalatable messages. So it’s George Osborne who’s cutting departmental 
budgets, Jeremy Hunt who’s imposing a new contract on junior doctors and Iain 
Duncan Smith who’s capping people’s benefits. Meanwhile kindly Mr Cameron 
greets world leaders, legalises gay marriage and writes plaintively to his 
local council bemoaning cuts. I’m amazed the news of his£10m official aircraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/18/ministers-to-receive-special-aircraft-for-official-visits>
 wasn’t spun as a permanent secretary’s plane in which the prime minister might 
sometimes be given a lift.

Since we’re all in it together, my plan to give everyone an agent would 
necessarily involve most of us also being someone’s agent. So there’d be a 
person for whom we’d have to ask for pay rises, dump partners, apologise for 
drunken behaviour and ask relatives to borrow money. There might be tricky 
conversations, but they’d be incomparably less embarrassing to conduct on 
someone else’s behalf than for ourselves.

The only real problem would come when your agent was letting you down. Who can 
you get to tell them? How do you get rid of them? Maybe The Breakup Shop has a 
future after all.
 