
Four years after Anders Behring Breivik went on a murderous rampage at a 
summer camp for young people inNorway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway>
, parents of the 69 people he killed on Utøya island are still too traumatised 
to return to full-time work, according to research.

Six out of 10 parents are still struggling with intense grief, while two out 
of three still have significant symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder, 
according to a paper in the journalScandinavian Psychologist 
<http://psykologisk.no/sp/2015/07/e13/> published on the eve of the fourth 
anniversary of the terror attacks.

Seventy-seven people died in the attacks on government offices in Oslo and on 
Utøya on 22 July 2011. Sixty-nine died at the Utøya summer camp, while a 
further 56 were injured.

Utøya, the island paradise turned into hell by Anders Behring Breivik
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/23/utoya-mass-murder-anders-behring-breivik>
Many of the young people were in mobile phone contact with their parents, who 
heard the shots and the screams of their children until they lost contact. 
Relatives also had to deal with extensive media coverage,Breivik’s trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/20/anders-behring-breivik-massacre-court>
, and the ensuing debate around his sentencing.

On Wednesday, as commemoration ceremonies took place, objects used by Breivik, 
including the van that concealed a bomb, went on show in Norway. Officials have 
said they hope it will to help Norway come to terms with the terror attacks, 
but critics warn it could attract extremists.

Since the attacks, researchers in Oslo have followed the lives of 86 parents 
of 65 of the victims – 45 mothers and 41 fathers. Their feelings were surveyed 
18, 28 and 40 months after the killings.

The parents were asked about their ability to cope with basic daily tasks such 
as shopping or cleaning, their social lives, leisure activities such as 
reading, walking or gardening, and their ability to establish and maintain 
close relationships with others.

A third of the mothers and a quarter of fathers were in direct contact with 
their children by phone and/or SMS during the shootings on Utøya, with 10 
mothers and nine fathers talking to their children immediately before they were 
killed. Eighty-five per cent attended Breivik’s trial.

Forty months after the killings, more than half – 51% – of the parents said 
they were completely or partially unable to work, with more mothers than 
fathers affected. There was no significant difference between the numbers 
unable to work at 28 and 40 months after the tragedy.

Mothers experienced the greatest loss of function in relation to work outside 
the home, while fathers had the most difficulties with participating in social 
life. While some parents had made progress since the last survey, others had 
regressed.

Unni Espeland Marcussen, who heard the screams of her 17-year-old daughter 
Andrine shortly before she was shot in the head and chest by Breivik, told 
Aftenposten newspaper that she quit her job and has since tried to get back 
into work, but it has never worked out. She said she still cannot stand long 
queues, she panics if she does not know where the emergency exits are, and she 
has very poor memory.

But some things she finds pleasurable again. “It is enough that I am starting 
to gain more control over the grief,” she said.

Last week, Breivik was accepted by the University of Oslo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/17/anders-breivik-serial-killer-study-oslo-university-norway>
 to study political science from his prison cell, in keeping with Norway’s 
policy of attempting to rehabilitate all offenders, however depraved their 
crimes. The Utøya summer camp is reopening for the first time in August with 
record numbers attending.
 