
Rightwing extremist Anders Behring Breivik made a Nazi salute as his lawsuit 
againstNorway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> opened, confirming 
fears he would use it to grandstand his extremist views.

Despite the theatrical entrance, Breivik’s lawyer Øystein Storrvik, said the 
suit, which contends his prison isolation constitutes “inhuman” treatment, was 
necessary because his client would probably be spending the rest of his life 
behind bars.

“This case is about something much more than what many people think, just a 
lawsuit brought to allow Breivik back into the spotlight to explain himself,” 
Storrvik said.

“This case is simply about his detention conditions for the rest of his life,” 
he said in the makeshift courtroom set up in the gymnasium of the Skien prison 
where the killer is being held.

‘We are taking the island back’: Norway’s long road back to Utøya
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/08/we-are-taking-the-island-back-norway-long-road-back-to-utoya>
Breivik is serving a maximum 21-year sentence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/23/utoya-mass-murder-anders-behring-breivik>
 for killing eight people in a bomb attack outside a government building in 
Oslo in July 2011, then murdering another 69 people, most of them teenagers, in 
a rampage at a Labour Youth camp on the island of Utøya. His prison sentence 
can be extended if he is still considered a danger to society.

Breivik entered the courtroom, turned toward the media present and extended 
his right arm. On several occasions during his 2012 trial, he made a variation 
of the Nazi salute by holding his closed right fist to his heart and then 
extending his arm.

“Incredibly provocative,” reacted Berit Reiss-Andersen, one of the lawyers for 
the victims’ families in his 2012 trial, speaking on television channel TV2.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fanders-behring-breivik-norway-court-inhuman-treatment-utoya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe34b192169504756efb0c909e5807137d53fa97%2F33_310_4347_2611%2F4347.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Breivik%20makes%20Nazi%20salute%20on%20first%20day%20of%20lawsuit%20against%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fanders-behring-breivik-norway-court-inhuman-treatment-utoya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Breivik%20makes%20Nazi%20salute%20on%20first%20day%20of%20lawsuit%20against%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fanders-behring-breivik-norway-court-inhuman-treatment-utoya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffe34b192169504756efb0c909e5807137d53fa97%2F33_310_4347_2611%2F4347.jpg>
 Anders Behring Breivik gestures as he enters a courtroom on Tuesday 15 March. 
Photograph: Lise Aserud/AP 
Breivik has previously likened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/09/breivik-complains-inhumane-conditions-prison>
 his prison conditions to “torture”. Now, the 37-year-old is suing the state 
for breaching two clauses of the European convention on human rights, one which 
prohibits “inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment”, and one which 
guarantees the right of respect for “private and family life” and 
“correspondence”.

In opening remarks, his lawyer stressed the frequent use of handcuffs and 
hundreds of strip-searches his client had been subjected to in the Ila prison 
near Oslo, where he was held until September 2013.

But his main complaint concerns his isolation: since his arrest on 22 July 
2011, Breivik has been held apart from the rest of the prison population and 
his contacts with the outside world strictly controlled.

Prison officials censor his mail to prevent him from establishing an 
“extremist network”, according to authorities, and his rare visits are almost 
exclusively with professionals behind a glass partition.

The only exception in five years was a five-minute meeting in 2013 with his 
mother during which they hugged, shortly before she died from cancer, Storrvik 
told the court.

Breivik is suffering “clear damage” from his isolation, according to Storrvik, 
who cited memory loss and an inability to focus on his studies.

Norway rejects Anders Breivik 'inhumane' prison conditions claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/02/norway-rejects-anders-breivik-inhuman-prison-conditions-claim>
“Put simply, Breivik is an extremely dangerous man,” countered Marius 
Emberland, the lawyer from office of the attorney general defending the state. 
“It’s unpleasant and it’s supposed to be unpleasant to serve a long sentence,” 
he added, stressing however that the prison conditions were “well within the 
limits of what is permitted” under the the European human rights convention.

Breivik followed the arguments closely, shaking his head several times to show 
his disagreement.

In prison he has access to three cells – one for living, one for studying and 
a third for physical exercise – as well as a television, a computer without 
internet access and a games console. He is able to prepare his own food and do 
his laundry.

The proceedings, which will last until Friday, are being held at the Skien 
prison 80 miles (130km) south-west of Oslo.

They are being broadcast on Norwegian television, though Breivik’s own 
testimony on Wednesday morning will not be aired out of respect for the victims.














 