
Enjoy a good pre-breakfast workout with a steep 3.5km trek to this secluded 
cafe inBanff national park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/picture/2015/mar/13/banff-national-park-canada-snow-art-simon-beck>
, built in 1901 as a shelter for hikers. Starting behind the historic Fairmont 
Lake Louise hotel, the path winds through forest that opens up with spectacular 
vistas of snow-streaked crags. For brisk walkers, the journey takes about an 
hour; the less fit will find it verges more on two. Make sure to take a 
breather at the shimmering Mirror Lake before making the final ascent.

In midsummer, the cabin swarms with hikers. Early in the season, though, it’s 
possible to snag a seat on the porch overlooking Lake Agnes (named for the wife 
of John A Macdonald, Canada’s first prime minister, who visited the area in 
1886) before choosing from the impressive menu of loose-leaf teas in relative 
tranquillity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fbrewing-up-in-banff-national-park-lake-agnes-tea-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37df6c9e305634c2b535e5ab92c43ce09403d5d7%2F0_109_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brewing%20up%20in%20Banff%3A%20tea%20with%20altitude%20at%20Lake%20Agnes%20Tea%20House%2C%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fbrewing-up-in-banff-national-park-lake-agnes-tea-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brewing%20up%20in%20Banff%3A%20tea%20with%20altitude%20at%20Lake%20Agnes%20Tea%20House%2C%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fbrewing-up-in-banff-national-park-lake-agnes-tea-house%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37df6c9e305634c2b535e5ab92c43ce09403d5d7%2F0_109_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Views and brews … customers on the porch at the teahouse. Photograph: Alamy 
The cafe also serves baked goods that rival any of the fussier desserts in 
nearby Banff. Particularly memorable is the apple crumble, a rustic heap of 
tender fruit collapsing under generous layers of streusel. There’s also 
heartier fare, such as vegetable stews and sandwiches on thick slabs of brown 
bread. Joanna Magee, who owns the teahouse with her mother Cynthia, gets up at 
5am to bake the day’s supply of loaves. Because the cabin has no electricity, 
she uses an old propane army stove.

Procuring ingredients is even more challenging. The dry goods are flown in by 
helicopter once a year, and to stock up on fresh items like cheese and 
vegetables, the teahouse staff trek down to Lake Louise with empty backpacks.

“If we run out of cucumbers for sandwiches, we have to hike 3.5km to get 
them,” Magee says.

For Joanna, the location also has its rewards. “My favourite thing is to see 
the look of accomplishment and sheer joy on people’s faces as they climb up the 
last of the stairs and see the lake,” she says.
 