
In an era of information overload and ephemera, where an online sensation may 
last all of five minutes, word is spreading that the internet has a memory, and 
its name is notGoogle <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>.

Even more surprising, it has a physical address: 300 Funston Avenue, Richmond, 
San Francisco <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/san-francisco>. It is a 
sleepy, unremarkable street, until you come to an imposing, neo-classical 
building with Greek pillars, heavy metal doors and a flag of the world planted 
on the lawn.

Step inside, and the first thing you see at reception is a heap of 
newly-delivered boxes containing hard-disk drives, each capable of storing 4 
trillion bytes of information. Follow the humming sound up a flight of stairs 
and you encounter rows of machines, lights blinking, methodically hoovering up 
humanity's knowledge. This is theInternet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> Archive.

"Our mission is universal access to all information all of the time," said 
Rick Prelinger, president of the board. "We are part of the infrastructure of 
the web. We are the web's memory."

The Internet Archive, a non-profit, is the digital equivalent of the ancient 
library of Alexandria, a burgeoning hoard of websites, video, film and music 
which could otherwise be lost. It currently holds 281bn webpages, or URLs, and 
each month adds billions more. It also captures and stores books, journals, 
YouTube clips and cable news. Long revered by scholars, techies and librarians, 
the Archive's fame is now spreading among ordinary people,drawing more than a 
thousand hits per second <http://archive.org/> to its website. Many, however, 
remain unaware of its existence, and as he gave a tour to the Guardian, 
Prelinger said:

I'm tremendously surprised that there are not more internet archives. It's the 
medium of our time but there is an ethos of ahistoricity. We're trying to 
negate that.

The organisation, which was co-founded in 1996 by Brewster Kahle, an internet 
pioneer and entrepreneur, considers its mission to be increasingly urgent. 
Technological, economic and political pressures devour digital information, 
just as termites – once dubbed the "teeth of time" – chomped through ancient 
libraries. Disks fade and warp, destroying information. Businesses go bust, or 
evolve, and in the process shed much if not all of their digital archives. 
Governments and institutions like to delete information that becomes 
inconvenient or embarrassing, leaving 404 error messages where once were pages.

"During the Iraq war the [Bush] White House quietly took down some of its 
earlier press releases. But we had them," said Prelinger, whose speciality is 
archiving film. "Digital information is part of our cultural heritage but it's 
tremendously volatile. It's fragile." Storing it is not just an act of 
historical preservation, he says, but a means to hold institutions accountable. 
"We want to help keep the internet honest and safe and defend it from 
ignorance."

'Philosophical allies'
 Aaron Swartz, the internet activist and developer of Reddit, who died in 
January. Photograph: Fred Benenson /creativecommoners/flickr 
Philosophical allies include www.wikimedia.org <http://www.wikimedia.org/>, 
Mozilla, the free software community, theElectronic Frontier Foundation 
<https://www.eff.org/>, a digital rights advocacy group, and the internet 
activist Aaron Swartz, until his death in January 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2013/jan/13/aaron-swartz>.

Google is not on the list. It is a marvel, said Prelinger, but tilts search 
results. "Its algorithms are not public. We don't know why we're seeing what 
we're seeing and we don't know what we're not seeing. Google knows your profile 
and adjusts accordingly. They want to sell you ads. We're not Google. We're a 
library."

Staff held a party last October to celebrate a milestone: 10 petabytes – 
equivalent to about 10 billion books – archived. Librarians and scholars 
acclaim the Archive's workers as "heroes" and "rock stars", but staff members 
are likelier to call themselves geeks and nerds. They joke about kilowatt 
consumption and meta-data replication.Some take part of their pay in Bitcoin 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2013/apr/03/bitcoin-currency-bubble-crash-not-rocking-financial-markets>
 and have persuaded the neighbouring Chinese restaurant to accept the currency. 
There is a growing throng of half-size terracotta statues depicting workers 
with more than three years service. The Wayback Machine, a searchable online 
museum of billions of web pages dating from 1996, is named after a segment in 
The Rocky and Bullwinkle cartoon show.

Kahle, a computer scientist who made a fortune in the 1990s with tech 
ventures, including Alexa Internet,dreamed of a Great Library of Alexandria 2.0 
since he studied at MIT 
<http://www.sfgate.com/news/article/Brewster-Kahle-s-Internet-Archive-3946898.php>
. The archive's first headquarters was in the nearby Presidio district. In 2009 
it moved into a former Christian Science church on Funston Avenue; its pillars 
and facade evoke antiquity.

About 50 staff work here and another 100 work elsewhere in the bay area and in 
32 scanning centres, usually in libraries, around the world. The centres 
digitise books, microfilm and regular film. Automation proved imprecise so it 
is done manually, each worker processing 800 to 1000 pages per hour. This 
labour means material such as Boston's John Adams Library, the Hoover archive 
and the 1930 US census are now online and free. Institutions such as government 
agencies, libraries and universities, many outside the US, pay modest fees for 
special requests.

The archive has also stored 750,000 actual books at a nearby 
climate-controlled storage unit, a literary equivalent of the Svalbard global 
seed vault.There is space for another 780,000 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2011/aug/01/internet-archive-books-brewster-kahle?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

Engineers "crawl" the world's top million websites, capturing and storing 
pages which link to other pages which are captured and stored. Every three 
months they start over, because the list of top million sites constantly 
changes. An average web page lasts 75 days. In 2009, they raced against the 
clock to save as much as they could of the web-hosting service GeoCities, before
Yahoo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/yahoo> shut it down. If the owner 
of a defunct website prefers that the pages remain dead, he or she can ask the 
archive to remove them, requests that are almost always granted.

Engineers also collect news from more than 60 TV stations worldwide and YouTube
 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> videos, selecting the latter 
according to Twitter mentions. "It's not perfect but tweets give us an idea of 
what people consider important," said Alexis Rossi, the web collections 
manager. She estimated that the 10bn URLs saved each every three month cycle 
represented – very, very roughly – about a 10th of the internet's output:

It's a Sisyphean task. We know we'll never get it all. The web by its nature 
is infinite.

The archive's three bay area data centres use 180 kilowatts, the equivalent of 
45 homes, to power servers and keep the lights on. New disks hold 4 trillion 
bytes, in contrast to earlier models which held 2 or 3 trillion, helping the 
archive keep pace.

"I'm proud that we're keeping all this going. We do it on a shoestring 
budget," said Jim Shankland, director of operations. "As long as we do our 
jobs, the bytes will live forever and ever."
 