
British taxpayers will still be paying fines to the EU over the mishandling of 
farming subsidies after the country has left the bloc,the National Audit Office 
warned on Friday. 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/report/department-for-environment-food-and-rural-affairs-and-rural-payments-agency-accounts-2015-16/>

At least £660m has already been paid in fines, owing to delays in implementing 
the rules of the common agricultural policy in the six years to 2013. More 
fines will follow for the intervening years, as they are levied 
retrospectively, and leaving the EU does not absolve the UK from responsibility.

The issue adds to the problems facing Andrea Leadsom, the surprise appointment 
to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/andrea-leadsom-repeal-fox-hunting-ban-climate-change>
 (Defra), as she struggles with the looming end of EU farming subsidies. 
Farmers and conservationists are tussling over what form any new subsidy should 
take, while the new secretary of state will have to explain her views on 
subsidieshaving previously rejected them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/14/theresa-may-cabinet-reshuffle-boris-johnson-philip-hammond-rules-out-emergency-budget?page=with:block-5787ae5ae4b08239dbab760a#block-5787ae5ae4b08239dbab760a>
.

The National Farmers Union (NFU) told the Guardian: “We will obviously be 
looking for guarantees from government that the support given to our farmers is 
on a par with that given to farmers in the EU, who will still be our principal 
competitors.”

Conservation and health groups have also lobbied the government this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/14/post-brexit-farming-subsidies-must-protect-nature-84-groups-say>
, ahead of Leadsom’s appointment, to ensure that any future subsidies from the 
taxpayer are given only on condition of farmers fulfilling strict requirements 
to protect the environment. At present only a small proportion of payments are 
directly tied to environmental stewardship, and some of the current rules are 
unpopular with sections of the farming community.

Big farms do best out of the current subsidy system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2016/apr/21/why-our-landed-gentry-are-so-desperate-to-stay-in-the-eu>
, with many gaining millions while small farmers make do with a few thousand 
pounds. Conservationists are concerned because intensive farming has led tobig 
declines in the number of farmland birds and other wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/17/wild-birds-uk-decline>, 
and want any new system to try to halt or reverse that. They are hoping to 
swing public opinion behind them.

Leadsom will have to negotiate between farmers anxious to preserve their 
subsidy – currently about £3bn a year, depending on the euro exchange rate – 
and civil society and conservation groups seeking to ensure current protections 
are not lost, and are strengthened as far as possible.

The NFU is currently holding a consultation with its members over what form 
post-Brexit trade agreements for the agricultural sector will take, which will 
inform its discussions with Defra. However, the organisation was unable to say 
whether questions on what role environmental protection requirements should 
play in any future subsidy system would be included in the consultation 
programme with members, which is still being finalised.

Meurig Raymond, president of the NFU, said he was seeking a meeting with 
Leadsom as soon as possible to discuss the issues. “At the forefront will be a 
new domestic agricultural policy,” he said. “This should encourage growth, 
innovation, productivity and profitability.”

Farmers are also hoping that a national system of support for farmers would be 
better administered than payments have been under the Common Agricultural 
Policy (CAP).Delays to the single farm payment 
<https://www.fginsight.com/news/growing-concern-over-cap-payments-across-uk-as-crunch-time-approaches-7085>
 were behind the fines from the European commission, and have caused hardship 
for thousands of farmers who have frequently had to wait months for payment, 
which often makes the difference between profit and loss on small farms.

A Defra spokesman told the Guardian that the department was catching up on the 
backlog and that the distribution of EU subsidies was proceeding more smoothly: 
“We understand the importance of rural payments to farmers, and over 87,000 
farmers successfully registered on the rural payments system in 2015. It has 
been used to process and pay over 86,700 farmers – over 99% of all those 
eligible – their basic payment scheme payment. We are taking action to tackle 
the causes [of the problems] and are making a significant investment in our 
mapping data. This will be used to better administer CAP payments.”

Raymond insisted that problems with the existing system – the underlying 
structure, data and technology of which is likely to form the basis of any 
replacement subsidy regime – must be remedied. “We need a simpler application 
process and improved delivery for [payments]. We need a guarantee from 
government that agreement for farmers in agri-environment schemes will be 
honoured in full,” he said.

But there are likely to be headaches far bigger than payment systems and EU 
fines facing Theresa May’s government when it comes to agricultural subsidies. 
Taken together, farming and food represent one of the UK’s biggest export 
industries 
<http://www.nfuonline.com/back-british-farming/why-should-i-back-british-farming/the-economy/>
, and any trade agreement with other countries, including EU partners, will be 
fraught with national concerns on each side. This will constrain the UK’s 
ability to subsidise its farming industry.

Small farmers may be particularly vulnerable to the uncertainty to come. 

Nigel Akehurst, a small farmer in Sussex, who voted remain but whose parents 
voted to leave, worries that whatever happens the smaller sector will lose out. 
“Sadly I do think a lot more family farms will go to the wall as many of them 
don’t have the skills to market their product direct and without subsidies they 
will make even bigger losses than many small farms are making currently,” he 
said.

“The only positive is that land prices may come down – though I appreciate 
most politicians see agricultural land, especially in the south east, as 
building or development land – and that may give more people the opportunity to 
buy small plots of land to grow and rear niche products to sell direct.”

“There are many uncertainties to overcome,” said Raymond. “Trade agreements, 
labour, financial support, legislation are all up in the air. [We want] a 
domestic agricultural policy that is science-based, adapted to the needs of 
British farmers, and promotes a profitable, productive and sustainable future 
for British food and farming.”

Less likely to cause problems is Leadsom’s own previous slamming of subsidies, 
as many iron political principles have become malleable under the heat of the 
referendum.
 