
The Brisbane Lions <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/brisbane-lions> will 
launch a bid for a priority draft pick but are yet to make a formal request to 
the AFL, coach Justin Leppitsch says. The Lions are on course for their worst 
season in club history and are expected to ask the AFL for extra draft 
assistance, although a priority pick has not been granted to any team since 
2007.

“I know they’re looking at that, that’ll help the club no doubt,” Leppitsch 
said. “From my understanding there’s been initial talks but nothing formal from 
the club that’s been mooted. I know the AFL’s looking to change the potential 
draft system over time and how to help clubs ... but there’s always going to be 
a club in this position where we’re at unfortunately.

From the outer sanctum: what it's like to be called 'excrement' by Sam Newman 
| Nicole Hayes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/12/from-the-outer-sanctum-what-its-like-to-be-called-excrement-by-sam-newman>
“When you’ve got a young team and you know you need more young talent, you’d 
like them (to develop) quicker. That will be what will be, I can only control 
from my bit down.”

The Lions were denied a priority pick last year and Leppitsch said it would be 
“obviously helpful” if they were to get one, but estimated their current list 
is 50 per cent better than what it was when he first came into the job three 
years ago. “They’re just young and they’re not quite ready to be at their best 
at this stage consistently yet,” he said.

Opinion amongst former AFL <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> greats is 
seemingly split on whether the Lions deserve a priority pick, with Chris Judd 
claiming they need a “leg up” while David Schwarz and Kevin Bartlett have 
argued Brisbane haven’t done the “hard yards” as other struggling clubs have in 
the past.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fbrisbane-lions-will-ask-afl-for-a-priority-pick-as-crows-re-sign-brad-crouch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15651b30fd5aa731276d8fbee76fbf5595c309fc%2F0_33_3618_2172%2F3618.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brisbane%20Lions%20will%20ask%20AFL%20for%20a%20priority%20pick%20as%20Crows%20re-sign%20Brad%20Crouch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fbrisbane-lions-will-ask-afl-for-a-priority-pick-as-crows-re-sign-brad-crouch%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brisbane%20Lions%20will%20ask%20AFL%20for%20a%20priority%20pick%20as%20Crows%20re-sign%20Brad%20Crouch&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fbrisbane-lions-will-ask-afl-for-a-priority-pick-as-crows-re-sign-brad-crouch%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15651b30fd5aa731276d8fbee76fbf5595c309fc%2F0_33_3618_2172%2F3618.jpg>
 Adelaide Crows star Brad Crouch has re-signed with the club, inking a 
four-year contract extension Photograph: Ben Macmahon/AAP 
Meanwhile, Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> onballer Brad 
Crouch has signed a four-year contract extension, spurning interest from 
interstate clubs. The 22-year-old Victorian had been linked to several 
Melbourne-based clubs, including Hawthorn, but instead signed a new deal with 
the Crows believed to be worth about $2.2 million.

“Brad’s attack on the footy is something that we really value, along with his 
ability to win the ball inside and outside the contest,” Crows coach Don Pyke 
said on Friday. “He’s an important part of our midfield group and a player that 
will continue to improve with the work he does on and off the field and with 
further games experience.”

The explosive midfielder, who gathered a season-best 34-touches in Adelaide’s 
138-point flogging of Brisbane on Saturday, is considered a key figure in the 
Crows’ midfield plans following the departure of Patrick Dangerfield. Crouch 
missed games early in the season with a hamstring injury and was dropped to the 
SANFL after struggling for form but has since strung together seven consecutive 
games and played some of his best football.

The Crows’ on-field success this year has helped them retain a number of 
quality players, including forward Josh Jenkins who last month inked a new 
five-year deal. Daniel Talia, Brodie Smith, Mitch McGovern and Rory Atkins have 
also signed new deals but Crouch had appeared the most likely to consider 
plying his trade elsewhere.

“I’m stoked to continue my career as a Crow and it’s a credit to my manager 
Alex McDonald and the club for getting the deal done,” Crouch said. “There’s 
plenty of hard work ahead but I think team success isn’t too far away.”

Crouch, whose younger brother Matt has also cemented a spot in the Crows’ 
midfield this year, has had a cursed injury run during his short career, 
missing all of last season with a foot injury and breaking his leg in 2014. He 
finished second behind Gold Coast’s Jaeger O’Meara in AFL Rising Star voting in 
his debut season in 2013.

In other player movement news, GWS Giants star Shane Mumford says fellow 
ruckman Rory Lobb is a massive part of the AFL club’s future and believes he 
loves the team, despite reports the West Australian youngster could be seeking 
a trade back to his home state.

Lobb has enjoyed a breakout year, playing every game, kicking 21 goals and 
notching the second most contested marks in the competition and is contracted 
to the club for 2017. “He’s obviously a required player at this club, he loves 
the joint, he loves the players here, so that’s actually a little bit 
surprising, so we’ll wait and see how that plays out,” Mumford said.
 