
A quartet of high-flying females will dominate next month's Brit awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/britawards>, the nomination list for the 
most glittering night in the UK music calender revealed tonight. Lady Gaga, 
Florence and the Machine, Lily Allen and Pixie Lott were nominated for three 
awards, matched only by tweenybopper band of the moment JLS.

There was one glaring female omission, however, as Susan Boyle, who recorded 
the biggest-selling British album of last year, was not nominated.

The shortlist, chosen by more than 1,000 record industry and media 
professionals, was disclosed at London's O2 Arena. The winners will be 
announced on 16 February at the Earls Court Arena, with performances by 
Kasabian, Cheryl Cole, JLS, Florence and the Machine andLady Gaga 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/lady-gaga>. The latter, who had last year's 
biggest-selling single with Poker Face, is in the running for best 
international female artist, international breakthrough act, and best 
international album.

Florence Welch, aka Florence and the Machine, whose album is currently number 
one in the UK album charts after its release 28 weeks ago, will do battle with 
Bat for Lashes, Leona Lewis, Lily Allen and Pixie Lott for the title of best 
British female solo act, and take on Lott again in the British breakthrough act 
category, along withFriendly Fires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/friendly-fires>, JLS and La Roux.

Welch, winner of last year's critic's choice award, is also in the running for 
album of the year for Lungs alongside Dizzee Rascal's Tongue n' Cheek, 
Kasabian's West Ryder Pauper Lunatic Asylum, and Lily Allen's It's Not Me, It's 
You.

Allen, whose second album went straight to number one last year, is also in 
the running for best British single for The Fear. The category, selected by UK 
radio listeners, shows the influence of TV talent shows with nominations for
Alexandra Burke <https://www.theguardian.com/music/alexandra-burke>, Joe 
McElderry, Alesha Dixon, Cheryl Cole and JLS, as well as La Roux, Pixie Lott, 
Taio Cruz and Tinchy Stryder.

In the British male artist category Calvin Harris is up against Dizzee Rascal, 
Mika, Paolo Nutini and veteranRobbie Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/robbie-williams>. Williams is guaranteed to 
walk away with at least one award, for his outstanding contribution to music.

Doves, Muse, Kasabian <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kasabian>, JLS and 
Friendly Fires fight it out in the best British group category.

Bruce Springsteen <https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen> and Michael 
Bublé feature in the international male solo artist category, while Animal 
Collective, Empire of the Sun and Daniel Merriweather take on Lady Gaga for the 
title of international breakthrough act. Industry executives will also vote for 
the best Brit awards performance over the years – whether Jarvis Cocker's 
bottom-baring during Michael Jackson's Earth Song could win it for the late 
prince of pop remains to be seen.
 