
It is not necessary to be a raving protectionist to feel a sense of absurdity 
atthe takeover of bus and train operator Arriva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/apr/22/foreign-takeovers-row-deutsche-bahn>
 by German state-owned train company Deutsche Bahn. The UK's mania for 
privatisation of industries such as rail, nuclear and utilities has led to 
important British assets being nationalised by a foreign government. EDF, a 
French state company, owns nuclear power group British Energy, along with 
several local electricity franchises; the Dutch state railway owns chunks of 
our network, German state telecoms companyDeutsche Telekom bought T-Mobile in 
the UK <https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/sep/08/orange-tmobile-merger> 
and Deutsche Post has a licence to deliver letters here. Then there are the 
sovereign wealth funds controlled by foreign governments, which bought chunks 
of Barclays Bank, P&O's ports and Manchester City football club.

This may not be a terrible thing. It may even be a good thing – the French 
government will probably do a better job of running nuclear power than ours. 
But these takeovers are too important to be waved through - and the situation 
is asymmetric. We did not use our North Sea oil revenues to create a sovereign 
wealth fund of our own; state-owned British firms are not on shopping sprees, 
and our open door policy towards bids is not replicated in Paris, Berlin, or 
even Washington DC.

I have been arguing for several years that there needs to be a public debate 
on foreign takeovers – a lonely view until US company Kraft's takeover of 
British chocolate-makerCadbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/cadburyschweppes> brought the issue 
centre stage.

Support is gathering for a tightening of takeover rules. The Tories are quiet 
on the subject but Labour and the Liberal Democrats want to lock short-term 
investors out of the voting, so firms cannot be bought and sold at the behest 
of hedge funds.The Lib Dems want to subject takeovers to a public interest test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/10/vince-cable-test-takeovers-public-interest>
 on whether a deal would serve the UK economy. Even bosses' clubthe Institute 
of Directors has joined in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/apr/22/institute-of-directors-takeover-rules>
, backing Labour's manifesto proposal to introduce a "Cadbury rule" so hostile 
takeovers can only go through on a "super-majority" of two thirds of 
shareholders in the target. The captains of industry actually go further, and 
say the higher threshold should apply to the bidder as well.

A major motivator for takeovers is the rewards they decant into boardrooms, 
legal firms, investment banks and PR advisers. The incentives in the top ranks 
of a target company are stacked towards succumbing to a hostile bidder, after 
racking up the price. In the case of Kraft,"winner" Irene Rosenfeld had a 40% 
pay rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/mar/30/kraft-irene-rosenfeld-payrise-cadbury>
 to £17m last year, but "loser" Todd Stitzer, the former Cadbury chief 
executive,walked away with £40m in cash, shares and pension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/apr/16/cadbury-kraft-merger-bonuses-executive-pay>
. The hedge funds just want a quick return and even "long-term" shareholders 
often prefer to cash out at a profit to boost their quarterly performance 
figures.

It is not an environment conducive to the welfare of employees or pension fund 
members, or to the long-term interests of the UK.
 