
How interesting to read (Obituaries, 21 September) that the views of Irving 
Kristol <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/20/irving-kristol-obituary> 
– "founder and champion of neoconservatism" in the US – moved to the right 
under the influence of his wife,Gertrude Himmelfarb 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gertrude_Himmelfarb>. I am reading The Roads to 
Modernity <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/mar/09/politics.society> by 
Himmelfarb, and was amazed to find that Gordon Brown wrote a glowing preface to 
it.

Brown commends Himmelfarb's 2004 book for setting out how the British 
enlightenment coupled "the passion for liberty" with "a strong ethos of social 
responsibility". He seems not to have noticed that in the second chapter 
Himmelfarb explains how – for Adam Smith in particular – it is the free market 
that promotes the sense of morality: "It was the 'system of natural liberty,' 
and only that system, that made self-love (or self-interest) conducive to the 
general interest." Self-interest was "not as lofty as benevolence", but "in the 
marketplace at least it was more reliable and practical – and moral as well".

I wonder if in the light of the amorality displayed by the financial markets 
recently,Gordon Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> 
regrets writing his preface to Gertrude Himmelfarb's book?

Ian Pirie

Upminster, Essex 

• Re "Beleaguered at home, feted abroad: Brown named world statesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/sep/23/gordon-brown-world-statesman> 
of the year (23 September): given that no one is more responsible for the 
current global economic crisis than Gordon Brown, other than maybe his mentor
Alan Greenspan <http://www.nndb.com/people/164/000023095/>, not even the most 
ironic postmodernist could have imagined our hapless prime minister would be 
named world statesman of the year.

Enrico Tortolano

Kingston upon Thames, Surrey
 