
Virtually all rock memoirs follow a similar pattern of rise and fall, before 
ending with acceptance – brought on by sobriety, spirituality, the death of 
peers, or just the plain realisation that it’s not worth hating your bandmates 
any more. Virtually all, too, are at their best in their early pages – covering 
the early years – when the passion for music still burns bright, when it’s all 
still fun, when the star is rising, rather than burning out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fbruce-springsteen-born-to-run-memoirs-autumn-arts-preview-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F987818b639f3ab30b62f0db0258a2955f24813e3%2F0_0_1824_2772%2F1824.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bruce%20Springsteen%3A%20born%20to%20write&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fbruce-springsteen-born-to-run-memoirs-autumn-arts-preview-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bruce%20Springsteen%3A%20born%20to%20write&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fbruce-springsteen-born-to-run-memoirs-autumn-arts-preview-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F987818b639f3ab30b62f0db0258a2955f24813e3%2F0_0_1824_2772%2F1824.jpg>
 The cover of Springsteen’s new memoir. Photograph: Simon & Schuster UK 
Bruce Springsteen’s memoir, Born to Run, out at the end of September, looks as 
if it might be a little different. For a start, there’s his status: no bass 
player with a second-rate hair-metal band, he. It’s hard to imagine this will 
be bathos-laden, often one of the only selling points of lesser rock biogs. His 
status, too, is current: no one else has spent as long as Springsteen selling 
out stadiums, year after year,to ecstatic receptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jun/10/bruce-springsteen-makes-you-feel-alive-wembley-stadium>
. No one else of his stature seems to feel the need to commune with their flock 
with such frequency.

Then there are the precedents: among his generation (and his commercial and 
critical peers), both Bob Dylan and Neil Young have produced books that steered 
well clear of the traditional rock volume. Dylan told a meandering narrative 
that avoided many major events, telling the stories less told. Young’s dwelled 
heavily on his passions – audio fidelity, green motoring – while his 
relationship with Crosby, Stills and Nash was dismissed with startling brevity.

Less ornery than either of them – in his public image, at least – Springsteen 
is likely to offer his fans a more straightforward read. The foreword to Born 
to Run, which he released on his website recently, promises to answer the two 
questions that occupy the mind of anyone watching someone undeniably great 
working a stage: how do they do that, and why do they do that?

Why, after 50 years as a musician, after more than 40 playing the song that 
gives the book its name, does Springsteen still need to hear 90,000 people 
singing “Tramps like us, baby we were born to run!” back at him? The foreword 
offered some clues: “DNA, natural ability, study of craft, development of and 
devotion to an aesthetic philosophy, naked desire for … fame? … love? … 
admiration? … attention? … women?… sex? … and oh, yeah …. a buck. Then … if you 
want to take it all the way out to the end of the night, a furious fire in the 
hole that just … don’t … quit … burning.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fbruce-springsteen-born-to-run-memoirs-autumn-arts-preview-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8880f6426d92f170d5107a173ae021a0bf6b0f73%2F0_0_5182_4050%2F5182.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bruce%20Springsteen%3A%20born%20to%20write&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fbruce-springsteen-born-to-run-memoirs-autumn-arts-preview-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bruce%20Springsteen%3A%20born%20to%20write&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F30%2Fbruce-springsteen-born-to-run-memoirs-autumn-arts-preview-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8880f6426d92f170d5107a173ae021a0bf6b0f73%2F0_0_5182_4050%2F5182.jpg>
 Communing with the flock … Springsteen in 1975. Photograph: Chris 
Walter/WireImage 
Springsteen has long appeared one of the most knowable of rock stars. So many 
of his songs, if not autobiographical, have appeared to give direct insights 
into his childhood, his family, his town, his country. One album, Tunnel of 
Love, dealt with his disillusionment with his first marriage. Songs are songs: 
they are a truth, they are notthe truth. But it’s not only in the songs: there 
are books compiling his many interviews. And this rock Charlemagne has his own 
Einhard, in the form of writer Dave Marsh, who has conveyed his thoughts to the 
world. Even while writing this book, he cooperated with Peter Ames Carlin on 
the really very decent biography, Bruce, published in 2012.

So, on the face of it, one really shouldn’t need this book. Don’t we all know 
about his dad, his struggles, his superstardom and so on? Yes, but we still 
only know the facts of the legends. Born to Run gives us the chance, at last, 
to know why Springsteen needed to build those legends.

• Born to Run is published on 27 September by Simon & Schuster.
 