
Live coverage of the next Ashes will be on BT Sport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bt-sport> after the broadcaster unveiled a 
five-year deal with Cricket Australia to show its international matches 
exclusively in the UK from 2016.

The centrepiece of the deal, believed to be worth around £80m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/bt-sport-tv-rights-ashes-australia>
, will be the next Ashes series in 2017-18 when the Australians will look to 
regain the urnthey lost to England this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/ashes-2014-england-win-series-australia-fifth-test>
.

The deal includes all one-day internationals and Twenty20 matches played in 
Australia including other series against New Zealand, South Africa, India and 
Pakistan.

It also includes rights to the Big Bash League and the women’s Ashes. BT has 
targeted premium cricket rights as a means to attract and keep subscribers in 
the summer months and already broadcasts the Caribbean Premier League T20.

BT Sport has secured UK TV rights to Ashes in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/23/bt-sport-tv-rights-ashes-australia>
This deal will be seen as a coup and a bloody nose for Sky Sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports>, which has marketed itself as 
the home of all international cricket. Sky’s exclusive deal with the England 
and Wales Cricket Board, for all international and domestic matches on home 
soil, runs until the end of 2019.

Sky could also lose the live rights to England’s series against Pakistan in 
the UAE in October. The rights have still to be sold and BT is understood to be 
considering a bid for the three Tests and one-day series.

BT’s deal with Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> Australia 
also includes the free-to-air rights to international highlights and the Big 
Bash, as well as one “match of the week” in the domestic T20 league that will 
be shown on BT’s free-to-air channel.

“BT Sport is delighted to be adding international cricket to its line-up, and 
to be the new home of the next Ashes tour in Australia,” said Delia Bushell, 
the managing director of BT TV and BT Sport. “We will show live domestic games 
featuring the best players in the world during the Big Bash League and all 
Australian home matches for the next five years.”

The deal will mark an escalation in the competitive battle with BSkyB. Both 
companies are using sport as a means of trying to sign up triple play customers 
and battle for market share.

This season BT will be the exclusive home of Champions League and Europa 
League footballafter paying £897m over three seasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/nov/09/bt-sport-champions-league-exclusive-tv-rights>
.

It has signed Gary Lineker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/jan/27/gry-lineker-bt-sport-bbc-champions-league>
 and a host of other pundits to front its coverage and launched a new channel 
that costs £5-a-month for non-BT TV subscribers who also take its broadband 
products. It also has the rights to Premier Rugby, the FA Cup and 38 Premier 
League matches per season.

The competition between the two broadcasters has led to the value of live 
rights to Premier League football soar to £5.1bn under the new deal that begins 
from next season, with Sky retaining the lion’s share of matches.
 