
Though less swingeing than the Commission of Audit's recommendations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/02/cutting-film-funding-would-take-us-back-to-the-stone-age-says-producer>
, which included a 50% cut to film and TV funding body Screen Australia, 
Australia's arts community has reacted with concern to the cuts to its funding 
announced in Tuesday's federal budget.

Screen Australia will lose $38m over four years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/13/budget-will-take-87m-from-arts-including-cuts-to-screen-australia>
, including a $25m reduction in the agencies appropriation; $10m from the 
termination of the Australian interactive games fund, meaning that games 
development will no longer receive government funding; and $2.5m by closing the 
interactive multiplatform funding initiative.

Graeme Mason, Screen Australia’s chief executive, said: “We will undertake a 
comprehensive review of all programs and how they are delivered. We will 
maintain our commitment to working efficiently in order to minimise the impact 
on the Australian screen sector. We will focus on our core business to support 
culture, innovation and quality on Australian screens.”

"I feel it’s a cut into the culture of Australia," said producer Liz Watts, 
the founder ofPorchlight films <http://www.porchlightfilms.com.au/intro.php>. 
"It will impact our ability to finance productions here, both TV and feature 
films, especially combined with theABC cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/14/120m-abc-budget-cuts-will-cause-job-losses-says-mark-scott>
."

The Porchlight film The Rover  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/jan/29/the-rover-trailer-robert-pattinson-guy-pearce>
is about to show at the Cannes film festival. "Ironically, that film would not 
have been made without Screen Australia," Watts said.

Matthew Deaner, executive director of Screen Producers Australia 
<https://screenproducersaustralia.org.au/>, warned that a lack of investment in 
Australian film would cause local talent to go overseas.

"New Zealand and Asia have increased support for screen productions, we have 
China on our doorstep, which is a very large market for screen producers, and 
we’ve always had the draw of Hollywood. We not only lose the talent, we lose 
the capacity of our nation to tell its own story in its own way, and the 
economic stimulus that brings."

In a statement released by the actors' union Equity, Richard Roxburgh 
<http://www.tvtonight.com.au/2014/02/richard-roxburgh-signals-the-end-of-rake.html>
, the producer and star of the hit TV series Rake, said that government 
investment in Australian TV and film had paid off.

"Our screen industries are currently thriving and this ongoing support has 
enabled Australian actors such as myself to work on great shows in our home 
country.

"The cuts to Screen Australia funding are significant, even if the most 
alarming predictions haven't come to pass. It would be a great shame if this 
resulted in fewer projects being funded at a time when our Australian screen 
industry – particularly television drama – has found its stride and is making 
its mark internationally."

The Australia Council <http://www.australiacouncil.gov.au/>, the nation's arts 
funding body, will be cut significantly, losing $28.2m over four years; $9.6m 
for the first year and approximately $6m for the following three.

Though some expressed fears that smaller theatre companies and individual 
performers would be hit, a spokesperson said: "The council is currently 
considering the most appropriate ways to apply this adjustment, with a focus on 
minimising the impact across the sector. Core operational funding to the major 
performing arts companies, the visual arts and crafts strategy (VACS), key 
small to medium arts organisations and regional touring will not be affected."

Other arts cuts include the merging of the administration of seven 
Canberra-based arts institutions 
<http://theconversation.com/federal-budget-2014-arts-and-culture-experts-react-26638>
– including the National Portrait Gallery and National Gallery of Australia – 
to save $2.4m over four years.

The Adelaide Festival Centre's Asia Pacific Centre for arts and cultural 
leadership 
<http://www.adelaidefestivalcentre.com.au/about-us/under-the-big-white-roof/asia-pacific-centre-for-arts-and-cultural-leadership/>
, which funds arts administration and exchange programs between South Australia 
and Asia, had its $1.8m funding removed.

"We’re disappointed but not surprised," said Douglas Gautier, the centre's CEO 
and artistic director. "We think it’s an opportunity lost but we won’t give up. 
It just means that our programmes will be a bit modest and the opportunity to 
send young Australians in the arts industry to Asia Pacific and to bring 
colleagues for exchanges from which creative and economic ties grow will just 
be a bit slower in development. But it's a tough budget context and we 
understand that."

However, it wasn't all bad news for the arts. Though the Commission of Audit 
recommended the abolition of funding for TV and community radio,the Treasury 
pledged $17.7m 
<http://www.fasterlouder.com.au/news/39383/Budget-win-for-community-radio>.

Community Broadcasting Association of Australia president Adrian Basso said: 
"There are going to be millions of listeners and volunteers breathing a big 
sigh of relief tonight. Community stations run on the smell of an oily rag – if 
the government had cut funding, as modest as the funding is, it could have 
spelt the end of many vital community radio services.”

The Australian Ballet School <http://www.australianballetschool.com.au/> in 
Melbourne was also awarded a surprise $1m one-off grant, which will go towards 
buying a residence for students. The school had previously raised $3.5m for the 
boarding hall from non-government sources.

The schoolʼs director, Marilyn Rowe, said: “Achieving a student residence is 
the last outstanding part of the vision I set for the school when I commenced 
as its director 16 years ago. Itʼs a wonderful announcement.”

A spokesman said the school was funded by a mix of sources: a third from fees, 
a third from the federal government and a third from philanthropy and other 
sources. It said 40% of its full-time students received some form of bursary 
support to pay the school's fees.

Asked whether ballet students at a private school deserved government funding 
more than the young filmmakers likely to be hit by the cut to Screen Australia, 
a spokesperson said: "We are not in a position to make comparisons to other 
members of the arts sector but we can say that our students deserve this 
support. They are a well-deserving group of committed and passionate young 
people. The health and welfare of our students is foremost in our efforts and 
the $1m towards a student residence will help us address the necessary duty of 
care to young students."

 