
The Bureau of Statistics is considering cutting key economic statistics to 
absorb recent funding cuts.

David Kalisch, the head of the ABS, revealed the news on Thursday, warning 
retail data, housing and lending finance data, and international trade data, 
could soon be published less frequently. He also admitted a slew of data could 
cease being collected altogether.

He said data collection of foreign ownership of agricultural businesses, 
industrial disputes, motor vehicle sales, livestock slaughter, and crime 
offenders and victims, could stop if extra funding cannot be secured.

ABS says release of names linked to 5,000 businesses was 'human error'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/24/abs-says-release-of-names-linked-to-5000-businesses-was-human-error>
The childhood education and care survey, and the internet activity survey, 
could also stop.

The revelation can be found in the ABS’s Forward Work Program 2016-17 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/DetailsPage/1006.02016-17?OpenDocument>
.

Kalisch said the ABS would be forced to cut its staffing levels 
“significantly” over the next three years, by about 400 staff in 2016–17, 300 
staff in 2017–18 and 40 staff in 2018–19, to absorb recent funding cuts.

He said the government had agreed, in its 2015–16 budget, to give the ABS an 
extra $257m in funding for critical infrastructure improvements until 2019–20, 
but after that the ABS’s budget would be cut by another 10% (worth about $25m 
per year).

Its average annual budget is currently $259m per year, excluding the census.

Kalisch said the ABS’s workload was due to expand next year, despite recent 
funding cuts, and that would make some data collection unaffordable within his 
existing budget.

The ABS would have to “free up” some resources to pay for the extra work, he 
said, by cutting some data collection.

“Over the last 15 years the ABS has had falling resources to deal with a 
bigger and more complex world to measure,” he said. “In contrast, staff numbers 
in the wider Australian Public Service have increased during this time.”

Andrew Leigh, the shadow assistant treasurer, has attacked the Turnbull 
government following the news, saying critical economic statistics were facing 
the axe.

Australian Bureau of Statistics lays blame for census bungle on IBM
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/23/australian-bureau-of-statistics-lays-blame-for-census-bungle-on-ibm>
“The retail data is often a leading indicator of whether there’s an economic 
downturn coming along,” Leigh said.


“And we know that the housing finance statistics are critical, too. Those 
housing finance numbers tell us the debt load that Australians are facing and 
also give us an indicator as to how the housing markets themselves are tracking.

“[The ABS] deserves better than a Turnbull government that is cutting away its 
ability to collect the data that Australians rely on.”

Following Leigh’s criticism, the ABS released a statement on Thursday 
afternoon. It said the ABS had not made any decision about which statistical 
series would be cut from 2017-18.

“No decisions on the ABS’ work program for 2017-18 and beyond have yet been 
taken,” an ABS spokesman said. “Future consultation will consider our broad 
legislative obligations and options regarding the value, usefulness and 
frequency of some indicators.”

The ABS was forced to apologise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/09/the-great-australian-census-fail-of-2016-website-crashes-under-load>
 two months ago after websites crashed during peak time on census night. It was 
forced to take down the online census form website for 40 hours after 
distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks.

Last month, in a submission to a senate inquiry into the census debacle, the 
ABS blamed service provider IBM for the disruption, saying it had not properly 
prepared for the risk of a DDoS attack.
 