
Some international conferences are immediate failures, but none are immediate 
successes. It will take weeks, months and ultimately years before the impact of 
the last few days at theBusan forum on aid effectiveness 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/fourth-high-level-forum-on-aid-effectiveness>
 will be known, and it is impossible to find two people with the same opinion 
at the moment. Here is my preliminary view.

If you think what matters are time-bound measurable commitments, then Busan is 
something of a failure.At Paris 
<http://www.oecd.org/document/18/0,3343,en_2649_3236398_35401554_1_1_1_1,00.html>
, most of the technical work on principles and indicators was already done, 
with a limited amount of target-setting left for after the conference. Here in 
Busan, there are next to no specific commitments, merely promises to come up 
with some. No wonder the large donors have big smiles on their faces â€“ they 
have no targets to which citizens can hold them accountable. The one specific 
commitment is on transparency, with 75% of official development assistance 
(ODA) now falling under theInternational Aid Transparency Initiative 
<http://www.aidtransparency.net/>.

While some are hopeful that the next six months will bring forth a meaningful 
global monitoring framework for the promises made at Busan, my instinct is that 
this will be a hard task, although one worth engaging in.

If you care about evidence-based policymaking, this conference has been mixed. 
While there was not enough explicit referencing, sifting and collation of the 
plethora of evidence available on what has worked and what hasn't over the five 
years since the Paris declaration, it has, nevertheless, filtered into the 
outcome document, with less important Paris commitments being dropped and the 
vital ones being reaffirmed.

And that is worth dwelling on. There was a time a few months ago when even 
core Paris commitments, such as ownership and putting aid money through 
systems, were thought to be in jeopardy given donor preference for "results" 
over process. That has not happened. Busan has thoroughly underlined the 
importance of ownership, and has stronger language on systems-approaches than 
ever before, insisting that the "default" option should be to use country 
systems, with any deviance explained to beneficiary countries. The new deal for 
fragile states will also be seen as one of the successes of Busan.

If you are interested in progressive language more generally, this document is 
satisfactory. It moves the debate well along from an obsession with aid to a 
much broader understanding of the co-operation, financial and otherwise, 
required for development to take place. Sure, they are just words, but 
sometimes that is useful. There is a section on illicit capital flight, 
language on creating the "enabling environment" for civil society to thrive and 
a general tonal shift towards a new global reality in which the west plays a 
supportive rather than a dominating role. South-south cooperation, with its 
strong emphasis on horizontal relationships, is the key new area of theory in 
this document and that is good news. It does not herald a paradigm shift, but 
describes one that is taking place.

Driving change

But despite the human resources spent on including time-bound commitments and 
perfecting language in international documents, we should not exaggerate their 
importance in driving change. Statements of intent are important, but not very 
important. As my boss at the Overseas Development Institute, Alison Evans, has 
put it (in the language of an economist) they marginally increase the cost of 
an alternative course of action, but seldom compete with more profound 
political and economic incentives. That is certainly one of the lessons of the 
last five years of Paris, in which donors have improved a bit, but 
substantially failed to meet their commitments.

That is why some people prefer to look at process issues more than wording, 
and if we look at political engagement rather than specific targets, Busan 
emerges as an important step forward. After last minute negotiations (in which 
Brazil played a key role) and the insertion of a paragraph distancing non-DAC 
(theDevelopment Assistance Committee 
<http://www.oecd.org/document/1/0,3746,en_2649_33721_46662849_1_1_1_1,00.html> 
of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) donors from 
concrete commitments, China, India and Brazilall endorsed the idea of working 
together more closely 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2011/dec/01/china-india-aid-partnership>
 in what is being described, even by usually critical civil society 
representatives, as a "new global partnership". This matters to African 
countries that want to apply principles to all international partners, without 
diminishing the distinctiveness of Chinese support for their development.

It is not a leap, it is a pigeon-step, but it is a step nonetheless - the 
latest in a long line that demonstrate the willingness of progressives to work 
more closely together to respond to global challenges such as poverty. The 
inclusion of civil society in negotiations was also an important procedural 
innovation, in contrast to the reduced political space it is experiencing in 
many countries. At one panel I was on, the idea emerged that civil society 
should be a formal part of many more UN processes.

The OECD, which, along with South Korea, deserves great credit for brokering 
the Busan agreement, realised that it had to decrease for a global partnership 
to increase, and it demonstrated leadership when it mattered. I am hopeful that 
despite the lack of measurable commitments, the building blocks are in place 
for an improved and much more inclusive model of international co-operation for 
development.

If Paris was a triumph of technocratic organisation, Busan has been an 
expression of shifting geopolitical realities, with the role of the BRICS 
(Brazil, Russia,India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, China and 
South Africa) proving more critical than ever before. But ultimately the same 
question applies to both talkfests: what difference will all this hullaballoo 
mean for the world's poorest and most vulnerable people? That will depend more 
on the actions of the international community than words on a page.
 