
A portrait of transgender reality star Caitlyn Jenner  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jul/26/caitllyn-jenner-i-am-cait-transgender>
will be among a series of pictures of women taken by celebrated photographer
Annie Leibovitz <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/annie-leibovitz> to 
be exhibited in London in January.

London to host new portraits by Annie Leibovitz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/19/london-portraits-annie-leibovitz-tokyo-new-york-women>
Jenner, who was formerly the US Olympic athlete Bruce Jenner and transitioned 
over the past year, will be among 30 women to feature in Leibovitz’s Women: New 
Portraits show, including Venus and Serena Williams, Amy Schumer and Gloria 
Steinem.

Leibovitz, who is famed for her photos for Rolling Stone and Vogue, first 
began her Womenproject in 1999 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/oct/16/weekend7.weekend1> in 
collaboration with political thinkerSusan Sontag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/dec/24/susan-sontag-rolling-stone-jonathan-cott-review>
, to document what female identity meant at the end of the 20th century and 
overturn tired stereotypes. The new works are a continuation of the series she 
began 15 years ago, said Leibovitz, updated with “people I really admire”.

The 66-year-old photographer took the high-profile Vanity Fair magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jun/01/caitlyn-jenner-bruce-jenner-vanity-fair>
 cover photo of Jenner this year, and said it was an example of how gender had 
become more fluid of a concept in the 21st century. 

Leibovitz said: “I think it’s kind of extraordinary that all of this is out 
there in the open … It’s interesting to realise that gender is very diversified 
and this is really what we are dealing with now. You can’t just put it into 
male/ female, there is more to that.”

The new series will first be displayed in Wapping Hydraulic Power Station in 
east London from 16 January before touring to 10 cities, including Tokyo, 
Istanbul, Mexico City and Zurich.

It’s interesting to realise that gender is very diversified and this is really 
what we are dealing with now
Annie Leibovitz 
Discussing how the role of women had changed since she started the project 
with Sontag, Leibovitz said the new series had highlighted to her how things 
had progressed.

“I think one of the biggest things is that since 1999 we were really 
struggling to find women who could represent fields whereas now it feels a lot 
easier,” she said. “I guess it just feels a bit more accessible. It really is 
happening, we are much more out there and diverse.”

On her own experience of sexism in the industry, Leibovitz said she felt her 
gender had never held her back since she began in the 1970s.

She said: “Have I felt discriminated against? Probably. I remember when I was 
younger being in a room with [comedian] Richard Pryor and some of his friends 
and it was like I was not there. And on some level it worked for me, I liked 
not being there. But I don’t think my gender has even stopped me from doing 
anything.”

As well as the new portraits, several of the photos from the original 
exhibition will also be on show to add context to the exhibition. Previous 
subjects for the Women project have ranged from television host Ellen DeGeneres 
to artist Agnes Martin. The original set of photos also featured a portrait of 
Leibovitz’s mother and the new series will include a family portrait of the 
photographer with her three daughters.

She said none of the faces and bodies in the exhibition would be subject to 
image manipulation by a programme such as Photoshop, a controversial issue in 
the magazine world as it has often been used to make women look thinner. 
However, she did not say she was against the use of retouching in publications 
in general.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fcaitlyn-jenner-to-feature-in-leibovitz-women-project%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f0d218ea84f7cdc16f90f8fc8ab10f30846f111%2F0_235_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caitlyn%20Jenner%20to%20feature%20in%20Leibovitz%20Women%20project&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fcaitlyn-jenner-to-feature-in-leibovitz-women-project%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caitlyn%20Jenner%20to%20feature%20in%20Leibovitz%20Women%20project&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fcaitlyn-jenner-to-feature-in-leibovitz-women-project%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f0d218ea84f7cdc16f90f8fc8ab10f30846f111%2F0_235_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Annie Leibovitz in London to launch the new show. Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA 
“I don’t think there is a cover for Vanity Fair or Vogue that goes out that is 
not retouched,” added Leibovitz. “I don’t know whether I consider the covers 
photographs, they are really covers, it’s pretty close to advertising if you 
ask me.”

Even though she is the world’s most sought-after photographer, Leibovitz also 
admitted back in 1999 she had been daunted by the prospect of beginning the 
project.

“I remember at the time that I wasn’t sure about doing something like this 
because it was just too big, too broad. I had my concerns about if it would 
work,” she said. “The accumulation of this project was a big surprise.”

Leibovitz added: “We felt that this was such a big undertaking that while we 
tried desperately to get as many kinds of women as we could into it, it was an 
unending project. There really isn’t an end to it. As the show goes on we’ll 
keep adding to it.”

 * WOMEN: New Portraits by Annie Leibovitz, sponsored by UBS, will launch in 
London in January 2016.  