
Rwanda upset their giant neighbours the Democratic Republic of Congo 1-0 
yesterday for their first African Nations Cup finals victory, only to have a 
place in the last eight snatched from them when a late Titi Camara goal gave 
Guinea a 1-1 draw with Tunisia.

In an error-strewn game in Bizerte Rwanda seized victory with a 74-minute goal 
by Said Abed Makasi, one of three Congo-born players appearing against their 
former homeland.

Mick Wadsworth criticised Congolese officials as his brief stint as coach 
ended on a low note. "The amount of pressure the players have to put up with 
from politicians and the federation is intolerable and unacceptable," he said. 
"Even at half-time today, I had to put up with a delegation of politicians that 
came in to address the players."

In Tunis Camara's 84th-minute goal ensured second place and a quarter-final 
berth for Guinea. Tunisia had dominated for long spells, but they settled for 
the draw that means they top the group.

"I am very happy," Camara said of his volleyed goal. "It was a great flick on 
from Samb√©gou Bangoura, and I just hit it as well as I could."

Tunisia, who made nine changes to the side that beat Congo on Wednesday, went 
ahead on 58 minutes through Slim Ben Achour, the match's dominant performer.

The PSG midfielder played a quick one-two with Francileudo Dos Santos and 
smashed home an unstoppable finish. When Rwanda then scored against Congo in 
the simultaneous game, the race for the second qualifying spot was perfectly 
balanced.

"We knew that Rwanda had scored, and with our goal differences being equal 
they would have drawn lots to see who finished second," the Guinea coach Michel 
Dussuyer explained. "We didn't know whether to hold on so as not to concede 
again, or go for a second goal. Thankfully Titi took the decision out of our 
hands, and saved us."

Nigeria kept their ambitions alive by hammering South Africa in Monastir on 
Saturday. The Super Eagles had been in trouble after their opening loss to 
Morocco, but their 4-0 victory will have done much to restore morale further 
damaged by the expulsion of three players on Friday.

The excellent Joseph Yobo got the first, before Jay-Jay Okocha scored a very 
dubious penalty - the 1,000th goal in African Nations Cup finals. The 
substitute Peter Odemwingie then lashed home two startling goals.

Morocco top the group after beating Benin 4-0 in Sfax.
 