
A place that used to be cool but now isn’t
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fcamden-town-sleep-the-spoon-wiz-khalifas-trousers-we-review-anything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f47a6ba6f34fdc5a37662435a56adcd75ac1755%2F0_411_5972_3581%2F5972.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Camden%20Town%2C%20sleep%2C%20the%20spoon%2C%20Wiz%20Khalifa's%20trousers%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0we%20review%20anything&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fcamden-town-sleep-the-spoon-wiz-khalifas-trousers-we-review-anything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Camden%20Town%2C%20sleep%2C%20the%20spoon%2C%20Wiz%20Khalifa%27s%20trousers%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0we%20review%20anything&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fcamden-town-sleep-the-spoon-wiz-khalifas-trousers-we-review-anything%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f47a6ba6f34fdc5a37662435a56adcd75ac1755%2F0_411_5972_3581%2F5972.jpg>
 Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
Sorry, you’re wrong, Camden Town is brilliant. I know what you’re thinking: 
but what about all those identikit shops selling the same chain wallets and 
striped socks? What of the once-glorious boozers that now aren’t even good 
enough to spend a penny in? The drug dealers crowding the canal? The head 
shops? Cyberdog? And when will someone burn down all those clubs that attract 
people who still insist on wearing winklepickers?

Chill your Ugg boots, people. At a time when gentrification is steam-rollering 
the capital quicker than you can say “better chances of a free Pret coffee 
amirite?”, the borough remains a magnificiently awkward mangle of tourist trap, 
student nightlife magnet and dog-eared desperation to cling on to its 
rock’n’roll heritage. Not for Camden Town a willingness to cave to tech 
roundabouts or pop-up food markets or anything resembling an independent coffee 
shop; it’s still clawing at the counterculture’s ashes like a crusty old punk.

But seriously (and I mean it), Camden Town must be the only stretch of high 
street that has managed to hang on to its great venues: the new romantics and 
Camden Palace (now KOKO but the same same); Britpop and the Good Mixer and 
Dublin Castle; theAmy Winehouse <https://www.theguardian.com/music/amywinehouse>
 set and the Hawley Arms. They’re still there, still sticky and sweaty, still 
flying two clammy fingers in the face of change. That’s why I’m going to go 
right ahead and give Camden Town...

10/10

KH

A thing we should all be doing but some people can’t 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fcamden-town-sleep-the-spoon-wiz-khalifas-trousers-we-review-anything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2b34853817c2de0bf9d5d056b07f32690080a54%2F0_356_5312_3187%2F5312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Camden%20Town%2C%20sleep%2C%20the%20spoon%2C%20Wiz%20Khalifa's%20trousers%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0we%20review%20anything&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fcamden-town-sleep-the-spoon-wiz-khalifas-trousers-we-review-anything%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Camden%20Town%2C%20sleep%2C%20the%20spoon%2C%20Wiz%20Khalifa%27s%20trousers%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0we%20review%20anything&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Fcamden-town-sleep-the-spoon-wiz-khalifas-trousers-we-review-anything%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2b34853817c2de0bf9d5d056b07f32690080a54%2F0_356_5312_3187%2F5312.jpg>
 This cat could be dead. We just don’t know. Photograph: Alamy 
Once you’ve brushed your teeth and spent a solid hour regretting every other 
thing you said and did during that particular day, sleep happens. Or, at least, 
it should do.

Because that’s the problem with sleep: sometimes it’s difficult to get 
started. If you’re a deep thinker, or what some people might lazily call 
neurotic, closing your eyes and keeping them shut is a difficult skill to 
master. Also if you’re on a bus or stuck next to someone you used to love but 
have gradually grown to resent and find sexually grotesque, it is also 
problematic.


To truly do a good sleep, you will need a busy day, an extra pillow so you can 
pretend it’s your ex-partner who broke your heart but you still care about, 
no/limited clothing and probably sleeping pills. But as this requires so many 
variables and a lot of prep work, sleep is something I can’t fully recommend. 
But when you do a good one, it often helps, especially if you don’t want to 
hate yourself/your life choices and worry about your heart exploding while at 
work the day after. I should probably add that I didn’t sleep so well last 
night.

6/10

BL

A thing that should cut food but doesn’t

Fork, knife, spoon. They’re your big three. Your power trio. The Gary, Mark 
and Howard of nosh. All serve different purposes, each as essential as the 
next, each lesser in the others’ absence. The jack-of-two-trades spork, 
convinced of its own importance, thought it could muscle in on territory that’s 
been held by the Stainless Steel Three for hundreds of years, but you don’t 
need a spork, any more thanTake That 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/take-that> needs Robbie Williams, who is 
basically the human spork.

The spoon alone ostensibly only serves a limited function: to scoop. Anyone 
who, lacking a knife, has tried to use its dull edge to cut a potato – only to 
send said spud hurtling over the horizon – might agree. But no: the spoon is in 
fact the only member of the cutlery boyband that can tackle both sweet and 
savoury with equal aplomb, proffering cereals and puddings before shifting 
seamlessly to hearty soups without so much as a “steady on, lads”. It also 
doubles as a rudimentary food catapult; handy in irreconcilable dinner-table 
contretemps. It’s like how Howard Donald can melt your eyebrows off with the 
sultry moves of a man made entirely of hips one minute, and cleave your heart 
in two with the sublime lead vocal of Never Forget the next. He has it all, and 
so does the spoon.

It’s as simple as this, really: if you were told you were to be stranded on a 
desert island and could only take one piece of cutlery with you, it would be 
the spoon wouldn’t it? Of course it would. Just me, the spoon and Howard, on 
the island for ever. Oh god we’d be so happy.

The spoon: 10/10
Howard Donald: 10/10
East 17: -10,000/10

LH

Trousers that shouldn’t be cool but might be

First, some context: Kanye West yelled at Wiz Khalifa on Twitter this week. He 
yelled at him because he thought thatWiz Khalifa was tweeting about his wife 
<https://twitter.com/wizkhalifa/status/692334374759616512>, when he was really 
tweeting about cannabis 
<https://twitter.com/wizkhalifa/status/692423417874796544>. Kanye used to 
really like Wiz <http://genius.com/680138>, and apparently still does now the 
whole thing has been settled 
<https://twitter.com/kanyewest/status/692435254431199233>, but in the process 
(in addition to unpleasantly attempting to shame his ex-girlfriend Amber Rose, 
with whom Wiz has a child) he brought up the hashtag #WizWearsCoolPants.

As Tim Maytom asks: what about Wiz’s pants? Are they, in fact, cool? Let’s 
find out.

Exhibit A: London’s got you a bit tired, poppet? London’s got me absolutely 
exhausted, pal. Still, I’m not wearing a pair of loose, lemon yellow trackie 
bottoms. Maybe I could get upgraded to a bit sleepy with these. 8/10

Exhibit B: Like Rick Ross said: you’ve got to judge a man by his principles. 
And if he’s wearing exquisitely printed trousers on the beach, when most of us 
are treating our solitary pair of shorts to their annual outing, you’ve got to 
judge him well. 9/10

Exhibit C: Wiz can fit into trousers so tight you can see his calfs, in white 
so blinding you can tell he’s made a firm commitment to not spilling any food 
on himself all day: two things to be admired in any man, really. 10/10

In summary: So thanks for asking, Tim: we can report that his trousers are 
officially very cool. Leave off him next time, Mr West. Overall trouser score...

9/10

CJ
 