
Key points

Cameron opened with a statement about the Brussels attacks, promising to 
“stand with all countries affected … and say [the terrorists] shall never win”. 
Corbyn echoed his statement and urged other governments to “refuse to be drawn 
into a cycle of violence”.

Corbyn then turned to the row over the withdrawal of plans to cut personal 
independence payments (PIP) to disabled people, which erupted amid the
resignation of Iain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/18/iain-duncan-smith-resigns-from-cabinet-over-disability-cuts>
. Cameron on the backfoot then referred toa list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/23/labour-mps-hostile-corbyn-leaked-party-document>
, apparently drawn up by Corbyn’s office, categorising Labour MPs according to 
their loyalty.

Cameron dripped sarcasm on Corbyn: “The king of fiscal rectitude speaks.” 
Addressing an MP and referring to the list again, he said they are “neutral not 
hostile”, and should shut up.

Disability campaigners occupy parliament over benefit cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/23/disability-campaigners-occupy-parliament-over-benefit-cuts>
Corbyn said the budget fell apart in two days and many people with 
disabilities went through stress and trauma. He said those MPs shouting did not 
have any idea what it is like to balance a budget at home and the budget has to 
mean something for people. The budget downgraded growth, wage growth and 
investment. And the chancellor has failed on his debt target. No credible 
economist backs the fiscal target.

Outside the chamber disability campaigners held a protest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/23/disability-campaigners-occupy-parliament-over-benefit-cuts>
.

Snap verdict

At times Corbyn was very good. The first half of his final question was 
excellent, he started well too, and his question about why the government 
proposed the PIP cut in the first place if it is saying now it can do without 
the money was a shrewd one that Cameron could not answer.

But Corbyn was too long-winded. His final question would make a Jim Naughtie 
question sound succinct, and by throwing in a question about employment support 
allowance (ESA) alongside the one about PIP, he helped Cameron dodge it. But it 
was Cameron’s day. As Corbyn said, Cameron’s Labour list riff was pure theatre, 
but it was funny, and even Labour MPs were smiling. More importantly, thought, 
Cameron’s sarcastic line about Corbyn as the “king of fiscal rectitude” hit 
home hard because it chimes with what so many people still think ofLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>.

Best lines

Cameron embarrassed Labour by reading from the leaked list of Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs categorising them by loyalty. 
Finishing:

Mr Speaker, I thought I had problems. 

Corbyn responded: 

If I could invite the prime minister to leave the theatre and return to 
reality. The reality is that he presided over a budget that unravelled in days.

 * For more on PMQs and the day’s politics, read our politics live blog with 
Andrew Sparrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/mar/23/boris-johnson-eu-referendum-pmqs-treasury-committee-about-eu-referendum-politics-live>
.
 