
Key points

Jeremy Corbyn used all six questions to press the prime minister on air 
pollution, citing the fact that 500,000 people die as a result of the failure 
to meet targets. Corbyn saidDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> once boasted about leading 
the greenest government ever: “No husky was safe from his cuddles. Why is the 
government failing people who work in the green energy industry?”

Cameron said the government had a good record on green energy. He listed some 
achievements in the area. On renewable electricity, the government is on track 
to get 30% of renewables by 2020, he said.

Snap verdict

Corbyn’s best PMQs <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs> yet? He was 
indignant, punchy and focused, and also, at least once, genuinely funny. 
Cameron did not seem to be expecting this line of attack, and Corbyn had him 
under pressure relentlessly in all six questions. A piece needs to be written 
about how he was transformed. And of course it was sartorial too. The beige 
suit seems to have gone, and Corbyn actually looked smart. Cameron’s mum would 
approve. Cameron himself will be less pleased about it all.


Best lines

Corbyn took a sombre approach in challenging Cameron on the government’s 
“failure” to deal with air pollution.

The sad truth is that half a million people will die because of this country’s 
failure to comply with the international law on air pollution.

Cameron countered that it was a Tory government that first regulated to 
improve air quality.

Corbyn came back: 

We all welcome the Clean Air Act of 1956 but things have moved on a bit since 
then.

Update we asked one of our fashion writers to consider his new look. Priya Elan
 gives his fashion verdict:

The Italians call it the “spezzato” the mis matched, bricolaged outfit. It’s a 
tailored, thought out look that’s been worn by male icons from Andre 3000 to 
David Beckham. And now Corbyn. Pairing black trousers with a deep sea blue 
jacket (cut just with a light, easy to wear touch) and a red almost maroon 
toned tie he looks, perhaps for the first time since he came to power in 
September 2015, like the take charge leader of our hopes and dreams. He’s gone 
from geography teacher chic to The Headmaster with one salient style flourish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fcameron-v-corbyn-pmqs-verdict-labour-leaders-best-round-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22ca823faf375787629d1731460fd1b595d56d7c%2F0_0_2560_1535%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron%20v%20Corbyn%20PMQs%20verdict%3A%20Labour%20leader's%20best%20round%20yet%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fcameron-v-corbyn-pmqs-verdict-labour-leaders-best-round-yet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cameron%20v%20Corbyn%20PMQs%20verdict%3A%20Labour%20leader%27s%20best%20round%20yet%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fmar%2F16%2Fcameron-v-corbyn-pmqs-verdict-labour-leaders-best-round-yet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F22ca823faf375787629d1731460fd1b595d56d7c%2F0_0_2560_1535%2F2560.jpg>
 Composite of Andre 3000, Jeremy Corbyn and David Beckham Composite: Getty/PA 
 * For more on PMQs and the day’s politics, read our politics live blog with 
Andrew Sparrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2016/mar/16/budget-2016-live-george-osborne-austerity-schools-tax-spending-live>
.






 