
There were shades of the Laura Spence affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/oct/27/oxford-elitism-laura-spence> 
in David Cameron’s recent swipes aboutdiversity at the University of Oxford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/31/university-of-oxford-rebuts-camerons-claims-over-student-diversity>
. Back then, Gordon Brown’s intervention in the case of a state school pupil 
with 5 As rejected by Oxford ushered in a golden era of government policy to 
widen participation in higher education. No such luck this time. Government 
policy has started to reverse access to parts of the sector – almost certainly 
by mistake.

Let's stop being defensive about the value of arts degrees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/29/study-arts-humanites-enrichment>
The prime minister’s comments are a colourful take on parts of Jo Johnson’s 
recent green paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/06/jo-johnsons-university-reforms-reactions-from-the-experts>
. Johnson wants 20% more black and minority ethnic (BME) students at 
universities by 2020, and Cameron wants that too. But not all of his ministers 
are pulling their weight. And although the government’s heart is in the right 
place, its head is not.


Let’s state the obvious. Universities are more open and diverse than they used 
to be, thanks to government policy and light-touch regulation. When the tuition 
fee cap rose to £9,000, we were instructed to spend some of the money on 
widening participation. This gave us the autonomy and funding – as well as a 
clear target – to do better.


As of 2015-16, black and minority ethnic students make up nearly a third of my 
university’s undergraduate cohort. Many other institutions have made similar 
progress. We plan to go further. In that sense, I don’t see huge challenges in 
increased targets.

But you can’t get to university before you’ve been to school. So while the 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills is making the right noises about 
tertiary education, the Department for Education’s (DfE)English Baccalaureate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/14/schools-gcse-ebacc-ofsted-nicky-morgan>
 is cutting access at secondary level to one of the UK’s big education success 
stories.

As most people know by now, the EBacc doesn’t include creative subjects – 
which is a problem if you want to study those subjects at tertiary level. Most 
universities expect prospective students to have school qualifications in 
relevant subject areas. Creative specialists like us are no different.


Music in higher education: what is it worth? – roundtable discussion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/dec/02/music-higher-education-cultural-value>
But the pool of state-school students qualified for our subjects is reducing 
rapidly. According to DfE’s own figures,the number of hours the arts were 
taught in secondary schools fell by 10% between 2010 and 2014, and the number 
of arts teachers fell by 11% 
<http://www.culturallearningalliance.org.uk/images/uploads/Arts_teaching_hours_and_workforce_2015.pdf>
 (pdf). There was a14% decline in the number of GCSE entries in arts subjects 
between 2010 and 2015 
<http://www.culturallearningalliance.org.uk/images/uploads/Patterns_in_GCSE_entries_2010_to_2015.pdf>
 (pdf). This compares to rises of 17% and 12% in Ebacc subjects geography and 
history respectively over the same period.

At the most basic level, this means that state schools have dramatically lost 
ground to private schools in preparing their pupils for a higher education in 
the arts. Our experience across a range of schools and further education 
colleges strongly suggests that this effect is disproportionately concentrated 
on pupils from BME and disadvantaged backgrounds.


This wouldn’t matter if there were no market for trained creatives. The pity 
is that the creative industries are famously open to people from all 
backgrounds, and are among Britain’s biggest and fastest-growing sectors.

We are more than willing to work with the government on this. As a starting 
point we have asked for an equality impact assessment of the EBacc school 
performance measure in respect of access to creative subjects in higher 
education.

Academic subjects alone won't 'set every child up for life'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jun/17/academic-subjects-alone-wont-set-every-child-up-for-life>
Some might say that this is just a problem for creative education, but it’s 
exactly this lack of attention to policy detail that sets poorer communities at 
a disadvantage. If it is happening in a priority area of UK business, it will 
certainly be a problem in other parts of education.

The prime minister is right. There is an issue to be addressed, but not just 
by universities. Unless policymakers look at the talent pipeline as a whole, it 
won’t be universities who are at fault.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 