
Key points

A heated debate that oscillated between the antisemitism row in Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and the Tories’ mayoral campaign 
strategy on the one hand, and social care cuts and the local elections on the 
other.


Corbyn was the first to mention the antisemitism row, declaring that racism 
had no place in society. Then he tried to move the debate on to local authority 
cuts affecting social care, housing and further education, but struggled to 
prevent Cameron coming back to antisemitism. He repeatedly called on Corbyn to 
condemn Hamas and Hezbollah and withdraw previous comments describing the 
proscribed groups as friends.

Corbyn attempted to turn the debate towards the Tory campaign for the London 
mayoralty, claiming that Cameron had smeared the Labour candidate, Sadiq Khan.

Snap verdict

A wretched 17 minutes for Corbyn. This is not the first time Cameron has 
attacked Corbyn’s alleged extremist sympathies at PMQs, but this latest 
onslaught was particularly timely and pertinent. Corbyn made a reasonable fist 
of trying to defend himself, dissociating himself from the “friends” remark 
about Hamas - although not retracting it as bluntly as Cameron proposed - and 
pointing out, quite rightly, the hypocrisy of the Tory attacks onSuliman Gani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/apr/20/london-mayor-cleric-cameron-said-supports-is-confirms-he-backed-conservatives>
.

The Cameron broadside was not especially fair, because there is probably no 
one in parliament who believes that Corbyn actually approves of Hamas rocket 
attacks on Israelis. The Labour leader, however, has been more sympathetic to 
groups such as Hamas than MPs in the political mainstream, meaning that 
Cameron’s comments had enough justification to give them potency. Cameron 
exploited that to the full, and with brutal effect.

Best lines

This PMQs <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs> will be remembered for 
Cameron pursuing the “friends of Hamas” question.

He [Corbyn] referred to Hamas and Hezbollah as his ‘friends’, now he needs to 
withdraw those remarks.

Corbyn’s response? 


I’ve made it very clear Labour is an anti-racism party and no place for 
antisemitism.

 * For more on PMQs and the day’s politics, read our politics live blog with 
Andrew Sparrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/may/04/labours-antisemitism-review-must-be-more-than-political-posturing-says-chief-rabbi-politics-live>
.
 