
Key points

Cameron and Corbyn paid tribute to the campaigners for justice for the 
Hillsborough victims after Tuesday’s inquest verdict. The Commons will return 
to the subject immediately afterPMQs <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs>
 in a debate.

Corbyn then used his six questions to the prime minister to pick up where he 
left off last week on academies. Over the weekend, there weresuggestions that 
Cameron could back down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/23/tory-mps-call-for-academies-plan-dropped-from-queens-speech>
 on his pledge to force all English schools to become academies after the plan 
met with Tory opposition. It resulted in Cameron confirming that the 
Conservatives would go ahead with the academy plan in theQueen’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/queens-speech>. 

Snap verdict

Corbyn said repeats often attracted more viewers than the first broadcast, but 
they often disappointed too, and that was his experience on Wednesday. Last 
week, he successfully exposed Tory divisions over forced academisation and 
showed up the rather shallow evidence base for the policy. This week, he 
devoted all six questions to the same issue, but did not have enough new 
material to discomfit Cameron, and the prime minister’s willingness to give a 
direct answer to the question about whether the academies bill would be in the 
Queen’s speech, plus his ability to reference Sir Michael Wilshaw and the OECD, 
allowed him to see Corbyn off. You could tell that Cameron was winning because 
his references to the need for a strong economy and so on were kept to a 
minimum, and, having made a very brief reference to Naz Shah, he did not feel 
the need to launch a lengthy counter-offensive onLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> antisemitism.

Best lines

Corbyn: 

There seems to be a pattern developing here. The pattern is quite simply this: 
a health secretary imposing contracts on junior doctors against the wishes … of 
the profession. He has an education secretary imposing a top-down reform nobody 
wants ... When will the government listen to the professionals?

Cameron made a dig at the developing row over antisemitism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/27/pmqs-cameron-corbyn-hillsborough-oecd-cost-britons-a-months-salary-by-2020-says-oecd-politics-live?page=with:block-57209869e4b0ba980af16d98#block-57209869e4b0ba980af16d98>
 in the Labour party:

Perhaps if you could deal with the antisemites in your own party, we’d all be 
prepared to listen to you a bit more.
 