
3.40pm GMT 15:40  <> 

Afternoon summary

 * Dominic Grieve, the former attorney general, has said that David Cameron’s 
proposed law to assert the sovereignty of parliament in relation to the EU 
would be “pointless”.(See 1.58pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/feb/09/labour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-?page=with:block-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312#block-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312>
 * Jamie Reed, the Labour MP, has accused Jeremy Corbyn of showing “chaotic” 
and “dishonest” leadership over Trident. (See 2.53pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/feb/09/labour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-?page=with:block-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632#block-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632>
 * Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has accused the UK Treasury of 
trying to “systematically reduce the Scottish budget” as talks over future 
funding arrangements appear deadlocked.She said the UK and Scottish governments 
did not have a “shared understanding” of one of the key principles behind 
proposals for further devolution. Referring to the “no detriment” principle in 
the Smith commission report (which says that, as Scotland and England adopt 
different policies after the new devolution settlement, one country should not 
lose out from what the other does), she said: 
I am writing to the prime minister today, seeking to address what I consider 
to be the central issue of principle that is standing in the way of a deal - 
the fact that we are currently not working to a shared understanding of what no 
detriment means.

It has become increasingly clear that what the Treasury seems to want to 
achieve is an outcome that would systematically reduce the Scottish budget as a 
result of our differential growth in population, even though the Scotland bill 
gives us no additional powers to grow our population.

 * Nigel Dodds, the DUP leader at Westminster, has said having the EU 
referendum in June would mean that it would clash with the European 
Championships. The DUP and nationalist parties in Scotland and Wales do not 
want the referendum in June because the campaign would overlap with the 
Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland elections. But in a Commons debate Dodds 
said football was another reason for delaying. He told MPs: 
Let’s face it, if we’re going to have these issues just because the government 
has chosen to foist the EU referendum on us at a time when the European 
Championships are taking place then people will want to concentrate on the 
football. That’s another good argument for having this debate later.

And given the fact that so many fans from England, Wales and Northern Ireland 
- sadly not Scotland - will be travelling to France, it’s another good reason 
to avoid all the extra costs of postal votes and proxy votes and all the rest 
of it to have it on a different date.

 * Government officials and the British Medical Association (BMA) are locked 
in last-ditch talks to avert strike action by thousands of junior doctors. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/09/bma-and-government-hold-last-ditch-talks-to-avert-doctors-strike>
That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec%23block-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec%23block-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec%23block-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec%23block-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec%23block-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec%23block-56ba03b4e4b01b57bb993fec&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.24pm GMT 15:24  <> 

Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, has welcomed the plans to extend Sunday 
trading. He said:

Extending Sunday trading hours could revolutionise the shopping experience for 
millions of Londoners and visitors to the city, and build on the capital’s 
position as an international shopping destination. We will now be working with 
London’s business community and local authorities to see how this could best 
work in the capital.
 Boris Johnson leaving cabinet this morning. Photograph: REX/Shutterstock 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f%23block-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f%23block-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f%23block-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f%23block-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f%23block-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f%23block-56ba0448e4b00fd8d131a39f&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.19pm GMT 15:19  <> 

In an article for Huffington Post Paul Ingram, director of the British 
American Security Information Council (a thinktank working for nuclear 
disarmament) has written a blog saying technological developments renderTrident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident> submarines useless. He said:

If we are to take security seriously, and not simply see our nuclear weapon 
systems as symbols of our power and status, then they have to work. If they do 
not they are worse than useless - we end up relying upon an illusion.As I have 
outlined elsewhere 
<http://www.basicint.org/publications/paul-ingram-executive-director/2016/will-trident-still-work-future>
, the emerging threats are serious - our systems, particularly our nuclear 
submarines, are under significant threat rendering deep doubt on the assurance 
our concepts of nuclear deterrence rely upon. Just because we believe that they 
have worked in the past is no clear indication of the future. History is 
littered with examples of armies failing to wake up to the changes to military 
technologies and suffering humiliating defeats as a result.

Ingram was on the World at One debating Lord West, the former first sea lord 
and formerLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> security 
minister. West said he did not agree.

I feel that we need to have the best affordable system at the minimum level to 
enable us to respond should sometime in the next 50 years someone want to 
attack us. And we have seen nothing which shows a technological breakthrough. 
There’s nothing there at all and it’s against the laws of physics.

Would America, would Russia, would China be investing way more than us - I 
mean billions of pounds - in new ballistic missile submarines if they really 
thought the seas were transparent?

West also said he would resign the Labour whip if it became a unilateralist 
party.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3%23block-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3%23block-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3%23block-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3%23block-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3%23block-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3%23block-56ba016de4b01b57bb993fe3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.01pm GMT 15:01  <> 

Salmond slams Cameron's handling of EU referendum debate

MPs have been debating the timing of the EU referendum, and Alex Salmond, the 
SNP international affairs spokesman and former Scottish first minister, used 
his speech to accuse David Cameron of running a dismal campaign to keep Britain 
in the EU. Salmond, who is also in favour of staying in the EU, offered a 
vision of what an alternative campaign could look like. He told MPs:

Yesterday’s ludicrous exchange on which side of the Channel a giant refugee 
camp would be located just about sums up this miserable, irrelevant debate.

The truth is that it doesn’t matter. It would take at least five years to 
withdraw from European Treaties and by then we could have ten times the number 
of refugees or none at all. No-one knows how that will affect bi-lateral 
arrangements between Britain and France. It is a pointless, pathetic, puerile 
debate typical of a deeply depressing campaign - the political equivalent of a 
no-score draw.


The lead responsibility for this state of affairs lies with the prime 
minister. This whole mess is of his creation. The time to propose a referendum 
when you want to achieve something important like Scottish independence not 
when you want to achieve nothing at all, like his sham Euro negotiations on 
points of little substance ...


We need to fight an entirely different campaign in Scotland. What people want 
to hear is how to build a European future which acts on the environment, which 
faces down the multi-nationals, which shows solidarity when faced with a 
refugee crisis, which acts together against austerity, which respects its 
component nations, which co-operates on great projects like a super grid across 
the North Sea and which revitalises the concept of a social Europe for all of 
our citizens.


That is a Europe worth voting for, not Cameron’s teeny, weeny vision of 
nothing much at all.

 Alex Salmond unveiling a portrait of himself at the Scottish National 
Portrait Gallery last year Photograph: Roberto Ricciuti/WireImage, Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4%23block-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4%23block-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4%23block-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4%23block-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4%23block-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4%23block-56b9fdd8e4b01b57bb993fd4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.53pm GMT 14:53  <> 

Back to Trident, and the Labour MP Jamie Reed  <http://there’s nothing 
pro-Labour about deliberately choosing to split the party on an issue that the 
Leadership knows cannot be influenced from a position of Opposition and about 
which every decision will have been made before 2020. Worst of all, the 
leadership has made an informed choice and that choice is to pursue electoral 
defeat. The leadership knows that an anti-Trident policy will lead to rejection 
at the ballot box. It knows that this is a litmus test of credibility. The 
leadership knows that an anti-Trident position means taking a pass on power; 
it’s an open-armed, wide-eyed, deliberate embrace of the wilderness. This is a 
chaotic, dishonest, shambolic process. For the sake of the Labour leadership, 
for the sake of the party, for the sake of the 9.3 million people who voted 
Labour at the last election, and for the sake of the country, it should be 
abandoned without delay.>has written a particularly harsh blog for Coffee House 
attacking Jeremy Corbyn’s handling of this issue 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/02/we-cant-let-labours-leadership-use-trident-to-destroy-the-party/>
. Reed accuses Corbyn of “an orgiastic embrace of the chaos theory” (whatever 
that means) and goes on:

There’s nothing pro-Labour about deliberately choosing to split the party on 
an issue that the Leadership knows cannot be influenced from a position of 
Opposition and about which every decision will have been made before 2020.

Worst of all, the leadership has made an informed choice and that choice is to 
pursue electoral defeat. The leadership knows that an anti-Trident policy will 
lead to rejection at the ballot box. It knows that this is a litmus test of 
credibility. The leadership knows that an anti-Trident position means taking a 
pass on power; it’s an open-armed, wide-eyed, deliberate embrace of the 
wilderness.

This is a chaotic, dishonest, shambolic process. For the sake of the Labour 
leadership, for the sake of the party, for the sake of the 9.3 million people 
who votedLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> at the last 
election, and for the sake of the country, it should be abandoned without delay.
 Jamie Reed Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632%23block-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632%23block-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632%23block-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632%23block-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632%23block-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632%23block-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.58pm GMT 13:58  <> 

Cameron's proposed sovereignty law would be 'pointless', says former attorney 
general

Last week David Cameron signalled that he will introduce some kind of law or 
measure to assert the sovereignty of parliament in relation to the EU. This is 
intended, in part at least, to appease Boris Johnson, the Conservative MP and 
mayor of London, who was been calling for this.

EU deal: Cameron vows to put Commons sovereignty 'beyond doubt'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/03/eu-deal-david-cameron-uk-parliament-sovereignty-beyond-doubt-boris-johnson>
But Dominic Grieve <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dominicgrieve>, the 
Conservative MP and former attorney general (senior legal adviser to the 
government), told the World at One that this would be “pointless”. Asked what 
Cameron’s plan might achieve, he replied:

All I would say is this: by virtue of the treaties and the acts which followed 
our treaty of accession, primacy in matters of European law, in its 
interpretation, is given to the court of justice in Luxembourg. And in those 
circumstances it is difficult to see how any piece of legislation can alter 
that without our being in breach of the treaties.

So, any attempt at doing this, I would be interested to see how something 
beneficial could be achieved without in fact interfering with the treaty 
obligations which it is quite clear the government doesn’t intend to do.

Grieve said that if Britain did breach European law, it would be taken to the 
European Court of Justice, and the ECJ could over-ride the relevant national 
law.

So would any sovereignty measure be pointless, he was asked. He replied:

It would in those circumstances be pointless, but it is not to say, for 
example, that it isn’t possible to have a dialogue between our own supreme 
court and the court in Luxembourg in which jurists who are considering the same 
piece of legislation may exchange views about what the legislation actually 
means. That’s very desirable in any working justice system.

But at the end of the day the buck stops somewhere. And the treaty of 
accession, and our own legislation, makes quite clear that it is the court in 
Luxembourg which has the last word, as indeed it has for every other state 
which is adherent to theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

(It is comments like this that help to explain why Grieve is a former attorney 
general.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312%23block-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312%23block-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312%23block-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312%23block-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312%23block-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312%23block-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.22pm GMT 13:22  <> 

Lunchtime summary

 * Labour tensions over Trident have erupted again after Emily Thornberry said 
nuclear submarines may not be able to hide under the sea within a decade, 
making them as obsolete as Spitfires. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/09/labour-trident-tensions-resurface-over-hiding-capability-of-submarines>
AsRowena Mason reports, the shadow defence secretary, who is leading Labour’s 
review of policy on Trident, made the claim at a stormy meeting of the 
parliamentary party on Monday night and explained it further on BBC Radio 4 on 
Tuesday. It drew the immediate ire of pro-Trident parliamentarians, with Alan 
West, theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> peer and former 
military chief, taking the unusual step of calling the Today programme to 
dismiss his colleague’s claims as “nonsense”. The shadow cabinet was due to 
discuss Trident at its meeting today, but it is understood that that debate has 
now been put off until a further meeting. 
 * Theresa May’s draft “snooper’s charter” bill fails to cover all the 
intrusive spying powers of the security agencies and lacks clarity in its 
privacy protections, the parliamentary intelligence and security committee has 
said. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/09/draft-snoopers-charter-fails-on-spying-powers-and-privacy-protections>
Commenting on the committee’s report, the prime minister’s spokeswoman said: 
This is a very detailed report. The government will want to take time to look 
at it and consider it. The whole point of having this pre-legislative scrutiny 
period is so we can hear the views of others and engage with them to make sure 
we get this absolutely right.

 * Usdaw, the shopworkers’ union, has described government plans to extend 
Sunday trading as “a nightmare scenario”. Sajid Javid, the business secretary, 
unveiled his proposals today. (See 10.33am.)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/feb/09/labour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-?page=with:block-56b9bef2e4b07a94592e8afa#block-56b9bef2e4b07a94592e8afa>
In response,John Hannett, the Usdaw general secretary, said: 
Whilst we accept that there are mixed views about longer Sunday opening in 
retail sector, we know there is huge opposition to the proposal to devolve the 
matter to local authorities. The overwhelming majority of retailers do not want 
to have to deal with nearly 300 different regulatory regimes across the 
country, it is a nightmare scenario.

 * Nick Herbert, the former policing minister, has said that campaigners in 
favour of leaving the EU have “no idea of what the alternative to EU membership 
looks like”.In a speech given in his capacity as chair of Conservatives for 
Reform in Europe, he said: 
Some of them want fortress Britain, sulking behind the Channel, while others 
want to turn the place into a gigantic Hong Kong, open to the world’s 
capitalists.

While Nigel Farage will mention migrants in every sentence if he can, Douglas 
Carswell will change the subject from immigration as fast as he can – though 
both want Britain to model our system on Australia’s, which, Liam Fox admits 
has allowed a higher rate of immigration per head than ours.

Matthew Elliot, chief executive of the Vote Leave campaign, suggests opening 
our borders not just to Australia, New Zealand and Canada but to the 300 
million people of the United States.

Whereas Aaron Banks, who leads another campaign, Leave.EU, argues that 
“Politicians of all parties have encouraged a total open door policy that has 
created tensions across Europe” 2 and suggests an immigration cap of 50,000 a 
year.”

 * Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Conservative leader, has said she has no 
interest in coming the next UK Tory leader. DailySunday Politics 
(@daily_politics) 
Laughing, @RuthDavidsonMP rules herself out of becoming next Tory leader. 
"Absolutely no interest in the job"#bbcdp 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/bbcdp?src=hash> https://t.co/vazXlNlb0Q 
<https://t.co/vazXlNlb0Q>
 <https://twitter.com/daily_politics/status/697035070427652097> February 9, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/daily_politics/status/697035070427652097> 
 * Lord Bew, the chair of the committee on standards in public life, has told 
peers that there is no appetite amongst the public for state funding of 
political parties. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-35531344>He was 
giving evidence to a committee looking at the impact of the trade union bill on 
party funding. 
 * Top authors have gathered in parliament to campaign against cuts to 
libraries and are calling on MPs to ensure the public service has sufficient 
funding. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/09/library-campaigners-descend-on-parliament-to-defend-public-funding>
Updated at 1.40pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77%23block-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77%23block-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77%23block-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77%23block-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77%23block-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77%23block-56b9e1b6e4b01b57bb993f77&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.45pm GMT 12:45  <> 

My colleague Owen Jones has written about Labour’s Trident split, and 
criticised the MPs who heckledEmily Thornberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/emily-thornberry> at last night’s meeting 
of the PLP. Here’s an extract.

In what other line of work is it acceptable to shout down a colleague because 
you don’t like their presentation? Here’s the sort of macho, yah-boo circus 
that deters anyone vaguely normal from wanting to have anything to do with 
anything political. These same MPs will, undoubtedly, be the first to complain 
about the Labour leadership briefing against their colleagues. If at a local
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party meeting – never mind 
the PLP – a bunch of activists linked to Momentum started trying to shout down 
their local MP, we might expect it to make national headlines: the thuggish 
hard-left trying to drown out anyone who disagrees with them.

And here’s his article.

Trident is too important an issue to be shouted down | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/09/trident-too-important-shouted-down-labour-mps>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9%23block-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9%23block-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9%23block-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9%23block-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9%23block-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9%23block-56b9df08e4b02839b203d5c9&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.39pm GMT 12:39  <> 

Last night Channel 4 News broadcast the results of a Michael Crick 
investigation that suggests the Conservatives overspent in three byelections in 
the last parliament.

Conservatives face possible inquiry after claims of byelection overspend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/08/conservatives-face-possible-inquiry-after-claims-of-byelection-overspend>
Crick has been on the Daily Politics talking about his scoop. He said there 
were unlikely to be prosecutions, because any prosecutions under the 
Representation of the People Act would have to take place within 12 months of 
each byelections, and those deadlines have expired. Some lawyers thought a 
conspiracy charge might be appropriate, Crick said. But he said the real 
problem was that no one seemed interested in investigating.

The trouble with this area is that no one really wants to handle it. The 
Electoral Commission are saying we only handle national spending limits, not 
the local constituency limits that apply in constituency campaigns. They say 
that’s the job of returning officers. The returning officers take the return in 
and look after it and make it available to the public, but they say, ‘Well, 
it’s not our job to check the returns.’ They say that’s a matter for the 
police. And the police say, ‘Well, we don’t really want to get involved.’ So 
nobody really polices any of this. The Electoral Commission has asked for 
greater powers from the government. But they say the government has not 
responded.

The Conservatives told Channel 4 News that they declared all byelection 
spending in accordance with the law. But Crick said the Tories had not 
explained why the hotel bills he unearthed did not appear in the byelection 
expense returns.

Crick had some bad news for the Tories. There will be more revelations on 
Channel 4 News tonight, he said, relating to spending in Thanet South during 
the general election.

 Michael Crick Photograph: BBC Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa%23block-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa%23block-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa%23block-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa%23block-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa%23block-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa%23block-56b9d9f4e4b00fd8d131a2fa&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
12.03pm GMT 12:03  <> 

On the subject of Trident, Michael Fallon, the defence secretary, has 
announced the government is committing £201m to spend on designing the new 
submarines that will replace the Vanguard boats that carry the Trident missiles.
 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/200-million-funding-boost-for-uk-industry-carrying-out-successor-submarine-design>

Here is an MoD picture of what the new submarines might look like.
 What the successor to the Vanguard submarines might look like Photograph: 
Ministry of Defence Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc%23block-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc%23block-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc%23block-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc%23block-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc%23block-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc%23block-56b9d4eae4b00fd8d131a2dc&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
11.56am GMT 11:56  <> 

Labour MP Clive Lewis floats idea of sharing nuclear deterrent with the French

The Labour MP Clive Lewis, a shadow energy minister and a prominent Jeremy 
Corbyn supporter, told BBC News a few minutes ago that there were compromise 
options available to Labour onTrident <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident>. 
It was not just a choice between renewal and unilateral disarmament, he said.

It was important to remember that the issue facing the Commons was not whether 
to get rid of Trident, but what to do about replacing it, he said.

And he suggested that Britain could share a nuclear deterrent with the French. 
This is what he said when he was asked what the compromise options available to
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> might be.

I think the Liberal Democrat review saw some of those options. I think if 
Emily Thornberry’s review also looks at those, it could be perhaps, for 
example, going in with the French. It could perhaps be having our own system 
which is land-based. It could be cruise missile based. There are a number of 
options that are already out there.

The Lib Dem option refers to keeping a submarine-based Trident system, but not 
ordering another four boats. This would mean not having a submarine on patrol 
at all times, or “stepping down the nuclear ladder”, as the Lib Dems described 
it. <http://www.libdems.org.uk/trident>
 Clive Lewis Photograph: BBC News Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124%23block-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124%23block-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124%23block-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124%23block-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron's%20proposed%20sovereignty%20law%20would%20be%20'pointless'%2C%20says%20former%20attorney%20general%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124%23block-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F09%2Flabour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124%23block-56b9cbbee4b082834087e124&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
 * Dominic Grieve, the former attorney general, has said that David Cameron’s 
proposed law to assert the sovereignty of parliament in relation to the EU 
would be “pointless”.(See 1.58pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/feb/09/labour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-?page=with:block-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312#block-56b9e2ade4b00fd8d131a312>
 * Jamie Reed, the Labour MP, has accused Jeremy Corbyn of showing “chaotic” 
and “dishonest” leadership over Trident. (See 2.53pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/feb/09/labour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-?page=with:block-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632#block-56b9fc33e4b02839b203d632>
 * Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has accused the UK Treasury of 
trying to “systematically reduce the Scottish budget” as talks over future 
funding arrangements appear deadlocked.She said the UK and Scottish governments 
did not have a “shared understanding” of one of the key principles behind 
proposals for further devolution. Referring to the “no detriment” principle in 
the Smith commission report (which says that, as Scotland and England adopt 
different policies after the new devolution settlement, one country should not 
lose out from what the other does), she said: 
I am writing to the prime minister today, seeking to address what I consider 
to be the central issue of principle that is standing in the way of a deal - 
the fact that we are currently not working to a shared understanding of what no 
detriment means.

It has become increasingly clear that what the Treasury seems to want to 
achieve is an outcome that would systematically reduce the Scottish budget as a 
result of our differential growth in population, even though the Scotland bill 
gives us no additional powers to grow our population.

 * Nigel Dodds, the DUP leader at Westminster, has said having the EU 
referendum in June would mean that it would clash with the European 
Championships. The DUP and nationalist parties in Scotland and Wales do not 
want the referendum in June because the campaign would overlap with the 
Scottish, Welsh and Northern Ireland elections. But in a Commons debate Dodds 
said football was another reason for delaying. He told MPs: 
Let’s face it, if we’re going to have these issues just because the government 
has chosen to foist the EU referendum on us at a time when the European 
Championships are taking place then people will want to concentrate on the 
football. That’s another good argument for having this debate later.

And given the fact that so many fans from England, Wales and Northern Ireland 
- sadly not Scotland - will be travelling to France, it’s another good reason 
to avoid all the extra costs of postal votes and proxy votes and all the rest 
of it to have it on a different date.

 * Government officials and the British Medical Association (BMA) are locked 
in last-ditch talks to avert strike action by thousands of junior doctors. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/09/bma-and-government-hold-last-ditch-talks-to-avert-doctors-strike>
That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.
 
Boris Johnson, the mayor of London, has welcomed the plans to extend Sunday 
trading. He said:

Extending Sunday trading hours could revolutionise the shopping experience for 
millions of Londoners and visitors to the city, and build on the capital’s 
position as an international shopping destination. We will now be working with 
London’s business community and local authorities to see how this could best 
work in the capital.
 Boris Johnson leaving cabinet this morning. Photograph: REX/Shutterstock  
In an article for Huffington Post Paul Ingram, director of the British 
American Security Information Council (a thinktank working for nuclear 
disarmament) has written a blog saying technological developments renderTrident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident> submarines useless. He said:

If we are to take security seriously, and not simply see our nuclear weapon 
systems as symbols of our power and status, then they have to work. If they do 
not they are worse than useless - we end up relying upon an illusion.As I have 
outlined elsewhere 
<http://www.basicint.org/publications/paul-ingram-executive-director/2016/will-trident-still-work-future>
, the emerging threats are serious - our systems, particularly our nuclear 
submarines, are under significant threat rendering deep doubt on the assurance 
our concepts of nuclear deterrence rely upon. Just because we believe that they 
have worked in the past is no clear indication of the future. History is 
littered with examples of armies failing to wake up to the changes to military 
technologies and suffering humiliating defeats as a result.

Ingram was on the World at One debating Lord West, the former first sea lord 
and formerLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> security 
minister. West said he did not agree.

I feel that we need to have the best affordable system at the minimum level to 
enable us to respond should sometime in the next 50 years someone want to 
attack us. And we have seen nothing which shows a technological breakthrough. 
There’s nothing there at all and it’s against the laws of physics.

Would America, would Russia, would China be investing way more than us - I 
mean billions of pounds - in new ballistic missile submarines if they really 
thought the seas were transparent?

West also said he would resign the Labour whip if it became a unilateralist 
party.
 
MPs have been debating the timing of the EU referendum, and Alex Salmond, the 
SNP international affairs spokesman and former Scottish first minister, used 
his speech to accuse David Cameron of running a dismal campaign to keep Britain 
in the EU. Salmond, who is also in favour of staying in the EU, offered a 
vision of what an alternative campaign could look like. He told MPs:

Yesterday’s ludicrous exchange on which side of the Channel a giant refugee 
camp would be located just about sums up this miserable, irrelevant debate.

The truth is that it doesn’t matter. It would take at least five years to 
withdraw from European Treaties and by then we could have ten times the number 
of refugees or none at all. No-one knows how that will affect bi-lateral 
arrangements between Britain and France. It is a pointless, pathetic, puerile 
debate typical of a deeply depressing campaign - the political equivalent of a 
no-score draw.


The lead responsibility for this state of affairs lies with the prime 
minister. This whole mess is of his creation. The time to propose a referendum 
when you want to achieve something important like Scottish independence not 
when you want to achieve nothing at all, like his sham Euro negotiations on 
points of little substance ...


We need to fight an entirely different campaign in Scotland. What people want 
to hear is how to build a European future which acts on the environment, which 
faces down the multi-nationals, which shows solidarity when faced with a 
refugee crisis, which acts together against austerity, which respects its 
component nations, which co-operates on great projects like a super grid across 
the North Sea and which revitalises the concept of a social Europe for all of 
our citizens.


That is a Europe worth voting for, not Cameron’s teeny, weeny vision of 
nothing much at all.

 Alex Salmond unveiling a portrait of himself at the Scottish National 
Portrait Gallery last year Photograph: Roberto Ricciuti/WireImage,  
Back to Trident, and the Labour MP Jamie Reed  <http://there’s nothing 
pro-Labour about deliberately choosing to split the party on an issue that the 
Leadership knows cannot be influenced from a position of Opposition and about 
which every decision will have been made before 2020. Worst of all, the 
leadership has made an informed choice and that choice is to pursue electoral 
defeat. The leadership knows that an anti-Trident policy will lead to rejection 
at the ballot box. It knows that this is a litmus test of credibility. The 
leadership knows that an anti-Trident position means taking a pass on power; 
it’s an open-armed, wide-eyed, deliberate embrace of the wilderness. This is a 
chaotic, dishonest, shambolic process. For the sake of the Labour leadership, 
for the sake of the party, for the sake of the 9.3 million people who voted 
Labour at the last election, and for the sake of the country, it should be 
abandoned without delay.>has written a particularly harsh blog for Coffee House 
attacking Jeremy Corbyn’s handling of this issue 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/02/we-cant-let-labours-leadership-use-trident-to-destroy-the-party/>
. Reed accuses Corbyn of “an orgiastic embrace of the chaos theory” (whatever 
that means) and goes on:

There’s nothing pro-Labour about deliberately choosing to split the party on 
an issue that the Leadership knows cannot be influenced from a position of 
Opposition and about which every decision will have been made before 2020.

Worst of all, the leadership has made an informed choice and that choice is to 
pursue electoral defeat. The leadership knows that an anti-Trident policy will 
lead to rejection at the ballot box. It knows that this is a litmus test of 
credibility. The leadership knows that an anti-Trident position means taking a 
pass on power; it’s an open-armed, wide-eyed, deliberate embrace of the 
wilderness.

This is a chaotic, dishonest, shambolic process. For the sake of the Labour 
leadership, for the sake of the party, for the sake of the 9.3 million people 
who votedLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> at the last 
election, and for the sake of the country, it should be abandoned without delay.
 Jamie Reed Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA  
Last week David Cameron signalled that he will introduce some kind of law or 
measure to assert the sovereignty of parliament in relation to the EU. This is 
intended, in part at least, to appease Boris Johnson, the Conservative MP and 
mayor of London, who was been calling for this.

EU deal: Cameron vows to put Commons sovereignty 'beyond doubt'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/03/eu-deal-david-cameron-uk-parliament-sovereignty-beyond-doubt-boris-johnson>
But Dominic Grieve <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dominicgrieve>, the 
Conservative MP and former attorney general (senior legal adviser to the 
government), told the World at One that this would be “pointless”. Asked what 
Cameron’s plan might achieve, he replied:

All I would say is this: by virtue of the treaties and the acts which followed 
our treaty of accession, primacy in matters of European law, in its 
interpretation, is given to the court of justice in Luxembourg. And in those 
circumstances it is difficult to see how any piece of legislation can alter 
that without our being in breach of the treaties.

So, any attempt at doing this, I would be interested to see how something 
beneficial could be achieved without in fact interfering with the treaty 
obligations which it is quite clear the government doesn’t intend to do.

Grieve said that if Britain did breach European law, it would be taken to the 
European Court of Justice, and the ECJ could over-ride the relevant national 
law.

So would any sovereignty measure be pointless, he was asked. He replied:

It would in those circumstances be pointless, but it is not to say, for 
example, that it isn’t possible to have a dialogue between our own supreme 
court and the court in Luxembourg in which jurists who are considering the same 
piece of legislation may exchange views about what the legislation actually 
means. That’s very desirable in any working justice system.

But at the end of the day the buck stops somewhere. And the treaty of 
accession, and our own legislation, makes quite clear that it is the court in 
Luxembourg which has the last word, as indeed it has for every other state 
which is adherent to theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

(It is comments like this that help to explain why Grieve is a former attorney 
general.)
 
 * Labour tensions over Trident have erupted again after Emily Thornberry said 
nuclear submarines may not be able to hide under the sea within a decade, 
making them as obsolete as Spitfires. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/09/labour-trident-tensions-resurface-over-hiding-capability-of-submarines>
AsRowena Mason reports, the shadow defence secretary, who is leading Labour’s 
review of policy on Trident, made the claim at a stormy meeting of the 
parliamentary party on Monday night and explained it further on BBC Radio 4 on 
Tuesday. It drew the immediate ire of pro-Trident parliamentarians, with Alan 
West, theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> peer and former 
military chief, taking the unusual step of calling the Today programme to 
dismiss his colleague’s claims as “nonsense”. The shadow cabinet was due to 
discuss Trident at its meeting today, but it is understood that that debate has 
now been put off until a further meeting. 
 * Theresa May’s draft “snooper’s charter” bill fails to cover all the 
intrusive spying powers of the security agencies and lacks clarity in its 
privacy protections, the parliamentary intelligence and security committee has 
said. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/09/draft-snoopers-charter-fails-on-spying-powers-and-privacy-protections>
Commenting on the committee’s report, the prime minister’s spokeswoman said: 
This is a very detailed report. The government will want to take time to look 
at it and consider it. The whole point of having this pre-legislative scrutiny 
period is so we can hear the views of others and engage with them to make sure 
we get this absolutely right.

 * Usdaw, the shopworkers’ union, has described government plans to extend 
Sunday trading as “a nightmare scenario”. Sajid Javid, the business secretary, 
unveiled his proposals today. (See 10.33am.)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/feb/09/labour-trident-corbyn-thornberry-burnham-andy-burnham-says-politics-?page=with:block-56b9bef2e4b07a94592e8afa#block-56b9bef2e4b07a94592e8afa>
In response,John Hannett, the Usdaw general secretary, said: 
Whilst we accept that there are mixed views about longer Sunday opening in 
retail sector, we know there is huge opposition to the proposal to devolve the 
matter to local authorities. The overwhelming majority of retailers do not want 
to have to deal with nearly 300 different regulatory regimes across the 
country, it is a nightmare scenario.

 * Nick Herbert, the former policing minister, has said that campaigners in 
favour of leaving the EU have “no idea of what the alternative to EU membership 
looks like”.In a speech given in his capacity as chair of Conservatives for 
Reform in Europe, he said: 
Some of them want fortress Britain, sulking behind the Channel, while others 
want to turn the place into a gigantic Hong Kong, open to the world’s 
capitalists.

While Nigel Farage will mention migrants in every sentence if he can, Douglas 
Carswell will change the subject from immigration as fast as he can – though 
both want Britain to model our system on Australia’s, which, Liam Fox admits 
has allowed a higher rate of immigration per head than ours.

Matthew Elliot, chief executive of the Vote Leave campaign, suggests opening 
our borders not just to Australia, New Zealand and Canada but to the 300 
million people of the United States.

Whereas Aaron Banks, who leads another campaign, Leave.EU, argues that 
“Politicians of all parties have encouraged a total open door policy that has 
created tensions across Europe” 2 and suggests an immigration cap of 50,000 a 
year.”

 * Ruth Davidson, the Scottish Conservative leader, has said she has no 
interest in coming the next UK Tory leader. DailySunday Politics 
(@daily_politics) 
Laughing, @RuthDavidsonMP rules herself out of becoming next Tory leader. 
"Absolutely no interest in the job"#bbcdp 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/bbcdp?src=hash> https://t.co/vazXlNlb0Q 
<https://t.co/vazXlNlb0Q>
 <https://twitter.com/daily_politics/status/697035070427652097> February 9, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/daily_politics/status/697035070427652097> 
 * Lord Bew, the chair of the committee on standards in public life, has told 
peers that there is no appetite amongst the public for state funding of 
political parties. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-35531344>He was 
giving evidence to a committee looking at the impact of the trade union bill on 
party funding. 
 * Top authors have gathered in parliament to campaign against cuts to 
libraries and are calling on MPs to ensure the public service has sufficient 
funding. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/09/library-campaigners-descend-on-parliament-to-defend-public-funding> 
My colleague Owen Jones has written about Labour’s Trident split, and 
criticised the MPs who heckledEmily Thornberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/emily-thornberry> at last night’s meeting 
of the PLP. Here’s an extract.

In what other line of work is it acceptable to shout down a colleague because 
you don’t like their presentation? Here’s the sort of macho, yah-boo circus 
that deters anyone vaguely normal from wanting to have anything to do with 
anything political. These same MPs will, undoubtedly, be the first to complain 
about the Labour leadership briefing against their colleagues. If at a local
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party meeting – never mind 
the PLP – a bunch of activists linked to Momentum started trying to shout down 
their local MP, we might expect it to make national headlines: the thuggish 
hard-left trying to drown out anyone who disagrees with them.

And here’s his article.

Trident is too important an issue to be shouted down | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/09/trident-too-important-shouted-down-labour-mps> 
Last night Channel 4 News broadcast the results of a Michael Crick 
investigation that suggests the Conservatives overspent in three byelections in 
the last parliament.

Conservatives face possible inquiry after claims of byelection overspend
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/08/conservatives-face-possible-inquiry-after-claims-of-byelection-overspend>
Crick has been on the Daily Politics talking about his scoop. He said there 
were unlikely to be prosecutions, because any prosecutions under the 
Representation of the People Act would have to take place within 12 months of 
each byelections, and those deadlines have expired. Some lawyers thought a 
conspiracy charge might be appropriate, Crick said. But he said the real 
problem was that no one seemed interested in investigating.

The trouble with this area is that no one really wants to handle it. The 
Electoral Commission are saying we only handle national spending limits, not 
the local constituency limits that apply in constituency campaigns. They say 
that’s the job of returning officers. The returning officers take the return in 
and look after it and make it available to the public, but they say, ‘Well, 
it’s not our job to check the returns.’ They say that’s a matter for the 
police. And the police say, ‘Well, we don’t really want to get involved.’ So 
nobody really polices any of this. The Electoral Commission has asked for 
greater powers from the government. But they say the government has not 
responded.

The Conservatives told Channel 4 News that they declared all byelection 
spending in accordance with the law. But Crick said the Tories had not 
explained why the hotel bills he unearthed did not appear in the byelection 
expense returns.

Crick had some bad news for the Tories. There will be more revelations on 
Channel 4 News tonight, he said, relating to spending in Thanet South during 
the general election.

 Michael Crick Photograph: BBC  
On the subject of Trident, Michael Fallon, the defence secretary, has 
announced the government is committing £201m to spend on designing the new 
submarines that will replace the Vanguard boats that carry the Trident missiles.
 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/200-million-funding-boost-for-uk-industry-carrying-out-successor-submarine-design>

Here is an MoD picture of what the new submarines might look like.
 What the successor to the Vanguard submarines might look like Photograph: 
Ministry of Defence  
The Labour MP Clive Lewis, a shadow energy minister and a prominent Jeremy 
Corbyn supporter, told BBC News a few minutes ago that there were compromise 
options available to Labour onTrident <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/trident>. 
It was not just a choice between renewal and unilateral disarmament, he said.

It was important to remember that the issue facing the Commons was not whether 
to get rid of Trident, but what to do about replacing it, he said.

And he suggested that Britain could share a nuclear deterrent with the French. 
This is what he said when he was asked what the compromise options available to
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> might be.

I think the Liberal Democrat review saw some of those options. I think if 
Emily Thornberry’s review also looks at those, it could be perhaps, for 
example, going in with the French. It could perhaps be having our own system 
which is land-based. It could be cruise missile based. There are a number of 
options that are already out there.

The Lib Dem option refers to keeping a submarine-based Trident system, but not 
ordering another four boats. This would mean not having a submarine on patrol 
at all times, or “stepping down the nuclear ladder”, as the Lib Dems described 
it. <http://www.libdems.org.uk/trident>
 Clive Lewis Photograph: BBC News  