
Cameroon retained the African Nations Cup on penalties, as they won it last 
time, at the end of a gruelling two-hour contest in which they largely had the 
measure of a wearySenegal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/senegal>. The 
Indomitable Lions join Ghana and Egypt as four-time winners and become the 
first side to retain the cup since Ghana in 1965.

"It was a very difficult match, both because of the conditions and because we 
played against a very good Senegal side," said Arsenal's Lauren. "I am very 
sorry for Senegal, because penalties is a hard way to lose any game."

It was Senegal's captain Aliou Cisse who had the misfortune of missing the 
final kick, after Amdy Faye and El Hadj Diouf had failed for Senegal, and Tony 
Sylva had saved brilliantly from the Cameroonians Pierre Wome and Rigobert Song.

Such an ending seemed improbable two hours earlier, when the Senegalese Lions, 
much as they had done in the semi-final, started with a flourish. In only the 
second minute Lamine Diatta's long clearance was cleverly dinked back by Diouf, 
but Henry Camara's shot scalped the crossbar when it seemed easier to score.

With Patrick Mboma, who has been in talks with Sunderland over a Â£4m move from 
Parma, missing for the second straight game with a thigh strain, Cameroon had 
difficulty holding the ball up in attack and, despite some neat build-up play, 
they initially struggled to create real scoring opportunities.

As if to knock Senegal out of any complacency Mboma's replacement Pius Ndiefi 
spurned a platinum opportunity to open the scoring. When his striking partner 
Samuel Eto'o careered down the right and guided the ball into Ndiefi's path 
eight yards out, the Sedan attacker really should have hit the target.

The match settled down into a satisfying rhythm with chances at both ends and 
Diouf almost scored for Senegal with an audacious 25- yard volley. A minute 
before half-time Cameroon thought they had taken the lead but Eto'o's header, 
from Geremi's prodigious throw, was ruled out for a far from evident foul on 
Sylva.

How much of Senegal's gradual fading was due to the exhausting 120-minute 
semi-final the Lions had played on Thursday? When Lamine Diatta allowed Eto'o's 
pedestrian header to loop over him in the 70th minute, tiredness seemed the 
only explanation for such an elementary mistake. Ndiefi raced on to that 
unexpected bonus and drilled the ball past Tony Sylva, only to see his shot 
rebound to safety off the far post.

Seven minutes into the first supplementary period, Ndiefi spurned his 
umpteenth chance to hand Cameroon the lead. Wome's deep cross arrived 
invitingly on his head but, despite making a solid contact, he was unable to 
direct the ball inside the post.

So the game went to penalties, an unsatisfactory conclusion to a tournament 
that never hit the heights. Not that such a judgment weighed on the 
Cameroonians, as they cavorted round the stadium with a cup they will be able 
to hold on to for another two years at least.

 Senegal (4-4-2): Sylva; Coly, Diatta, Cisse, Daf; Makhtar Ndiaye (Moussa 
Ndiaye, 46min), Diop (Faye, 91), Diao, Fadiga; Henry Camara (Souleymane Camara, 
105), Diouf.

 Cameroon (3-5-2): Alioum; Song, Kalla, Tchato; Geremi, Lauren, Foe, Olembe, 
Wome; Ndiefi (Suffo, 104), Eto'o.

 Referee: Gamal al Ghandour (Egypt).
 