
Key points

Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> used all 
six of his questions to press the prime minister over the government’s record 
on housing. His last question introduced a constituent, Linda, who wants to 
downsize her council house due to her advancing age but now faces a dilemma: 
stay and be charged the bedroom tax for her too-big home; leave or face losing 
her secure tenancy.

Snap verdict

The Labour leader started well, with precise, technical points that put David 
Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> on the back foot, 
but the prime minister soon got the upper hand with a strong rhetorical point 
about aspiration (branding Labour as small-c conservatives who would let people 
stew in sink estates) and a useful statistic about average deposit costs. He 
also apparently solved Linda’s dilemma by claiming that pensioners were not 
liable for the bedroom tax.

In truth, the Tory record on home ownership is poor (Cameron ignored the 
question about the rate of decline), and Corbyn’s success is largely driven by 
the fury of young people (especially in London) who have no chance of buying a 
home, but worryingly Cameron comfortably bested him on this topic.

Best lines

Corbyn accused Cameron of belatedly releasing information this week on the 
housing crisis – but that the promised £140m to renovate 100 estates amounted 
to only £1.4m each. He called it a “drop in the ocean” that would not even 
cover the bulldozer costs.

Challenged by Corbyn that his housing policy was “not thought out”, Cameron 
replied: “Well I admit it is not as well thought out as his reshuffle.”


For more on PMQs, read our politics live blog with Andrew Sparrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jan/13/cameron-and-corbyn-at-pmqs-politics-live>
.

• This article was updated on 13 January 2015. An earlier version said 
Corbyn’s constituent, Linda, was retired. Although this was implied, it was not 
explicitly stated.
 