
Key points

Corbyn used his tried and tested method of asking a constituent’s question, 
this time from Nina, asking for reassurance that as an EU citizen who has lived 
in the UK for 30 years she will have the right to stay here. Cameron responded 
with a firm guarantee, but then he said that he had an email to read as well. 
He says he got an email from Judith on 16 September 2015 telling him to be 
polite to Corbyn because Tom Watson was far more of a threat. Judith predicted 
that Corbyn would end up creating disunity in the Labour party, prompting 
Cameron to quip: “I must find the sender to find out what happens next.”

Cameron said he had addressed 5,500 questions as prime minister. He would 
leave it up to others to decide how many he had answered. And he spent 92 hours 
answering statements. But he wished to quash a rumour. He loved Larry the 
Downing Street cat, he said.

David Cameron (@David_Cameron) 
Proof... pic.twitter.com/UZVXn6WcUw <https://t.co/UZVXn6WcUw>
 <https://twitter.com/David_Cameron/status/753192942077145088> July 13, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/David_Cameron/status/753192942077145088> 
Here is Cameron’s peroration.

I will watch these exchanges from the backbenches. I will miss the roar of the 
crowd, I will miss the barbs from the opposition, but I will be willing you on.

And when I say willing you on, I don’t just mean willing on the new prime 
minister at this dispatch box, or indeed just willing on the frontbench 
defending the manifesto that I helped put together. But I mean willing all of 
you on, because people come here with huge passion for the issues they care 
about. They come here with great love for the constituencies that they 
represent. And also willing on this place. Because, yes, we can be pretty tough 
and test and challenge our leaders – perhaps more than some other countries – 
but that is something we should be proud of and we should keep at it, and I 
hope you will all keep at it, and I will will you on as you do.

The last thing I would say is that you can achieve a lot of things in 
politics. You can get a lot of things done. And that in the end, the public 
service, the national interest, that is what it is all about. Nothing is really 
impossible if you put your mind to it. After all, as I once said, I was the 
future once.

That last sentence is a reference to what he told Tony Blair in his very first 
PMQs <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs>. You can see that 2005 
exchange here:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fcameron-v-blair-in-first-pmqs-he-was-the-future-once-2005-archive-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron%20v%20Blair%20at%20first%20PMQs%3A%20'He%20was%20the%20future%20once'%20%E2%80%93%202005%20archive%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fcameron-v-blair-in-first-pmqs-he-was-the-future-once-2005-archive-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cameron%20v%20Blair%20at%20first%20PMQs%3A%20%27He%20was%20the%20future%20once%27%20%E2%80%93%202005%20archive%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fcameron-v-blair-in-first-pmqs-he-was-the-future-once-2005-archive-video&media=>
Cameron v Blair in first PMQs: ‘He was the future once’ – 2005 archive video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/13/cameron-v-blair-in-first-pmqs-he-was-the-future-once-2005-archive-video>
Verdict

 Cameron’s final appearance at PMQs was dignified and good-humoured but not 
charged with the same emotion that Blair’s was nine years ago. Like Blair, 
Cameron chose to end with a little spiel expressing his faith in the House of 
Commons and in politics generally. But, whereas Blair’s (see11.51am) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/13/pmqs-cameron-may-reshuffle-labour-leadership-bid-as-mcdonnell-defends-claim-that-anti-corbyn-plotters-fucking-useless-politics-live?page=with:block-57861b6be4b0fe16cc71a2e5#block-57861b6be4b0fe16cc71a2e5>
 is a lovely piece of writing that stands the test of times, Cameron’s comments 
(see12.46pm)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/13/pmqs-cameron-may-reshuffle-labour-leadership-bid-as-mcdonnell-defends-claim-that-anti-corbyn-plotters-fucking-useless-politics-live?page=with:block-57862863e4b00a75ba298be9#block-57862863e4b00a75ba298be9>
were relatively trite. Perhaps he has something a bit more high-powered 
prepared for the statement he is due to make outside No 10 later. Cameron’s 
decision to end with the words he used about Blair at his first PMQs, this time 
self-deprecatingly, was quite neat. But the line about how “nothing is really 
impossible if you put your mind to it” sounded somewhat crass given that he is 
leaving office because he found that winning the EU referendum was impossible. 
Cameron reportedly has no regrets about holding the referendum because he 
thinks the Commons must ultimately submit to the will of the public. But given 
that this nostrum has ended his career, it would be interesting to hear him 
elaborate on it.

Best quotes

Cameron, comparing the Labour and Tory leadership contests, points out there 
is already a new Tory PM but:

They haven’t even decided what the rules are yet.

Corbyn’s response: 

Democracy is an exciting and splendid thing.

• For more on PMQs and the day’s politics as Theresa May becomes prime 
minister, read ourpolitics live blog with Andrew Sparrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/may/04/labours-antisemitism-review-must-be-more-than-political-posturing-says-chief-rabbi-politics-live>
.

• Click here <https://www.theguardian.com/series/andrew-sparrow-verdict> to 
read more of Andrew Sparrow’s verdicts on PMQS.
 