
Wind whips my face and pushes me into the wire sides of the hanging bridge I’m 
attempting to cross. At 105 metres high, with the river flowing below and steep 
rock walls on either side, it feels a little daring, but not terrifying. And I 
had come here expecting terror, for I’m walking the infamous El Caminito del 
Rey path.

Dubbed “one of the world’s scariest hikes”, the walkway attached to the steep 
walls of the El Chorro gorge in the province of Málaga, southernSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>, reopens to the public on 28 March 
after a €2.7m refurbishment. Built at the turn of the 20th century to give 
workers access to two hydroelectric plants, the path – also known’s as the 
King’s Little Pathway – was closed in 2000, for more than a decade, after a 
number of people died attempting to cross it. The dangerously worn-out path 
earned a reputation though as thrill-seekers ignored the closure and dared the 
crossing, despite a maximum fine of €6,000 for trespassers.

Now, secured wooden walkways and stony paths make up much of the once 
dilapidated route. We approach the walkway from the town of Ardales; the route 
is linear and there are two entrances, one in Ardales, the other from Álora.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fcaminito-del-rey-malaga-path-reopens-spain-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427462207904%2Fc5043719-79e3-4711-a8f5-e85ef473e203-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caminito%20del%20Rey%20path%20in%20M%C3%A1laga%20reopens%20with%20beauty%20replacing%20the%20fear%20factor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fcaminito-del-rey-malaga-path-reopens-spain-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caminito%20del%20Rey%20path%20in%20M%C3%A1laga%20reopens%20with%20beauty%20replacing%20the%20fear%20factor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fcaminito-del-rey-malaga-path-reopens-spain-hiking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427462207904%2Fc5043719-79e3-4711-a8f5-e85ef473e203-2060x1236.jpeg>
 A view from the boardwalk of the new Caminito del Rey path in El Chorro, near 
Malaga. Photograph: Jon Nazca/Reuters 
We are swiftly handed hard hats. Safety is key on the new route. Indeed, I 
feel so secure that it takes a few minutes of walking along the new boardwalk 
before I look down and glimpse the 100-metre drop to the floor of the gorge – 
at this stage it feels more like a nature trail on a family day out (although 
children under the age of eight are not allowed and it is not wheelchair 
accessible).

Videos of the old route <https://youtu.be/ZmDhRvvs5Xw> had left my palms 
sweaty; this new path gives me a slight flutter but more of surprise than fear. 
I am so consumed with taking in the views, I forget I’m so high up. The wind is 
blowing hard though and I’m more afraid my camera equipment might fly off than 
that I might pitch over the side.

The first part of the path, a boardwalk that offers great views of the 
turquoise water of the Gualdalhorce river swirling below and the cliffs, 
eventually turns into a stony track that gently runs down and then slopes 
gradually upwards. Among the trees, some benches have been erected. It’s a sign 
of its new calm ambience, where walkers will be able to sit and take in the 
views. A group of locals are traversing the route – they have been invited to 
come and see the new tourist attraction before it opens to the public – and the 
mixture of ages reflects the new accessibility.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fcaminito-del-rey-malaga-path-reopens-spain-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427462425943%2F9b1298aa-e9f7-46b8-9b14-0b2e73e88819-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caminito%20del%20Rey%20path%20in%20M%C3%A1laga%20reopens%20with%20beauty%20replacing%20the%20fear%20factor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fcaminito-del-rey-malaga-path-reopens-spain-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caminito%20del%20Rey%20path%20in%20M%C3%A1laga%20reopens%20with%20beauty%20replacing%20the%20fear%20factor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fcaminito-del-rey-malaga-path-reopens-spain-hiking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427462425943%2F9b1298aa-e9f7-46b8-9b14-0b2e73e88819-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The new pathway clings to the rock face. Photograph: Jon Nazca/Reuters 
Marrying the old path with the new construction, says Luis Machuca, head 
architect and director of the project, was very important to him. Testament to 
this can be seen as I walk along the second part of the boardwalk, pinned to 
the mountain walls. Through the wooden slats you can glimpse the rocks and 
water below, but the real stomach-churner comes from seeing the old path 
snaking beneath. Riddled with holes and with sections where entire chunks have 
long ago rusted away or fallen into the ravine, you wonder at those who walked 
along it over the years and those that lost their lives here. A poignant 
reminder of the path’s tragic past remains: a workman sits on the floor eating 
his lunch, a memorial plaque to three young men who died in 2000 screwed into 
the rock wall above him.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fcaminito-del-rey-malaga-path-reopens-spain-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427462508671%2F5f7ac248-ce28-4464-a6b9-c0a5a807d6a6-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caminito%20del%20Rey%20path%20in%20M%C3%A1laga%20reopens%20with%20beauty%20replacing%20the%20fear%20factor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fcaminito-del-rey-malaga-path-reopens-spain-hiking%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caminito%20del%20Rey%20path%20in%20M%C3%A1laga%20reopens%20with%20beauty%20replacing%20the%20fear%20factor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F27%2Fcaminito-del-rey-malaga-path-reopens-spain-hiking%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F27%2F1427462508671%2F5f7ac248-ce28-4464-a6b9-c0a5a807d6a6-1360x2040.jpeg>
 A view from the valley floor. Photograph: Jon Nazca/Reuters 
The climax of the 7.7km walk comes around two thirds of the way along. After 
the tranquil stroll through the Hoyo valley, there are steps onto the next part 
of the boardwalk. It winds around a corner and curves along the rock and I’m 
seized by the sheer scale of the spectacular steep sidewalls of the gorge. 
This, Machuca tells me, is his favourite part of the route. To our left is a 
view of the mountains and the river, to our right the glass-floored section 
hangs over the cliff giving walkers a clear view of the gorge. Machuca 
describes this part as making him feel as if he were a mouse entering a 
cathedral: “It’s not only the view and the surroundings, but the emotion of 
walking the Caminito del Rey,” he says.

The reopening of El Caminito del Rey is of huge importance to the local area. 
“When people think of Málaga, they think of the sun and beaches, but now this 
is something totally different,” says Francisco Vázquez, an engineer who worked 
on the project, “It’s another experience. A pretty special experience 
concentrated into a short time.”

Selected as one of Lonely Planet’s top new travel experiences for 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/gallery/2015/jan/09/lonely-planet-top-new-travel-experiences-2015-in-pictures>
, the reopening of the pathway has been anticipated for years. Already the 
route is booked up until June. Groups of 50 people are allowed to enter the 
walkway every half an hour and the organisers expect to see 600 people walking 
the path each day.

It may not be the world’s scariest hike anymore, not even close, but Caminito 
del Rey’s true attraction is still there. Stunning views and an awe-inducing 
sense of scale from the sheer rock walls and dizzyingly high pathway will stay 
with you long after you’ve stepped down from the hanging bridge and walked 
away. Adventure-seekers may be disappointed by the makeover but for those 
looking for a bit of excitement mixed with beautiful views it may just be the 
ticket, if you can get one.

caminitodelrey.info <http://www.caminitodelrey.info/en/#1>. 
 