
To the news of the day: happy 49th birthday, Bill Shorten! Asked what he was 
getting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/12/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-named-in-panama-papers-politics-live?page=with:block-5733e08ae4b0b748a3b12c23#block-5733e08ae4b0b748a3b12c23>
, he said: “My present is standing right next to me”, gesturing to his wife,
Chloe. Aww/eww – delete as necessary. No word on whether Malcolm Turnbull being 
named in the Panama Papers counts as a gift.

Bill Shorten (@billshortenmp) 
Thanks for the birthday wishes everyone. It was great to be able to spend the 
day with@chloeshorten <https://twitter.com/chloeshorten> 
pic.twitter.com/T18bYvGaIr <https://t.co/T18bYvGaIr>
 <https://twitter.com/billshortenmp/status/730603742332997633> May 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/billshortenmp/status/730603742332997633> 
On Thursday it was revealed that Turnbull was previously listed as the director
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/12/malcolm-turnbull-listed-in-panama-papers>
 of a British Virgin Islands company that Mossack Fonseca acted as registered 
agent for. Asked if he was “happy” to be named in the Panama Papers,he 
reportedly chuckled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/12/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-named-in-panama-papers-politics-live?page=with:block-5733cbdde4b0b748a3b12c09#block-5733cbdde4b0b748a3b12c09>
, then said there was “no suggestion of impropriety whatsoever”. Cool as a 
cucumber.


Labor’s campaign spokeswoman, Penny Wong, is pushing for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/12/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-named-in-panama-papers-politics-live?page=with:block-5733bc50e4b0405426d4c34e#block-5733bc50e4b0405426d4c34e>
 “a full and frank explanation of his involvement”. But the treasurer,Scott 
Morrison, felt Turnbull had dealt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/12/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-named-in-panama-papers-politics-live?page=with:block-5733e161e4b0405426d4c381#block-5733e161e4b0405426d4c381>
 with the Panama papers “fairly comprehensively”, saying the matter was “20 
years ago”.

“The thing about Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> is ... he has had 
a lot of experience in supporting businesses not unlike this one,” he said, 
then transitioned nearly seamlessly to spin about the Liberals’ national 
economic plan. That’s what you call being on-message.

Even setting aside from being caught up in one of the biggest leaks in 
journalistic history, Turnbull’s had a big day, kicking off with a 30-minute 
phone call to the president of the United States,Barack Obama (about “a range of
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/12/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-named-in-panama-papers-politics-live?page=with:block-5733caf7e4b0b748a3b12c08#block-5733caf7e4b0b748a3b12c08>
 global and regional issues”, including the Trans-Pacific Partnership), and 
taking in Melbourneand Adelaide and Sydney.

Shorten, meanwhile, was still kicking around up north in Rockhampton, “the 
beef capital of Australia”. What a way to ring in the big 49! Todayhe pledged 
that $1.8bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/12/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-named-in-panama-papers-politics-live?page=with:block-5733da85e4b0b748a3b12c1b#block-5733da85e4b0b748a3b12c1b>
 of the $3.8bn already allocated to additional needs-based funding for schools 
would be put towards those in regional areas.

Given that the federal government doesn’t actually run schools, there were 
questions over howthis and Labor’s other education policies would work in 
practice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/12/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-named-in-panama-papers-politics-live?page=with:block-5733df6ae4b0b748a3b12c21#block-5733df6ae4b0b748a3b12c21>
. His education spokeswoman,Kate Ellis, said the funding would be put towards 
programs with a track record of results and there would be “accountability 
mechanisms ... We are being very clear that taxpayers deserve to know how every 
dollar is being spent.”

The ghost of PMs past lingers

The Daily Tele’s new BFF, Labor’s Anthony Albanese, wrote today that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/12/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-named-in-panama-papers-politics-live?page=with:block-57339a82e4b0b748a3b12bc1#block-57339a82e4b0b748a3b12bc1>
 the Greens candidate for Grayndler has aTony Abbott agenda. Creative! Jim Casey
 reportedly said in 2014 that he would rather Abbott be prime minister thanBill 
Shorten, leading DJ Albo to suggest that “for Mr Casey, protest has become an 
end in itself”.

He expanded on his theme at Marrickville public school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/12/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-named-in-panama-papers-politics-live?page=with:block-5733e477e4b0b748a3b12c31#block-5733e477e4b0b748a3b12c31>
: “[Casey’s] view appears to be to be a rather old-fashioned, extreme view that 
if people are oppressed enough they’ll rise up … I entered political [life] to 
uplift people, that’s what drives me each and every day.”

Casey published a response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/12/thanks-daily-telegraph-i-welcome-a-debate-about-the-overthrow-of-capitalism>
 on Guardian Australia, thanking the Tele for the opportunity to debate the end 
of capitalism. We look forward to this rivalry playing out, hopefully in more 
media outlets.

After he was invoked at Fiona Scott’s stand-up with Turnbull on Wednesday, 
that makes two mentions of Tone in as many days. The man himself was out 
campaigning alongside fellow backbencherGeorge Christensen in Queensland after 
a mixed couple of days 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/newslocal/north-shore/deposed-prime-minister-tony-abbott-poses-for-selfies-with-delighted-crowds-in-mosman/news-story/916e92ce9ed7dbee92fdcd4c862a7c67>
 on the north shore, being “mobbed by adoring fans” in Mosman one moment and 
cutting “a forlorn figure” at Manly wharf the next.
Nick No To PC Bullys (@nickbarnesaus) 
Fantastic photos from today of very popular Tony Abbott surrounded by locals!
From https://t.co/tKnPplWJ3T <https://t.co/tKnPplWJ3T> #auspol 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/auspol?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/W79Pye7hTE 
<https://t.co/W79Pye7hTE>
 <https://twitter.com/nickbarnesaus/status/730385109472284673> May 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/nickbarnesaus/status/730385109472284673> 
Abbott appears to have changed his tune on the matter of concessions on 
superannuation, which not so long ago he wasn’t a fan of. “There is a degree of 
anxiety about that particular budget announcement but people are just as 
anxious about Labor’s policy as they are about the Coalition’s policy,” hetold 
the Daily Telegraph today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/12/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-named-in-panama-papers-politics-live?page=with:block-5733bf3ce4b0b748a3b12bff#block-5733bf3ce4b0b748a3b12bff>
. That’s that, then!

No Dunkley country for young men
Mikearoo (@mpbowers) 
PM Turnbull tours a brewery in Morningron @murpharoo 
<https://twitter.com/murpharoo> @GuardianAus <https://twitter.com/GuardianAus> 
#politicslive <https://twitter.com/hashtag/politicslive?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/wBjbbTADHZ <https://t.co/wBjbbTADHZ>
 <https://twitter.com/mpbowers/status/730550085101092866> May 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mpbowers/status/730550085101092866> 
Turnbull’s whirlwind tour of Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/victoria> led him to Mornington 
brewery this morning. AsKatharine Murphy wrote, it’s early in the campaign to 
be driven to drink –especially the longest campaign since the 1970s. Bruce 
Billson was front and centre at the stand-up, despite, er – retiring.

“You have to feel sorry for the Liberal candidate for Dunkley, Chris Crewther
,” wroteMelissa Davey in the live blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/12/australian-election-2016-malcolm-turnbull-named-in-panama-papers-politics-live?page=with:block-5733e331e4b035c26fc404c0#block-5733e331e4b035c26fc404c0>
. He blended into the background as Billson stole the show, greeting reporters 
with hugs and exclaiming: “There’s a reason every season to be in Dunkley.” 
That’s literally four reasons to be in Dunkley.

Billson, 50, has held the seat in outer metropolitan Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> since 1996 but some 
reports say his popularity is worth a couple of per cent alone, and Labor hopes 
his retirement will be enough for them to steal the seat he took by 5.6% last 
time. Hence Billson was rolled out for Turnbull’s visit, promoting the 
government’s free trade agreement with China and the importance of supporting 
small businesses.

Is 32-year-old Crewther worried that without the Billson factor the electorate 
will be hard to hold? “He’s been a spectacular candidate for the past 20 years 
in Dunkley and a strong community advocate,” he said. “And I hope to do the 
same.”

Meanwhile, Billson didn’t know “which hoppy beer would be the best parallel to 
the election campaign” but hedid say that re-electing the 
<https://twitter.com/MelissaLDavey/status/730542289014149121> Turnbull 
government would be “a first-class result – a bit like these beers”. Turnbull 
was comparatively restrained, saying that he was merely “inspired” by craft 
beer. (Note: “by”, not “after” – though he clarified that his preference was 
for lager.)

Best of Bowers
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcampaign-caustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fae3115811cc99e1731a9f07f3c1c00810a33f2%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Campaign%20catchup%3A%20Shorten%20celebrates%20a%20birthday%20and%20the%20PM%20downs%20a%20beer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcampaign-caustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Campaign%20catchup%3A%20Shorten%20celebrates%20a%20birthday%20and%20the%20PM%20downs%20a%20beer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fcampaign-caustralian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-catchup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fae3115811cc99e1731a9f07f3c1c00810a33f2%2F0_0_4500_3000%2F4500.jpg>
 Bruce Billson gets ready to steal the limelight before Malcolm Turnbull’s 
visit to the federal seat of Dunkley. Photograph: Mike Bowers for the Guardian 
Further reading

• The weak case for a company tax cut 
<http://www.theage.com.au/comment/election-2016-the-weak-case-for-a-company-tax-cut-20160510-gos1np.html>
 (the Age) Serious economic modelling underpins Turnbull’s campaign – but his 
plan to cut company tax might not have been completely thought through, writes
Peter Martin.

• ANU modelling shows how the 2016 budget really affects your hip pocket 
<http://www.theage.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/anu-modelling-shows-how-the-2016-budget-really-affects-your-hip-pocket-20160511-gosewj.html>
 (the Age) Modelling by the Australian National University shows Australia’s 
poorest families will be hardest hit when the budget is implemented.

• The superannuation changes are seriously good. The Coalition must fight for 
them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/12/the-superannuation-changes-are-seriously-good-the-coalition-must-fight-for-them>
 “The Coalition should pull their socks up. And Labor should be ashamed.” 
Fighting words from Guardian Australia’sGareth Hutchens.

And also ...

Modelling hailed by the Liberal party as proof its Direct Action plan could 
meet Australia’s long-term climate promisesin fact assumes the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/coalition-climate-plan-assumes-emissions-trading-says-government-modeller>
 would turn its policy into a type of emissions trading scheme, according to 
the authors.

The environment minister, Greg Hunt, released the modelling, by the Energetics 
consulting firm, just days before the election was called and said it was proof 
that critics of the government’s policy were totally wrong.

But Peter Holt, associate at Energetics, told Lenore Taylor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/12/coalition-climate-plan-assumes-emissions-trading-says-government-modeller>
 that the policies would only achieve those reductions with changes – either 
large funding top-ups to the ERF (estimated by others at at least $6bn) or a 
strengthening of the safeguards mechanism so it turned into a baseline and 
credit emissions trading scheme.

Meanwhile, in the rest of the world ...
 The listing of the weapon 
<http://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/12/george-zimmerman-trayvon-martin-gun-auction>
 that killed Trayvon Martin on GunBroker.com included photos of the weapon 
taken during George Zimmerman’s trial. Photograph: www.gunbroker.com 
George Zimmerman is auctioning off the gun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/12/george-zimmerman-trayvon-martin-gun-auction>
 with which he killedTrayvon Martin in 2012, touting it as “your opportunity to 
own a piece of American history”. He intends to use part of the proceeds to 
“fight BLM [Black Lives Matter] violence against law enforcement officers” as 
well as ending the career ofAngela Corey, his prosecutor – “and Hillary Clinton
’s anti-firearm rhetoric”.

And if today was a pop song ...

Could’ve gone for any number of birthday tunes but, since we’re running a 
little bit hot tonight:Van Halen’s Panama 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w-NshzYK9y0> is the song of the day. Happy 
birthday, Billsy <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=inS9gAgSENE>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw-NshzYK9y0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw-NshzYK9y0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw-NshzYK9y0&media=>
 Can barely see the road from the heat coming off of it. 
Never miss another catchup: If you’re reading this in the Guardian app, tap on 
“Australian election briefing” at the top or bottom of this page, then tap on 
“Follow series” to get an app notification as soon as the Campaign catchup 
publishes every afternoon.

 