
What an unforgettable day in a tournament that gets better and better - and it 
had nothing to do with the two games in Group D in Tamale (great stuff from 
Angola 
<http://football.theguardian.com/africannations2008/story/0,,2248063,00.html>, 
but there will be plenty more opportunities to write about them).

The only game we saw on Sunday was a 50-minute exhibition match in Kwahu-Tafo, 
a town with a population of 5,000 in Ghana's eastern Kwahu mountains. It went 
to a penalty shoot-out between Virgin FC and Zonga, a team from the town's 
Muslim quarter, with a 50 cedis prize for the winners (about Â£28). It finished 
0-0 and we - a three-man tour of British journalists - put up a five cedis 
man-of-the-match prize for the Zonga forward in green shorts, one yellow sock 
and one blue sock. But after the Virgin keeper's brilliance in the shoot-out, 
when he saved three penalties to give his team a barely deserved victory, we 
had to make a second payment for shoot-out man of the match.

The pitch was ropey, trimmed in both penalty areas but with a huge swathe of 
the midfield covered in nine-inch tufts of grass. Not surprising really, as 
there is no lawnmower in Kwahu-Tafo and the grass is cut with machetes by 
students in their 'work and happiness' sessions. The prize money was donated by 
the chief, or ohene, of Kwahu-Tafo, and presented by his youngest son, Boat 
(short for Boateng), who made our visit extra special by cooking a superb lunch 
of peanut stew with chicken and beef, accompanied by an avocado and onion 
salad. The restaurant meals have been fine but nowhere near this quality.

Boat was the drinks waiter as we sat down after the game for an evening 
session with the ohene and his elders, including the weapons chief, the 
linguist, the development chief and the drum chief. The ohene, who was wearing 
an impressive cloth wrap, is something of a Campari fiend. For a very good 
reason. "It is not a common drink in these parts," he said. "I must go to many 
official functions and I do not always want to drink. I say 'You do not have 
Campari, you have nothing to my taste.' So I never get drunk." With this sort 
of thinking, you can see why he is in his 23rd year as chief. Having been 
forewarned of his favourite drink, we took along a couple of bottles, along 
with a woolly Sunderland hat.

It would have been rude not to join him in a Campari as he told us about the 
town's history, the importance of its sacred monuments, the success of local 
schools, the locals' hopes for the future, the dead elephant story, the efforts 
to improve sport, and much more. What does Kwahu mean? "Come here and you die," 
he said. But, he emphasised, the Kwahu are peaceful people, even if they did 
roll rocks down on 'foreigners' approaching the hills in centuries past, and 
the name is misleading. There are three religions in the town - Christian, 
Muslim and traditional - and all three get along fine.

We toured the palace before the game and visited schools, the library and one 
of the most popular wells. Why were we there? Because we needed a day off from 
matches, matches, matches, and because we were invited, with the help of our 
tour planners, Justghana, as Kwahu-Tafo is a success story that is seeking to 
bring tourists to the area. A lot of its success is down to the development 
chief, Humphrey Barclay. He is a Briton who used to direct comedy programmes 
for TV, and has built up the town's secondary school from a low point of four 
pupils to nearly 300. He's a remarkable man, but what's he doing in Kwahu-Tafo? 
You can find out on the GU video later this week.
 