
A not-for-profit organisation that charges Australians up to $120 to camp out 
in memory of Anzac war veterans is under investigation over concerns it did not 
pass on money it raised to veterans’ associations.

Anzac Day: details of ceremonies in Australia's major cities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/24/anzac-day-details-of-ceremonies-in-australias-major-cities>
The Camp Gallipoli Foundation received $2.5m in grants from the Department of 
Veterans’ Affairs to hold sleep-out events in every state on the eve of the 
Anzac centenary in 2015.

Fairfax media claimed the foundation’s chief executive, Chris Fox, may have 
personally profited from 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/camp-gallipoli-federal-government-orders-probe-into-anzac-charity-20160423-godhjh.html#ixzz46i2WM516>
 the events by charging management fees worth up to $1.5m a year through 
commercial companies owned by his family and an associate. It said he earned 
$150,000 himself as chief executive.

Fairfax asked the foundation and Fox to provide proof it had donated money 
raised to veterans’ charities but said the foundation was unwilling to do so.

The veterans’ affairs minister, Dan Tehan, said on Sunday: “I was extremely 
concerned to learn of the allegations made about the conduct of Camp Gallipoli 
and its associated companies.

“As a consequence, I have asked the department to conduct a review into the 
funding arrangements for Camp Gallipoli and provide advice on the charitable 
donations they have committed to make.”

“It would be disturbing if any company or individual tried, or gave the 
impression of trying, to gain a commercial advantage by the inappropriate use 
of the word ‘Anzac’.

“My department has now written to Camp Gallipoli advising them their permit to 
use the word ‘Anzac’ has been revoked.”

The foundation’s constitution states it will use the surplus from the Camp 
Gallipoli commemorative events to support RSL branches and Legacy Clubs and 
other similar charities.

But according to Fairfax the national leadership of the RSL and Legacy said 
they had not received any financial donations from Camp Gallipoli.

The Camp Gallipoli Foundation responded in a statement on Sunday rejecting 
“allegations that any moneys, especially funds provided through the Anzac 
centenary grants program, were used for purposes other than intended”.


All funds from the centenary grants program were subject to proper and 
thorough external auditing by PricewaterhouseCoopers, it said. That included 
auditing each payment from the department that was paid directly to the 
supplier for running events in all states.

Fox told Guardian Australia claims he, his family or an associate owned 
companies which benefited from management fees were “totally and utterly 
factless”.

“No management fee has been paid at all. There’s a provision in the foundation 
accounts for a salary, which is standard. I am entitled to live,” he said.

Fox denied that any of Camp Gallipoli’s suppliers were owned by his family or 
associates. “We are inAdelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/adelaide>, and everyone knows 
someone. But our service provision is contracted out and we go through a tender 
process. Our accounts have all been audited.”

Fox said Camp Gallipoli broke even in its first year so there was no cash 
surplus to donate to RSL and Legacy. However, he said Camp Gallipoli had spent 
funds on a number of programs that benefited the veterans’ associations 
including a school education campaign aboutAnzac Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/anzac-day> and a special ceremony at the 
national war memorial.

Woolworths takes down Anzac tribute website amid Twitter outrage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/15/woolworths-takes-down-anzac-tribute-website-amid-twitter-outrage>
The foundation said it looked forward to events planned across Australia on 
Sunday, the eve of Anzac Day, 2016.


Camp Gallipoli is no stranger to controversy. In 2015 Target pulled Camp 
Gallipoli products branded with the the word Anzac 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/anzac-day/target-has-pulled-three-camp-gallipoli-products-from-sale-following-a-government-crackdown-on-the-use-of-the-word-anzac/news-story/669984e96ef3052aaf8a0bb45d2a145e>
 after the Department of Veterans’ Affairs advised they were inappropriate.

The veterans affairs minister also canned a joint Camp Gallipoli and 
Woolworths ad campaign 
<http://minister.dva.gov.au/media_releases/2015/apr/s01.htm> featuring the word 
Anzac without permission.Woolworths’ ad campaign featured images of Anzac 
soldiers and described them as “fresh in our memories” 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-04-14/woolworths-under-fire-for-anzac-promotion/6392848>
, prompting a large social media backlash over commercialisation of the Anzac 
memory.
 