
Into the valley of daytime TV ... Alfred Tennyson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alfred-tennyson>. Photograph: Corbis

Guillermo del Toro's Hellboy films 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hellboy#Feature_films> are clearly a different 
breed to the majority of big-screen comic book adaptations. The good guys are 
as ugly as the monsters they are trying to protect humanity from, and the hero 
is a slob who sucks on Cuban cigars and never tries overly hard in his fights, 
which are frequently punctuated by squabbles with his girlfriend.

One other aspect of Hellboy II <http://www.hellboymovie.com/> which separates 
it from the average superhero blockbuster is even more singular, however - the 
presence of poetry in the film. During a lull in the battle to save the world, 
an elf princess, Nuala, makes use of the extensive library at the secret HQ of 
the Bureau for Paranormal Research and Development, andAbe Sapien 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abe_Sapien>, a cerebral member of Hellboy's crew, 
overhears her reading from one of the books - a copy of In Memoriam by 
Tennyson, from which she chooses the verse which begins"Be near me when my 
light is low" <http://home.att.net/~tennysonpoetry/50.htm>. The pair bond over 
the beauty of the lines, and the physical book subsequently becomes an 
important plot device.

Though the film has been well-received 
<http://www.metacritic.com/film/titles/hellboy2>, reactions to the inclusion of 
poetry have been mixed, ranging from theunimpressed 
<http://theamericanscene.com/2008/07/15/hellboy-ii-is-the-worst-movie-of-the-summer#c005192>
 to the more accepting. (Ken Tucker aptly note 
<http://thebestamericanpoetry.typepad.com/the_best_american_poetry/2008/07/tennyson-goes-t.html>
s that the lines in question are well-suited for a scary movie: "When the blood 
creeps, and the nerves prick/And tingle; and the heart is sick".) Hellboy II, 
if somewhat inferior in artistic terms to In Memoriam, is nonetheless concerned 
with the ideas of loss and gain, of sacrifice and mortality, which also pervade 
Tennyson's masterpiece.

In Memoriam also featured in the last episode of the recent BBC series 
Bonekickers <http://www.bbc.co.uk/bonekickers/>. The archaeologists in the show 
discover that Arthur Hallam's letters to Tennyson have not, in fact, been 
destroyed; and not only does this correspondence conclusively prove that the 
young men had a homosexual relationship, it also reveals that In Memoriam 
functions as a key to the location of the true Excalibur.

In a series which put the suspension of disbelief to a stern test throughout, 
one of the least credible parts was that a four-strong team of archaeologists 
would be able to rattle off entire verses of Tennyson's very long poem, and 
could even identify the numerical position of these verses in the text as a 
whole.

Viewers of Hollyoaks 
<http://www.channel4.com/entertainment/tv/microsites/H/hollyoaks/> and 
Desperate Housewives will remember the inclusion of references to Wuthering 
Heights and Madame Bovary respectively, and John Mullan on this blog has noted 
the inclusion of famousliterary love letters as a plot device 
<http://blogs.theguardian.com/books/2008/08/can_carries_book_of_love_lette.html>
 in the recent film of Sex and the City. There are surely many other examples 
of literature appearing in TV programmes or films, apparently unconnected to 
the text.

As Deborah Friedell has pointed out <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v30/n14/frie04_.html>
, "young literary things" in New York and London are as likely to talk about TV 
as about books, and the seepage between the two media has clearly generated 
some crossover interest - having been featured in the recent seriesMad Men 
<http://www.amctv.com/originals/madmen/>, Frank O'Hara's poetry 
<http://www.frankohara.org/> experienced a 218% jump in sales 
<http://poetryfoundation.org/harriet/2008/08/meditations_in_an_emergency.html#more>
 in America. (Although it would be interesting to know exactly how many copies 
this amounted to.)

However the inclusion of poetry in places as different as Hellboy II and 
Bonekickers poses a dilemma. Should one celebrate the fact that verse is still 
seen as relevant, to whatever end, in such differing productions? Or could the 
wholesale changes to Tennyson's life story, and the reduction of his poetry to 
a variety of treasure map, warp our understanding of his work?
 