
With so many superfoods jostling for attention in the media and on supermarket 
shelves, it’s not always easy to separate the fad from the genuinely healthy. 
We spoke to nutritionists and doctors to discover which foods really benefit us 
as we grow older and to bust some of the most popular myths about diets for 
healthy ageing.

Can curry cure Alzheimer’s?

Could a common ingredient found in most curries hold the key to preventing or 
even curing a disease that shatters the lives of millions of older people and 
their families every year?

A new study by researchers at the Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine in 
Jülich, Germany <http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2014/09/140925205819.htm>
, found that when aromatic turmerone – a compound found in the spice turmeric – 
was tested on rats’ neural stem cells, these cells multiplied faster and the 
production of new nerve cells was accelerated, boosting the brain’s ability to 
heal itself.

Despite the promising results, all the evidence is based on animal studies and 
further trials on humans are needed. According to Clare Walton of the
Alzheimer’s Society <http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/>, the few studies that have 
been done on people have not replicated those promising initial findings. 
“There is currently no evidence to suggest people should go out and eat more 
turmeric,” she says. “It doesn’t appear to get into the brain very well. When 
people eat it, the liver does a very good job of excreting it. It is unclear 
whether you can even eat enough to get the levels that were seen in the animal 
studies.”

Far better, Walton claims, is to adopt a Mediterranean diet. Studies show that 
it canreduce a person’s risk of developing dementia in later life 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23680940>. It is high in olive oil, fish, 
nuts, and low in meat, dairy sources of fat, processed carbohydrates and sugar. 
However, doctors advise against singling out just one of these food types.

Does a drink a day keep the doctor away?

While drinking too much alcohol is linked to the development of a form of 
dementia calledKorsakoff’s syndrome 
<http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/documents_info.php?documentID=98>, 
research suggestslow to moderate consumption can actually be preventative 
<http://www.neurology.org/content/68/21/1790>. In a study published in 
Neurology, the scientific journal of theAmerican Academy of Neurology 
<https://www.aan.com/>, scientists found that people with mild cognitive 
impairment who had up to one alcoholic drink a day developed dementia at an 85% 
slower rate than people with mild cognitive impairment who were teetotalers.

Red wine has long been advocated by experts as the drink of choice for the 
health conscious. But should we really believe the hype about its supposed 
power to prevent cancer and cardiovascular disease? A study earlier this year 
on the wine ingredient resveratrol now suggests the tipple may not hold the 
secret of why countries such as France have such a low incidence of heart 
disease.

Researchers from the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine 
<http://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/som/> in Baltimore tested 783 elderly people 
living in two small towns in Tuscany. The volunteers gave details about their 
daily diets as well as urine samples for measurement of their resveratrol 
intake. During the nine years of the study, 268 of the men and women died, 174 
developed heart disease and 34 got cancer. But urinary resveratrol was not 
linked with death risk, heart disease risk or cancer risk. Nor was it 
associated with any markers of inflammation in the blood, theresearchers report 
in Jama Internal Medicine 
<http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1868537>.

The NHS warns, however, that while resveratrol may not be the magic ingredient 
for maintaining a healthy heart, red wine may still have elements that could be 
of benefit. For example, anyone anxious about the prospect of wearing dentures 
one day will be comforted bya study published in the Journal of Agriculture and 
Food Chemistry 
<http://www.acs.org/content/acs/en/pressroom/presspacs/2014/acs-presspac-may-21-2014/red-wine-shows-promise-as-cavity-fighter.html>
. The research found that the polyphenols, organic chemicals found in grape 
seed extract and wine, can slow bacterial growth, protecting our teeth from 
cavities and decay. Interestingly,green tea has also been found to have similar 
antimicrobial properties <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20109485>.

Too much red meat is bad, but should we give it up entirely?

Eating too much red and processed meat has been linked to bowel cancer. The 
NHS recommends that if you eat more than 90g of it a day you should cut down. 
However, red meat such as pork, beef and lamb can be a great source of protein, 
vitamins and minerals.

According to Emma Derbyshire, nutritionist from healthcare providers 
Simplyhealth, red meat is a particularly rich source of vitamin D – essential 
for healthy bones and teeth – and iron, a mineral particularly important for 
women going through the menopause. Thelatest government National Diet and 
Nutrition Survey data 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-national-diet-and-nutrition-survey-shows-uk-population-is-eating-too-much-sugar-saturated-fat-and-salt>
 showed evidence of low vitamin D status in 23% of adults aged 19 to 64 years, 
while 23% of adult women in the same age group had low iron intakes.

If something contains antioxidants it’s healthy, right?

From blueberries to beetroot, there seems no end to the foods which are rich 
in antioxidants. But why is it so important to include them in your diet, 
especially as you grow older? Antioxidants can help protect the ageing body 
from the harmful effects of so-called free radicals – a type of highly reactive 
molecule which can destroy cell walls and lead to diseases such as cancer.

Polly Douglas, a nutritional therapist for Nuffield Health, recommends a diet 
rich in vegetables, fruit and unprocessed foods. Foods which are high in sugars 
and fats such as dark chocolate are also a source of antioxidants, but too much 
can lead to diabetes and obesity. Weight is particularly problematic as people 
grow older, Douglas explains, because of the strain it places on joints. She 
recommends eating only small amounts of sugary foods, such as chocolate, 
together with a meal to ensure blood sugar levels remain balanced.

Keeping blood sugar levels in check is the key to healthy ageing, she claims. 
It not only has a huge impact on energy, but also the quality of our sleep and 
mood.

“It’s getting the right combination of complex carbohydrates, with protein, so 
that you’ve got a slow release of sugars into the bloodstream,” Douglas 
explains. “It doesn’t matter if you are two or 102; by having balanced blood 
sugar levels you will feel better, you will have more energy and therefore it 
will be easier for you to function and keep going.”
 