
Marks & Spencer is a national treasure. But as all national treasures, from 
Andy Murray to Adele, know, being cool has no place in one’s armoury of 
talents. Its new menswear collection, a collaboration with the young Scot 
Kestin Hare, however, tells a different story. It brushes against the 
coat-tails of hip and urban, and suggests a high-street brand that is gutsy 
enough to try and compete with the likes of Topman and Asos. Is that a wise 
move?

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fmarks-spencer-menswear-kestin-hare-alexa-chung%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5acae140e905afe1082fa0d0db57fe23da84142f%2F215_1197_4738_5922%2F4738.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Marks%20%26%20Spencer%20do%20an%20Alexa%20Chung%20with%20its%20menswear%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fmarks-spencer-menswear-kestin-hare-alexa-chung%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Marks%20%26%20Spencer%20do%20an%20Alexa%20Chung%20with%20its%20menswear%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fmarks-spencer-menswear-kestin-hare-alexa-chung%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5acae140e905afe1082fa0d0db57fe23da84142f%2F215_1197_4738_5922%2F4738.jpg>
 Kestin Hare. 
While M&S’s reinvention of its women’s line with Alexa Chung continues apace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/13/the-alexa-effect-behind-the-scenes-at-the-launch-of-archivebyalexa>
, reinventing its menswear range is a trickier proposition. Known for its solid 
and dependable line of basics, from wool jumpers to slacks, M&S has lacked a 
killer, affordable menswear line for some time. Joseph Kocharian, fashion and 
grooming director of Attitude, points to theirBest Of British 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/l/men/best-of-british/best-of-british-collection>
 range (that featured Harrington bombers and parkas) andDavid Gandy’s Autograph 
<http://www.marksandspencer.com/s/men/david-gandy-for-autograph> collection, as 
evidence of the gradual re-focusing of their menswear range. “They have put a 
lot of investment into making their clothes more premium and 
fashion-orientated,” he says. “For a couple of seasons, they have been tapping 
into a younger market.”

Alexa Chung: can she make M&S sparkle once again? | Observer profile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/apr/17/alexa-chung-marks-spencer-fashion>
Enter Kestin Hare. The choice of Hare – only two years old as a brand – goes 
against the grain of what other high-street menswear chains are doing. While 
the likes of River Island have collaborated with in-the-know designers such as 
Lou Dalton and Christopher Shannon, M&S has gone the other way. “He’s a 
‘wardrobe brand’,” says David Hellqvist, fashion features director of Port 
magazine. “It isn’t fashion per se. It’s about garments, pieces you can build 
and expand your wardrobe with.”

In the promo video <http://www.marksandspencer.com/s/men/kestin-hare#> for 
Hare’s affordable (the short-sleeved shirt is priced at £45) capsule 
collection, he says: “quality and craftsmanship has always been key to me”, 
which sounds uncannily like M&S’s slogan: “Quality worth every penny”). So far, 
so core M&S value. But the clothes themselves veer away from the script.


From the botanical theme to the pieces themselves – a short-sleeved shirt with 
a hand-drawn print, a slim-fit suit jacket paired with patterned shorts – they 
feel different. The aesthetic is clean and modern with a soupçon of nostalgia 
in the hand-drawn, khakis and designs in muted colours. It feels like something 
you would see on the racks at Topman. Will the gambit pay off? The homely 
associations men have with M&S run deep. While women have an all-ages 
relational history with M&S, many men’s relationship with M&S clothes stopped 
when they hit puberty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fmarks-spencer-menswear-kestin-hare-alexa-chung%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1b7a0ee1a585dec534b76674b981f3ba7734366%2F0_0_1100_1430%2F1100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Marks%20%26%20Spencer%20do%20an%20Alexa%20Chung%20with%20its%20menswear%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fmarks-spencer-menswear-kestin-hare-alexa-chung%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Marks%20%26%20Spencer%20do%20an%20Alexa%20Chung%20with%20its%20menswear%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fapr%2F19%2Fmarks-spencer-menswear-kestin-hare-alexa-chung%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1b7a0ee1a585dec534b76674b981f3ba7734366%2F0_0_1100_1430%2F1100.jpg>
 Kestin Hare for M&S, £39.50. 
“M&S’s problem is getting people through the door in the first place,” says 
Robert Johnston, fashion director at GQ. “Their menswear is of high quality, 
it’s not that people who come to the clothes hate them: it’s that it’s M&S.”

Still, the Kestin Hare range pushes the idea that you can have a product that 
is both cool and high quality. But in a world of ready-to-wear, disposable 
fashion bought at the click of a button, can M&S have it both ways? “If you’re 
going for an audience who don’t actually care about quality because they’re not 
going to wear them for that long, what are you going to do?” says Johnston.


David Hellqvist, Avaunt magazine’s fashion director, thinks that the range may 
find an audience. “M&S isn’t for young people and never will be, I imagine. It 
could bring in ayounger audience than they currently have, though.” Which might 
be the best it can hope for.
 