
When Strictly Come Dancing returns for its seventh series next month, it will 
be a rather different beast from the one we are used to. No Arlene Phillips -
you might have read about that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/17/arlene-phillips-strictly-come-dancing>
 - andno Sunday night results show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/aug/12/strictly-come-dancing-results-show-axed>
.

Last year's series failed to reach the peaks of previous runs, despite (or 
perhaps because of) thetiresome John Sergeant brouhaha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/nov/20/strictly-come-dancing-realitytv-bbc>
. So is the new season make or break for the celebrity talent show?

Possibly. Last year's lot were a dull bunch, featuring too many EastEnders 
actors <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QFOAq1-X3HY&feature=channel> (past and 
present) and contestants who were neither likeable enough or good enough 
dancers to remain in the memory much beyond the closing credits.Austin Healey 
was the exception <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sP0e6j-bA0Y>, but when he 
left on the eve of the final, so did my interest in the show.

It still sticks in the craw that Holby City's Tom Chambers, hardly likely to 
earn a place in a Strictly Come Dancing hall of fame, managed to win the thing.
Tom Chambers! <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kLZrTyJ14d0>

Axing the Sunday slot is a wise move. A pre-recorded show, it never had the 
energy of the Saturday night programme 
<http://www.heatworld.com/Article/2429/Strictly-Come-Dancing/Strictly-Come-Dancing-results-moves-to-Sunday!-Why>
, and (in my home at least) would invariably end up being taped so you could 
fast forward straight to the dance-off.

A 90-minute standalone live Saturday show will also help it feel more of an 
"event", and a slightly better excuse not to go out.

It will make even more sense if reports that ITV1 is moving the X Factor 
results show to Sunday, a move that was said to have been resisted last year by 
Simon Cowell.

Whisper it quietly, but there was another reason why last year's Strictly had 
gone off the boil.Bruce Forsyth <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7EElxhewqoU>. 
Don't get me wrong, I love Bruce, but his hilariously lame gags just aren't 
that hilarious anymore, and now feels like the right time to hand over to 
someone new.

But who? Graham Norton? Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing> is camp enough 
already. Anton Du Beke – or Tony Beak, if you will – is the only man for the 
job, if he can spare the time from hosting BBC1's Hole In The Wall. Anton! 
Who's your agent again?

But with BBC cutbacks hitting the programme budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jun/19/bbc-tv-networks-budget-savings>, 
don't expect the corporation to be splashing the cash on contestants.

Those rumoured to be taking part, according to my whistlestop survey of the 
tabloids, include the actors Zoe Lucker (from Footballers' Wives), Kara Tointon 
(of EastEnders' fame) and Natalie Cassidy, also of, er, EastEnders fame. 
Woo-hoo!

Sharon Osbourne and Richard Madeley were both linked with the show, and 
subsequently unlinked by red tops who said the show hadn't offered them enough 
money. Shame. For Madeley I would willingly have bought two TV licences.

Peter Mandelson said last year he would like to take part, but very possibly 
he has better things to do right now.

The show also has a new judge in the form of a former winner, Alesha Dixon. 
She'll have a tough time following Arlene Phillips, who I loved to hate. But 
that's half of Strictly's fun. Last year's was a six out of 10. Hopefully this 
year will do better, with more moments likethis 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=71-CUqUD8oQ&feature=PlayList&p=B207024D56CE616B&playnext=1&playnext_from=PL&index=20>
,this <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KXb7X-4-NCA>, and - best of all - this! 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q-_ceoJYufg>
 