
Do whales hear earthquakes long before humans? As tsunami warnings hit the 
Indonesian and Sri Lankan coasts last week, observers at sea watched as every 
species of cetacean – from massive blue whales to diminutive spinner dolphins – 
disappeared within five minutes. British photographer and film-maker Andrew 
Sutton, who took this remarkable shot last Wednesday off the southern tip of 
Sri Lanka, reports that he and his crew were mystified as the whales they were 
watching vanished in the space of a few minutes. The humans on the boat were 
unaware that the quake had happened, but the animals had evidently sensed the 
subsea seismic shocks, and fled.

Could cetaceans act as canaries in the sea, as advance alarms of potentially 
dangerous seismic activity? Both the Japan and New Zealand earthquakes of last 
year were preceded by mass cetacean strandings on beaches in these respective 
islands. And a recent scientific report from Mexico appears to prove that a fin 
whale accelerated sharply away from the site of an underwater earthquake.

But having already exploited whales for centuries, perhaps we should not be so 
quick to enlist their services. Back in 1964, another erstwhile resident of Sri 
Lanka, the science-fiction writer,Arthur C Clarke 
<http://www.arthurcclarke.net/>, predicted that by the year 2000, "we will not 
be the only intelligent creatures. One of the coming techniques will be what we 
might call bioengineering – the development of intelligent and useful servants 
among the other animals on this planet, particularly the great apes and, in the 
oceans, the dolphins and whales".

Clarke thought it a scandal that man had neglected to domesticate any new 
animals since the Stone Age. But he also foresaw other issues, too: "Of course 
[they] would soon start forming trades unions and we'd be right back where we 
started."
 