
After Alan Jones’ extraordinary comments that Australia needs another stolen 
generation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/15/alan-jones-says-australia-needs-another-stolen-generation-to-protect-children>
, it’s worth revisiting Kevin Rudd’s speech of apology. No, not the famous one 
from 2008 but a far less controversial address he delivered a year later about 
the so-called forgotten Australians – the people subjected to institutional 
abuse as wards of the state during the 20th century.

“[W]e come together today to offer our nation’s apology,” Rudd told the 
parliament in November 2009 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/australiaandthepacific/australia/6578427/Australian-apology-to-British-child-migrants-speech-in-full.html>
. “To say to you, the Forgotten Australians, and those who were sent to our 
shores as children without your consent, that we are sorry. Sorry – that as 
children you were taken from your families and placed in institutions where so 
often you were abused.”

Alan Jones says Australia needs another stolen generation 'to protect' 
children'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/15/alan-jones-says-australia-needs-another-stolen-generation-to-protect-children>
The rhetorical echo of Rudd’s earlier “sorry speech” is not, of course, a 
coincidence. The abuse of the British child migrants stemmed from the same 
eugenicist logic:as Coral Dow and Janet Phillips argue 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/BN/0910/ChildMigrants?print=1#intro>
 in their 2009 background note for the Australian parliament, the official 
Child Migrant Programme that sent 150,000 children to Commonwealth countries – 
mainly Australia and Canada – was intended “to maintain the racial unity of the 
Empire and populate the Dominions of Canada, Rhodesia, New Zealand and 
Australia, with good white stock.” On that basis, children deemed to be 
neglected in Britain were removed from their parents and shipped out to the 
colonies, to be raised in residential institutions.

Dow and Phillips explain: 

Most were placed in the care of Barnardos, the Fairbridge Society, the Church 
of England and the Christian Brothers. The House of Commons Health Committee 
concluded that children were placed in large, often isolated, institutions and 
were often subjected to harsh, sometimes intentionally brutal, regimes of work 
and discipline, unmodified by any real nurturing or encouragement. The 
institutions were inadequately supervised, monitored and inspected.

Like Indigenous kids removed from their families, the British child migrants 
were often falsely told their parents were dead. There were also more than 
500,000 Australian citizens taken from their families and put into 
institutional care. They, too, were often subjected to sexual abuse, suffering 
trauma that haunted them for the rest of their lives.

“We look back with shame” Rudd continued, “that many of these little ones who 
were entrusted to institutions and foster homes instead, were abused 
physically, humiliated cruelly, violated sexually. And we look back with shame 
at how those with power were allowed to abuse those who had none. And how then, 
as if this was not injury enough, you were left ill-prepared for life outside – 
left to fend for yourselves; often unable to read or write; to struggle alone 
with no friends and no family. For these failures to offer proper care to the 
powerless, the voiceless and the most vulnerable, we say sorry.”

Two obvious points come to mind when comparing the forgotten Australians and 
the stolen generation.

The first is that it’s difficult to imagine anyone subjecting the (now often 
elderly) survivors of British child migration to the vilification directed at 
the stolen generations.Alan Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones>
 says that Indigenous children were removed from their parents for their own 
protection. It’s certainly true the white officials taking the kids made that 
claim – but, of course, precisely the same justification was offered for 
ripping British child migrants from their families. Could anyone imagine Jones 
demanding that more white kids be stolen?

If Rudd’s speech about the forgotten Australians isn’t nearly as well known as 
his apology to Indigenous Australia, it’s because no one sees the former as in 
any way controversial. On the contrary, it’s almost universally regarded as a 
decent (albeit long overdue) gesture toward people subjected to unthinkable 
abuse.

By contrast, recognition of the stolen generations continues to infuriate 
people like Jones.

Indigenous kids are still being removed from their families, more than ever 
before | Larissa Behrendt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/commentisfree/2016/feb/13/eight-years-after-the-apology-indigenous-kids-are-still-being-removed-from-their-families>
An apology to white people seems normal and natural. An apology to black 
people does not – even though, asLarissa Behrendt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/commentisfree/2016/feb/13/eight-years-after-the-apology-indigenous-kids-are-still-being-removed-from-their-families>
 notes, the removal of Indigenous children is still going on and in greater 
numbers than ever before.

Yet there’s a second, more positive, point to take from the comparison – 
simply, that social justice is not a zero sum game. Aggrieved conservatives 
will often complain that the acknowledgement of racism means that injustices 
committed against whites are ignored. Actually, though, the campaign for 
acknowledgement of the forgotten Australians received a massive boost from the 
1995 inquiry into the removal of Aboriginal children, as non-Indigenous 
survivors heard echoes of their own treatment in the testimony provided by the 
stolen generations. The struggle of black Australians provided a template that 
enabled white child migrants to press their own claims.

There are lots of Alan Joneses’ around at that moment: wealthy and entitled 
conservatives, intent on fanning white anxieties about a changing world, as if 
any gains for Indigenous people necessarily come at the expense of the 
non-Indigenous. Actually, nothing could be further from the truth.

This article was amended on 18 February 2016 to make reference to the 500,000 
Australian citizens also taken from their families and put into institutional 
care.
 