
What is one to make of NSA whistleblower Edward Snowden's "reluctant" appeal 
for temporary asylum in Russia, an appeal that Russia yesterday insisted had 
still notbeen received 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/14/world/europe/edward-snowden-asylum.html?_r=0>
?

It's easy to admire Snowden for what he has revealed about the vast extent of 
US and UK spying. It is easy, too, to sympathise with the predicament he has 
found himself in after making his revelations and wishing, understandably, to 
avoid decades in prison. Indeed, contrary to what some have argued, there is no 
"rule" that states whistleblowers should voluntarily surrender to the prospect 
of a long jail sentence.

The consequence is that Snowden has found himself stripped of his passport by 
the US government that seeks him and has been subjected to a harshly applied 
international flight ban as Washington has sought to block his travel to a 
friendly South American country. In these circumstances, his desire for 
temporary refuge in Moscow – where he is trapped in any case – makes perfect 
sense.

Yet there is a "but". You can hold all of these ideas as true, yet still feel 
deeply uncomfortable about the manner of Snowden's request for asylum, not 
least his praise forRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

Perhaps it was no more than being naive, but to list Putin's Russia, as 
Snowden did, among his little list of countries for "being the first to stand 
against human rights violations" suggests a dangerous moral relativism.

Far from being a champion, Russia's record on human rights violations is a 
grim one. Snowden's meeting with human rights groups in Moscow's Sheremetyevo 
airport was preceded by another piece of human rights news – the posthumous 
conviction of whisteblowerSergei Magnitsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/11/sergei-magnitsky-russia-trial-verdict-tax-fraud>
, who was tortured in a Russian prison and denied medical attention that might 
have saved his life.

Amnesty <http://www.amnesty.org.uk/>, whose representative was at the Snowden 
meeting, had earlier announced the latest murder of a journalist in Russia,
Akhmednabi Akhmednabiev 
<http://www.indexoncensorship.org/2013/07/journalist-akhmednabi-akhmednabiev-killed-in-russia/>
, who was killed by an unknown gunman in the North Caucasus region after his 
name appeared on a death list.

There have been other recent reminders of what happens to those who criticise 
the Kremlin and Putin. Two members of the punk bandPussy Riot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/pussy-riot> remain in jail. Indeed, 
yesterday – almost unremarked – it was reported that Maria Alyokhina, one of 
the two imprisoned musicians, was being transferred from the labour camp in the 
Perm region, where she has been serving two years for hooliganism for 
performing a song, to another prison in central Russia.

A new trial opened last month into those accused of murdering the journalist 
Anna Politkovskaya <https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya> in 
2006, though few expect those behind her murder ever to face justice.

A cursory glance of Amnesty's list of recent alerts on Russia from the past 
two months makes very ugly reading, revealing the continuing assault on gay 
rights inside the country, the use of torture to extract confessions and the 
pursuit through the courts of non-governmental associations.

If that is too abstract, consider the treatment of Tanya Lokshina 
<http://www.hrw.org/bios/tanya-lokshina>, the Human Rights Watch researcher, 
one of those invited to meet Snowden on Friday and who tweeted the
whistleblower's picture <http://inagist.com/all/355698363594833920/>. Last 
year, the then pregnant Lokshina, who has been a prominent human rights 
campaigner for more than a decade, received a series of text messages 
threatening both her and her unborn child.

Commenting on the affair, Human Rights Watch's executive director, Ken Roth, 
said: "The climate for human rights advocacy in Russia is as bad as we've seen 
in 20 years. Russia's international partners should make clear that the surest 
route to pariah status is to reinstate the bleak human rights environment of 
the Soviet era."

Or take the case of Alexei Navalny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexei-navalny>, the anti-corruption 
campaigner who this week will learn whether he is to be jailed for his 
activities.

Why all this matters is simple.

Snowden has built his argument on the moral imperative for leaking the NSA 
document trove increasingly in terms of human rights, not least relating to 
privacy.

He has justified his actions by invoking one of the Nuremberg principles – 
that it is the duty of an individual to break the law of his own state if 
international law is being broken – and the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights.

While that is a compelling argument, what is less convincing is his suggestion 
that Russia is in the forefront of the fight by the "powerless" against the 
"powerful".

Instead, in providing a public relations coup for Putin, Snowden has provided 
cover for a gross and serial human rights-violating state. Even then, it is not 
hard to imagine the circumstances how this came about. To sympathise again: 
exhausted, confused, perhaps, even under pressure, Snowden must feel he has 
been left by Washington with nowhere else to turn.

But that cannot change the fact that the comments he made on Friday – uttered 
naively or under duress – still have consequences. That is because Snowden's 
well-developed and credible defence for leaking the NSA documents has been 
that, as a citizen and as a moral being, he could not tolerate the abuses he 
witnessed and was compelled to break the law – a powerful appeal to natural 
justice.

In appealing to the universality of human rights values, while appearing to 
apply his criticism of human rights abuse selectively, that justification, 
sadly, now rests on shaky ground.
 