
The Guardian's Three Little Pigs 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/video/2012/feb/29/open-journalism-three-little-pigs-advert>
 TV campaign was among the material honoured at this year'sCannes Lions awards 
<http://www.canneslions.com/>, which took place last week during 17 - 23 June. 
The campaign, byBartle Bogle Hegarty <http://www.bartleboglehegarty.com/> 
London, won a gold lion in the Film category, one gold and five silver lions in 
the Film Craft category and a silver in the Titanium and Integrated category. 
Andrea Stillacci, one of the judges of the Film section, praised the campaign 
calling it very "today."

The Guardian was also rewarded in the Outdoor Lions category, scooping seven 
silver lions for Bartle Bogle Hegarty's campaigns 'egg', 'pyramid', 'gold 
coin', 'pill', 'record', 'orange' and 'pie chart.'

In the Young Lions Media competition 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/canneslions/competition-overview>, which celebrates 
the brightest new stars of the advertising and communications industry and of 
which the Guardian is the official UK representative, the United Kingdom won 
the distinguished silver award. The winning team members from the UK were Rosie 
Duncan and Laura Robinson.

This year's brief, disclosed to competitors on 17 June by The Big Issue, 
required the 28 competitors to come up with a media strategy which would give 
vendors a platform to tell their story and help increase circulation of the 
magazine. Juror Katrina Henry congratulated the UK team, stating that their 
work "was built on a great idea and a very tight concept."

The Cannes Lions awards are a mark of excellence for the advertising and 
creative communications industry and celebrate work which inspires, excites and 
innovates. For more information about the awards and to see a full list of 
winners, clickhere <http://www.canneslions.com/>.
 