
If the Harvey Nichols 2013 Christmas ad Sorry I spent it on myself 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ITyeI3YyYw8> was a suspect in a crime, it 
would have almost given in by the end of theCannes Lions festival 
<http://www.canneslions.com/>. It was subjected to relentless interrogation, a 
spotlight pushed continually into its face to try to expose any inconsistencies 
in its story, its motivation and its authenticity. The 21 jurors never stopped 
cross-examining this film, but it didn't buckle under pressure, not for a 
second.

That's why, following hours of intense discussion and seven straight days of 
searching for the world's best advertising and film content of 2012, we decided 
to awardone of two Grand Prix  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/21/cannes-lion-british-resurgence> 
to this work – because it felt right.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FITyeI3YyYw8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FITyeI3YyYw8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FITyeI3YyYw8%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
It's bold, brave and beautifully executed. But most of all it found a very 
different way into solving a business problem. In this it achieved something we 
felt was extremely difficult: to make self-indulgence funny.

But it goes much deeper than that. First off, it's absolutely unapologetic in 
its agenda. This year, buy expensive stuff … only, for yourself instead. As an 
insight, it recognises this trait – this little guilty voice within the target 
audience – and presents them with an idea that gives them the means to be able 
to indulge it.

The whole thing works because the balance is right. Embarrassed, pregnant 
pauses contrasted with guilty, slightly worried laughs. Accusing stares 
juxtaposed with oblivious self-obsession. The Christmas morning 
present-unwrapping ritual is a very British situation, and yet because of its 
uniquely human insight, it becomes a universally understood one, as exemplified 
by the fact that a jury of 21 people from countries as diverse as the US, 
Argentina, Japan, Thailand, India, Brazil, South Africa, Mexico and Norway 
connected with it.

The epic split ad for Volvo Trucks 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=M7FIvfx5J10>, on the other hand, was probably 
the least-biggest surprise ever in the history of Cannes, but that's exactly 
what's so powerful about it. A lot has been written about the elements that 
make the film sublime, such as the music, the precise timing of the sun rising, 
the gold trucks and, of course, the serenity of the entire piece.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FM7FIvfx5J10%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FM7FIvfx5J10%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FM7FIvfx5J10%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
What's most appealing to me is how all of these moving parts work seamlessly 
together to create a feeling of harmony. It leaves me with a sense of exactly 
what Volvo Dynamic Steering must actually feel like, and that is what remains 
long after the film has finished. That's why I believe the film will still 
remain fresh, remarkable and memorable for many years to come.

If the Harvey Nichols ad was a crisp enactment of a brilliant insight, then 
the Volvo Trucks was the capturing of a certain feeling. Both ideas were brave; 
both were focused; both were, we believed, benchmark pieces of work that should 
be rewarded and recognised accordingly.

Jeremy Garner was on the film jury at Cannes Lions 2014 – he is a creative 
consultant atOrange Digital <http://www.orange-digital.co.uk/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 