
My journey to work is quite long – about 50 minutes – which is actually great 
because it gives me the opportunity to plan for the day ahead. As soon as I 
arrive, I take Tess – my four-and-a half-month-old dog – for a walk around the 
community to see the residents. They all adore her, so we don’t do a lot of 
walking. We mainly stop and chat with everyone to see how their day is going.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fcare-home-activities-residents-social-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424946885591%2F3e5d751a-848b-4971-aaee-35f30a71f1bb-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Care%20home%20activities%3A%20how%20I%20ensure%20older%20residents%20have%20a%20varied%20social%20life%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fcare-home-activities-residents-social-life%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Care%20home%20activities%3A%20how%20I%20ensure%20older%20residents%20have%20a%20varied%20social%20life%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F27%2Fcare-home-activities-residents-social-life%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F26%2F1424946885591%2F3e5d751a-848b-4971-aaee-35f30a71f1bb-680x1020.jpeg>
 Louise Murkin and Tess. Photograph: Sunrise Senior Living 
Once we have finished our greetings, we go upstairs to the office, which is in 
the community’s activities lounge. One of the great things about Sunrise Senior 
Living of Winchester – a care home with around 100 residents – is that 
activities are such an integral part of everyday life for the people here. In 
my office the team and I plan events for the day ahead, as well as the 
forthcoming weeks and months. These can range from exercise classes to 
afternoon teas.

It is important to provide a full calendar of activities for older people 
because staying active makes a huge contribution to individuals’ physical and 
emotional wellbeing. For example, taking part in a regular exercise class can 
help a person stay more mobile as they get older. At Sunrise, we have a popular 
“head to toe” class, which takes residents through a series of structured, 
seated exercises. Movements like this are not strenuous, but they make an 
enormous difference in helping people remain active and retaining their 
independence.

As well as physical activities, we have lots of events that give residents the 
opportunity to socialise with one another. An active social life is just as 
important for older people as it is for people who are young, and it really 
makes a difference to other aspects of their wellbeing.

I like to go to as many activities and events as possible throughout the day, 
so that’s why I have my lunch (lovingly prepared by my husband) at my desk. 
This gives me a chance to do some much needed admin, like organising our team 
of fantastic volunteers who help out with many of our activities.

Going to activities in the afternoon with residents is an excellent way of 
getting to know them and finding out what they like and, perhaps even more 
importantly, what they don’t like. I wouldn’t be doing a very good job if I was 
continually booking an entertainer they didn’t enjoy or arranging a club nobody 
wanted to attend.

Having this interaction with them is also valuable for their families. They 
can speak to carers about their physical wellbeing, but by coming to me and my 
team, we can give them an idea about how their loved ones are doing socially. 
We can also tell their relatives whether they are happy and getting along with 
other residents here.

I have worked in activities for older people for more than 12 years and I have 
always believed in building strong relationships with families. If, for 
whatever reason, family members aren’t able to see their loved ones regularly, 
maintaining communication provides that vital comfort their relative is happy 
and living a fulfilled life. After all, this is exactly what we would want if 
our parents or grandparents were in care.

Family is incredibly important to me too. After a day full of activities at 
work, I drive back to see my husband at home and we Skype our daughter and 
granddaughter in Cyprus. The three of them keep me as busy as the residents 
here do.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.
 