
Cus D’Amato, who guided the 21-year-old Floyd Patterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/may/12/guardianobituaries.usa1> to the 
world heavyweight title in 1956 as the youngest ever champion to that point by 
putting in him with old Archie Moore, often said matchmaking was about 
minimising risk. Not a single boxing fan agreed with him, and very few aspiring 
contenders did either, because they see the sport and the business from a 
diametrically opposed perspective.

Fans want action; fighters want titles, glory and money; promoters and 
managers want steady meal tickets. It has been that way since 1750, when the 
Duke of Cumberland turned his back on his champion – poor, half-blind Jack 
Broughton, who begged vainly for understanding in defeat. But the Duke, 
notorious as the Butcher of Culloden, had blown a fortune backing his man, so 
he closed his amphitheatre in Tottenham Court Road and opened an antiques shop.

Gennady Golovkin proving a worthy heir to Floyd Mayweather’s boxing crown | 
Kevin Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/oct/19/gennady-golovkin-floyd-mayweather-boxing-world-champion-chris-eubank-jr>
Nothing so wicked or dramatic occurs now. What we have today are long, boring 
stand-offs between competing promoters trying to get the final edge in 
contracts for their champions. And so it has finally come to pass, after 
negotiations stretching back at least two years, thatCarl Frampton and Scott 
Quigg will put their world super-bantamweight belts up for grabs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/02/scott-quigg-carl-frampton-british-super-bantamweight-title-unification-fight>
 at the Manchester Arena on Saturday 27 February.

“Yes! All I can say is yes – get in!” said Quigg’s promoter Eddie Hearn.

Frampton’s adviser, Barry McGuigan, was not quite as vociferous, but chipped 
in: “I am very pleased that we have managed to get this fight made.”

But maybe not quite as pleased as if the fight were made in Belfast, where he 
himself enjoyed so many great nights in the ring.

Picking a winner is as tough as in any genuine contest – as close and 
potentially as exciting as the clash of the unbeaten scousers, Callum Smith and 
Rocky Fielding, for the vacant British super-middleweight title in Liverpool 
this weekend.

That is a match that has been simpler to make, given both fighters work for 
Matchroom – and Hearn has to be commended for bringing two potential world 
champions together earlier in their development than some safety-first 
promoters might have regarded as advisable.

As for the super-bantams who already have their big baubles with which to make 
money, Quigg has home advantage, although Frampton says he is happy to bring 
his IBF title over from Belfast, having defended it twice, the last time rising 
from the canvas twice in the first round on his US debut tobeat the lightly 
regarded Alejandro González Jr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/19/carl-frampton-retain-ibf-world-title-texas-alejandro-gonzales>
.

“I’m going to his backyard to defend my title because that’s what champions 
do,” Frampton said after the announcement this week. “The fans will find out 
who the real champion is. I’m going to win this fight in style.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fcarl-frampton-scott-quigg-bout-boxing-kevin-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446552239793%2F1cce9a15-916c-4761-9f30-4487b38981ab-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carl%20Frampton%20v%20Scott%20Quigg%20bout%20a%20tantalising%20prospect%20after%20numbers%20finally%20add%20up%20%7C%20Kevin%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fcarl-frampton-scott-quigg-bout-boxing-kevin-mitchell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carl%20Frampton%20v%20Scott%20Quigg%20bout%20a%20tantalising%20prospect%20after%20numbers%20finally%20add%20up%20%7C%20Kevin%20Mitchell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fblog%2F2015%2Fnov%2F03%2Fcarl-frampton-scott-quigg-bout-boxing-kevin-mitchell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F11%2F3%2F1446552239793%2F1cce9a15-916c-4761-9f30-4487b38981ab-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Scott Quigg says of facing Carl Frampton: ‘I know I will beat him in every 
department.’ Photograph: Andrew Couldridge/Action Images 
Naturally Quigg, who holds a WBA belt, doesn’t see it quite like that. “I’ve 
finally got the fight I’ve wanted for so long,” he said. “February 27 will be 
the best night of my life. I’ve dedicated my life to this sport and I have 
never been more confident going into a fight, I know I will beat him in every 
department.”

Maybe those knockdowns by González clinched the deal. Perhaps Quigg and his 
handlers sensed just a slight slip in Frampton. That would not be a wise 
assessment. Frampton recovered well from what were quick visits to the floor 
and boxed with increasing composure to close out the fight over 12 rounds.

What we have now is the prospect of nearly four months of ballyhoo before what 
should be a cracking contest. It is a fight that doesn’t need a lot of selling 
but Sky will insist it gets the treatment to boost pay-per-view clicks.

The pressure is on Hearn to come up with these revenue-churners and it has not 
been easy this year trying to do that with domestic opponents. Quigg-Frampton, 
though, is a bona fide ppv bout.

It is on a par with the other fight we have been waiting for way too long: 
Amir Khan v Kell Brook. There is talk now that Khan will switch his attention 
from a 50-50 shot atManny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/08/manny-pacquiao-retire-floyd-mayweather>
 (who is no given to return to the ring) to a rematch with Danny García, who
ripped away his light-welterweight title so ruthlessly in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/15/knockdown-amir-khan-danny-garcia>
.

Khan has been accused of dodging Brook and spending too much time chasing 
Floyd Mayweather Jr, who teased him mercilessly before announcing his 
retirement aftera perfunctory farewell stroll against Andre Berto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/13/floyd-mayweather-finishes-up-unbeaten-after-one-sided-victory-over-andre-berto>
.

There is the inevitable bottom line: Khan – who should exact revenge on 
García, who has slipped as a welter – will fight Brook only if the numbers add 
up, the same conundrum that delayed Quigg-Frampton for so long. If Eddie Hearn 
can put that one together after his Manchester extravaganza in February, he 
will be smiling more broadly than usual.

It is, after all, a business. The Duke of Cumberland and Cus D’Amato knew that.
 