
Whenever an avoidable tragedy occurs, it's common for there to be an intense 
spate of anger in its immediate aftermath which quickly dissipates as people 
move on to the next outrage. That's a key dynamic that enables people in 
positions of authority toevade consequences for their bad acts 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/national/archive/2012/04/remember-the-pepper-spraying-cop-uc-davis-releases-a-powerful-report/255903/>
. But as more facts emerge regarding the conduct of the federal prosecutors in
the case of Aaron Swartz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/12/aaron-swartz-heroism-suicide1>
 - Massachusetts' US attorney Carmen Ortiz and assistant US attorney Stephen 
Heymann - the opposite seems to be taking place: there is greater and greater 
momentum for real investigations, accountability and reform. It is urgent that 
this opportunity not be squandered, that this interest be sustained.

The Wall Street Journal reported 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324581504578238692048200404.html?mod=WSJ_hp_mostpop_read>
 this week that - two days before the 26-year-old activist killed himself on 
Friday - federal prosecutors again rejected a plea bargain offer from Swartz's 
lawyers that would have kept him out of prison. They instead demanded that he 
"would need to plead guilty to every count" and made clear that "the government 
would insist on prison time". That made a trial on all 15 felony counts - with 
the threat of a lengthy prison sentence if convicted - a virtual inevitability.

Just three months ago, Ortiz's office, as TechDirt reported 
<http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20120917/17393320412/us-government-ups-felony-count-jstoraaron-swartz-case-four-to-thirteen.shtml>
, severely escalated the already-excessive four-felony-count indictment by 
adding nine new felony counts, each of which "carrie[d] the possibility of a 
fine and imprisonment of up to 10-20 years per felony", meaning "the sentence 
could conceivably total 50+ years and [a] fine in the area of $4 million." That 
meant, asThink Progress documented 
<http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2013/01/14/1441211/killers-slavers-and-bank-robbers-all-face-less-severe-prison-terms-than-aaron-swartz-did/?mobile=nc>
, that Swartz faced "a more severe prison term than killers, slave dealers and 
bank robbers".

Swartz's girlfriend, Taren Stinebrickner-Kauffman, told the WSJ that the case 
had drained all of his money and he could not afford to pay for a trial. At 
Swartz's funeral in Chicago on Tuesday,his father flatly stated 
<http://www.suntimes.com/business/17594002-420/aaron-swartz-killed-by-government-his-father-says-at-funeral.html>
 that his son "was killed by the government".

Ortiz and Heymann continue to refuse to speak publicly about what they did in 
this case - at least officially. Yesterday, Ortiz's husband, IBM Corp executive 
Thomas J. Dolan, took to Twitter and - without identifying himself as the US 
Attorney's husband -defended the prosecutors' actions 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/buzzfeednews/prosecutors-husband-defends-push-to-jail-internet>
 in response to prominent critics, and even harshly criticized the Swartz 
family for assigning blame to prosecutors: "Truly incredible in their own son's 
obit they blame others for his death", Ortiz's husband wrote. Once Dolan's 
identity was discovered, he received assertive criticism and thensheepishly 
deleted his Twitter account 
<http://www.boston.com/metrodesk/2013/01/15/attorney-husband-causes-backlash-twitter-with-posts-hacker-suicide/NW3H71cvJyw0zjDvzTkabP/story.html>
.

Clearly, the politically ambitious Ortiz - who was touted just last month 
<http://www.bostonglobe.com/metro/2012/12/07/patrick-reportedly-cites-prosecutor-vying-for-governor/0aEpGj5QqjvJfgSwgFNc7H/story.html>
 by the Boston Globe as a possible Democratic candidate for governor - is 
feeling serious heat as a result of rising fury over her office's wildly 
overzealous pursuit of Swartz. The same is true of Heymann, whose father was 
Deputy Attorney General in the Clinton administration and who has tried to 
forge his own reputation as a tough-guy prosecutor who takes particular aim at 
hackers.

Yesterday, the GOP's House Oversight Committee Chairman, Darrell Issa, 
announced 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/15/darrell-issa-aaron-swartz-_n_2481450.html>
 a formal investigation into the Justice Department's conduct in this case. 
Separately, two Democratic members of the House Judiciary Committeeissued 
stinging denunciations 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/hillicon-valley/technology/277353-lawmakers-blast-trumped-up-doj-prosecution-of-internet-activist>
, with Democratic Rep. Jared Polis proclaiming that "the charges were 
ridiculous and trumped-up" and labeling Swartz a "martyr" for the evils of 
minimum sentencing guidelines, while Rep. Zoe Lofgren denounced the 
prosecutors' behavior as "pretty outrageous" and "way out of line".

A petition on the White House's website 
<https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/remove-united-states-district-attorney-carmen-ortiz-office-overreach-case-aaron-swartz/RQNrG1Ck>
 to fire Ortiz quickly exceeded the 25,000 signaturesneeded to compel a reply 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/01/15/petition-to-remove-carmen-ortiz_n_2479458.html>
, anda similar petition 
<https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/fire-assistant-us-attorney-steve-heymann/RJKSY2nb>
 aimed at Heymann has also attracted thousands of signatures, and is likely to 
gather steam in the wake ofrevelations 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/justinesharrock/internet-activists-prosecutor-linked-to-another-h>
 that another young hacker committed suicide in 2008 in response to Heymann's 
pursuit of him (You can [and I hope will] sign both petitions by clicking on 
those links;the Heymann petition 
<https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/fire-assistant-us-attorney-steve-heymann/RJKSY2nb>
 in particular needs more signatures).

In sum, as CNET's Declan McCullagh detailed in a comprehensive article this 
morning 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-13578_3-57564212-38/prosecutor-in-aaron-swartz-hacking-case-comes-under-fire/>
, it is Ortiz who "has now found herself in an unusual - and uncomfortable - 
position: as the target of an investigation instead of the initiator of one." 
And that's exactly as it should be given that, as he documents, there is little 
question that her office sought to make an example out of Swartz for improper 
and careerist benefits. Swartz "was enhancing the careers of a group of career 
prosecutors and a very ambitious - politically-ambitious - U.S. attorney who 
loves to have her name in lights," the Cambridge criminal lawyer Harvey 
Silverglate told McCullagh. Swartz's lawyer said that Heymann "was going to 
receive press and he was going to be a tough guy and read his name in the 
newspaper." Writes McCullagh:

"If Swartz had stolen a $100 hard drive with the JSTOR articles, it would have 
been a misdemeanor offense that would have yielded probation or community 
service. But the sweeping nature of federal computer crime laws allowed Ortiz 
and [] Heymann, who wanted a high-profile computer crime conviction, to pursue 
felony charges.Heymann threatened the diminutive free culture activist with 
over 30 years in prison as recently as last week."

For numerous reasons, it is imperative that there be serious investigations 
about what took place here and meaningful consequences for this prosecutorial 
abuse, at least including firing. It is equally crucial that there be reform of 
the criminal laws and practices that enable this to take place in so many other 
cases and contexts.

To begin with, there has been a serious injustice in the Swartz case, and that 
alone compels accountability. Prosecutors are vested with the extraordinary 
power to investigate, prosecute, bankrupt, and use the power of the state to 
imprison people for decades. They have the corresponding obligation to exercise 
judgment and restraint in how that power is used. When they fail to do so, 
lives are ruined - or ended.

The US has become a society in which political and financial elites 
systematically evade accountability for their bad acts, no matter how 
destructive. Those who torture, illegally eavesdrop, commit systemic financial 
fraud, even launder money for designated terrorists and drug dealersare all 
protected from criminal liability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/12/hsbc-prosecution-fine-money-laundering>
, while those who are powerless - or especially, as in Swartz's case, those who 
challenge power - are mercilessly punished for trivial transgressions. All one 
has to do to see that this is true is tocontrast the incredible leniency 
<http://hcrenewal.blogspot.com.br/2013/01/the-tragic-case-of-aaron-swartz-unequal.html>
 given by Ortiz's office to large companies and executives accused of serious 
crimes with the indescribably excessive pursuit of Swartz.

This immunity for people with power needs to stop. The power of prosecutors is 
particularly potent, and abuse of that power is consequently devastating. 
Prosecutorial abuse is widespread in the US, and it's vital that a strong 
message be sent that it is not acceptable. Swartz's family strongly believes - 
with convincing rationale - that the abuse of this power by Ortiz and Heymann 
played a key role in the death of their 26-year-old son. It would be 
unconscionable to decide that this should be simply forgotten.

Beyond this specific case, the US government - as part of its war to vest 
control over the internet in itself and in corporate factions - has been wildly 
excessive, almost hysterical, in punishing even trivial and harmless activists 
who are perceived as "hackers". The 1984 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) - 
enacted in the midst of that decade's hysteria over hackers - is so broad and 
extreme that it permits federal prosecutors to treat minor, victimless computer 
pranks - or even violations of a website's "terms of service" - as major 
felonies, which is why Rep. Lofgrenjust announced her proposed "Aaron's Law" 
<http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-57564193-93/new-aarons-law-aims-to-alter-controversial-computer-fraud-law/>
 to curb some of its abuses.

But the abuses here extend far beyond the statutes in question. There is, as I 
wrote about on Saturday when news of Swartz's suicide spread, a general effort 
to punish with particular harshness anyone who challenges the authority of 
government and corporations to maintain strict control over the internet and 
the information that flows on it. Swartz's persecution was clearly waged by the 
government as a battle in the broader war for control over the internet. As 
Swartz's friend, the NYU professor and Harvard researcher Danah Boyd, described 
inher superb analysis 
<http://www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2013/01/13/aaron-swartz.html>:

"When the federal government went after him – and MIT sheepishly played along 
– they weren't treating him as a person who may or may not have done something 
stupid. He was an example. And the reason they threw the book at him wasn't to 
teach him a lesson, but to make a point to the entire Cambridge hacker 
community that they were p0wned.It was a threat that had nothing to do with 
justice and everything to do with a broader battle over systemic power. 

"In recent years, hackers have challenged the status quo and called into 
question the legitimacy of countless political actions. Their means may have 
been questionable, but their intentions have been valiant. The whole point of a 
functioning democracy is to always question the uses and abuses of power in 
order to prevent tyranny from emerging. Over the last few years, we've seen 
hackers demonized as anti-democratic even though so many of them see themselves 
as contemporary freedom fighters. And those in power used Aaron, reframing his 
information liberation project as a story of vicious hackers whose terroristic 
acts are meant to destroy democracy . . . .

"So much public effort has been put into controlling and harmonizing geek 
resistance, squashing the rebellion, and punishing whoever authorities can get 
their hands on. But most geeks operate in gray zones, making it hard for them 
to be pinned down and charged. It's in this context that Aaron's stunt gave 
federal agents enough evidence to bring him to trial to use him as an example. 
They used their power to silence him and publicly condemn him even before the 
trial even began."

The grotesque abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/12/bradley-manning-cruel-inhuman-treatment-un>
 of Bradley Manning. Thedangerous efforts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/may/11/us-opens-wikileaks-grand-jury-hearing>
 to criminalize WikiLeaks' journalism. Thesevere overkill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/nov/23/anonymous-trial-wikileaks-internet-freedom>
 that drives the effort to apprehend and punish minor protests by Anonymous 
teenagers while ignoring far more serious cyber-threats aimed at government 
critics. The Obama administration'sunprecedented persecution of whistleblowers 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2012/06/obamas-whistleblowers-stuxnet-leaks-drones>
. And now the obscene abuse of power applied to Swartz.

This is not just prosecutorial abuse. It's broader than that. It's all part 
and parcel of the exploitation of law and the justice system to entrench those 
in power and shield themselves from meaningful dissent and challenge by making 
everyone petrified of the consequences of doing anything other than meekly 
submitting to the status quo. As another of Swartz's friends, Matt Stoller, 
wrote inan equally compelling essay 
<http://www.nakedcapitalism.com/2013/01/aaron-swartzs-politics.html>:

"What killed him was corruption. Corruption isn't just people profiting from 
betraying the public interest. It's also people being punished for upholding 
the public interest. In our institutions of power, when you do the right thing 
and challenge abusive power, you end up destroying a job prospect, an economic 
opportunity, a political or social connection, or an opportunity for media. Or 
if you are truly dangerous and brilliantly subversive, as Aaron was, you are 
bankrupted and destroyed. There's a reason whistleblowers get fired. There's a 
reason Bradley Manning is in jail. There's a reason the only CIA official who 
has gone to jail for torture is the person – John Kiriakou - who told the world 
it was going on. There's a reason those who destroyed the financial system 
'dine at the White House', as Lawrence Lessig put it.

"There's a reason former Senator Russ Feingold is a college professor whereas 
former Senator Chris Dodd is now a multi-millionaire. There's a reason DOJ 
officials do not go after bankers who illegally foreclose, and then get jobs as 
partners in white collar criminal defense. There's a reason no one has been 
held accountable for decisions leading to the financial crisis, or the war in 
Iraq.

"This reason is the modern ethic in American society that defines success as 
climbing up the ladder, consequences be damned. Corrupt self-interest, when it 
goes systemwide, demands that it protect rentiers from people like Aaron, that 
it intimidate, co-opt, humiliate, fire, destroy, and/or bankrupt those who 
stand for justice."

In most of what I've written <http://www.salon.com/2011/01/10/fear_12/> and 
spoken about <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HfBUjRao7kk> over the past several 
years, this is probably the overarching point: the abuse of state power, the 
systematic violation of civil liberties, is about creating a Climate of Fear, 
one that is geared toward entrenching the power and position of elites by 
intimidating the rest of society from meaningful challenges and dissent. There 
is a particular overzealousness when it comes to internet activism because the 
internet is one of the few weapons - perhaps the only one - that can be 
effectively harnessed to galvanize movements and challenge the prevailing 
order. That's why so much effort is devoted to destroying the ability to use it 
anonymously - the Surveillance State - and why there is so much effort to 
punishing as virtual Terrorists anyone like Swartz who uses it for political 
activism or dissent.

The law and prosecutorial power should not be abused to crush and destroy 
those who commit the "crime" of engaging in activism and dissent against the 
acts of elites. Nobody contests the propriety of charging Swartz with some 
crime for what he did. Civil disobedience is supposed to have consequences. The 
issue is that he was punished completely out of proportion to what he did, for 
ends that have nothing to do with the proper administration of justice. That 
has consequences far beyond his case, and simply cannot be tolerated.

Finally, there is the general disgrace of the US justice system: the wildly 
excessive emphasis on merciless punishment even for small transgressions. 
Numerous people have written extensively about the evils of America's penal 
state, including me in my last book andwhen the DOJ announced that HSBC would 
not be prosecuted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/dec/12/hsbc-prosecution-fine-money-laundering>
 for money laundering because, in essence, it was too big to jail.

All the statistics are well known at this point. The US imprisons more of its 
citizens than any other nation in the world, both inabsolute numbers 
<http://www.prisonstudies.org/info/worldbrief/wpb_stats.php?area=all&category=wb_poptotal>
 andproportionally 
<http://www.dailymarkets.com/economy/2011/03/06/worlds-largest-jailer-by-far-its-not-even-close/>
. Despite having only roughly 5% of the world's population, the US has close to 
25% of the world's prisoners in its cages. This is the result of decades of a 
warped, now-bipartisan obsession with proving "law and order" bona fides by 
advocating for ever harsher and less forgiving prison terms even for victimless 
"crimes".

The "drug war" is the leading but by no means only culprit. The result of this 
punishment-obsessed justice approach is not only that millions of Americans are 
branded as felons and locked away, but that the nation's racial minorities are
disproportionately harmed <http://www.project.org/info.php?recordID=115>. As 
the conservative writer Michael Moynihandetailed this morning 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2013/01/15/aaron-swartz-s-death-should-change-america-s-absurd-legal-system.html>
 in the Daily Beast, there is growing bipartisan recognition "the American 
criminal justice system, in its relentlessness and inflexibility, its unduly 
harsh sentencing guidelines, requires serious reexamination." As he documents, 
prosecutors have virtually unchallengeable power at this point to convict 
anyone they want.

In sum, as Sen Jim Webb courageously put it 
<http://www.salon.com/2009/03/28/webb_2/> when he introduced a bill aimed at 
fundamentally reforming America's penal state, a bill that predictably went 
nowhere: "America's criminal justice system has deteriorated to the point that 
it is a national disgrace" and "we are locking up too many people who do not 
belong in jail." The tragedy of Aaron Swartz's mistreatment can and should be 
used as a trigger to challenge these oppressive penal policies. As Moynihan 
wrote: "those outraged by Swartz's suicide and looking to convert their anger 
into action would be best served by focusing their attention on the brutishness 
and stupidity of America's criminal justice system."

But none of this reform will be possible without holding accountable the prime 
culprits in this case: Carmen Ortiz and Stephen Heymann [MIT officials have
their own reckoning to do 
<http://business.time.com/2013/01/14/mit-orders-review-of-aaron-swartz-suicide-as-soul-searching-begins/>
]. Their status as federal prosecutors does not and must not vest them with 
immunity; the opposite is true: the vast power that has been vested in them 
requires consequences when it is abused. It is up to the rest of us to ensure 
that this happens, not to forget the anger and injustice from this case in a 
week or a month or a year. A sustained public campaign is necessary to bring 
real accountability to Ortiz and Heymann, and only then can further urgently 
needed reforms flow from the tragedy of Swartz's suicide.

Note

A photograph was originally included with this column that purported to be of 
Stephen Heymann, but uncertainty over its accuracy resulted in my removal of it 
pending confirmation.
 