
Adam Carroll dominated the final round of the A1GP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> World Cup at Brands Hatch yesterday to 
win the championship for Team Ireland. The 26-year-old Ulsterman became the 
first driver this season to score a clean sweep as he took pole position for 
the sprint as well as the feature race before going on to win them both.

With the original final round in Mexico cancelled due to swine flu, Ireland 
arrived at the former grand prix circuit in Kent knowing they had to beat 
Switzerland and Portugal to win the title for the first time since the series 
began four years ago.

"It's the perfect result: two poles, two wins and now the championship," said 
Mark Gallagher, the former marketing director of the Jordan formula one team 
and the driving force behind Team Ireland. "Adam's a world-class driver and we 
gave him the chance. He deserved this: this is his day and Team Ireland's 
championship."

"It all went to plan," said Carroll. "I knew I was ready to do the job and 
I've got to thank these guys for the chance. They did something like 70 
practice pit stops when we were in Portugal and it's really paid off. Their 
commitment is second to none. I've got to admit that I cried on the slowing 
down lap. It's a weight off my shoulders. Let's see what happens next."

Carroll was given a testing role with the former Honda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/honda> formula one team in 2006 but it 
proved to be a false dawn when he was given very little running. His aggressive 
form this season in a competitive series has put his name in the frame with 
some of the smaller teams considering formula one in the light of the Â£40m 
budget cap coming into force next year.
 