
As they seek to identify and protect trafficked children arriving at the port 
of Dover, Karen Goodman's social services team faces a particularly tough set 
of circumstances. The number of young, unaccompanied arrivals looks set to 
increase, there's a funding squeeze on the horizon, and they are acutely aware 
that theirs is an area that does not attract huge public sympathy.

The key to meeting this challenge, says Goodman, who is head of services for 
unaccompanied asylum-seeking children at Kent county council, is to develop 
innovative ways of working. Kent is piloting a set of guidelines to help 
police, social services, immigration and the voluntary sector deal with victims 
of trafficking. "Getting all the agencies involved is crucial," she says. "We 
need to get to know each other and understand each other's problems, 
particularly social services and the immigration authorities. Just as social 
services and the police worked really hard to establish relationships in the 
1970s in the sphere of child protection, now we need to do the same with the UK 
Borders Agency [UKBA].

"If we've got a child we believe is a victim of trafficking we've got a 
certain number of days to do different assessments. But the clock has already 
started ticking on the immigration and asylum processes.

"We need to resolve that inherent tension between whether they are dealt with 
primarily under childcare legislation or immigration legislation so that their 
rights as children come first."

This year the UKBA has signed up to a new code of practice on safeguarding 
children. But the crucial next step, Goodman says, is for the agency's 
political masters to shift their thinking towards treating the young people she 
helps as children first and foremost.

"Government needs to become joined up. The Department for Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children>, Schools and Families, not just 
the Home Office, needs to be engaged."
 