
The Catholic church in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> is pressing the attorney 
general to appeal against a landmark ruling by Belfast’s high court that will 
ease the near-total ban on abortions in the region.

In a judgment issued in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/30/northern-ireland-law-on-abortion-ruled-as-incompatible-with-human-rights>
, the court said pregnancies could be terminated in cases of rape, incest and 
fatal foetal abnormality. The attorney general is considering whether to appeal 
against the judgment.


There were a number of grounds for “a fundamental challenge” to the ruling, 
said Tim Bartlett, secretary of the Catholic Council for Social Affairs. The 
Catholic church was recognised by the court as an ‘interested party’ in the 
case, giving it the right to be heard in court.

“The most obvious one is the claim by the judge that there is no life to be 
protected in cases of so-called fatal foetal abnormality,” Bartlett said. The 
church preferred to use the term “life-limiting condition”, he added.

“In the church, we work with women whose babies have life-limiting conditions, 
and these children can live for minutes, hours, days, weeks and in some cases 
years. The child is still technically, clinically and in every sense alive as a 
human person, and is entitled to have their life protected,” he said.


The Catholic church believed that “the right to life of an innocent person is 
always inviolable, and that is a fundamental moral principle on which society 
and human rights should stand. That right begins from the moment of conception, 
and science affirms that,” Bartlett said.


The church also rejected the right of raped woman to seek an abortion. 
Although rape was “the most heinous of crimes, the answer is not to take the 
life of an innocent third party. The challenge is to give that person every 
possible support and care.”


The Presbyterian church – the largest Protestant denomination in Northern 
Ireland – said it also opposed an easing of the current law, saying it was 
“content” with current provisions which permit abortion only when the mother’s 
life or mental stability is at risk.


The church opposes abortion on demand for social reasons or “as a form of 
birth control”, and says stringent safeguards are needed to prevent abuse in 
exceptional cases where a medical abortion might be necessary.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F4%2F1451907768025%2FKP_1197437_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Abortion%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%3A%20'Why%20don't%20we%20trust%20women%20to%20make%20the%20right%20choice%3F'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Abortion%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%3A%20%27Why%20don%27t%20we%20trust%20women%20to%20make%20the%20right%20choice%3F%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F06%2Fabortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F4%2F1451907768025%2FKP_1197437_crop_640x480.jpg>
Abortion in Northern Ireland: The Guardian spoke to five women willing to tell 
the stories of their journeys over the last 40 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/06/abortion-in-northern-ireland-why-dont-we-trust-women-to-make-the-right-choice-video>
But, said Norman Hamilton, a former moderator of the Presbyterian church, “we 
have always taken the view, contrary to the Catholic church, that where the 
mother’s life is in serious danger, or if there is substantial risk to mental 
health, then the law allows for abortion, and we are content with that.”


But it too disputed the notion of fatal foetal abnormality. “The assumption 
that a child will not survive after a birth is not sufficiently watertight,” 
said Hamilton.


He said the church opposed abortion in cases of rape because rape was “hard to 
establish in the criminal justice system”. Cases of incest were likely to be 
provided for under the existing mental health clause, he added.


Both clergymen acknowledged shifting public opinion and the declining 
influence of the churches in Northern Ireland, as elsewhere in the UK. “I have 
no difficulty in the church being something of a minority voice in society; I’m 
not troubled by declining influence,” said Hamilton.


“But there is a much wider question about how dissenting voices in modern, 
pluralist society are valued and heard in public debate, and the rubbishing in 
the public arena of Christian and biblical worldviews. That troubles me much 
more than the loss of influence on political power.”


Bartlett said there was no doubt that the influence of churches was receding. 
“But this issue goes beyond faith. The right to life is a shared human value, 
not a uniquely religious value.”


Chris Hudson, a minister with the Non-Subscribing Presbyterian church, a small 
Protestant denomination, said the abortion debate should not be framed as “an 
ideological struggle between the liberal left and the religious right”.


Describing himself as “very much on the liberal wing of Christian ministry”, 
he said: “I believe it is wrong that certain issues, such as abortion and 
marriage equality, can be proscribed in one part of the UK when freely 
available in the rest of the UK. There should be universal rights.


“You only have to look at the numbers of women who have to travel from 
Northern Ireland to other parts of the UK to have a pregnancy terminated to see 
that it’s a hypocritical arrangement. It’s not actually stopping women having 
abortions, just relocating them. It’s a holier-than-thou attitude: somehow if 
it’s not happening here, it makes us purer than our fellow citizens in the rest 
of the UK.”

Public opinion in Northern Ireland had been conservative during the 30-year 
Troubles, “but now we’re moving further and further away from the conflict 
there is a growing normality in Northern Ireland”, he added. “People are now 
debating these issues and taking more nuanced positions.”


Gladys Ganiel, a research fellow at Queen’s University Belfast, also 
highlighted generational changes in public opinion. “Until a generation ago, 
the conservatism of the churches was reflected in public attitudes, but that 
has changed in the past 10-20 years. There’s now a silent majority which is 
more liberal on issues such as abortion and homosexuality than their public 
representatives in politics or in the churches,” she said.

 