
The new AFL king of Geelong <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geelong> has 
overshadowed the man who filled the role for many years, with the Cats doing a 
120-point demolition job on a hapless Gold Coast.


Former Crow Patrick Dangerfield continued his dream start to life as a Cat on 
Saturday night, amassing 30 possessions – 17 of them contested – and kicking 
two goals as Geelong won 25.18 (168) to 7.6 (48).

Former Cats darling, Gary Ablett Jnr, is now into his sixth year as Suns 
skipper, and the two-time Brownlow medallist was among the few Suns to put in a 
four-quarter effort.


But all of the most dominant players on the ground were wearing blue and white 
hoops.


Skipper Joel Selwood had 32 touches, Josh Caddy, Jimmy Bartel and Dangerfield 
also all topped the 30-possession mark and Shane Kersten booted four majors as 
one of six multiple goalscorers for the free-flowing, free-scoring Cats.


Gold Coast spearhead Tom Lynch looked set to continue his fine start to the 
season with two early goals opposed to veteran defender Tom Lonergan.


But it was not long before the Cats wrested control of the contest.


They led by 14 points at quarter-time and extended the margin to 41 at the 
long break.


The Suns lost defender Trent McKenzie to a game-ending left ankle injury early 
in the second term.


Jarrod Harbrow kicked the opening goal of the third term for Gold Coast to 
briefly trim the margin to 35, only for the Cats to slot the next 10 majors.


Gold Coast were held to a miserable 2.3 in the second half.


The Cats improved their win-loss record to 5-1 and will again start as 
favourites back at Simonds Stadium against West Coast next Saturday night.


Having dropped their past three games, the Suns will need to regroup ahead of 
a clash against Melbourne at Metricon Stadium.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa23acc5214e314c0d758680240241649efd53688%2F0_265_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fremantle%20flounder%20as%20Saints%20get%20back%20to%20winning%20ways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fremantle%20flounder%20as%20Saints%20get%20back%20to%20winning%20ways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa23acc5214e314c0d758680240241649efd53688%2F0_265_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 Richmond coach Damien Hardwick faces some unwanted media attention after 
another disappointing loss. Photograph: Scott Barbour/AFL Media/Getty Images 
At the MCG, Port Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/port-adelaide> 
have heaped further pressure on Richmond coach Damien Hardwick, thumping the 
Tigers by 35 points.


The heat was already on Hardwick after an underwhelming start to the AFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> season and it proceeded to get hotter 
as Port triumphed 13.16 (94) to 8.11 (59).


The upset loss leaves the Tigers, who next face reigning premiers Hawthorn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/hawthorn>, with one win from the opening six 
rounds; not since 2010, Hardwick’s first season in charge, have Richmond 
started a season so poorly.

Hardwick temporarily coached from the boundary line after halftime, when Port 
enjoyed an 18-point lead, but couldn’t spark his charges.


A magnificent goal from Richmond’s returning vice-captain Brett Deledio 
reduced the margin to 14 points early in the third term.


It was as close as the hosts came to hitting the front after the major break.


An opening-quarter injury to Kane Lambert, who was taken to hospital after 
reporting breathing difficulties, left the Tigers one short on the bench.


It was a mitigating factor of sorts but couldn’t explain the way Port 
recovered from a poor start to take control of the contest.


The Power didn’t register a goal until the 17th minute of the game but then 
proceeded to score with relative ease.


Richmond’s defence was rudderless without suspended fullback Alex Rance, while 
they struggled to hit targets all over the field.

It was a scrappy affair between two sides desperate to regain confidence, 
having recorded one victory from their combined past eight games.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffb240cb60a3bb54679a7c14bcf5757735df5285%2F0_11_3284_1971%2F3284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fremantle%20flounder%20as%20Saints%20get%20back%20to%20winning%20ways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fremantle%20flounder%20as%20Saints%20get%20back%20to%20winning%20ways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffb240cb60a3bb54679a7c14bcf5757735df5285%2F0_11_3284_1971%2F3284.jpg>
 Rory Lobb celebrates kicking a goal with team mates during the round six AFL 
match between the Greater Western Sydney Giants and the Hawthorn Hawks. 
Photograph: Brett Hemmings/AFL Media/Getty Images 
Earlier, GWS Giants looked every inch a potential AFL finalist with a stunning 
and record-breaking 75-point home thrashing of premiers Hawthorn.


The Giants kicked a club record 24.14 (158) to Hawthorn’s 12.11 (83) as a 
delirious crowd chanted “Here come the Giants.”


Veteran forward Steve Johnson produced his first five-goal effort since June 
2012 when GWS were on the receiving end and he was wearing Geelong’s colours.


Kangaroos hold off Bulldogs to maintain unbeaten start to AFL season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/kangaroos-hold-off-bulldogs-to-maintain-unbeaten-start-to-afl-season>
Emerging ruckman-forward Rory Lobb kicked an equal career-best four goals and 
chief spearhead Jeremy Cameron, Toby Greene and Rhys Palmer all bagged three 
majors.


In a sign of their growing maturity, GWS barely blinked on the two occasions 
in the second and third quarters when Hawthorn threatened to mount a comeback, 
responding both times with multiple goals.


With Lachie Whitfield and Dylan Shiel in irresistible form and driving a eager 
corps of on-ballers, the Giants frequently moved the ball with thrilling speed 
and precision.


Hawthorn kicked the first goal of the game, but trailed by 32 at the first 
break and were ultimately flogged 153-114 in contested possessions.


Johnson, Cameron and Lobb each kicked two goals in the opening period, with 
the rampaging Giants notching a club record first quarter score of 7.3.


Hawthorn kicked three goals in as many minutes to cut the deficit to 27, but 
GWS slammed on the final three goals of the period to restore their 45-point 
lead by the main break.


It was a similar story in the third quarter, with Hawthorn posting the first 
two goals of the period and the Giants retaliating with five of the last six.


Jack Gunston kicked five goals and Luke Breust three for Hawthorn, with Sam 
Mitchell racking up 26 touches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f79aa42af42636f74b2f4366f610bb258613c05%2F0_0_4248_2550%2F4248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fremantle%20flounder%20as%20Saints%20get%20back%20to%20winning%20ways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fremantle%20flounder%20as%20Saints%20get%20back%20to%20winning%20ways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f79aa42af42636f74b2f4366f610bb258613c05%2F0_0_4248_2550%2F4248.jpg>
 Eddie Betts cleans up loose ball in front of Zac Dawson during the round 6 AFL 
match between the Adelaide Crows and the Fremantle Dockers. Photograph: Ben 
Macmahon/AAP 
Meanwhile, in Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide>, Crows ace 
Eddie Betts has booted four goals in a 33-point win over Fremantle to hand the 
Dockers an unwanted AFL record.


The Crows triumphed 14.13 (97) to 8.16 (64) at Adelaide Oval to leave 
Fremantle winless after six rounds.


The Dockers now take an inglorious record: they are the first club in AFL 
history to finish minor premier the previous year and start the next season 
with six consecutive losses.


Inside 50: Fremantle's AFL malaise could stretch well beyond 2016 | Russell 
Jackson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/29/inside-50-fremantles-afl-malaise-could-stretch-well-beyond-2016>
Fremantle’s woes deepened in an error-riddled contest, the visitors unable to 
contain Betts and fellow forwards Josh Jenkins and Tom Lynch, who kicked two 
goals each before a 47,423-strong crowd.


The Crows were well served by a hardened midfield core – Rory Sloane (30 
disposals), Scott Thompson (30 possessions) and Richard Douglas (21 touches) 
were all influential.


The trio thrived on the ruck dominance of Sam Jacobs while Adelaide’s defence 
was supreme, led by Rory Laird (24 disposals) and Kyle Hartigan, who will face 
match review panel scrutiny for a high bump on Freo’s Michael Walters in the 
final quarter.


In contrast, Freo had few clear winners and were overly-reliant on Lachie 
Neale, who collected a game-high 40 disposals, Michael Barlow (33 touches) and 
Stephen Hill (25 disposals), while Walters kicked three goals - all 
last-quarter consolations.


Adelaide broke the game open in the third term – after leading 5.5 to 2.11 at 
half-time, the home side slotted four goals to one for a decisive 32-point 
advantage at three quarter-time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c011be1f28d07eaa03a188055a834f10526a360%2F0_29_2082_1250%2F2082.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fremantle%20flounder%20as%20Saints%20get%20back%20to%20winning%20ways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fremantle%20flounder%20as%20Saints%20get%20back%20to%20winning%20ways&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fapr%2F30%2Fafl-round-6-saturday-roundup%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c011be1f28d07eaa03a188055a834f10526a360%2F0_29_2082_1250%2F2082.jpg>
 Nick Riewoldt in action during the round 6 AFL match between the Melbourne 
Demons and the St Kilda Saints. Photograph: Tracey Nearmy/AAP 
Earlier, captain Nick Riewoldt has led supremely with St Kilda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/st-kilda> belting Melbourne for a 39-point 
AFL win.

In his 304th game, the 33-year-old took 14 marks and kicked three goals as the 
Saints bounced back from last week’s loss to GWS, winning 20.15 (135) to 15.6 
(96).

At the other end, Melbourne key forward Jesse Hogan was a rare highlight for 
his team with seven goals, a career-best haul in the young star’s second season.

The Demons have not won three games in a row since 2010 and Saturday’s poor 
performance at Etihad Stadium raises the obvious question – were they seduced 
by their own publicity?

In his first senior game this season, Tim Membrey also kicked five goals for 
the Saints as Jack Sinclair and Blake Acres impressed.

St Kilda first absorbed Melbourne’s fast start, where the Demons led by 17 
points late in the first quarter.

The Saints then hit the front with the opening three goals of the second term.

By half time it was a tale of the two key forwards, with Hogan kicking five 
goals and Riewoldt three, plus 10 marks, as the Saints led by 12 points.

The Saints tore the game apart in the third term, kicking eight goals to three 
for a match-winning 42-point lead at the last break.

The only blots on Hogan’s outstanding game were two bad misses from 
straightforward set shots in the second half.

St Kilda kicked their highest score so far this season and did it efficiently, 
with 35 scoring shots from 57 inside 50s.
 