
On 23 July 2011, a 24-year-old entertainer named Katie Robinson was working at 
a charity event in Aldershot, Hampshire. Dressed for the day in denim 
short-shorts and a pair of LA pumps, dozens of transferred-on tattoos carefully 
applied to her arms and a towering beehive wig secured to her head with pins, 
Robinson mingled with guests. She was being paid to be there as anAmy Winehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/amywinehouse> lookalike, cackling, batting 
her artificial eyelashes, hugging strangers, posing for photographs. Later, as 
she was driving away, Robinson received a text from a friend that read: “RIP.” 
Once home, she turned on the news and saw reports of Winehouse’s death.

“It was awful,” the lookalike remembered. “It sounds sad, but it felt like I’d 
lost someone. A friend. Because I’d been following her so closely, reading 
about her, watching videos, learning how she behaved. It was a huge shock.” 
Robinson was so absorbed by the news that day, she forgot about the outfit she 
was wearing and got a shock when she looked up and caught sight of herself in 
the mirror. Suddenly, it all felt a little... gross. The tattoos. The wig. When 
she was called a couple of days later and offered work dressing up as Winehouse 
for a few hours on the streets of Camden (a morbid stunt arranged by a European 
television company), Robinson declined. She put away the beehive and entered 
temporary retirement, looking like no one but herself for a while.

Pity the lookalikes: theirs is not an obviously heroic profession, and as 
entertainers these women and men tend to be ranked near-bottom, thought of, if 
they’re thought of at all, as strange limpets of the celebrity age. Their 
fortunes are ineluctably hitched to those they impersonate; and when a star 
totters, or falls from grace, their lookalike will totter and maybe fall as 
well. The wrong kind of public scandal, a sudden switch in popular opinion or a 
shock result in an election or football match, and lookalikes can expect a 
drastic change in the quality of their work. If the work continues at all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftony-blair-amy-winehouse-bowie-celebrity-lookalikes-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50dcd90da9d8945654d02a48e06619f0413ac2b3%2F0_145_3744_5115%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98One%20minute%20they%20want%20your%20picture.%20Next%20you%E2%80%99re%20finding%20the%20back%20door%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20peculiar%20fame%20of%20the%20celebrity%20lookalike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftony-blair-amy-winehouse-bowie-celebrity-lookalikes-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98One%20minute%20they%20want%20your%20picture.%20Next%20you%E2%80%99re%20finding%20the%20back%20door%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20peculiar%20fame%20of%20the%20celebrity%20lookalike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftony-blair-amy-winehouse-bowie-celebrity-lookalikes-fame%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50dcd90da9d8945654d02a48e06619f0413ac2b3%2F0_145_3744_5115%2F3744.jpg>
 Katie Robinson as Amy Winehouse 
I spoke to lookalikes around the country and heard from them all roughly the 
same story about how they found their way into this strange business. Friends 
always told them they looked like someone famous. They sent off headshots to 
agents, and the agents arranged work for them, usually a few hours for a few 
hundred pounds, mingling or making speeches in costume, at a charity event or a 
corporate party, sometimes on TV or in adverts. Most did it to supplement other 
work (Robinson, when not paid to be Amy, is a cosmetics consultant). The money 
was OK, usually, but more than that, the lookalikes found the work thrilling 
and addictive – getting to pretend to be a sort of moving Tussauds waxwork.

They can’t have their photo with Amy, but they can with me. It’s the next best 
thing

It was unpredictable, too, and depending on who they imitated they might 
suffer short-term fluctuations in their popularity.Dean Taylor, an impersonator 
<http://deantaylorimpersonator.com/> who for a while had a good thing going as 
Fabio Capello <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fabio_Capello>, back when the 
Italian managed England, told me what it was like working parties when football 
matches were being screened: “One minute they want your picture. Next minute 
you’re finding the back door because the real Fabio’s put the wrong substitutes 
on and England are two-nil down.”

Others have seen through more dramatic tidal shifts. A Tony Blair in Cornwall 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/cornwall/content/articles/2007/05/10/aboutcornwall_blairalike_feature.shtml>
, real name John Brolly, now 52, started working as a lookalike around the time 
of the 1997 general election. Blair was massively popular back then Brolly got 
so much work, initially, dressing up in a double-breasted suit and brushing his 
hair a certain way to take part in tabloid stunts, ads, TV shows, that he was 
able to quit his job as an education officer. “I seemed to spend all of my time 
on the sleeper from Penzance to Paddington, travelling into London to be the 
prime minister,” Brolly said. “Then the Iraq war happened. He became toxic. For 
years, nobody would touch him.”

Brolly was sometimes paired on jobs with a Cherie, real name Caroline 
Bernstein. Together, they opened a ride at Alton Towers (Bernstein recalled a 
windy day and immense difficulty with her wig). Bernstein already knew what it 
was like to lose characters: she had been a Cilla Black for years, until that 
work dried up. And a Margaret Thatcher before that. Inevitably, Cherie went out 
of fashion, too. “You miss them,” Bernstein told me. All the mimics who’d left 
behind a persona said something similar: you missed them.

It didn’t always sound fair, what determined whether this lookalike or that 
lookalike stopped getting booked. The three-person team atSusan Scott Lookalikes
 <http://www.lookalikes.info/>, an agency based in north London, told me that, 
to their continued surprise, they were able to find work for the Hitler on 
their roster. But not for the Pierce Brosnan. Not for the Sarah Ferguson. “Poor 
Fergie,” company founder Susan Scott said, speaking in her office one 
afternoon, shelves around her busy with box-files full of headshots. “She 
didn’t do any work after the toes. The toes wereit for her.” One of Scott’s 
colleagues said they worried for their Daniel Craigs: popular for years, paid 
to work rooms around the country in their tuxedos, but what would happen to 
them now that Craigseems to be cooling on 
<http://www.timeout.com/london/film/daniel-craig-interview-my-advice-to-the-next-james-bond-dont-be-shit>
 the Bond franchise?

I’d be asked to mill around at a billionaire's party, but be gone before 
anyone realised I wasn’t Blair

They would wait and see. The professionals I spoke to agreed that death, for 
the lookalike, was the real career-threatener. One Thursday night this summer, 
I went to watch a David Bowie called Paul Longland do a tribute show at the
Broadway theatre <http://www.thebroadwaybarking.com/Sales> in Barking. I sat in 
the audience next to another Bowie from Essex, a pleasant, 52-year-old 
furniture dealer calledSteve Spratt <http://www.bowiebowie.co.uk/>. On stage, 
Longland swung his hips and manhandled his mic stand, moving in time to the 
nuclear “do-do-dos” of his opening song,Rebel Rebel 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U16Xg_rQZkA>. (“Good evening, Barking!” he 
purred, swishing aside a straightened blond tuft, pouting in a slim blue suit. 
“Here’s one for you rebels. Do we have any rebels in?”) Longland styled himself 
a tribute artist, not a lookalike, because he sang and danced like the person 
he was paid to imitate. Spratt, watching on from the stalls, was impressed – 
envious, too.

As anyone in the business of celebrity impersonation will tell you (probably a 
little peevishly), there are essential and irreconcilable differences between 
being a lookalike and being a tribute artist. This was never more evident, to 
Spratt, than in the months since Bowie – the real Bowie –died in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-at-the-age-of-69>
. Spratt’s fortunes diverged sharply from Longland’s, and while the tribute was 
being booked to be Bowie more than ever (fans who wanted to hear the music live 
having no other option now), Spratt’s lookaliking had entered a decline.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftony-blair-amy-winehouse-bowie-celebrity-lookalikes-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9f33294b39cc7d7a373e88eba50b49cc9f59d26%2F0_371_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98One%20minute%20they%20want%20your%20picture.%20Next%20you%E2%80%99re%20finding%20the%20back%20door%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20peculiar%20fame%20of%20the%20celebrity%20lookalike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftony-blair-amy-winehouse-bowie-celebrity-lookalikes-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98One%20minute%20they%20want%20your%20picture.%20Next%20you%E2%80%99re%20finding%20the%20back%20door%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20peculiar%20fame%20of%20the%20celebrity%20lookalike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftony-blair-amy-winehouse-bowie-celebrity-lookalikes-fame%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa9f33294b39cc7d7a373e88eba50b49cc9f59d26%2F0_371_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
 Steve Spratt as David Bowie 
At the height of his career, Spratt worked at parties for banks, charities and 
minor celebrities, and made appearances on TV shows such asTime Trumpet 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Time_Trumpet>. Though about 10 years younger 
than Bowie, his craggy, small-mouthed face is startlingly similar to the late 
musician’s, and there have been incidents of mistaken identity even when Spratt 
was off duty, on holiday or out with friends in bars and pubs. “Even once when 
I was shopping in a Boots in Harlow. And God knows what people thought Bowie 
was doing in a Boots in Harlow.”

Spratt admitted to me that he would not always correct such misunderstandings, 
especially not if it meant an interesting freebie coming his way. (He was once 
mistaken for Bowie during a weekend in Venice, he said, and given the use of a 
chauffeured speedboat.) When I asked if this ever felt icky, or plain wrong, 
Spratt said no: because to teeter in this way between the real and the fake is 
just what makes encounters between lookalikes and the general public 
successful. Spratt said the delight in lookaliking was the moment that 
conviction (“It’s him!”) gave way to doubt (“Or is it?”) and then, most of the 
time, to realisation (“Ah, well – can I have a photo anyway?”). It was a 
rollercoaster of emotion, he said, that he enjoyed being paid to provide. But 
it could happen only when Bowie was still around, alive, encounterable.

It’s a bit like champagne without the fizz. People look at me now and think, 
'That bloke looks like Bowie'

“Life’s still good,” said Spratt, who has put on a bit of weight recently, the 
uncanny facial similarities buried a little beneath thicker jowls. “But it’s a 
bit like champagne without the fizz. People look at me now and think, ‘That 
bloke looks like Bowie.’ Now that he’s dead, I’m never going to bereally 
mistaken for him again.”

There was only one worse fate a lookalike could suffer. At Susan Scott’s 
agency, I asked about those impersonators on their books who’d been 
scandal-swamped. Did they still have any Rolf Harrises for hire? Any Jimmy 
Saviles? The team had once had a Rolf, they said, but he hadn’t been in touch 
for a while. They still had a Jimmy – a 60-year-old, Northwich-based, called 
John Barry. When I called Barry, he said he was still ready to go. Just find 
him a booking.

Barry told me a little about his life as an imitator. For a long time, in the 
late 90s and 00s, he’d been an Austin Powers. He took upSavile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/jimmy-savile> in 2009, hoping for “a nice 
change. After 12 years of doing Austin, I thought that if I had to say, ‘Do I 
make you horny, baby?’ one more time, I would scream.” He bought a string vest, 
a shellsuit, a blond wig and a fake cigar, and for a couple of years was happy 
to find himself in regular demand. When Savile passed away in 2011, “I felt 
gutted. I thought, ‘Jimmy, what a time to do this! Why didn’t I start 
impersonating you years ago?’”

Then came the rumours. The mounting accusations. The months-long national 
scandal. Barry recalled: “Someone put a picture of me as Jimmy up on Facebook 
and wrote, ‘Poor sod. The bookings must have dried up for this guy.’ I wrote 
back saying, ‘That poor sod is me.’” For a while, as the outrage was still 
taking shape, Barry kept gigging. He tried to see it as a kind of positive 
review, he told me, whenever people hissed words at him like “molester”. “You 
had to see it as a compliment,” he said, “that I was so convincing they 
believed I was real.” It couldn’t last, though. As stories about Savile 
continued to get more and more disturbing, Barry took a final job at a party in 
Euston (“I said to the booker, ‘Do you still want me? Even though it’s 
snowballed a bit?’”) and went back to doing Austin Powers.

“I have kept the shellsuit,” Barry told me, “just in case.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftony-blair-amy-winehouse-bowie-celebrity-lookalikes-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa527ffb12f571de14cd0225e945f0b5b79b2511%2F209_415_5168_3101%2F5168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98One%20minute%20they%20want%20your%20picture.%20Next%20you%E2%80%99re%20finding%20the%20back%20door%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20peculiar%20fame%20of%20the%20celebrity%20lookalike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftony-blair-amy-winehouse-bowie-celebrity-lookalikes-fame%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98One%20minute%20they%20want%20your%20picture.%20Next%20you%E2%80%99re%20finding%20the%20back%20door%E2%80%99%3A%20the%20peculiar%20fame%20of%20the%20celebrity%20lookalike&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Ftony-blair-amy-winehouse-bowie-celebrity-lookalikes-fame%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa527ffb12f571de14cd0225e945f0b5b79b2511%2F209_415_5168_3101%2F5168.jpg>
 Tom Larg as Daniel Craig 
Because, as a lookalike, you never know. Sometimes the retired or the 
redundant have been surprised to find themselves thrust back into employment. 
About 18 months after she gave up playing Winehouse, in 2011, Robinson received 
a lucrative offer to appear at a Christmas event for the car company Audi. 
“They wanted an Amy, a Mick Jagger and a Queen,” she remembered. “I was 
concerned about it. I’d always been used to working as Amy and people 
wondering: ‘Is that really her?’ I couldn’t see how it was going to work now 
she was dead. I wasn’t sure how people would react to seeing me dressed up. I 
was nervous.”

But she took the booking and went on, Robinson recalled, to outshine Jagger, 
even the Queen. “Everybody wanted time with Amy,” she said. “It showed me that, 
even though she’s not around, people could appreciate my work. They can’t have 
their photo with Amy, but they can with me. It’s the next best thing.”

Meanwhile Brolly, the Cornish Blair, who’d likewise assumed he was finished, 
done in by Iraq, suddenly found his lookaliking career entering its richest 
phase. It was 2007, and Blair was newly out of office. Brolly had taken up 
other work, as a motivational speaker, as an associate at a theatre in 
Cornwall. All of a sudden, “I was being flown to millionaires’ parties. To
billionaires’ parties.” He spent time as Blair in Nice, in Tuscany, in 
Amsterdam, in Cape Town. “Everyone wanted Tony again.”

It took Brolly some time to figure out what was happening. Now that the real 
Blair was free of Westminster, and taking bookings on the international 
speaking circuit, the former PM was more available than he’d ever been. But he 
couldn’t be everywhere. Brolly guessed he was being brought in as a lookalike 
by hosts who’d missed out on Blair, but who didn’t necessarily want their 
guests to know they’d missed out. “Sometimes I’d be asked to mill around a 
party, but be gone before anyone realised I wasn’t him. Sometimes I’d be sat at 
a faraway table, so no one could tell. Quite often it was literally to put on 
the suit and walk through a room. Go hundreds of miles to walk through a room 
with an entourage.”

This was in 2008, 2009. I asked Brolly if the renaissance had lasted.

“For a while there,” he said, wistfully, “my agent was just making up numbers. 
I got paid £1,000 for an hour once.”

But no, it had not lasted. “I’d work as Tony for a bag of chips now,” Brolly 
told me. He hadn’t been booked for significant work in years. Not even in the 
days after theChilcot inquiry <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/iraq-war-inquiry>
, last week, when the real Blair came back into national focus? Brolly said it 
had been interesting to see his doppelganger back on TV. He was surprised to 
see how much Blair had aged, and wondered if he’d still be able to pull the 
imitation off. But there had been no new inquiries. “The moment has passed,” 
Brolly said.
 