
The arts community has come out fighting in support of Melbourne critic 
Philippa Hawker 
<https://www.change.org/p/mark-forbes-keep-film-and-arts-writer-philippa-hawker-at-the-age/c>
, who was one of 30 journalists to be made forcibly redundant by Fairfax Media 
this week.

A petition to the paper’s editor-in-chief, Mark Forbes, to retain Hawker, who 
has been writing about film and the arts since 1997, has been signed by 
hundreds of readers, including actor Geoffrey Rush, writers Helen Garner and 
Christos Tsiolkas, comedian Magda Szubanski and broadcaster Phillip Adams. 
“Philippa Hawker is one of the most astute and engaged of the critics working 
in Australia. Her dismissal is a stupid and short-sighted decision driven by 
panic not sense,” said Tsiolkas. Garner said: “This is a crazy waste of a fine 
talent and decades of experience.”

The Sydney Morning Herald, the Age and the Australian Financial Review are 
losing more than 80 journalists in this round of cuts, 30 on the AFR alone. 
Artists have been particularly hard hit – the SMH’s Rocco Fazzari, the Age’s 
John Spooner and the Fin’s Rod Clement are all leaving. Among those writers 
taking a package are aviation journalist Jamie Freed, careers specialist Fiona 
Smith, SMH national affairs editor Tom Allard, Age environment editor Tom Arup 
and Sunday Age senior writer Jill Stark.

Greg Hywood’s paper cut 

In the same week he was losing some of his best talent, Fairfax Media CEO Greg 
Hywoodwas in talks to merge Fairfax’s New Zealand business with APN News & Media
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/11/new-zealand-one-major-newspaper-group-merger-talks-revealed>
 and was involved in a pow-wow withindustry rivals to talk up the newspaper 
business. Newspaper Works – representing News Corp Australia, Fairfax Media, 
West Australian Newspapers and APN News & Media – not so subtly changed its 
name to NewsMediaWorks on Tuesday, dropping the word “newspaper” along the way. 
It all points to Hywood pulling the plug on printing the Monday to Friday 
papers, perhaps as early as February next year.


News Corp’s Logies logic

The reason News Corp has it in for Waleed Aly? Not sure, sorry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/06/the-reason-news-corp-has-it-in-for-waleed-aly-not-sure-sorry>
No one seems to care when The Block host Scott Cam or Today’s Karl Stefanovic 
win the Gold Logie, a publicly-voted award for the most popular person on 
television. But whenWaleed Aly won it on Sunday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/09/waleed-aly-gold-logie-challenges-australian-tv-improve-diversity>
 all hell broke loose in some quarters. Almost as if on cue News Corp Australia 
columnists Andrew Bolt, Miranda Devine and Rita Panahi devoted their columns to 
how “ludicrous” Aly’s win was.Panahi even called for an end to the Logies 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/opinion/waleed-alys-award-simply-shows-we-should-lose-the-logies/news-story/414220ae587ad66e4054f5e436753a14>
: “This cringe-worthy affair has long been mocked as a lame irrelevancy but it 
well and truly jumped the shark last night and not just because the top award 
at TV’s ‘night of nights’ went to a divisive co-host of a lowly rating program”.

In her piece titled “Waleed Aly Mustafa screw loose somewhere” Devine blamed 
it all on the “self-loathing of the left and their relentless need to elevate 
themselves above the mob”. Bolt said that Aly’s success “is a walking 
contradiction of claims that Muslims or people from Middle Eastern families are 
invariably the oppressed” and The Project co-host should just have said 
“thanks”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fthe-project-waleed-aly-wins-gold-logie-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Project's%20Waleed%20Aly%20wins%20the%20Gold%20Logie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fthe-project-waleed-aly-wins-gold-logie-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Project%27s%20Waleed%20Aly%20wins%20the%20Gold%20Logie%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fthe-project-waleed-aly-wins-gold-logie-video&media=>
The Project’s Waleed Aly wins the Gold Logie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/may/09/the-project-waleed-aly-wins-gold-logie-video>
The Bolt Report: is there anyone out there?

The first 11 episodes of The Bolt Report, Andrew Bolt’s new show at 7pm 
weeknights on Sky News, averaged 23,254 viewers nationally. On Sky News alone, 
even Alan Jones (36,122) and Paul Murray (30,186) are more popular. Meanwhile 
over on The Project onChannel Ten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel-ten> Aly and Carrie Bickmore get 
about 700,000 viewers in the five major capital cities alone, rising to close 
to a million when the regional numbers are added in. Just saying.

Mark Colvin on the road to recovery

The ABC’s PM host Mark Colvin is taking a few weeks off work after cancer 
surgery and radiation treatment. After a nasty skin cancer was removed from his 
head Colvin continued to broadcast his daily program on RN and local radio but 
radiation therapy has taken its toll and he is now very tired, he tells Weekly 
Beast. After his final treatment next week he will take a month off to recover. 
Colvin assures us the prognosis is good and he is looking forward to finishing 
off the last few chapters of his book and returning to work in late June.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2F-readers-complain-the-age-sacking-arts-writer-the-weekly-beast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dec89edb79440c0f77edc3003b55f0993cf37fa%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrities%20protest%20at%20'crazy'%20redundancy%20of%20Age%20arts%20critic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2F-readers-complain-the-age-sacking-arts-writer-the-weekly-beast%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrities%20protest%20at%20%27crazy%27%20redundancy%20of%20Age%20arts%20critic&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2F-readers-complain-the-age-sacking-arts-writer-the-weekly-beast%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9dec89edb79440c0f77edc3003b55f0993cf37fa%2F0_0_3000_2000%2F3000.jpg>
 Malcolm Turnbull campaigns in Melbourne. Buzzfeed editor Mark Di Stefano has a 
book deal covering the federal election campaign. Photograph: Michael 
Dodge/Getty Images 
What a time to have a book deal 

We are only in the first week of the federal election campaign but already one 
of the journalists on the campaign trail has signed a book deal. BuzzFeed’s 
political editor Mark Di Stefano is writing a book for MUP titled What a time 
to be alive: That and other lies in the 2016 campaign. MUP describes it as “the 
ugly and un-sanitised diary behind the curtain of the double dissolution 
election campaign”. The former ABC reporter will document the day-by-day 
activities of an election campaign and what goes on behind the scenes.

Good Weekend’s murder mystery

We’d love to know what went on behind the scenes at the Good Weekend when its 
cover story “Sue Neill-Fraser and the murder that divided Tasmania” was 
published in the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age on 7 May.

Written by Greg Callaghan the story was about a trial in Tasmania in 2010 in 
which Neill-Fraser was found guilty of murdering her partner, Bob Chappell, on 
board the couple’s yacht on Hobart’s River Derwent. The story has been covered 
by multiple outlets as it has been labelled a miscarriage of justice on the 
scale of a Lindy Chamberlain. But the Callaghan story completely disappeared 
from the website shortly after it was published.

GW editor Amelia Lester wasn’t giving anything away when we asked what 
happened. “We are reviewing the story and during this time it won’t be 
available,” Lester said.

Chris Graham on editing New Matilda: 'I have pissed off a lot of people'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/media-blog/2014/oct/23/chris-graham-on-editing-new-matilda-i-have-pissed-off-a-lot-of-people>
Betting the house on independent media

Pleas for financial support from independent media are common and we’ve become 
used to emails from Crikey and New Matilda asking us to support them by 
subscribing. But one email from NM publisher Chris Graham on Sunday certainly 
stood out.“Buy A House And Boost Independent Media!” Graham said 
<https://newmatilda.com/?na=v&id=80&nk=1673-c0e02e284a>. 

“If you’ve ever thought about buying a house to fund help fund independent 
media that doesn’t kowtow to corporate and government interests, now’s your 
chance,” Graham wrote under a picture of his $719,000 Canberra house.

“No kidding! I’m selling my house in Canberra. You can view it in all its 
Mawson loveliness here. It’s not an entirely random and shameless free plug – 
the proceeds from the sale will be invested into New Matilda, to keep our 
journalism fierce and independent.”
 