
Senior government ministers and the Australian Bureau of Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-bureau-of-statistics> 
have moved to allay privacy and other concerns with Tuesday’s census, after 
independent MPs raised numerous constituent complaints.

At a press conference in Canberra on Wednesday, the chief statistician David 
Kalisch said privacy groups regularly raised complaints around the census.

“There is also a heightened dimension [of concern] around privacy over recent 
years, particularly with much more electronic information,” he said.

Australian Bureau of Statistics reports 14 data breaches since 2013
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/australian-bureau-of-statistics-reports-14-data-breaches-since-2013>
“I can assure the Australian population the ABS has the best security features 
you could ever ask.”

He said this included securing names separately from addresses, separate from 
other census content in three separate computer systems that were never brought 
together.

“We’ve never had a privacy breach with census information.”

However, the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) has told 
Guardian Australiait had received 14 data breach notifications with regard to 
personal information held by the ABS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/australian-bureau-of-statistics-reports-14-data-breaches-since-2013>
 since 2013.

At a separate press conference Malcolm Turnbull said “the ABS, in undertaking 
the census, always protects people’s privacy”.

“The security of their personal details is absolute and that is protected by 
law and by practice.”

Census 2016: Australians who don't complete form over privacy concerns face 
fines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/census-2016-australians-who-dont-complete-form-over-privacy-concerns-face-fines>
On Tuesday, senator Nick Xenophon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/nick-xenophon> said in a Facebook 
post that he had been “inundated with calls from constituents who are 
encountering a range of difficulties and expressing concerns about the 2016 
Census”.

These included people who did not receive an initial census letter, were 
unable to obtain a paper form, faced long waiting times at call centres, had 
concerns about fines for failing to complete the census and concerns about 
privacy and data retention.

The 2016 census, to be conducted on Tuesday, 9 August, will for the first time 
collect and store for four years the names and addresses of 24m Australians as 
well as data and answers provided.

Previously name and address information was removed from the census data.

The change has prompted concerns about the data’s security and the possibility 
of leaks or hacking.

Criticism from civil liberty groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/census-2016-australians-who-dont-complete-form-over-privacy-concerns-face-fines>
 has alarmed the ABS and raised concernsabout the potential for a boycott 
<https://www.crikey.com.au/2016/03/31/why-you-should-boycott-the-census/> of 
the census on privacy grounds.

Census 2016: Australians who don't complete form over privacy concerns face 
fines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/census-2016-australians-who-dont-complete-form-over-privacy-concerns-face-fines>
The census will be conducted electronically unless households apply for a 
paper form to complete.

Failing to fill in the census can result in a direction to complete it and 
possible fines of $180 a day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/census-2016-australians-who-dont-complete-form-over-privacy-concerns-face-fines>
.

The treasurer, Scott Morrison, said only 100 penalty notices were issued at 
the last census.

“The last resort is for the ABS to issue a notice, [they do so] only if there 
is a clear willingness of the respondent not to participate,” he said at a 
press conference on Wednesday.

Morrison said the ABS had an unblemished record on privacy.


Independent MP, Andrew Wilkie, said in a statement 
<http://andrewwilkie.org/a-statement-on-the-census-shambles/> he had been 
shocked by the number of people raising concerns about the census.


“A big problem is the difficulty and cost being experienced by many people 
attempting to contact the ABS by phone.

“Typically they are experiencing very lengthy delays, if they can get through 
at all, and even having to pay for the calls.”

Wilkie said the logic of collecting names had not been communicated to the 
public.

“Nor has any explanation been given for why the ABS holding this information 
for much longer than normal is warranted,” he said.

Wilkie said he did not doubt the importance of the census and praised ABS 
staff for doing the very best they can.

But he called on the government to “listen to the concerns in the community 
and provide an assurance that no one will be fined if they haven’t been able to 
complete the census”.

The shadow assistant treasurer, Andrew Leigh, said Labor accepts there may be 
legitimate reasons for the changes in data storage, but the government should 
make the case for it.

“Regardless of how frustrated people are with the Turnbull government, Labor 
urges Australians not to spoil the census,” he said.
 