
Central Coast Mariners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/central-coast-mariners> came from behind 
with two goals in the second half to register an unlikely 2-1 win over Adelaide 
United at Coopers Stadium on Sunday.

The visitors were largely outplayed in the first half but a Connor 
Pain-inspired second 45 minutes saw them claim victory. Pain scored with a 
long-range strike and set up another goal.

FFA to review pitchside equipment after Michael Zullo's table collision
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/06/ffa-to-review-pitchside-equipment-after-michael-zullos-table-collision>
United’s Spanish midfielder Isaias ran the show for the Reds in the first half 
and he almost broke the deadlock on three minutes with a curling free-kick 
which went just wide.


Ryan Kitto was next to go close for the home side after he was teed up by a 
cushioning header from Jordan O’Doherty, but the winger’s shot from close range 
was blocked by Jake McGing.


On 20 minutes O’Doherty thought he had opened the scoring when he was released 
by a delightful through ball from Isaias, but his shot rebounded off the 
upright.


A minute later and the Mariners struck the post after Roy O’Donovan 
capitalised on an errant pass from Iacopo La Rocca, and dribbled into the box 
before hitting the woodwork from a tight angle.


The Reds did eventually take the lead from the penalty spot after Sergi 
Guardiola was brought down by Storm Roux. The Spanish striker stepped up and 
sent Central Coast keeper Paul Izzo the wrong way to make it 1-0 on 27 minutes.

Tarek Elrich had the chance to double Adelaide’s lead on the stroke of 
half-time but the full-back squandered his one-on-one chance from 10 metres.


The Mariners emerged from the half break a different side and equalised after 
the restart. Pain made the most of some sloppy passing in the Reds’ defensive 
half and set up O’Donovan who looped his shot over the onrushing Eugene 
Galekovic from just inside the area to level the scores.

After a period of dominance, Central Coast then took the lead courtesy of a 
20-metre bullet from Pain who picked out the top corner with his right foot on 
57 minutes.


United pressed for an equaliser but failed to carve out any clear cut chances 
while the Mariners soaked up the Reds pressure and were content to hit on the 
counter. Guardiola did have another chance late after he was picked out by Ben 
Garrucio, but his free header was directed straight at Izzo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fcentral-coast-finally-break-281-day-winless-run-with-victory-over-adelaide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa09899b9405d36eda90083f79a618ae2363174cd%2F0_141_4392_2636%2F4392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Central%20Coast%20finally%20break%20281-day%20winless%20run%20with%20victory%20over%20Adelaide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fcentral-coast-finally-break-281-day-winless-run-with-victory-over-adelaide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Central%20Coast%20finally%20break%20281-day%20winless%20run%20with%20victory%20over%20Adelaide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fnov%2F06%2Fcentral-coast-finally-break-281-day-winless-run-with-victory-over-adelaide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa09899b9405d36eda90083f79a618ae2363174cd%2F0_141_4392_2636%2F4392.jpg>
 Diego Castro of Perth Glory gets away from Bruno Pinatares and Dimas of 
Western Sydney Wanderers during the stalemate a nib Stadium. Photograph: Gary 
Day/Getty Images 
In the late kick-off on Sunday, a rapid-fire goal apiece in the opening five 
minutes set the tone for an entertaining 2-2 draw between Perth and Western 
Sydney.

It took only 31 seconds for the Wanderers to open the scoring through Nicolas 
Martinez before Glory answered four minutes later with an Alexander Grant 
header from a free-kick.

A Glory goal in the second half from Andy Keogh was cancelled out for 
Wanderers by Brendon Santalab and the two teams shared the spoils.

Glory now have two wins, two draws and a loss and will take on an unbeaten 
Sydney FC next Sunday on the road. The Wanderers have just the one win and a 
loss along with three draws and face Melbourne Victory away on Saturday.

Sunday’s nib Stadium attendance of 13,290 was over six thousand more than at 
the Test match at the Waca Ground (7,207).

The Wanderers quickly caught Glory off guard, pushing forward before an 
incisive pass infield from Mitch Nichols found Martinez unchecked. He had time 
to set up his shot and delivered a cracker from well outside the box for 
Western Sydney’s quickestA-League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/a-league> goal.

The joy was short-lived with Perth answering thanks to a perfect free-kick 
from Nebojša Marinković. Grant got on the end of it to head it home to level.

Things settled the rest of the first half with Castro for Glory providing the 
best chances before Glory went ahead just six minutes into the second half. A 
cross from Chris Harold was palmed away by Western Sydney keeper Andrew 
Redmayne but Keogh was there to pick up the scraps and tap in his fourth goal 
of the season.

It was then Santalab’s turn to nab his fourth of the season to level scores in 
the 67th minute, latching onto a Martinez through pass which sliced through 
Perth’s defence.
 