
Dear Doctor, what’s good for a really big, self-indulgent sulk? 
Feeling sorry for ourselves, are we? My advice is to dig deep into this moody 
broodfest and enjoy the blues. Start by pouring yourself a black cocktail: 
Death By Chocolate, a recipe passed to me by Ian Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/ianbrown> of the Stone Roses. Take a 
half-pint glass, pour in one shot of vodka, one shot of Tia Maria, and top up 
with Guinness or similar. Now you’re ready for a serious, sulky groove.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOiZ4qOAOcI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOiZ4qOAOcI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DiOiZ4qOAOcI&media=>
Try Ede Robin’s Dead <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iOiZ4qOAOcI>, which 
starts with lashings of fat organ pads, a wailing saxophone and the 
half-spoken, desperate vocals (“Leave me alone. I don’t care no more”). You’ll 
find it on the aceDown & Out: The Sad Soul Of The Black South 
<http://www.allmusic.com/album/down-out-the-sad-soul-of-the-black-south-mw0000400403>
, a compilation that pulls no punches. Now let Alison Krauss take you deeper 
withLay My Burden Down <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hayb9mZSZDQ>. She 
wastes no time getting to the point: “Lay my body in the ground, cool clay 
against my skin.” Paul Robeson, that gracious singer with the lowest of the low 
registers, is the man to take a hard-done-by wretch by the hand, so join him on
Nobody Knows The Trouble I’ve Seen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4EJSkJlh_fg>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4EJSkJlh_fg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4EJSkJlh_fg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4EJSkJlh_fg&media=>
This moping may be making you feel curiously good. Like a goth revving into 
top gear, open the curtains and crank up another version of Lay My Burden Down 
– this time by the Magnificent Seventh’s Brass Band. Get up on those twinkle 
toes, raise yo’ hands up and let the world see you celebrate. And, as the 
neighbours stare through your windows, the Doctor invites you to enjoy their 
confusion. “Those who dance are considered insane by those who can’t hear the 
music,” said the comedian George Carlin (or was it Nietzsche?), so keep those 
hands a-clappin and pine on until that grumpy strop is long, long gone.
 