
Over the past few years, wires have been cut for everything from internet 
connections to earphones – but still, almost every device needs to be plugged 
in at least once a day to charge. That may be about to change.


At CES <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ces> this year, Dell unveiled 
the Latitude 7285, a convertible two-in–one Windows 10 computer that gets its 
power from a desktop wireless charging pad, and Ford announced it would be 
conducting tests of wireless vehicle charging. But it was Energous that 
revealed the most interesting development.

The four-year-old company, a CES regular, had something to show of its WattUp 
wireless system, which beams power to devices using radio frequencies, rather 
than the magnetic induction used in the the contactless charging of certain 
smartphones of the past few years. Magnetic induction can’t be used over larger 
distances, radio frequencies potentially can.

Energous had six companies showing off devices with WattUp technology powering 
them. From Bluetooth trackers, hearing aids and styluses, to a small module you 
can plug into other things, WattUp’s tentative steps into the real world with 
products you may actually be able to buy are encouraging with one small caveat: 
it only works over a few centimetres.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6INH8o6GLec&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6INH8o6GLec>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6INH8o6GLec&media=>
 Energous promotional video 
Energous claims that these devices will be able to “seamlessly transition from 
being charged by small, contact-based, portable transmitters, to forthcoming 
larger transmitters that offer charging at-a-distance of up to 15 feet (4.6m)”.

How long before that switch to power at a distance greater than a few 
centimetres takes is unknown, but one of the WattUp devices is capable of 
providing 700mAh of power to any microUSB port, a level of power greater than 
minimum expected of traditional USB supplied power from a computer.

While 700mAh is certainly not enough power for something large, yet, it should 
be easily capable of powering portable devices and the burgeoning Internet of 
Things ecosystem instead of requiring a USB cable or replaceable battery.

Energous also signed a undisclosed deal last year to supply its wireless power 
system to “one of the largest consumer electronic companies in the world” 
according to the Energous chief executive, Steve Rizzone,talking to the Verge 
<http://www.theverge.com/2017/1/4/14124938/energous-truly-wireless-charging-apple-ces-2017>
. The companyalso claimed 
<http://venturebeat.com/2016/09/15/proof-that-apple-is-working-with-energous-on-wireless-charging-is-hidden-in-plain-sight/>
 that its technology was going through “Apple compliance testing” suggesting 
that it might have inked a deal with the Cupertino-based company.

Wireless power is still in its infancy, but CES 2017 has marked a significant 
milestone for the technology. To leap out of the pages of science fiction and 
into the real world products you might actually buy will need a large 
electronics firm to put the technology into its products. A company such as 
Apple orSamsung <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung>, which was an 
early adopter of wireless charging technology, may just be catalyst needed to 
make it happen.
 