
The Force is not strong in Wenger

Deep down, a part of Arsène Wenger must have been pleased. Something within a 
coach who was once celebrated for nurturing youth and trying to slay financial 
monsters must have lit up with righteous glee as a bold and talented young 
Anderlecht side refused to accept defeat against the ultimateChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> establishment club, 
Arsenal, who just hang around the tournament year after year, rarely doing 
anything inspiring, just getting rich. And perhaps that explains it: perhaps 
there is an Anakin Skywalker/Darth Vader-style conflict raging within Wenger, 
and some residual high-mindedness prevents him from properly doing what José 
Mourinho tends to do: identifying the gaps in his team and just spending 
whatever it takes to fill them with the best available players. Or maybe, like 
all those fouls that his players used to commit, Wenger just doesn’t see 
blatant weaknesses and, even worse, doesn’t see that he doesn’t see them.Paul 
Doyle


Dortmund’s European opponents play to their strengths
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415263235354%2F100c6dc1-0e61-4458-84ab-64edecb79251-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund's%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano's%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund%27s%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano%27s%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415263235354%2F100c6dc1-0e61-4458-84ab-64edecb79251-2060x1236.jpeg>
 9-5 on corners, which shows Dortmund were better... Photograph: Patrik 
Stollarz/AFP/Getty Images 
Borussia Dortmund <https://www.theguardian.com/football/borussiadortmund> have 
more points after four Champions League matches than they do after 10 
Bundesliga games, and have scored 13 goals in what is supposed to Europe’s 
elite competition, compared to just 11 domestically. What’s up? It seems that 
Jürgen Klopp’s injury-ravaged side have been cast into a handy Champions League 
group, featuring teams who are neither equipped nor inclined to stifle 
opponents and thus leave lots of space in which Dortmund can romp free and 
swiftly.PD


Another rising Belgian star
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415263159944%2Faa680a6d-0dff-48c4-b3a7-b3255f1e51f3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund's%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano's%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund%27s%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano%27s%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415263159944%2Faa680a6d-0dff-48c4-b3a7-b3255f1e51f3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Yannick Ferreira Carrasco , another off the remarkable Belgian production 
line, runs towards the ball. Photograph: Miguel Riopa/AFP/Getty Images 
Attend nearly any match in the world and there are certain things you are sure 
to see, such as (a) some gonk filming the action with a mobile phone so that it 
can be viewed later on a tiny screen rather than when it is actually happening 
right in front of him in real life, thereby proving what rash schoolboy 
spurters have always known, that experiencing something fully is not as 
important as being able to boast about experiencing it slightly; and (b) a 
gifted young Belgian footballer. One notable feature of Tuesday’s 
Benfica-Monaco match was another fine performance by Yannick Ferreira Carrasco, 
the 21-year-old Belgian attacking midfielder who has been in sparkling form in 
Ligue 1 and caused much more trouble to Benfica than the disappointing Joao 
Moutinho or Lucas Ocampos did.PD


Are Liverpool starting to pull themselves together?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415266352887%2Ffac046c1-3a51-48bd-9732-00e858fca5de-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund's%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano's%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund%27s%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano%27s%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415266352887%2Ffac046c1-3a51-48bd-9732-00e858fca5de-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Real Madrid’s Karim Benzema scores against Liverpool. Photograph: Reuters 
At times this season it has seemed that Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/liverpool> have not only failed to get 
over the loss of Luis Suárez but actually lurched into a full-blown breakdown, 
stumbling through the season like a club on the bitter rebound, hellbent on 
doing things as differently as possible to the way they did them when they were 
with their Uruguayan darling. That would not only explain the purchase of Mario 
Balotelli – perhaps the least Suárez-like striker on the planet – but also the 
new-found slowness, almost passivity, with which they have played and the 
recent attempt to remove Steven Gerrard from the quarterback role in which he 
revelled last term. It’s all been a bit of a puzzle. And it certainly hasn’t 
been working.


Thankfully, it seems that Brendan Rodgers noticed that the time had come for a 
good shake-up in the hope that that might clear everyone’s minds, including 
his. Tuesday night’s surprising team selection might have woken a few people up 
and reminded Liverpool what they are supposed to be about, as the men in Red 
pressed with something approaching the dynamism of last season and had a 
semblance of cohesion and fortitude to them. But not, of course, enough to 
justify Rodgers’ bizarrely triumphant post-match demeanour: they did, after 
all, lose. And it is far from certain that they will beat Basel and Ludogorets 
in their remaining Champions League games, let alone Chelsea this weekend. But 
at least a cycle of torpor was broken and some players – in particular Emre Can 
– suggested that they are ready to be deployed more regularly from the start. 
Gerrard, then, could soon be set for a more enduring rest. If Rodgers really is 
ready to adjust to difficult truths.PD

Further reading

 * Manchester City 1-2 CSKA Moscow: match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/manchester-city-cska-moscow-champions-league-match-report>
 * Pellegrini perplexed by City’s European stage fright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/06/manuel-pellegrini-manchester-city-cska-moscow-champions-league>
 * Paul Wilson: Pellegrini and City again found wanting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/05/manchester-city-pellegrini-cska-moscow-chmpions-league>
 * Maribor 1-1 Chelsea: match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/maribor-chelsea-champions-league-match-report>
 * Messi ties Raul’s goal record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/ajax-barcelona-champions-league-match-report>
 * Bayern Munich 2-0 Roma: match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/bayern-munich-roma-champions-league-match-report>
 * Sporting Lisbon 4-2 Schalke: match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/sporting-lisbon-schalke-champions-league-match-report>
 * Arsenal 3-3 Anderlecht: match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/arsene-wenger-arsenal-anderlecht>
 * Wenger rails at his defence after fiasco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/arsene-wenger-arsenal-anderlecht>
 * Ramsey display sums up Arsenal’s confusion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/05/arsenal-aaron-ramsey-champions-league-anderlecht>
 * Real Madrid 1-1 Liverpool: match report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/04/real-madrid-liverpool-champions-league-match-report>
 * Rodgers hits back after accusations of surrender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/liverpool-brendan-rodgers-gary-lineker-white-towel>

 * Platini: Rodgers must explain to fans, not me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/05/brendan-rodgers-liverpool-michel-platini-real-madrid>
 * Marcus Christenson: why Rodgers was spot on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/nov/05/liverpool-real-madrid-brendan-rodgers>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliverpool-real-madrid-throwing-towel-brendan-rodgers-carlo-ancelotti-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415185503629%2FReal-Madrids-Cristiano-Ro-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brendan%20Rodgers%20defends%20his%20team%20selection%20after%20Real%20Madrid%20loss%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliverpool-real-madrid-throwing-towel-brendan-rodgers-carlo-ancelotti-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brendan%20Rodgers%20defends%20his%20team%20selection%20after%20Real%20Madrid%20loss%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F05%2Fliverpool-real-madrid-throwing-towel-brendan-rodgers-carlo-ancelotti-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415185503629%2FReal-Madrids-Cristiano-Ro-017.jpg>
Winners and losers

Winners … Luiz Adriano: Way back in 1885, Dundee Harp pulled off a pretty 
impressive result, beating Aberdeen Rovers 35-0 in the early stages of the 
Scottish Cup. So the story goes, giddy Harp full back Tom O’Kane rushed off to 
send a telegram to his former colleagues just down the road at Arbroath, 
boasting of the gargantuan success, but his grin must have faltered somewhat 
when he discovered that the very same day, Arbroath had beaten Bon Accord 36-0. 
What were the chances?Shakhtar Donetsk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/shakhtardonetsk> striker Luiz Adriano’s 
feat isn’t quite on the same level as a 35-goal hoying, but the Brazilian 
became the first man to ever score back-to-back hat-tricks in the Champions 
League on Wednesday night, a mighty impressive feat for sure, only to be 
upstaged a little by Lionel Messi rather peskily equalling Raúl’s goals record 
that very same evening.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415268896257%2F931386b9-319f-4cb4-8d42-10cc89123ae3-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund's%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano's%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund%27s%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano%27s%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415268896257%2F931386b9-319f-4cb4-8d42-10cc89123ae3-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Luiz Adriano Photograph: Reutrs 
It’s been a decent few weeks for Luiz Adriano, all in all. Indeed, BATE 
Borisov might have thought themselves quite lucky to only get away with a 
treble from the Brazilian and a 5-0 defeat by Shakhtar, given that in the last 
round of games Adriano bagged five in their 7-0 demolition of the Belarusian 
side, presumably leaving BATE keeper Andriy Pyatov, the man between the sticks 
for all 12 harrowing goals, a quivering and shell-shocked mess, and if he never 
sees another orange and black-striped shirt it will be too soon. And to cap 
things rather nicely for Adriano, he earned his first call-up to the Brazil 
squad for the upcoming friendlies against Turkey and Austria. Very nice indeed.
Nick Miller


Losers … Manuel Pellegrini: It’s remarkable that, having not won any of their 
first four matches,Manchester City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchestercity> still have a reasonable 
chance of qualifying for the knockout stages of the Champions League. In fact, 
it’s not quite so much remarkable as absurd. Still, to do so they will need to 
beat both Roma and Bayern Munich, the latter without Yaya Touré and Fernandinho 
following their red cards against CSKA Moscow, and quite possibly David Silva 
if he doesn’t recover from his knee injury in time. So, a tall order, then. 
City will theoretically be bouyed by Bayern having already qualified as group 
winners, and their own injury issues (David Alaba was the latest to go lame on 
Wednesday) probably meaning that Pep Guardiola will field a ‘weakened’ side 
when they visit the Etihad, but would you trust this City side to beat even a 
second-string Bayern side in the Champions League?

City’s European blindspot is troubling for the club but more immediately their 
manager, who was brought in with improvement on the continent in mind following 
Roberto Mancini’s struggles, although given the state City are currently in, 
finishing third in a group behind Bayern and Napoli a couple of years ago 
suddenly doesn’t look quite so bad. A couple of things will trouble City 
further, notablyPellegrini’s apparent bafflement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/nov/06/manuel-pellegrini-manchester-city-cska-moscow-champions-league>
 at their inability to compete in the competition (“The mentality of the 
players, all of them are important players, so I don’t understand why they 
cannot play in Champions League”), but also how the team fell apart in the face 
of a one-goal deficit against an average CSKA side. They were on the end of 
some rough refereeing decisions in the closing stages, but they had two men 
sent off for acts of brainlessness to rival Chris Smalling, and were lucky not 
to see Samir Nasri dismissed as well. City don’t seem to be progressing in 
Europe, and that could do for Pellegrini eventually. Incidentally, at the end 
of last month the Chilean was 66-1 to be the next Premier League manager to 
leave his job. If you’re quick, you can just get 8-1 now.NM


It’s stat time again …
OptaJoe (@OptaJoe) 
3 - This is only the third time that 4 English clubs have failed to win in the 
same CL group stage matchday (+ 07/12/05 & 05/11/08). Rare.
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/530113210368942080> November 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/530113210368942080> Infostrada Sports 
(@InfostradaLive) 
PSG equal Ipswich Town (31, since 1962) as club with longest RUNNING unbeaten 
home streak in Europe.
 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/530115031607037952> November 5, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/530115031607037952> 
WhoScored.com (@WhoScored) 
Yacine Brahimi: Only 2 players have directly contributed to more goals in the 
CL this season than Brahimi (5 - 3 goals & 2 assists)
 <https://twitter.com/WhoScored/status/530103085218430977> November 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/WhoScored/status/530103085218430977> OptaFranz (@OptaFranz)
14 - Roma manager Rudi Garcia has conceded 14 goals in his 3 CL matches vs 
@FCBayern <https://twitter.com/FCBayern>, as many as in his other 12 CL games 
in total. Bugaboo.
 <https://twitter.com/OptaFranz/status/530077783419281408> November 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/OptaFranz/status/530077783419281408> OptaJoe (@OptaJoe) 
5 - Five of Seydou Doumbia's ten Champions League goals have been scored 
against Manchester City. Menace.
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/530094613701623808> November 5, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/530094613701623808> 
Best images
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415208519124%2Fee8ee6aa-f568-448f-b491-456d3da0b52e-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund's%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano's%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund%27s%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano%27s%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415208519124%2Fee8ee6aa-f568-448f-b491-456d3da0b52e-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Christmas comes early to Signal Iduna Park with the sale of Borussia Dortmund 
themed goodies. Photograph: Dean Mouhtaropoulos/Bongarts/Getty Images  <> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415209227671%2Fa5fd1c97-203e-4846-bba4-2b29032e55a5-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund's%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano's%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund%27s%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano%27s%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415209227671%2Fa5fd1c97-203e-4846-bba4-2b29032e55a5-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Though the Galatasaray fans won’t be getting any presents from Saint Nicholas 
as they were very badly behaved - throwing firecrackers, flares and smoke bombs 
into the Dortmund fans and onto the pitch. Photograph: Martin Meissner/AP  <> 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415230734405%2F46d9e14d-f78c-4e3e-ae7e-e54de1358066-1020x680.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund's%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano's%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund%27s%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano%27s%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415230734405%2F46d9e14d-f78c-4e3e-ae7e-e54de1358066-1020x680.jpeg>
 That’s gotta hurt pt1 - Schalke 04’s Benedikt Hoewedes gets the ball in the 
kisser during their 4-2 defeat to Sporting Lisbon Photograph: Jose Sena 
Goulao/EPA  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415230973653%2F77650287-5e58-4cad-babf-d996fa68b04c-2060x1923.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund's%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano's%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund%27s%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano%27s%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F5%2F1415230973653%2F77650287-5e58-4cad-babf-d996fa68b04c-2060x1923.jpeg>
 That’s gotta hurt pt 2 - After Luiz Adriano scored five in Shakhtar’s 
Donetsk’s 7-0 win at last week’s corresponding fixture, FC BATE defender Evgeni 
Yablonski has come up with an “unorthodox” method to curtail Shakhtar’s 
striker. It didn’t work as Adriano scored a hat-trick during Shakhtar Donetsk’s 
5-0 victory Photograph: Sergei Supinsky/AFP/Getty Images 
And finally …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415265996799%2F76c62430-9397-41e9-bdfa-0d4cf2b9cfe8-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund's%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano's%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Dortmund%27s%20riddle%20and%20Luiz%20Adriano%27s%20record%20trick&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2014%2Fnov%2F06%2Fchampions-league-review-talking-points-stats-images%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F6%2F1415265996799%2F76c62430-9397-41e9-bdfa-0d4cf2b9cfe8-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Anderlecht’s Anthony Vanden Borre scores a penalty. Photograph: Dougie 
Allward/JMP/REX 
Planning is everything, we are told. Fail to prepare, etc and so on. Dave 
Brailsford will have a lucrative career on the motivational speaking circuit 
when his cycling days are over, preaching the benefits of marginal gains. All 
of which might be true, but it’s a little joyless, isn’t it? The fun bits of 
sport are the chaotic, the unpredictable and the logic-defying. It’s why we 
support the underdog and watch clips of star players missing open goals over 
and over. It was therefore pretty amusing and, dare we say refreshing, to see 
Anderlecht yank Arsenal’s chain on Tuesday despite their coach being stuck in 
traffic on the way to the ground, the driver rather optimistically thinking he 
could breeze through London rush-hour traffic without too much bother. The
Anderlecht <https://www.theguardian.com/football/anderlecht> players stumbled 
off the bus 45 minutes before kick-off at the Emirates, quite possibly pulling 
on their socks as they went, and went through what were presumably quite 
cursory warm-ups before taking the field. Granted, they took a little while to 
get going, but despite this chaos and terrible preparation, they managed to 
come from 3-0 down and claim an implausible draw. Comforting proof that no 
matter how well you plan, and how meticulously you prepare, sometimes logic 
will flit out of the window. More of this sort of thing, please.NM

 