
Will anyone stop Lionel Messi and Barcelona? 

Lionel Messi doesn’t appear to have lost any sharpness after missing two 
months with a knee injury. After coming off the bench in the second halfof the 
clásico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/21/real-madrid-barcelona-la-liga-match-report>
 – just so Real Madrid didn’t bother trying anything funny – he was back in 
Barcelona’s starting line-up on Tuesday night and played like a man who was
making up for lost time against Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/barcelona-roma-champions-league-match-report>
. Messi scored twice, the first a delicious dink over Wojciech Szczesny at the 
end of a superb team move that was full of flicks, tricks and feints and there 
was more evidence that the best player in the world gets a buzz out of Neymar 
and Luis Suárez, laughing and joking with the other members of Barcelona’s 
front three as they trotted on to the pitch. What fun those three must have – 
how about that volley from Suárez? Barcelona’s 6-1 victory sealed first place 
in Group E and at the moment it looks like only a fully-fit Bayern Munich can 
stop them.Jacob Steinberg

Another forgettable night at Old Trafford

There was a moment in the second half at Old Trafford when Luuk De Jong took 
on Daley Blind on the edge of United’s penalty area, bought himself a little 
space and then, falling backwards, speared a shot high and wide of goal. It was 
the kind of incident that has no place on any self-respecting highlights 
package, and seeing it on ITV’s round-up show later in the evening was evidence 
of the kind of bullet those who decided not to watch the game live had dodged. 
Inhis match report for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/25/manchester-united-psv-eindhoven-champions-league-match-report>
 Daniel Taylor describes “a perplexing lack of action”, all the more 
distressing if you’re in charge of picking out the best bits for broadcast. One 
person who enjoyed himself at Old Trafford, however, was the PSV coach Phillip 
Cocu. “I am very excited about this result,” he said. “I’ve enjoyed our 
tactical play, our attitude and our way of playing overall. I am very proud.” 
His team appeared to enjoy it too, performing link-armed fan-rushing group 
celebrations at the end of a kind that normally indicate at the very least 
heroic qualification for the quarter-finals, rather than a goalless draw and 
the mere possibility of progress to the round of 16 – reliant on this instance 
on them beating CSKA Moscow at home while United lose or draw at Wolfsburg 
(their apparent assumption that United are incapable of winning at the 
third-best side in the Bundesliga is something of an indictment of the English 
side’s current malaise). There was one notable moment in the match, though: 
towards the end Jesse Lingaard grappled with Santiago Arias, who after feeling 
some contact on his ear flung himself to the turf clutching his face and 
started rolling around. It was ludicrously overdramatic, but also perhaps 
fitting for a player called Arias to act like a diva.Simon Burnton

Mourinho will relish watching Casillas’s error again and again


Porto find themselves in a pickle after their unbeaten run came to an end in 
their2-0 home defeat by Dynamo Kyiv 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/porto-dynamo-kyiv-champions-league-match-report>
, a result that leaves them needing to beat Chelsea in their final game to 
guarantee a place in the last 16. Although they are still top of Group G, Porto 
would plunge into the Europa League if they draw at Stamford Bridge and Dynamo 
beat Maccabi Tel-Aviv, who are pointless at the bottom of the group. Three 
teams would finish on 11 points in that scenario and a head-to-head mini-league 
that excludes results against Maccabi would be created to separate them, with 
goal difference used as the deciding factor. Chelsea only need a point because 
theirs is zero, but Dynamo are on plus one thanks to some horrific goalkeeping 
from Iker Casillas, whose farcical attempt to save Derlis González’s chip in 
the 64th minute means that Porto are on minus one. Once regarded as one of the 
best goalkeepers in the world, Casillas has become an obvious weak link and it 
will presumably not be lost on him that his mistake could help the man with 
whom he fell out so acrimoniously at Real Madrid. José Mourinho must have had a 
good laugh when he saw González’s goal and Chelsea’s manager will be targeting 
Casillas on 9 December.JS

Zlatan’s dream return more of a nightmare for Malmö
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmalmo-life-after-zlatan-ibrahimovic-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F24%2F1448392337987%2FKP_600959_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Malmo%3A%20life%20after%20Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmalmo-life-after-zlatan-ibrahimovic-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Malmo%3A%20life%20after%20Zlatan%20Ibrahimovic%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F25%2Fmalmo-life-after-zlatan-ibrahimovic-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F24%2F1448392337987%2FKP_600959_crop_640x480.jpg>
Malmö: life after Zlatan Ibrahimovic – video. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2015/nov/25/malmo-life-after-zlatan-ibrahimovic-video>
“I lived the dream tonight,” said Zlatan Ibrahimovic, after his longed-for 
return to Malmö – fully 5,343 days after he scored his final goal for the club 
– ended merrily for hisParis Saint-Germain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/parisstgermain> side, for whom the Swede 
scored one in a 5-0 win. He has now scored in each of his last 11 competitive 
games on Swedish soil. “I’m very happy. Since the beginning, there’s been a 
great relationship between Malmö’s fans and me,” he added. And perhaps he did 
not want to endanger it, celebrating his goal in understated style while 
l’Equipe suggested that, although he scored one goal and played a part in two 
more, he had not given his all, playing “with a kind of restraint, as if he did 
not want to add to the humiliation”. PSG will finish second to Real Madrid in 
Group A while Malmö will finish fourth unless Shakhtar lose in Paris in their 
final game while the Swedes get an unlikely point or even unlikelier multiple 
points from Madrid. The Swedes could do with a young Ibrahimovic at the moment 
– last year’s champions finished a disappointing fifth in the Allsvenskan, 
although they did get to watch the champions being crowned on the final day of 
their domestic season, if only because they lost 2-0 to them at home 
(Norrköping, the team in question, had finished a distant 12th in 2014). 
Malmö’s only hope of European football next season is now to win the Svenska 
Cupen (the group stage draw is today) while their Norwegian coach, Ago Hareide, 
could be on his way out of the club (perhaps to take over the Danish national 
side). “We have a friendly against Molde soon and I intend to be here for 
that,” he said last night. “I have not taken any decision and will not do so 
until we’re finished.”SB

Real Madrid’s 11-minute defensive blunderfest

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec7ba01df63312f3746d3d47e29b6bb932f03439%2F0_0_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec7ba01df63312f3746d3d47e29b6bb932f03439%2F0_0_2000_1201%2F2000.jpg>
 Porto goalkeeper Iker Casillas looks on as Dynamo Kyiv players celebrate their 
2-0 win in Portugal. Photograph: Paulo Duarte/AP 
“Both teams have strong attacking instincts and this is why we saw so many 
goals tonight,” said Rafa Benítez afterReal Madrid’s remarkable 4-3 victory 
over Shakhtar Donetsk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/25/shakhtar-donetsk-real-madrid-champions-league-match-report>
, who trailed 0-4 with 13 minutes to play before launching a remarkable if 
ultimately futile comeback. In other words, there was no problem with our 
defence, the other lot were just great. “I think we should analyse all the 
goals we conceded but I am sure it is not due to the mistakes of our defenders, 
it is because Shakhtar’s players combined so well,” he continued, reinforcing 
that first message. And then: “Sometimes we lack concentration but more 
important is that we scored four goals in an away game. It may be an indication 
of the team’s revival.” In other words, we were defensively shambolic (and the 
marking when Dentinho scored Shakhtar’s second certainly didn’t suggest there 
was a lot of concentration going on) but at least we scored a lot. Real have 
now conceded 10 times in their last three games, after letting in four in their 
first 14 of the season. As indications of a team’s revival go, it is not the 
most convincing. Still, they are through as group winners, and at least they 
don’t still have Casillas in goal.SB

Gent are remarkably within touching distance of the last 16

There were no away supporters at Stade de Gerland because of security reasons, 
but Gent have made a habit of defying expectations this season and they are in 
control of their own destinyafter their 2-1 victory over Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/lyon-gent-champions-league-match-report>
. The Belgians are the smallest side in Group H, yet there they are in second 
place, a point above Valencia, dreaming of reaching the last 16. Despite 
falling behind to a goal from Jordan Ferri in the seventh minute, Gent 
equalised thanks to a peach of a free-kick from Danijel Milicevic, before 
Kalifa Coulibaly snatched the points for the supposed whipping boys in the 95th 
minute. As for Lyon, defeat brought a miserable end to their European campaign.
JS

Tata Astana


“Even if we had lost I would have been happy because the team showed they can 
play football at the highest European level,” said Stanimir Stoilov, the Astana 
coach, very much looking on the bright side given that his side, needing a win 
to extend their hopes of progression to the final group game, had surged into a 
2-0 lead at home to Benfica only to draw 2-2 and go out. Still, they will end 
the group stage unbeaten – though also unvictorious – at home, having drawn 0-0 
at Astana Arena with Atlético Madrid and 2-2 against Galatasaray. Away from 
home they have lost two, conceded six and scored none, with only a visit to 
Gala remaining for them to get some credit in the travelling bank. Astanahave 
been praised here previously 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/sep/17/champions-league-review-an-angel-at-psgs-top-table-and-astana-impress-in-defeat>
 and have performed creditably – they have indeed shown they can play football 
at the highest European level, but not yet that they are better at it than 
anyone else.SB

Through: Real Madrid, Paris St-Germain, Benfica, Atlético, Juventus, 
Manchester City,Barcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona>, 
Bayern Munich, Zenit St Petersburg.
Out: Shakhtar Donetsk, Malmo, CSKA Moscow, Galatasaray, Astana, Borussia 
Mönchengladbach, Sevilla, Dinamo Zagreb, Maccabi Tel-Aviv, Lyon.

Further reading

 * Paul Wilson: Lingard asked to do too much for Manchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/25/jesse-lingard-manchester-united-psv-eindhoven>
 * Barney Ronay: Sánchez shows Arsenal there is no substitute for quality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/nov/24/alexis-sanchez-arsenal-substitute-dinamo-zagreb>
 * Fears for Joe Hart but Manchester City are still top dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/25/manuel-pellegrini-joe-hart-manchester-city>
 * Wayne Rooney: ‘We can’t keep on saying it’s a learning curve’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/26/manchester-united-wayne-rooney-learning-curve>
 * Suárez says Barcelona played ‘perfect game’ in 6-1 thrashing of Roma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/25/luis-suarez-barcelona-perfect-game-roma-messi>
 * Mourinho and Costa made up with ‘kisses and cuddles’ after row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/25/jose-mourinho-chelsea-diego-costa-row-kisses-cuddles-maccabi-tel-aviv>
Stat time
OptaJohan (@OptaJohan) 
27 - There were 27 passes ahead of Lionel Messi's goal vs AS Roma, a 
season-high in the Champions League. Smooth.pic.twitter.com/gi2PFIaVJ0 
<https://t.co/gi2PFIaVJ0>
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJohan/status/669248023164297216> November 24, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJohan/status/669248023164297216> OptaJoe (@OptaJoe) 
6 - Willian has scored 6 times from 12 free-kick attempts this season in all 
comps; 4 of 5 in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>. Specialist.
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/669264080918716417> November 24, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJoe/status/669264080918716417> MisterChip (English) 
(@MisterChiping) 
Millennial goals in Champions League: 1000 Khokhlov 2000 Fernando Couto 3000 
Trezeguet 4000 Crouch 5000 Luisao 6000 Ramos 7000 DI MARÍA
 <https://twitter.com/MisterChiping/status/669607660275294208> November 25, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/MisterChiping/status/669607660275294208> OptaJose 
(@OptaJose) 
10 - Real Madrid have conceded 10 goals from their last 15 shots on target 
faced in the last three games (La Liga &#UCL 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UCL?src=hash>). Wound.
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJose/status/669634813985443840> November 25, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJose/status/669634813985443840> WhoScored.com 
(@WhoScored) 
Mesut Özil: Has now had a direct hand in a goal in 8 of his last 9 apps for 
Arsenal, scoring 3 goals and registering 8 assists in that time
 <https://twitter.com/WhoScored/status/669250138859307009> November 24, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/WhoScored/status/669250138859307009> OptaJohan (@OptaJohan)
16 - The games played by Dutch teams in European competition this season, 
ranked by possession. Blueprint.pic.twitter.com/czciasyj7K 
<https://t.co/czciasyj7K>
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJohan/status/669593479241166849> November 25, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJohan/status/669593479241166849> MisterChip (English) 
(@MisterChiping) 
At least 2 UCL Group Stages played and NEVER have been eliminated: > Madrid: 
24 of 24 > Leeds: 2 of 2 (Today Sevilla dropped off the list)
 <https://twitter.com/MisterChiping/status/669632220257255424> November 25, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/MisterChiping/status/669632220257255424> Infostrada 
Sports (@InfostradaLive) 
Messi (5-0) Scoring 2+ goals in most #UCL 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/UCL?src=hash> matches: 22 - MESSI 22 - Ronaldo
 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/669260490502221824> November 24, 
2015 <https://twitter.com/InfostradaLive/status/669260490502221824> 
Best images
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4527a41dd02781a4ee42f4ebe03afa817037fc25%2F0_0_5184_3445%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4527a41dd02781a4ee42f4ebe03afa817037fc25%2F0_0_5184_3445%2F5184.jpg>
 A police horse is seen outside Allianz Arena ahead of Bayern Münich’s game 
against Olympiakos. Following the Paris attacks and the bomb threat that caused 
the cancellation of Germany’s friendly against Holland, security has been 
stepped up across Europe at all Champions League games. Photograph: Alexander 
Hassenstein/Bongarts/Getty Images  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc479b1a854ee7644bf950f34ce6c3c70b297ddd%2F799_0_1563_2344%2F1563.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc479b1a854ee7644bf950f34ce6c3c70b297ddd%2F799_0_1563_2344%2F1563.jpg>
 Barcelona’s Lionel Messi looks surprised at the acrobatic clearance by Roma’s 
Lucas Digne. What he wouldn’t necessarily be surprised about is that he twice 
got on the scoresheet during Barça’s 6-1 win. Photograph: Lino De 
Vallier/Xinhua Press/Corbis  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ef311b454981d45a550e02030076619942a443b%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ef311b454981d45a550e02030076619942a443b%2F0_0_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Does the appearance of this snowman at Zenit St Petersburg 2-0 win over 
Valencia signify the start of the festive season? Photograph: Dmitry Lovetsky/AP
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2a5ad77702a354ced311afa6b35d50351ec7927%2F0_0_1414_1908%2F1414.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2a5ad77702a354ced311afa6b35d50351ec7927%2F0_0_1414_1908%2F1414.jpg>
 An impressive piece of nasal control by Paris Saint-Germain’s Thiago Motta. 
Photograph: Andreas Hillergren/EPA  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09d595430b7b87cda22664be50e10f331162c6c3%2F0_0_4096_2708%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09d595430b7b87cda22664be50e10f331162c6c3%2F0_0_4096_2708%2F4096.jpg>
 That wasn’t the only impressive thing on display in Malmö, as despite being on 
the wrong end of a 5-0 drubbing, the home fans had their scarves out as they 
cheered on their side. Malmö’s favourite son, Zlatan Ibrahimovic, was one of 
the four PSG scorers. Photograph: Goran Barkfors/EPA  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8072cc39c470c6c94a5486aca0c06f16e155b7ee%2F0_0_3500_2349%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Champions%20League%20review%3A%20Barcelona%20unstoppable%2C%20Manchester%20United%20unremarkable&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fnov%2F26%2Fchampions-league-review-barcelona-unstoppable-manchester-united-unbearable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8072cc39c470c6c94a5486aca0c06f16e155b7ee%2F0_0_3500_2349%2F3500.jpg>
 Juventus’ Paul Pogba’s tribute to the victims of the Paris attacks. 
Photograph: Giorgio Perottino/Reuters  