
9.55pm GMT 

That's it from me - thanks for all your emails. The draw on Monday will have 
Manchester United, Real Madrid, PSG, Bayern Munich, Chelsea, Dortmund, Atletico 
andBarcelona <https://www.theguardian.com/football/barcelona> in the top pot, 
with Bayer Leverkusen, Galatasaray, Olympiakos, Manchester City, Arsenal, 
Schalke, Zenit and Milan in the other pot. For Manchester United and Chelsea, 
that is very good news. For Arsenal and Manchester City, not so much. BYE!

9.48pm GMT 

So Napoli go out of the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> with 12 points, while 
Zenit go through with six points. Zenit progess with the lowest points tally 
since Milan went through with five points in 94-95 and Napoli equal PSG's 
dubious record of reaching 12 points but failing to progress in 97-98. That's 
not something that will make Rafa Benitez feel very good tonight - still he is, 
at least, the Europa League's defending managerial champion so there's that to 
play for.

9.43pm GMT 

FINAL GROUP STANDINGS

Group E

Chelsea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chelsea> 12 points QUALIFY

Schalke <https://www.theguardian.com/football/schalke> 10 points QUALIFY

Basel <https://www.theguardian.com/football/basel> 8 points EUROPA LEAGUE

Steaua 3 points

Group F

Dortmund 12 points Q

Arsenal 12 points Q

Napoli 12 points E

Marseille <https://www.theguardian.com/football/marseille> 0 points

Group G

Atletico 16 points Q

Zenit 6 points Q

Porto <https://www.theguardian.com/football/porto> 5 points E

Austria Vienna <https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria-vienna> 5 points

Group H

Barcelona 13 points Q

Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/football/acmilan> 9 points Q

Ajax <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ajax> 8 points E

Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> 3 points

9.39pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Marseille 1-2 Dortmund

Dortmund go through from Group F as group winners, Arsenal are through as 
runners up.

9.38pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Austria Vienna 4-1 Zenit St Petersburg

Austria Vienna get their first ever Champions League win. Zenit go through 
nonetheless.

9.38pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Napoli 2-0 Arsenal

It's all over in Naples: Arsenal lose 2-0  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/11/napoli-arsenal-live-mbm>but 
still go through. However, as it stands, they will go through as runners up.

9.37pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Schalke 2-0 Basel

Basel go out - but, in Italy, Arsenal have just conceded again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/11/napoli-arsenal-live-mbm>...

9.36pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Atletico 2-0 Porto

That's the end of Porto in the Champions League - they go into the Europea 
League and Atletico finish the group stages unbeaten.

9.35pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Chelsea 1-0 Steaua

That's the end of that at Stamford Bridge. Not a night to live long in the 
memory but Chelsea finish as group winners.

9.35pm GMT 

FULL TIME! Barcelona 6-1 Celtic

The referee puts Celtic out of their misery in Spain.

9.33pm GMT 

So, currently: Chelsea and Schalke, Dortmund and Arsenal, Atletico and Zenit 
and Barcelona and Milan are going through. As it stands...

9.32pm GMT 

GOAL! Marseille 1-2 Dortmund (Grosskreutz)

Lewandowski plays the ball to Grosskreutz, he thumps the ball into the ground. 
Mandanda gets a hand to it but can't keep it out of the net. That means 
Dortmund will go through at Napoli's expense. 

Updated at 9.34pm GMT

9.31pm GMT 

GOAL! Barcelona 6-1 Celtic (Samaras)

Samaras takes the shine off Barcelona's performance. Sort of.

Updated at 9.32pm GMT

9.30pm GMT 

Lewandowski goes down in the box, the referee thinks about the penalty after 
Mandanda comes into contact with him … but nothing is given.

9.29pm GMT 

GOAL... oh. Offside. Lampard plays the ball into Ba, standing what looked like 
about a hair offside. He swivels on the penalty spot and blasts the ball into 
the top corner. Nothing doing. Chelsea 1-0 Steaua

9.27pm GMT 

Oh, Celtic.
OptaJose (@OptaJose) 
26 – Barcelona’s third goal today was preceded by 26 passes; a record for this 
season’s Champions League. Tiki-taka.pic.twitter.com/shA80wj4Nb 
<http://t.co/shA80wj4Nb>
 <https://twitter.com/OptaJose/statuses/410883203138736128> December 11, 2013 
<https://twitter.com/OptaJose/statuses/410883203138736128> 
9.26pm GMT 

Diarra has been heroic at the back for Marseille, but Dortmund have been very 
wasteful. Arsenal, too, are a shambles currently so there's plenty of scope for 
a grand farce in Group F. Here's hoping.

9.25pm GMT 

Corrections and clarifications dept (or the dangers of half listening to Sky 
Sports news): " Much I'd as I'd love it if my team, the Glorious Glasgow 
Rangers, held this honour, Uefa think Celtic'sgreatest ever defeat was actually 
at the hands of ... Motherwell 
<http://www.uefa.com/teamsandplayers/teams/club=50050/profile/index.html>
! True?" reveals Ryan Dunne.

9.23pm GMT 

Chelsea are beginning to look a little ragged, with Mourinho growling on the 
touchline. A Steaua goal wouldn't be a disaster for them, but wouldn't help the 
mood at Stamford Bridge much.

9.21pm GMT 

"Has anyone proffered 'Men against Bhoys' yet?" asks Mark Gillies. Just the 
20-odd of you.

9.20pm GMT 

Red card!

Arsenal's Mikel Arteta is given his marching orders. Find out what happened 
here <https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/11/napoli-arsenal-live-mbm>.

9.19pm GMT 

Celtic have just given up. Barcelona have another couple of efforts at goal, 
more for something to do. Like an unwilling cat flicking lazily at a half-dead 
mouse, Barcelona are taking Celtic apart with insouciant ease.

9.18pm GMT 

Dortmund's Lewandowski latches onto an underhit Marseille backpass, takes the 
ball around the keeper and puts his shot into the side-netting from six yards 
out. A moment later, Reus blasts over the bar.Meanwhile, Higuain scores for 
Napoli against Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/11/napoli-arsenal-live-mbm>. 
That'll put Napoli through at Dortmund's expense.

9.16pm GMT 

GOAL! Barcelona 6-0 Celtic (Tello)

That's Celtic's heaviest ever defeat, and it equals Barcelona's biggest home 
Champions League margin of victory. Oh dear. 

9.13pm GMT 

"At the height of Rafa's unpopularity at the Bridge last season they announced 
over the tannoy that Mikel had just put pen to paper on a new 5 year contract," 
writes Ian Burch. "Rafa must have wondered why the home crowd were more angry 
than normal when he walked out of the tunnel that day." He collects the ball 30 
yards out and is urged to shoot by the crowd. He elects not to, wisely. 
However, he has been very slow tonight - needing too many touches and largely 
making little different when he does get the ball away.

9.12pm GMT 

Dortmund are all over Marseille, but it's the home side who have had the 
biggest chance. Gignac nearly puts 10-man Marseille ahead against Dortmund 
before his side are forced to revert to full on defence mode as Lewanowski 
manages to miss a sitter.

Updated at 9.13pm GMT

9.08pm GMT 

Should have been six for Barcelona. The ball is played over the top to Neymar 
and he goes around Forster but collides with Pedro, who takes the ball off him 
and fails to score.

Updated at 9.09pm GMT

9.07pm GMT 

Hazard intercepts and breaks, racing goalwards with the ball bouncing about 
ahead of him. Georgievski, who can't helped but be a part of the action, races 
across to clear. Chelsea have been pretty ponderous in this half - passing 
extremely slowly. The problem might well be Mikel, who is having one of his 
games. Mourinho addresses this by taking Oscar off and bringing Schurrle on. Oh.

9.05pm GMT 

"Ten things we've learned from the CL group stage," emails Simon McMahon. 
"Nos. 1-10: Celtic are rubbish."

9.02pm GMT 

GOAL! Schalke 2-0 Basel (Matip)

Basel, so good against Chelsea, are going down to Schalke. That's something of 
a shame for them - alongside Olympiakos, they were probably the best performing 
underdogs of the season.

Updated at 9.02pm GMT

9.01pm GMT 

GOAL! Barcelona 5-0 Celtic (Neymar)

Neymar picks the ball up on the left, goes past one defender, puts the ball 
through the legs of another defender, then clips the ball into the net. Having 
not scored a Champions League goal since getting to Barcelona, he has now 
scored three in a night.

9.00pm GMT 

Chelsea will also be pleased about that Schalke goal. If it stays the same 
there, that means Chelsea can afford to draw. At Stamford Bridge, Hazard runs 
down the left wing and is rugby tackled by the Steaua left back. Oscar, dazzled 
by a laser pen, hits the cross too long.

8.58pm GMT 

GOAL! Austria Vienna 3-1 Zenit St Petersburg (Hosner)

Another one for Hosner as Austria Vienna step nearer that first Champions 
League victory. 

8.56pm GMT 

GOAL! Schalke 1-0 Basel (Draxler)

An important goal in Chelsea Group E and it means Schalke have leapfrogged 
Basel in the group and slot into the runners-up spot under Chelsea.

8.55pm GMT 

Demba Ba! Willian plays a ball into the Steaua box to within six yards of the 
goal. Ba runs through in between two defenders and strokes the ball 
superlatively into the crowd away and behind the goal. He's really grasping his 
chance ...

8.54pm GMT 

GOAL! Austria Vienna 2-1 Zenit St Petersburg (Jun)

Well, this could be interesting*. Vienna have gone ahead against Zenit as they 
search for their first ever Champions League win. That means that, if Porto can 
beat Atletico, Porto will go through instead of Zenit.

*May not be interesting.

8.51pm GMT 

GOAL! Barcelona 4-0 Celtic (Neymar)

Neymar plays a pretty one-two with Pedro, then strokes the ball into the 
corner of the net from distance. Celtic had barely stopped sucking their 
half-time oranges.

8.49pm GMT 

Hazard skedaddles up the left, pings a crossfield ball to Willian - which 
Lampard allows to reach him by ducking. Willian plays a delightful slide-rule 
pass into the box, the ball whizzing about like a pinball ... only for Ivanovic 
to get on the end of it and play with all the flair for which he's known. 
Still, it was nice until then.

8.47pm GMT 

Chelsea are back out on the pitch first, presumably the clocks at Stamford 
Bridge have all been wound forward a few minutes as everyone is hoping to nip 
off early and beat the traffic.

8.38pm GMT 

As it stands

If things stay as they are …

Group E: Chelsea will go through on top, with Basel second and Schalke into 
the Europa League.

Group F: Arsenal will finish on top, with Dortmund going through in second. 
Napoli would go into the Europa League.

Group G: Atletico were already winners, while Zenit are currently going 
through in second, with Porto into the Europa League

Group H: Barcelona would top the group, with Milan in second and Ajax in the 
Champions League - though Milan are down to 10 men.

8.35pm GMT 

Half time scores

Milan 0-0 Ajax

Atletico 2-0 Porto

Barcelona 3-0 Celtic

Chelsea 1-0 Steaua

Austria Vienna 1-1 Zenit St Petersburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/zenitstpetersburg>

Marseille 1-1 Dortmund

Napoli 0-0 Arsenal

Schalke 0-0 Basel

8.33pm GMT 

HT Napoli 0-0 Arsenal

It's half-time in Naples: follow that with Scott Murray here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/11/napoli-arsenal-live-mbm>.

Updated at 8.33pm GMT

8.32pm GMT 

GOAL! Barcelona 3-0 Celtic (Neymar)

Barcelona are on for a cricket score. They're barely having to work against 
Celtic and Neymar is the latest to steer the ball into the net. That's his 
first Champions League goal for Barcelona.

Updated at 8.35pm GMT

8.31pm GMT 

GOAL! Austria Vienna 1-1 Zenit St Petersburg (Hosner)

Some hope for Porto?

Updated at 8.41pm GMT

8.31pm GMT 

Relief for Georgievski: according to the Champions League Twitter account, 
Chelsea's opener has now been put down as a Ba goal. Which is a shame as, had 
it gone to the Steaua man, it would have meant he had scored as many Champions 
League goals for Chelsea as Torres and Eto'o and one more than Ba. Half time at 
Stamford Bridge:Chelsea 1-0 Steaua

8.27pm GMT 

GOAL! Barcelona 2-0 Celtic (Pedro)

Neymar works some magic in the Celtic box, finding space, then clipping the 
ball to Pedro for a tap in.

8.26pm GMT 

GOAL! Atletico Madrid 2-0 Porto (Diego Costa)

Worse news for Porto! Diego Costa pours more hurt on Porto who appear to be on 
their way out. Atletico could well be going through unbeaten.

Updated at 8.26pm GMT

8.24pm GMT 

GOAL! Austria Vienna 0-1 Zenit St Petersburg (Kerhakov)

That's bad news for Porto: Zenit go ahead against Vienna and into prime 
position to go through as runner up in Group G.

8.22pm GMT 

Open journalism in action: "Atletico leads from 14th minute (Raul Garcia) and 
Porto just missed a penalty, Cheers, Bojan"

8.21pm GMT 

Steaua's Kapetanos shrugs off Terry with ease, turns and blooters a shot wide 
from 30 yards. Schwarzer watches it go by without raising an eyebrow.

Updated at 8.23pm GMT

8.20pm GMT 

Red cards!

Basel's Ivanov is shown a red card for a professional foul, while Marseille's 
Payet gets a yellow then immediately charges into the box and takes a dive, to 
earn an immediate second yellow. Good work.

8.17pm GMT 

Steaua venture into the Chelsea half and fling balls into the box. A series of 
shots are blocked and scrambled clear by the Chelsea defence. It looks scrappy 
and disorganised back there, with Mikel particularly chaotic. If Mourinho has 
told his players to organise their defence, then they haven't been listening.

8.13pm GMT 

Hazard diddles around in the box for Chelsea and wins a corner. Ir's played 
short, to Hazard, who blazes in a vicious cross. Ivanovic gets a head to it but 
thumps it straight at the keeper who turns it over the bar. Willian hits 
another corner long and Lampard cracks a first time volley into the Kings Road.

8.09pm GMT 

Red card in Milan!

Riccardo Montolivo has been sent of for Milan for a challenge on Christian 
Poulsen. He gets an absolute earful from his manager Massimiliano Allegri as he 
goes, too. Milan down to 10 men.

Updated at 8.10pm GMT

8.07pm GMT 

Ajax are just shading the match in Milan and have managed to hit the bar and 
had a header tucked around the post. A win for Ajax, as things stand, would 
mean they go through. Should they do so and should things remain as they are in 
Naples, this will represent a very poor Champions League campaign for Italian 
sides.

8.05pm GMT 

Georgievski has had an awful time against Chelsea. Not only was he given a 
torrid time by Schurrle when Chelsea came to Bucharest, he also scored an own 
goal. He'll be delighted to have done exactly the same in this match, meaning 
he has now managed to score for Chelsea in both of the clubs' two meetings. 
Excellent work.

Updated at 8.29pm GMT

8.01pm GMT 

Correction - that Marseille goal was actually scored by Souleymane Diawara.

Updated at 8.01pm GMT

8.01pm GMT 

At Stamford Bridge, incidentally, Steaua very nearly scored. The first time 
the visitors got into the Chelsea half, they dismantled the Terry/Luiz axis and 
Iancu stroked a shot just wide of Schwarzer's post.

8.00pm GMT 

GOAL! Marseille 1-1 Dortmund (Diawara)

Marseille haven't given up on this Champions League campaign yet. A cross 
comes in, keeper Weidenfeller misses it, the ball thumps into the cross bar and 
back out for Diawara to nod home. He might have been offside mind.

Updated at 8.01pm GMT

7.57pm GMT 

Minutes before that goal - which looks increasingly like an own goal - a wag 
in the crowd was shining one of those pointy laser things into Jose Mourinho's 
eye. He ignored it, but let's stick with it ...

7.56pm GMT 

GOAL! Chelsea 1-0 Steaua (Georgievski OG)

Another corner comes in, Oscar nods it across the box and Ba bundles it into 
the net from a yard (though it may have been Georgievski scoring an own goal). 
Think we know who will claim that one.

Updated at 8.14pm GMT

7.54pm GMT 

GOAL! Barcelona 1-0 Celtic (Pique)

Forster makes a good save but can't get hands to the ball. It falls to Pique 
who buries it in the back of the net. 

7.52pm GMT 

Another corner to Chelsea, taken short for Lampard to cross in. Some hilarious 
defensive confusion leads to the Steaua defenders virtually ushering the ball 
into their own net. The ball bounces off the Steaua keeper Tatarusanu and out 
for another corner. It's all Chelsea. Chelsea are going to lose this, aren't 
they?

Updated at 8.14pm GMT

7.50pm GMT 

GOAL! Marseille 0-1 Dortmund (Lewandowski)

That was quick. Lewandowski controls the ball and dinks it over Mandanda in 
the goal. Marseille really haven't bothered much with this Champions League 
campaign, have they?

Updated at 7.53pm GMT

7.48pm GMT 

Corner to Chelsea, which falls to Luiz. He clobbers it wide of the post and at 
the the ludicrous extra official, who has to move sharpish to get out of the 
way.

7.47pm GMT 

Peep peep: They've kicked off at Stamford Bridge and, indeed, at other places. 
Though Arsenal are still lounging about on the pitch.Follow that match here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/11/napoli-arsenal-live-mbm>.

7.43pm GMT 

The teams are clickety-clacking their way onto pitches around Europe. The 
music of Georg F Handel is getting a good airing from stadium PAs around the 
continent, as the man himself does a couple of his twice-weekly revolutions 
around his final resting place in Westminster Abbey. Still, if you can't beat 
them etc.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7BluigblcgE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7BluigblcgE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7BluigblcgE&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7BluigblcgE&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7BluigblcgE>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D7BluigblcgE&media=>
close 
Updated at 7.44pm GMT

7.24pm GMT 

FK Austria Vienna v Zenit St Petersburg

FK Austria Vienna: Lindner, Dilaver, Rogulj, Ortlechner, Suttner, Holland, 
Murg, Stankovic, Mader, Jun, Hosiner.

Subs: Kardum, Simkovic, Ramsebner, Leovac, Kienast, Royer, Koch.

Zenit St Petersburg: Lodigin, Ansaldi, Hubocan, Lombaerts, Criscito, Witsel, 
Zyryanov, Faitzulin, Shirokov, Hulk, Kerzhakov.

Subs: Baburin, Luis Neto, Smolnikov, Aniukov, Arshavin, Bystrov, Tymoschuk.

Referee: Aleksandar Stavrev (FYR Macedonia) 

Updated at 7.39pm GMT

7.23pm GMT 

Milan v Ajax

Milan: Abbiati, De Sciglio, Bonera, Zapata, Constant, Montolivo, De Jong, 
Muntari, Kaka, Balotelli, El Shaarawy.

Subs: Coppola, Mexes, Matri, Poli, Nocerino, Emanuelson, Zaccardo.

Ajax: Cillessen, Van Rhijn, Moisander, Denswil, Blind, Klaassen, Poulsen, 
Serero, Schone, Bojan, Fischer.

Subs: Vermeer, van der Hoorn, Sigthorsson, Andersen, Hoesen, Ligeon, De Sa.

Referee: Howard Webb (England) 

Updated at 7.39pm GMT

7.22pm GMT 

Barcelona v Celtic

Barcelona: Pinto, Montoya, Mascherano, Pique, Adriano, Sergi Roberto, 
Busquets, Xavi, Alexis, Neymar, Pedro.

Subs: Oier, Puyol, Iniesta, Song, Jordi Alba, Tello, Dongou.

Celtic: Forster, Lustig, Ambrose, van Dijk, Matthews, Brown, Biton, Ledley, 
Boerrigter, Pukki, Samaras.

Subs: Zaluska, Stokes, Commons, Balde, Mulgrew, Atajic, Fisher.

Referee: Sergei Karasev (Russia) 

Updated at 7.39pm GMT

7.21pm GMT 

So Jose Mourinho has dropped Petr Cech - apparently not on form, but because 
Schwarzer has been training well and so deserves a go. At 41 years and 66 days, 
he becomes the oldest Champions League debutant ever. Meanwhile Ashley Cole and 
David Luiz return.

Updated at 7.23pm GMT

7.16pm GMT 

Team news

Chelsea v Steaua Bucharest (Mourinho drops Cech)

Chelsea: Schwarzer, Ivanovic, Luiz, Terry, Cole, Oscar, Mikel, Lampard, 
Willian, Ba, Hazard.

Subs: Cech, Ramires, Torres, Mata, Schurrle, De Bruyne, Cahill.

Steaua Bucharest: Tatarusanu, Georgievski, Szukala, Gardos, Latovlevici, 
Chipciu, Iancu, Pintilii, Stanciu, Parvulescu, Kapetanos.

Subs: Nita, Prepelita, Cristea, Tatu, Piovaccari, Neagu, Varela. 

Referee: Gianluca Rocchi (Italy) 

Schalke 04 v Basel

Schalke 04: Fahrmann, Uchida, Howedes, Felipe Santana, Kolasinac, Matip, 
Neustadter, Farfan, Meyer, Draxler, Boateng.

Subs: Hildebrand, Hoogland, Goretzka, Clemens, Fuchs, Ayhan, Szalai.

Basel: Sommer, Voser, Schar, Ivanov, Xhaka, Salah, El-Nenny, Frei, Die, 
Stocker, Streller.

Subs: Vailati, Philipp Degen, Ajeti, David Degen, Delgado, Sauro, Sio.

Referee: Paolo Tagliavento (Italy) 

Marseille v Borussia Dortmund

Marseille: Mandanda, Fanni, Lucas Mendes, Diawara, Mendy, Thauvin, Cheyrou, 
Lemina, Payet, Khelifa, Gignac.

Subs: Samba, Abdallah, Jordan Ayew, Morel, Imbula, Aloe, Bangoura.

Borussia Dortmund: Weidenfeller, Grosskreutz, Papastathopoulos, Sarr, Durm, 
Kehl, Sahin, Blaszczykowski, Mkhitaryan, Reus, Lewandowski.

Subs: Langerak, Hofmann, Aubameyang, Kirch, Schieber, Piszczek, Gunter.

Referee: Marijo Strahonja (Croatia) 

Atletico Madrid v FC Porto

Atletico Madrid: Aranzubia, Manquillo, Alderweireld, Miranda, Insua, Gabi, 
Koke, Torres, Raul Garcia, Adrian, Diego Costa.
Subs: Gil, Godin, Villa, Turan, Gimenez, Leo Baptistao, Hernandez.

FC Porto: Helton, Danilo, Maicon, Mangala, Alex Sandro, Fernando, Gonzalez, 
Defour, Varela, Martinez, Josue.

Subs: Fabiano, Quintero, Ghilas, Herrera, Lica, Ricardo, Otamendi.

Referee: Deniz Aytekin (Germany) 

Updated at 7.39pm GMT

6.59pm GMT 

Preamble

Good evening. There's plenty at stake in tonight's Champions League action 
with something to play for in all four groups. Here's a quick run down:

Group E

Chelsea v Steaua <https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/3667042>

Schalke v Basel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2013/dec/11/schalke-v-basel>

Chelsea are top of the group before tonight's kick-offs and are through to the 
knock-out stages but not as group winners. They must beat Steaua (P5 W0 D3 L3) 
to ensure that happens. Should Chelsea lose, then the winner of Schalke v Basel 
will go through as group winner, though Chelsea will still top the group should 
that match end as a draw.

Group F

Napoli v Arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/11/napoli-arsenal-live-mbm>

Marseille v Dortmund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2013/dec/11/marseille-v-borussiadortmund>

Group F is very much up in the air, with none of Arsenal, Dortmund or Napoli 
yet through. For Arsenal, it's relatively simple: they must avoid losing by 
three goals or more to ensure they go through -follow that match live with 
Scott Murray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/dec/11/napoli-arsenal-live-mbm>. 
They will go through as group winners if they win or draw against Napoli. 
Dortmund face Marseille who are yet to win a game in the group stages. Victory 
for the German side will put them through should Napoli lose or draw. Napoli 
need to beat Arsenal by three goals or draw and hope Dortmund lose at Marseille.

Group G

Atletico Madrid v Porto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2013/dec/11/atleticomadrid-v-porto>

Austria Vienna v Zenit St Petersburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/3667045>

Atletico Madrid are clear winners in Group G and are currently unbeaten, while 
Austria Vienna are already out. It means Porto must beat Atletico and hope 
Zenit cannot beat Austria Vienna if they are to go through.

Group H

Barcelona v Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2013/dec/11/barcelona-v-celtic>

Milan v Ajax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/match/2013/dec/11/acmilan-v-ajax>

Barcelona are through but not as guaranteed group winners yet. Celtic will 
definitely finish bottom, no matter what happens tonight. Victory for Barca 
will secure them the top spot, while Milan and Ajax are involved in a straight 
shoot-out to see who goes through, with only a win enough for the Dutch side.

At least, that's what it looks like. But there's always room for a Pellegrini 
in there somewhere.

Updated at 7.02pm GMT
 