


Nine ended up with a legal bill that was $7m higher than it usually is, the 
network revealed on Thursday, in no small part because the 60 Minutes crew 
ended up in jail in Lebanon. The substantial legal bill didn’t include the cash 
the network had to pay to Lebanese authorities to get Tara Brown, Stephen Rice 
and the crew out of jail either. Chief finance officer Greg Barnes admitted 60 
Minutes plus a stoush over streaming rights with regional affiliate WIN and 
another legal battle with Seven, which accused them of stealing the format for 
My Kitchen Rules, had blown out the budget: “Included in costs were … a $7 
million incremental legal cost associated with various legal matters with WIN, 
Seven as well as the 60 Minutes Beirut story”. The network’s poor performance 
was also attributed to programming flops including Australia’s Got Talent, 
Farmer Wants a Wife, Renovation Rumble, The Briefcase, The Verdict, and The 
Hotplate. Nine reported an after-tax net profit for 2016 of $120m, down 7% on 
last year.

Don’t rock the boat

A job ad for a journalist at maritime publication Baird Maritime not 
surprisingly asked for a competent journalist and editor who who was passionate 
about ships, boats and the sea. Bizarrely however there was another requirement 
specified in the seek.com.au posting. Apparently the job would “not suit a safe 
spaces/micro-aggression/social justice warrior type”. At least the candidates 
know what they’re in for.


Come on over, the reef is fine

The Courier Mail’s take on the bleaching of the Great Barrier was front and 
centre on Mondayin a story 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/reef-tourism-operators-find-less-than-five-per-cent-of-coral-dead-under-extreme-bleaching/news-story/79247a63aa8166da0920d6af6567e642>
 headlined “White Trashed”. The Murdoch-owned tabloid declared that the 
scientists were wrong and most of the reef is in fact in pristine condition: 
“Reef tourism operators have found less than five per cent of coral has died 
off — compared to the 50 to 60 per cent estimated by scientists — under 
‘extreme’ mass coral bleaching on the northern Great Barrier Reef,” the report 
in the Queensland daily said.
 The Courier Mail front page on Monday. Photograph: News Corp Australia 
The story quoted local businesses Mike Ball Dive and Spirit of Freedom who had 
commissioned teams of divers to survey “the hardest-hit part of the reef from 
Bathurst Head to Raine Island”.

Spirit of Freedom owner Chris Eade was motivated by global headlines which had 
“damaged the reputation of the $5bn reef tourism industry”, he said.

“Scientists had written off that entire northern section as a complete 
white-out,” Eade said.

“We expected the worst but it is tremendous condition. Most of it is pristine, 
the rest is in full recovery. It shows the resilience of the reef.’’

Mike Ball Dive boss Craig Stephen also found almost no change in the reef: “It 
wasn’t until we got underwater that we could get a true picture of what 
percentage of reef was bleached,” he said.

“The discrepancy is phenomenal. It is so wrong. Everywhere we have been we 
have found healthy reefs. There has been a great disservice [done] to the Great 
Barrier Reef and tourism and it has not been good for our industry.”

In April, an aerial survey of the reef reported that up to 93% had been hit by 
coral bleaching. Professor Terry Hughes, from James Cook University and head of 
the NationalCoral <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coral> Bleaching 
taskforce, said that the northern region of the reef was seeing mortality as 
high as 50% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/19/great-barrier-reef-93-of-reefs-hit-by-coral-bleaching>
 and he expected some reefs would exceed 90%. Hughes told Guardian Australia: 
“We’ve never seen anything like this scale of bleaching before. In the northern 
Great Barrier Reef, it’s like 10 cyclones have come ashore all at once.”
Jeff Sparrow (@Jeff_Sparrow) 
An exemplary case of #pubtestresearch 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/pubtestresearch?src=hash> https://t.co/hR1Wgwv6gK 
<https://t.co/hR1Wgwv6gK>
 <https://twitter.com/Jeff_Sparrow/status/767884129102798848> August 23, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Jeff_Sparrow/status/767884129102798848> 
Bad taste award 

While we’re on Murdoch tabloids, the bad taste award must surely go to The 
Daily Telegraph for its picture selection on the tragic story of British 
backpacker Mia Ayliffe-Chung who was stabbed to death in a Queensland hostel on 
Tuesday. With dozens more suitable snaps of the 21-year-old available online, 
the Tele’s editor, Chris Dore, chose to publish on the front page on Thursday a 
photo of the murder victim scantily clad in long black stockings and underwear.

A bitter pill for ABC supporters

There was an immediate outcry this week 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-08-23/concerns-raised-as-australia-plus-partners-with-swisse-wellness/7778488>
 when the ABC announced it had entered into a commercial partnership with 
Swisse Wellness, a vitamins and supplements company which pays celebrities, 
including Nicole Kidman and Sonia Kruger, to spruik its wares. The ABC’s 
international arm, a multi-platform, international media service called 
Australia Plus (A+), will now be branded with exclusive Swisse logos on its 
online platforms, digital and social media channels and Australia Plus TV. The 
ABC has also signed Monash University and the Victorian state government as 
partners.

Swisse chief executive Radek Sali, who was one of the few people to be 
thrilled about the arrangement: “Our mission at Swisse is to make people around 
the world healthier and happier, and through this exciting partnership we will 
be able to take our message to a number of new regions and audiences,” he said. 
One of the critics was Dr Ken Harvey, an adjunct associate professor in the 
department of epidemiology and preventive medicine at Monash University. 
“Swisse have an unenviable reputation for marketing their products, both in 
Australia and internationally,” Dr Harvey told Guardian Australia.

“Their sales success reflect the large amount of money they spend on marketing 
hype and the use of celebrities, not on science. Their advertising claims have 
also been the subject of a number of satirical segments on the ABC Checkout 
program,” Harvey said. In 2013 a story on the Checkout regarding some of the 
product claims was the subject of a defamation lawsuit which was eventually 
settled out of court with both sides paying their own costs.

But the ABC has defended the deal, saying ABC International is “expressly 
permitted under the ABC Act” to accept advertising and sponsorship. “It does so 
in accordance with the ABC Editorial Policies, ensuring that editorial 
decisions are in no way influenced by any companies, government, universities 
or other organisations who advertise or provide sponsorship on Australia Plus. 
Because of that, the existence of sponsors and advertisers on Australia Plus 
has absolutely no improper impact or influence on ABC editorial content on the 
Australia Plus platform or anywhere else on the ABC.”

Worth paying for?

Andrew Bolt’s book “Bolt: Worth Fighting For” (Wilkinson Publishing, June 
2016) is on an international mystery tour, courtesy of Bolt’s fans. Every 
couple of days the Herald Sun columnist posts a photograph of his book in an 
exotic location, on a train or in a field of tulips, always urging readers to 
buy their own copy for just $29.99 viaa helpful link 
<http://www.wilkinsonpublishing.com.au/index.php?route=product/product&product_id=500>
. Bolt explains: “My book is an odyssey, visiting Bath, the skulls of 
Montpellier, York Minster, Shanghai, Croatia, Ho Chi Minh City, Santorini, 
London, Lake Como, Ithaca, Scotland, the Bay of Naples, Dubrovnik, Fiji, 
Aileron, New Zealand, Sri Lanka, the Andes, the Northern Territory, the 
Whitsundays, Kalgoorlie and Condabri, Queensland, before invading Australia’s 
most leftwing parliament – an experience which convinced one reader at the 
Katharine River Mango Farm to try teaching even a donkey to understand what’s 
in it. Meanwhile, it attended a christening in Newcastle, checked in at a 
Penrith hospital and recuperated at the Moreton Bay Boat Club before sailing 
down the Murray and visiting the Mt Annan Australian Botanical Garden.” Could 
the endless publicity Bolt has lavished on his tome be because it is selling 
rather poorly in the bookshops? According to Bookscan figures, Worth Fighting 
For has sold just 2,665 copies to date. For comparison Niki Savva’s book about 
former PM Tony Abbott, Road to Ruin, has sold 34,496 copies since it came out 
in March.

 * This story was amended on 26 August 2016 to clarify that the ABC, not 
Swisse, has signed Monash University and the Victorian state government as 
partners.
 