
Channel 5 has bagged the new series of American Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>, the Simon Fuller 
talent show that previously aired in the UK on ITV2.

The 12th season of American Idol will air on Channel 5's spin-off channel, 5*, 
beginning in January next year, the same month it premieres in the US on Fox.

American Idol's new series will feature a revamped judging lineup including 
Mariah Carey, Nicki Minaj, Randy Jackson and Keith Urban after ratings dipped 
for the 11th series, won by Phillip Phillips, in May this year.

Stars to have emerged from previous runs of the show, fronted by Ryan 
Seacrest, include Kelly Clarkson and Jennifer Hudson.

Channel 5's head of acquisitions Katie Keenan said: "American Idol is immense. 
We believe it's going to be a defining show for 5* building on an already 
impressive schedule."

American Idol, the global spin-off of Pop Idol, which aired on ITV1 between 
2001 and 2003, has been on ITV2 since the show began in 2002 and was one of the 
channel's earliest ratings bankers.

The most recent series launched on ITV2 in January this year with an audience 
of 350,000 viewers.

American Idol regularly tops the US ratings but its audience has fallen from a 
peak of 36.4 million for the final of its fifth series in 2006. This year's 
11th series final was watched by 20.7 million viewers in the US.

Channel 5 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/channelfive> clinched the rights 
in a two-year deal for the 12th and 13th series of the show with 
FremantleMedia, which co-produces the show with Fuller's 19 Entertainment.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>. 
 