
The comic writer and actor Charlie Higson couldn’t help but see the funny side 
when his alma mater, theUniversity of East Anglia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofeastanglia>, asked him to 
consider transferring his archive of manuscripts to its care. It happened 
shortly after he had tossed two boxes of papers into a skip, assuming they were 
of no value.

UEA will announce this week that his papers will go into its British Archive 
for Contemporary Writing <https://portal.uea.ac.uk/library/archives/bacw>, 
whose literary holdings include Malcolm Bradbury and JD Salinger. The 
university has an international reputation for creative writing through its MA, 
with Ian McEwan among its alumni.

Brilliant! The Fast Show archive - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gallery/2016/sep/10/brilliant-the-fast-show-archive-in-pictures>
Higson, 58, is co-creator of The Fast Show 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00fn9t2>, the BBC2 comedy sketch series 
watched by millions. He has also written for Harry Enfield, Vic Reeves and Bob 
Mortimer, and is the author of the bestsellingYoung Bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/13/charlie-higson-enemy-young-bond-interview>
 novels.

He has loaned the material under the UEA’s innovative storehouse model, which 
organises and provides access to collections much earlier in a writer’s career 
while retaining flexibility should they need to withdraw the material at a 
later date.

“The archive is invaluable because comedy is a genre for which little 
historical documentation is kept – which is odd, given humour’s centrality to 
British culture and its importance to institutions such as the BBC,” said Dr 
Brett Mills, a senior lecturer at UEA and an expert on comedy and popular 
television.

While having a clearout, Higson never dreamed that a university boasting the 
literary archive of Nobel laureate Doris Lessing would want his notebooks and 
scripts for television and film, not to mention his novels.

“I was moving my office,” he told the Observer. “I’d kept tons of stuff in 
boxes and also put stuff in storage at great expense. I just thought, nobody’s 
really going to be interested in this. So I did start heaving stuff out.”

It was at UEA that Higson met his future comedy-writing partner, Paul 
Whitehouse. After university they moved to a squat in Hackney while trying to 
break into comedy, and met Harry Enfield who was then working as a milkman. 
Higson and Whitehouse received their big break when Higson created Enfield’s 
characterLoadsamoney <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gXuRvthgn4U>, the epitome 
of 1980s greed, and Whitehouse inspired Enfield’sStavros 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0mYssEXILjc>, the Greek kebab shop owner. The 
pair went on to createThe Fast Show, which ran on BBC2 primarily from 1994 to 
2000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcharlie-higson-donates-fast-show-scripts-uea-literary-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548294bad2504978cc99ed6fbb773497d0f62fb6%2F0_606_1386_832%2F1386.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlie%20Higson%20hands%20Fast%20Show%20scripts%20to%20UEA%20literary%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcharlie-higson-donates-fast-show-scripts-uea-literary-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlie%20Higson%20hands%20Fast%20Show%20scripts%20to%20UEA%20literary%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcharlie-higson-donates-fast-show-scripts-uea-literary-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F548294bad2504978cc99ed6fbb773497d0f62fb6%2F0_606_1386_832%2F1386.jpg>
 Charlie Higson as The Fast Show character Swiss Toni. Photograph: Suki Dhanda 
Higson’s archive is full of unpublished and unperformed sketches and projects. 
They include Bollock Street, written with Whitehouse and set among a community 
of squatters, punks and arts students. When Frenchman Philippe arrives with a 
guitar, mayhem ensues. In another, Meat, an art school graduate returns home to 
a traditional father who suspects she is turning communist and vegetarian. On a 
weekend away, friends experiment with a strange new drug and things go horribly 
wrong.

Some are early drafts. Others have raw material worked into later sketches. 
One typedFast Show page sets the scene: “A young Yorkshire man walking down the 
street.” A rambling monologue about the good things in life follows: “Ain’t it 
brilliant <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B12WBTFLK0Q> these days? The pubs 
are open all day … Fantastic. You can drink all day … Eh, and have you seen 
them photo shops? You can get your pictures developed in, like, two hours. It’s 
brilliant. Used to take a week … And you know another brilliant thing? 
Ansaphones. Have you seen them? If you’re out they answer your phone for you. 
And whoever’s rung you up can leave a message. And when you gerrin from being 
in the pub all day or … having your photos developed, you can listen to the 
message and then ring ’em back. It’s brilliant …” His rambling continues until 
he walks into a lamp-post.

Higson said: “There are a lot of film scripts that never saw the light of day, 
including a couple of children’s films that Paul and I wrote, which we never 
quite got right.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcharlie-higson-donates-fast-show-scripts-uea-literary-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9899ed8874d1f5d9a3836ee4cd1901fe02162b4%2F0_105_1790_1074%2F1790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Charlie%20Higson%20hands%20Fast%20Show%20scripts%20to%20UEA%20literary%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcharlie-higson-donates-fast-show-scripts-uea-literary-archive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Charlie%20Higson%20hands%20Fast%20Show%20scripts%20to%20UEA%20literary%20archive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F11%2Fcharlie-higson-donates-fast-show-scripts-uea-literary-archive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9899ed8874d1f5d9a3836ee4cd1901fe02162b4%2F0_105_1790_1074%2F1790.jpg>
 Caroline Aherne as Janine in The Fast Show. Photograph: SAS Tim 
UEA archivist Justine Mann said that the material sheds light on their “comic 
genius”. EarlyFast Show drafts include “Suit you, sir 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4EVFdPjFR5s>”, featuring two shop assistants 
becoming suggestive with a man wanting to buy a suit: “Your secretary, sir. 
Will you be giving it to her?” Mann said that the sketch is from their initial 
pitch – before the programme was commissioned – and later became more 
suggestive. The Suit You tailors, played by Whitehouse and Mark Williams, went 
on to appear in almost every edition of the show. There are also photographs of 
the late comedian Caroline Aherne, a fellow writer and performer onThe Fast Show
. One shows her with a pram, waiting to shoot the character of Janine, the 
gum-chewing schoolgirl with big dreams.

Asked about television comedy today, Higson said: “The problem with the BBC is 
that they’re so strapped for cash that they’re not investing in anything 
particularly ambitious. They’re playing it safe.”

Higson will be at UEA on 16 September, discussing Ian Fleming and the creation 
of Young Bond at acrimewriting festival 
<https://www.uea.ac.uk/events/-/noirwich-crime-writing-festival?inheritRedirect=true>
.
 