
Three and a half years ago, the far-right Norwegian terrorist Anders Breivik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik> bombed Oslo, and 
then gunned down dozens of young people on the island of Utøya. His 
rationalisation for the atrocity was to stop the “Islamisation” of Norway: that 
the Norwegian left had opened the country’s doors to Muslims and diluted its 
Christian heritage. But Norway’s response was not retribution, revenge, 
clampdowns. “Our response is more democracy, more openness, and more humanity,”
declared the prime minister Jens Stoltenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/15/anders-breivik-norway-copes-horror>
. When Breivik was put on trial, Norway played it by the book. The backlash he 
surely craved never came.

Here’s how the murderers who despicably gunned down the journalists and 
cartoonists of Charlie Hebdo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/jan/08/charlie-hebdo-shooting-several-arrests-in-manhunt-for-suspects-live-updates>
 do not want us to respond. Vengeance and hatred directed at Muslims as a whole 
serves Islamic fundamentalists well. They want Muslims to feel hated, targeted 
and discriminated against, because it increases the potential well of support 
for their cause. Already, there are multiple reports ofattacks in France 
against mosques 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/france/11332467/Paris-shootings-lead-to-firebomb-attacks-on-French-mosques.html>
, and even a “criminal explosion” in a kebab shop. These are not just 
disgraceful, hateful acts. Those responsible are sticking to the script of the 
perpetrators. They are themselves de facto recruiting sergeants for terrorists.

Social media abounds with Islamophobes seizing this atrocity to advance their 
hatred. Islam as an entire religion is responsible, they cry: it is 
incompatible with “western values”. They wish to homogenise Muslims, as though 
Malala and Mo Farah have anything in common with the sectarian murderers of 
Isis. Most victims of Islamic extremists are of course themselves Muslims: 
includingAhmed Merabet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/08/uk-police-commemorate-french-officers-charlie-hebdo-attack-france>
, the French police officer killed at close range by the terrorists in Paris 
yesterday.

This is a dangerous moment. Anti-Muslim prejudice is rampant in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. The favoured target of 
Europe’s far-right – like France’s Front National, which currently leads in the 
opinion polls – is Muslims. France is home to around 5 million Muslims, who 
disproportionately live in poverty and unemployment, often in ghettoised 
banlieues. This incident should rightfully horrify, but it will now undoubtedly 
fuel an already ascendant far-right.

The consequences? More anti-Muslim hatred, more disillusionment among already 
marginalised young Muslims, more potential recruits for extremist groups.

There is a choice, of course. Norway’s enlightened response could be a model 
elsewhere in Europe too. It would be the last thing the attackers would want us 
to do. That, in itself, should give us all pause to think.
 