
Charlize Theron has spoken about the true meaning of feminism and the 
importance of equal pay in a new interview withElle UK 
<http://www.elleuk.com/now-trending/charlize-theron-elle-cover-june-2015>.

The actress, who stars in this month’s action reboot Mad Max: Fury Road, 
managed to negotiate an equal salary for The Huntsman 
<http://pagesix.com/2015/01/07/charlize-hemsworths-earning-10m-for-huntsman-and-so-should-i/>
 afterleaked Sony emails showed the disparity between pay on the set of 
American Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/12/sony-email-hack-jennifer-lawrence-paid-less-american-hustle>
. She engineered a $10m rise to put her on par with co-star Chris Hemsworth for 
theSnow White prequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/20/is-snow-white-prequel-the-huntsman-the-most-pointless-follow-up-of-all-time>
.

Kristen Stewart: 'Hollywood is disgustingly sexist'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/29/kristen-stewart-hollywood-is-disgustingly-sexist>
“I have to give them credit, because once I asked, they said yes,” she said. 
“They did not fight it. And maybe that’s the message: that we just need to put 
our foot down.”

Theron, who won an Oscar for her role in Monster, used the American Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-hustle> emails, which revealed that 
Amy Adams and Jennifer Lawrence were both taking home a smaller percentage of 
profits than their male co-stars, to engineer better pay.

“When I thought about the temperature out there – with finding out what 
Jennifer and Amy were being paid on a set with guy actors who are their 
counterparts … They’re just as good as any of the guys on there. Yeah, that 
pissed me off!”

Theron also went on to speak about the importance of being a feminist.

“This is a good time for us to bring this to a place of fairness, and girls 
need to know that being a feminist is a good thing,” she said. “It doesn’t mean 
that you hate men. It means equal rights. If you’re doing the same job, you 
should be compensated and treated in the same way.”


Carey Mulligan: film industry is 'massively sexist'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/22/carey-mulligan-film-industry-is-massively-sexist-far-from-the-madding-crowd>
In the same interview, she also talked about the difficulties of working with 
her partner Sean Penn on the romantic drama The Last Face, where she stars 
alongside Javier Bardem.

“Putting aside that he’s my partner, he’s the love of my life; for the first 
time, I felt that my work was really bleeding into my life and that made it 
hard,” she said. “There were moments where I was incredibly unfair to him. And 
moments where I felt like … he was incredibly unfair to me. But it makes you 
realise that no matter how complicated it gets, the priority is the 
relationship.”


Theron was last seen in Seth MacFarlane’s A Million Ways to Die in the West 
and will appear next in Gillian Flynn adaptation Dark Places.
 