
Arqiva, which owns the TV and radio transmitters used by most UK broadcasters, 
has hired former senior Channel 5 executive Charles Constable to head a new 
digital unit responsible for assets including its stakes inFreeview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/freeview> and YouView.

Constable, responsible for the BBC's successful bid team for Freeview and one 
of Greg Dyke's closest advisers when he was head of the BBC, was most recently 
strategy director at Channel 5. He left in 2010 after more than five years 
following the acquisition of the business by Richard Desmond's Northern & Shell.

He will take the newly-created role of managing director of digital platforms 
Arqiva, the first senior executive hiring by new chief executive John 
Cresswell. Cresswell, the former ITV interim chief executive,joined the 
business in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/11/john-cresswell-arqiva?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

Constable will officially take up his new role from 6 June with responsibility 
for developing the Freeview business and the company's interest in the 
BBC-backed consortium behind video-on-demand ventureYouView 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/youview>.

He will also play a key role in developing Arqiva's strategy – as both a 
supplier of services and potential buyer in its own right – of the potential 
uses of the 600Mhz spectrum that will be freed up by Ofcom.

However, Constable will not have responsibility for SeeSaw, the online TV 
venture Arqiva launched after acquiring the assets of the ill-fated Project 
Kangaroo abandoned by ITV, Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide,for which the company is 
currently seeking an investment partner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/jan/19/arquiva-seesaw-online-tv?INTCMP=SRCH>
.

Advisers Ingenious Media are examining strategic options, from selling a stake 
through to potentially selling SeeSaw.

"With the launch of Freeview HD and the continuing progress with digital 
switchover the Freeview platform goes from strength to strength," Constable 
said. "The launch of YouView and the prospect of additional spectrum for new 
multiplexes also present significant opportunities to further strengthen and 
develop the platform."

Arqiva <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> is owned by a consortium of 
eight shareholders, the biggest of which are Canada Pension Plan Investment 
Board and Australian firm Macquarie. The company employs 2,000 staff in 80 
sites across the UK, Europe and the US.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
on Twitter at http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian and Facebook at 
http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian
 