
Donald Trump faced some uncomfortable questions during the making of our new 
feature documentary,A Dangerous Game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-dangerous-game>, which probes the 
environmental cost of luxury golf resorts, including two developed by the Trump 
Organisation.

But to give the tycoon credit, at least he talked to us. Trump even invited me 
to an extraordinary interview in Trump Tower in Manhattan. A couple of years 
ago, Trump had tweeted to his 2.4 million followers that I was a "stupid fool" 
during the making of our previous film,You've Been Trumped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/oct/22/donald-trump-bbc-film-row> – 
after my producer and I had beenthrown in jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/sep/12/film-makers-arrested-donald-trump-scottish-golf-resort>
. The police later issued a half-baked apology.

He also invited me speak to his son Donald Trump Jr at Trump National, a 
hugely expensive golf club (with only 300 members) in a drought-prone area of 
New Jersey. Environmentalists accuse the club of using up hundreds of millions 
of gallons of much-needed water from the public supply. The younger Trump, who 
works closely with his father, explained howhe could call himself an 
environmentalist 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/donald-trump-says-hes-an-environmentalist-others-beg-to-differ/2011/05/12/AFPJV42G_story.html>
 while also defending his role ina widely reported African hunting safari 
<http://www.tmz.com/2012/03/12/donald-trump-sons-wildlife-elephant-kill-hunting/>
.

Whatever you may think of the Trumps, they cooperated fully and answered all 
of our questions.

The same can't be said of Scotland's first minister Alex Salmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/alexsalmond>, whose government made the 
decision to allow Trump to destroy a protected conservation site of special 
scientific interest, in order to build Aberdeenshire's 62nd golf course.

Our efforts to interview the first minister took up several months. To begin 
with, his office requested that any interview be played in its entirety in the 
final film. After we refused, his office scheduled, postponed, rescheduled, 
then finally cancelled the interview at the last minute.

Among other things, we wanted to ask the first minister on camera about the 
effect of the Trump golf course development on local residents, including a 
90-year-old woman who hasn't had a proper water supply for four years, and 
about what happened to the 6,000 jobs his government promised whenapproving the 
development 
<http://www.cybergolf.com/golf_news/trump_gets_approval_for_golf_resort_in_scotland>
.

Greg Norman didn't want to talk either. He is the designer and public face 
behinda golf course at the world heritage site in Dubrovnik 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/soc/2827>, Croatia, that UN experts say may do 
"irreversible harm" to one of the most beautiful and historic cities in the 
world. But the two-time Open champion refused to explain why he is still going 
ahead with the project despite the fact that 84% oflocal voters rejected it 
<http://www.foeeurope.org/dubrovnik-residents-vote-against-golf-course-290413> 
in Croatia's first official referendum.

Perhaps most troubling was the silence from Peter Dawson, executive director 
of the R&A, the British organisation that claims to govern golf worldwide. We 
wanted to ask Dawson about how the R&A can facilitate and promote the expansion 
of the sport in places where golf course developments blatantly violate the 
R&A's ownenvironmental guidelines 
<http://golfcoursemanagement.randa.org/en/Environmental-Impact.aspx>, and where 
the sport is reserved for the very richest and most powerful.

As revealed in Dan Washburn's new book The Forbidden Game: Golf and the 
Chinese Dream, the world's biggest golf boom has taken place in China, despite 
a government ban on golf course construction. Corrupt local officials, in 
cahoots with real-estate developers, are ensuring that countless courses are 
being built (no one knows how many) with little or no environmental oversight. 
Though Dawson refused to talk to us, he did recently appoint the R&A's first
"golf ambassador" 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2013/07/09/golf-ra-liang-idUKL4N0FF2AX20130709> 
to China.

Dawson is also in charge of introducing golf to the 2016 Olympics in Brazil – 
another country where the sport is the preserve of the super-elite (fewer than 
one in 10,000 Brazilians play). The newOlympic course in Rio de Janeiro 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/early-lead/wp/2014/06/02/brazil-cant-catch-a-break-environmental-concerns-could-halt-construction-of-rios-olympic-golf-course/>
 is already raising environmental and social concerns in a city where hundreds 
of thousands of families still live in extreme poverty. In what seems a parody 
of the Olympic spirit, the course has become a magnet for the rich, who are 
snapping upwell-protected apartments and villas 
<http://www.luxuryestate.com/p11001522-apartment-for-sale-rio-de-janeiro> along 
its lush fairways for millions of pounds.

"Large-scale environmental injury and the corruption of democracy go hand in 
hand, they always do," said one person who did agree to talk to us, noted 
environmental lawyer Robert F Kennedy Jr.

Trump would no doubt argue that Kennedy's words don't apply to him – for 
whatever you think ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, he is prepared to go on the 
record. In this respect at least, it's perhaps time for Salmond, Norman and 
Dawson to follow Trump's example.

• A Dangerous Game is released on 5 September in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and the rest of the UK on 12 
September.
 