
The images are enough to turn your stomach. Photographs of young children and 
babies, their tiny limbs blistered and covered in lesions, their faces 
contorted in pain. Some of those in the photographs died shortly after they 
were taken, we learned.

Children bear brunt of alleged chemical weapon attacks in Sudan, says Amnesty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/29/sudan-children-babies-alleged-chemical-weapon-attacks-amnesty>
These harrowing images came to our attention during an eight-month 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/29/sudan-children-babies-alleged-chemical-weapon-attacks-amnesty>
 carried out byAmnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> into one of the most 
remote places on Earth,Jebel Marra 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marrah_Mountains>, in Sudan’s Darfur  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/darfur>region.

The research, which used extensive satellite imagery analysis as well as more 
than 200 detailed interviews with witnesses, revealed a troubling picture. The 
Sudanese armed forces have carried out widespread attacks on hundreds of 
villages, committing war crimes and gross human rights violations including 
bombing, killings, rapes and the use of scorched-earth tactics.

We also found substantial evidence – the photos included – of the use of 
chemical weapons being used to kill and maim civilians, including children.

Amnesty International <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>
 has not taken the decision to publish these deeply disturbing photos lightly: 
we believe the horrific war crimes being committed in Darfur require concerted 
action on the part of the international community.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fchemical-weapons-used-against-darfuris-war-crime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc885542d25f3e6f0e2ac90da16353de83ca21414%2F0_0_1109_1247%2F1109.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chemical%20weapons%20are%20being%20used%20against%20the%20Darfuris.%20This%20is%20a%20war%20crime%20%7C%20Salil%20Shetty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fchemical-weapons-used-against-darfuris-war-crime%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chemical%20weapons%20are%20being%20used%20against%20the%20Darfuris.%20This%20is%20a%20war%20crime%20%7C%20Salil%20Shetty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fchemical-weapons-used-against-darfuris-war-crime%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc885542d25f3e6f0e2ac90da16353de83ca21414%2F0_0_1109_1247%2F1109.jpg>
 Satellite photographs showing that Karmal village has been almost completely 
razed by fire. Photograph: Amnesty International 
Once the cause celebre of many in the west, Darfur seems to have dropped off 
the global agenda in recent years. The fact that the region is under the watch 
of one of the largest peacekeeping forces in the world, and that earlier this 
month Sudan’s president,Omar al-Bashir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/omar-al-bashir>, proclaimed that peace had 
returned to the troubled region, make Amnesty’s findings all the more galling.

After all, we are talking about the same types of war crimes that first 
catapultedDarfur <https://www.theguardian.com/world/darfur> into the world’s 
consciousness in 2004. But this is 13 years later; and the attacks we’ve 
documented happened between January and September 2016. The most recent was on 
9 September 2016; just a few weeks ago and the day after Bashir’s lofty 
proclamation.

And if the use of chemical weapons is confirmed, this would represent a new 
level of barbarity in the conflict, and a new depth to the range of suffering 
endured by the Darfuri people. One woman described how her baby was still sick 
some six months after exposure to what she described as “poisoned air”.

“The baby is not recovering … he is swollen … he has blisters and wounds,” she 
said. “The [medical staff] say he will get better if he drinks [breast] milk … 
but it is not working.”

Chemical weapons have been banned for decades at the international level in 
recognition of the fact that the suffering they cause can never be justified. 
Credible evidence that Sudan’s government might now repeatedly be using them 
simply cannot be ignored.

More than a decade ago, the international criminal court (ICC) issued an 
arrest warrant for Bashir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/15/south-africa-to-fight-omar-al-bashirs-arrest-warrant-sudan>
 on three counts of genocide, five counts of crimes against humanity and two 
counts of war crimes. And yet, the president has since won two elections and 
travelled regularly, including to Kenya, Nigeria and South Africa. As 
signatories to theRome statute which created the ICC 
<https://ihl-databases.icrc.org/ihl/intro/585>, each of these countries had a 
duty to arrest Bashir on his arrival. None of them did.

Absolutely no effective measures have ever been put in place to protect 
civilians in Darfur despite being under the watch of a jointAfrican Union and 
United Nations peacekeeping mission 
<http://www.un.org/en/peacekeeping/missions/unamid/> (Unamid). Peace talks and 
agreements have brought no security or respite for the Darfuri people.

The response of the international community in the last 10 years has been 
utterly deplorable and in the face of such an ineffective reaction, it is 
little wonder that Al-Bashir’s hubris has grown.

In the light of this shocking new evidence, and on the eve of the UN security 
council meeting in New York, we are calling on it to do more to protect the 
children, men and women of Darfur.

It can do this by applying political pressure on the government of Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> to ensure that the Unamid 
peacekeeping force, as well as humanitarian agencies, can access parts of 
Darfur such as Jebel Marra, where some of the worst abuses appear to be 
happening. There need to be more peacekeeping bases, and they must be able to 
conduct proactive patrols deep into these remote areas.

There also needs to be an urgent investigation into the use of chemical 
weapons in Jebel Marra and, if there is sufficient evidence, prosecutions of 
all those suspected of criminal responsibility must follow.

Bashir must learn that there are consequences when crimes under international 
law are committed. There has been 13 years of catastrophic violence and 
recurring human rights violations; it’s time the world set its focus, once 
more, on Darfur and act.
 