Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZ2YB2EjRZso%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZ2YB2EjRZso%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FZ2YB2EjRZso%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
As a result of his courageous work investigating reports of forced abortions 
and sterilisations by local authorities in Linyi, China,Chen Guangcheng 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chen-guangcheng>, a blind, self-taught 
lawyer and human-rights activist, has endured a relentless campaign of 
harassment, persecution and physical abuse for the past six years.

Sentenced to four years and three months in prison on spurious charges of 
"damaging property and disturbing traffic", the 40-year-old served his sentence 
in full and should have been freed in September 2010. But upon his release he 
and his family were immediately placed under house arrest.

The authorities have gone to extreme lengths to cut Chen Guangcheng's family 
off from the world. Their computer has been confiscated and their internet 
connection and phone line blocked. Security personnel have flooded Dongshigu 
village, Shandong province, which is where they live, and surveillance cameras 
are keeping watch on their home. Neither Chen nor his wife Yuan Weijing have 
been allowed to leave the house in the past 12 months, not even to shop for 
groceries or visit the doctor. Their six-year-old daughter has only recently 
been allowed to attend school.

In February this year, a home video shot by Chen documenting the harsh 
conditions of his life under house arrest was smuggled out of the country and 
posted on the internet.

Conditions have become even more unbearable for the family since the video was 
made public. In a letter published by American NGO ChinaAid in July this year, 
Yuan described how 70 plainclothes security personnel stormed her house and 
beat her and her husband for more than two hours. In March, she wrote, security 
officials raided her house several times. They confiscated personal property, 
including family photos and toys belonging to the couple's daughter, and sealed 
up windows with metal.

Chen Guangcheng and Yuan Weijing's plight has inspired a wave of protests by 
activists in China. In recent weekssupporters have attempted to visit 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2011/nov/11/wellwishers-lawyer-house-arrest-china?newsfeed=true>
 their home in Dongshigu, and have been met with brutality and intimidation. 
But despite the risks, Chen's supporters continue to campaign for him to be 
freed.

To call on the authorities in China to end the persecution of Chen Guangcheng 
and his family, click here:
http://action.amnesty.org.uk/ea-action/action?ea.client.id=1194&ea.campaign.id=8256
 
<http://action.amnesty.org.uk/ea-action/action?ea.client.id=1194&ea.campaign.id=8256>
 