
Following the success of August: Osage County in 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/nov/27/august-osage-county-theatre-review>
, the National theatre has confirmed it will present another play developed by 
Chicago's renownedSteppenwolf Theatre Company <http://steppenwolf.org/> next 
year.

Plans for a Broadway run of Lisa D'Amour <http://www.lisadamour.com/plays.htm>
's Detroit, which was first seen at the Steppenwolf theatre in late 2010, have 
been replaced by a run at the National's Cottesloe in 2012.

The new production will not be a straight transfer of the Steppenwolf one. 
Austin Pendleton, who directed the original, will come back for a new 
production with a British cast, however, and certain members of his production 
team may also return.

Detroit, which lost out to Bruce Norris's Clybourne Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/sep/03/clybourne-park-review> in this 
year'sPulitzer prize <https://www.theguardian.com/books/pulitzerprize>, is an 
examination of the American dream and middle-class ambitions as a group of 
suburbanites gather for a barbecue to welcome their newly arrived neighbours.

New York Times theatre critic Charles Isherwood wrote that the play "speaks to 
the fractious, frightened American moment more perceptively than any play I've 
seen on a New York stage" 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/23/theater/reviews/23steppenwolf.html?pagewanted=all>
.

Producers still hope for a future New York run for either the original 
production or the new one, but thepreviously announced Broadway run 
<http://www.playbill.com/news/article/146583-Detroit-New-Play-by-Lisa-DAmour-Seen-at-Steppenwolf-Will-Arrive-on-Broadway-in-the-Fall>
, scheduled for autumn of this year, will no longer take place.

August: Osage County, Steppenwolf's last London outing, came after a gap of 20 
years and saw itpick up an Olivier award for best design, along with three 
other nominations 
<http://www.olivierawards.com/about/previous-winners/view/item106339/Olivier-Winners-2009/>
.

Michael Billington wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/nov/27/august-osage-county-theatre-review>
 that the production "satisfies a palpable hunger for big theatrical 
experiences," going on to praise the company's "faultless ensemble acting".
 