
Jamila Begum is a canteen assistant at the Chittagong Eye Infirmary and 
Training Complex, and also the sister of one of its recent patients. Five-year 
old Syed underwent surgery that allowed him to regain his sight and his sister 
to regain her job. "Blindness affects the whole family when a child is blind", 
says Imrul Khan, Senior Project Manager for ORBIS Bangladesh, an eye care 
non-profit organisation. "Syed's blindness meant that he required full 
attention from a family member, and so Jamila could not go out to work. His 
surgery has given independence to both of them, and saved the family from 
falling into poverty."

Not all children and families are as fortunate â€“ there are still 1.4 million 
blind children in the world. According to estimates from the World Health 
Organisation, nearly half a million children become blind each year with over 
three-quarters living in developing countries. Compared to the total number of 
blind people, the proportion of children is relatively low, however as 
Professor Clare Gilbert from the International Centre for Eye Health (ICEH) in 
London points out: "Blind children become blind adults. Inadequate primary eye 
care and clinical services for children means that those with treatable causes 
of blindness remain blind, and to make matters worse the lack of support 
services results in blind children who are unable to participate fully in 
society". When the concept of blind-years is applied (number blind multiplied 
by the length of life), blind children suffer an estimated 75 million 
blind-years, reinforcing the reality these children will face a lifetime of 
visual loss.

An analysis of the economic cost of blindness by public health 
ophthalmologists Allen Foster and Kevin Frick found that in terms of the loss 
of productivity of individuals with visual impairment, the annual global impact 
of blindness and low vision in 2000 was US$42 billion. Without interventions to 
address blindness, this figure was projected to increase to US$110 by the year 
2020. Preventing and treating adult and child blindness has the potential to 
increase global economic productivity, with eradication of blindness and low 
vision potentially leading to savings of US$102 billion. Although childhood 
blindness accounts for a small proportion of the blind population, it has been 
estimated that nearly a third of the global economic cost of blindness is due 
to child blindness. With this in mind it might seem surprising that until 
recently, addressing childhood blindness has not always been high on the global 
blindness agenda.

In a global context, cataract (cloudiness of the lens in the eye) is the 
leading cause of blindness worldwide. Treatment is by surgical removal of the 
cataract and replacement with a prosthetic implant, and has been shown to be 
successful both clinically and economically. Indeed, the World Bank evaluated 
cataract surgery to be the most cost-effective public health intervention in 
terms of cost per DALY [disability-adjusted life-years, a measure of disease 
burden developed by the WHO]. It is not unreasonable to assume that the 
procedures used in adults (like cataract surgery), could be used in children 
and hence treatment for childhood cataract, a major cause of child blindness 
could be easily addressed. However, a child's eye is not simply a smaller 
version of an adult eye. Surgery and management of pediatric eye conditions 
requires specialist training and expertise as well as specialized equipment for 
diagnosis and assessment. This leads to increased costs in terms of training, 
resources and infrastructure, and may partly explain why the huge progress seen 
with adult cataract surgery have not been replicated within children's eye care 
services.

Recognition of the importance of childhood blindness, from an economic and 
social perspective, has led to a shift in eye care priorities, and a greater 
investment in human resources and infrastructure related to children's eye care 
particularly within Africa. Professor Kovin Naidoo is the Africa Chair for the 
International Agency for the Prevention of Blindness, an umbrella organisation 
that leads international efforts in blindness prevention activities. He says 
that the eye care agenda is evolving: "Recently, we have seen a move towards 
prioritization of children's eye care services, particularly within sub-Saharan 
Africa. Stakeholders realize that children who are blind or visually impaired 
are not only prevented from developing academically and socially during 
childhood, but also as adults who are unable to join the workforce or 
contribute to their family's income". He has also noticed that the strategic 
and economic focus within the non-profit eye care sector is changing: "Several 
NGOs are investing in pediatric ophthalmology, having recognized the need for 
development of training capacity and strengthening of existing pediatric eye 
care services. However this requires a significant amount of capital. One way 
of doing this is by integrating eye health programmes, where profitable 
activities like cataract surgery can cross-subsidize children's services".

Investing in children's eye care services although costly can have 
wide-reaching consequences. Interventions to prevent childhood blindness can 
also prevent death and illness. According to the USAID Child Blindness Program, 
improving vitamin A status reduces the risk of blindness and reduces child 
deaths by almost a quarter. Recent data from ICEH suggest that measles 
vaccination and vitamin A supplementation have helped to reduce the number of 
blind children to 1.26 million in 2010. This is encouraging and indicates that 
eradicating childhood blindness may be tenable goal. However, Professor Naidoo 
urges caution and the need for partnerships outside of eye care: "Comprehensive 
and accessible eye care will not occur in a vacuum. Eye health for children 
must be seen within the context of comprehensive healthcare, and needs to occur 
within the broader development agenda. Public health interventions addressing 
maternal and child health, community health, maternal education are all 
critical for achieving the Millennium Development Goal of reducing child 
mortality, and may have the added benefit of helping to reduce avoidable 
blindness in children".

Imrul Khan has been part of the team to establish paediatric cataract 
treatment programmes within the most underdeveloped areas of Bangladesh. Some 
local stakeholders argue that funds should continue to be targeted for more 
cost-effective procedures such as adult cataract surgery. His response is to 
invite them to programmes in action for themselves: "When these children come 
to the clinic for an assessment you almost do not realise they are there. They 
are introverted and withdrawn, hiding behind their parents. When you see them 
after their surgery, you cannot recognise them, they are smiling, laughing, 
running around and making noise. They are normal kids again. You cannot put a 
price on that".

This feature was written between 6 March and 30 April 2010 as part of the 
Guardian International Development Journalism Competition
 