
A Chilean judge has ordered the arrest of seven army officers for questioning 
over an attack on two democracy activists who were doused with petrol by 
soldiers and set on fire.

The 1986 attack on Rodrigo Rojas and Carmen Gloria Quintana was one of the 
most notorious torture cases of the 17-year military dictatorship ofAugusto 
Pinochet <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pinochet>.

Rojas, a US resident, later died from his burns, while Quintana was left 
disfigured, but attempts to investigate the case were stymied by a decades-long 
“pact of silence” among the former servicemen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fchile-army-custody-carmen-gloria-quintana-burned-alive-augusto-pinochet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfa4658922f7b759a5a994d0c2988675e7948989%2F0_205_2274_1364%2F2274.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chilean%20army%20officers%20in%20custody%20over%201986%20attack%20on%20activists%20burned%20alive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fchile-army-custody-carmen-gloria-quintana-burned-alive-augusto-pinochet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chilean%20army%20officers%20in%20custody%20over%201986%20attack%20on%20activists%20burned%20alive&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fchile-army-custody-carmen-gloria-quintana-burned-alive-augusto-pinochet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfa4658922f7b759a5a994d0c2988675e7948989%2F0_205_2274_1364%2F2274.jpg>
 A group of colleagues of Rodrigo Rojas raise their cameras during the 
relocation ceremony of the remains of five political victims of the Chilean 
dictatorship. Photograph: Victor Rojas/AFP/Getty Images 
The case was reopened in 2013, and last year a former army conscript testified 
and identified two former officers and five former noncommissioned officers who 
had participated in the attack. All seven were taken into custody on Tuesday 
night.


Rojas, the son of a Chilean exile, had left the Woodrow Wilson School in 
Washington DC and returned toChile <https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> to 
photograph popular protests against Pinochet. Along with Quintana, he was 
captured by soldiers on 2 July 1986, as they documented a two-day national 
strike against the dictatorship.

Quintana and other witnesses described how she and Rojas were beaten, sprayed 
with petrol and set alight. They were then dumped on the outskirts of Santiago 
where they were found by nearby residents and rushed to a hospital.

“These two individuals were trying to document and register what was going on 
in working-class areas of Santiago by showing the world the brutality of 
Pinochet’s repression,” said Jose Miguel Vivanco, executive director of Human 
Rights Watch’sAmericas <https://www.theguardian.com/world/americas> division in 
Washington DC.

“This group of military officers decided in cold blood to kill them. Clearly 
the intention of the military was to set a precedent. To send a clear message, 
to draw a line in the sand and make sure everybody took note of what where they 
are capable of doing,” he said.

Pinochet-era secret police chief’s sentence now 505 years in Chilean jail
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/21/pinochet-era-secret-police-chiefs-sentence-now-505-years-in-chilean-jail>
An army coverup was launched immediately after the attack, with Pinochet 
himself suggesting that the two activists hadaccidentally set themselves on fire
 
<http://www.theclinic.cl/2015/07/22/audio-asi-fue-la-fria-explicacion-que-dio-pinochet-en-1986-por-el-caso-quemados/>
 while they were making petrol bombs.

But last year Fernando Guzmán – who was an 18-year-old soldier at the time of 
the attack – told Judge Mario Carroza that the commanding officer, Lieutenant 
Julio Castañer, had ordered a soldier to douse the victims in petrol and set 
them on fire.

Castañer, who was arrested on Tuesday, was still serving as assistant to the 
chief of staff of an army division in Tierra del Fuego. In previous testimony, 
he had denied seeing gasoline poured on the two young activists.

Carroza said the recent testimony “fundamentally changes the ability to prove 
these acts were intentional because at the time there was only talk of 
negligence. The version of the victims is now corroborated by the [military] 
witness.”

After undergoing lengthy treatment for severe burns at a Canadian hospital, 
Quintana went on to work as as a diplomatic attaché for the Chilean government 
after democracy was restored.

Speaking after the arrests, she said that many of the low-level conscripts who 
participated in her abduction and abuse were acting under orders and thus 
should also be considered as victims.


“The most important thing that has happened is the revelation that inside the 
army there is an entire system to protect this lie that they created to coverup 
human rights crimes,” she said.”
 