
Chinese internet giant Alibaba <https://www.theguardian.com/business/alibaba> 
will pay $266m for Hong Kong’s South China Morning Post, the newspaper said on 
Monday, in an acquisition that has sparked fears the paper will lose its 
independent voice.


The deal comes at a time when concern over press freedom in Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> is growing after attacks on 
journalists, reports of pressure on editorial staff from authorities and 
increasing self-censorship.

Internet giant Alibaba valued at $231bn after frenzied debut as public company
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/19/alibaba-shares-price-americas-biggest-ipo>
Alibaba “has agreed to purchase the media business of the (SCMP) Group for a 
cash consideration of HK$2,060,600,000”, the newspaper said in a statement to 
the Hong Kong stock exchange.

SCMP Group also owns the Hong Kong editions of magazines Esquire, Elle, 
Cosmopolitan and Harper’s Bazaar.

The Chinese firm said it would use its “digital expertise”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/dec/11/south-china-morning-post-to-be-bought-by-alibaba>
to provide “comprehensive and insightful news and analysis of the big stories 
in Hong Kong and China”.

In a letter to the newspaper’s readers following the announcement of the sale, 
Alibaba executive vice chairman Joe Tsai vowed the SCMP would be “objective, 
accurate and fair” and have “the courage to go against conventional wisdom”.

In an interview published on the SCMP website, however, Tsai accused western 
media of bias againstChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, saying 
that Alibaba would “see things differently” – a statement likely to stoke 
critics’ concern.

However, there are fears that press freedoms are being eroded, particularly 
since last year’s mass pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong and the rejection of 
China’s political reform package in June – an unprecedented rebuke to Beijing.

Despite the fears over the newspaper’s editorial independence, some have said 
the SCMP could prosper from the business acumen of Alibaba founder Jack Ma.

The tycoon launched Alibaba in 1999 and under his stewardship it has become 
China’s biggest e-commerce company, operating consumer-to-consumer platform 
Taobao, which is estimated to hold more than 90% of the mainland market.

It has also branched out, buying ChinaVision Media in 2014 and renaming it 
Alibaba Pictures, today China’s biggest film company, which produced this 
year’s blockbuster “Mission: Impossible – Rogue Nation”.

The purchase echoes the decision by another e-commerce tycoon, Amazon founder 
Jeff Bezos,to buy the Washington Post for $250m in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/aug/05/washington-post-sold-jeff-bezos-amazon>
.

The once globally renowned SCMP was founded in 1903 and has long given 
international readers an insider’s perspective on Hong Kong and the mainland, 
but profits and sales have in recent years been hit by an industry-wide decline.

Though it has a relatively small readership, with around 104,000 print and 
digital subscribers by the end of 2014, it retained an outsize influence for 
its coverage of the mainland and willingness to broach controversial topics 
such as the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests in Beijing.

Rupert Murdoch bought the SCMP in 1987, taking it private. In 1993, Malaysian 
tycoon Robert Kuok bought a controlling interest, prompting an editorial shift 
towards Beijing.

Readers’ trust has also dipped as the more pro-Beijing editorial policy has 
not gone unnoticed in a city that saw tens of thousandstake to the streets last 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/22/hong-kong-polls-to-test-public-opinion-one-year-after-umbrella-movement>
to protest against mainland interference.

Hong Kong is semi-autonomous after being handed back to China by Britain in 
1997 and retains freedoms unseen on the mainland.
 