
Parachuting into a massive national funeral can't be fun, so I was relieved on 
Monday night when the pilot of the plane taking me from London to Ghana 
announced: "Ladies and gentlemen, the word from Accra is that the Black Stars 
beat Morocco 2-0 to secure their place in the quarter-finals!" A loud cheer 
went up and passengers slapped each other on the back. Several exuberant souls 
jumped out of their seats and made for the cockpit. "Ladies and gentlemen," 
came a second announcement. "I'm afraid I don't know who got the goals so 
please stop asking."

Vans, taxis, buildings, crumbling wooden stalls and most visible limbs - 
almost nothing in Accra remains unfestooned with a flag, banner or some other 
proud indicator that the African Cup of Nations is in progress. "Are you here 
for the football?" I am constantly asked, and my positive reply draws a warm 
smile and hearty exclamation: "Ah yes sir, that is very good - thank you for 
coming."

Organisers predicted this tournament would attract up to one million fans to 
Ghana and though that figure seems wildly over optimistic, the atmosphere is as 
intoxicating as theHarmattan <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harmattan>, that 
strange wind that has arrived late this year but, as ever, brought with it 
enough Saharan sand to obscure the sky and reduce the sun to a valiant foglight 
- while the opacity tempers the temperature, the sand inflames the throat: 
everyone is coughing.

But they're cheering too, and not just for Ghana. I've been to two matches so 
far and though neither featured the hosts, Ghanaians have been generous in 
their support for the other teams. If the organisers had been equally generous 
in their ticket pricing (the cheapest is four cedis, or over US$4), the 
stadiums would have been packed. As it was, Accra's Ohene Djan Stadium was 
little over half-full for Tuesday's bout between a regal Ivory Coast side and 
the disappointingly tame Eagles of Mali. But still the noise was incredible.

Did I say noise? I meant the music. Djemb√©s pounded throughout and makeshift 
brass brands played on, with trumpeters and trombonists bobbing and jiving and 
blowing in defiance of the Harmattan or, more accurately, in celebration of the 
football. Or life. Or Africanness. Or something. Whatever, the prevailing mood 
in the stadium was of celebration. No one here was simply waiting to be 
entertained. In fact, the football seemed incidental - certainly the 
festivities didn't depend on it. They started long before kick-off and 
continued at the same lusty rhythm and soul-stirring volume regardless of 
anything that was happening on the pitch.

The 3,000 or so Ivorian fans went suitably crazy when Didier Drogba opened the 
scoring and ran straight to the corner they were in, but the 1,500 or so Malian 
fans, amongst whom I found myself, were just as joyful, undeterred by the 
depressing capitulation of their team. Take, for example, the guy covered in 
red, yellow and green body paint and sporting an enormous wooden eagle on his 
head - nothing was going to stop him dancing like a champion; same for the loon 
with a Malian flag around his shoulders and a metal bowl full of burning coals 
on his head - Ghanaians, who were more numerous and, though neutral, only 
slightly less boisterous in the 20,000 crowd, were particularly taken by him. 
Many were the funsters who approached him to perform tricky dances that he 
would then emulate while keeping the coals balanced atop his bonce. Upon 
successfully meeting each challenge he would giddily milk the adulation as he 
was justly acclaimed a hero.

The only hint of trouble came at the end when Seydou Keita trotted over to the 
Malian fans, applauded their devotion and tossed his jersey to them. It landed 
plum in one beaming guy's arms, but his smile quickly disappeared as, like a 
rugby player who'd just fielded a Garryowen, he was engulfed and buried under a 
mass of heaving bodies. The police reluctantly moved in and, with some robust 
words but without so much as wielding a truncheon, restored order, insisting 
that the original recipient be allowed to scurry away gratefully with what 
remained of the jersey.

Moments later Drogba, whose wife is Malian, also came to pay homage to the 
Malian fans and, though he'd already thrown his shirt to the Ivorian flock, 
hundreds of adorers pushed themselves up against the Perspex fence that 
surrounds the pitch and clamoured for his attention. His affection seemed as 
sincere as theirs and, all in all, the communion was beautiful. It remained 
that way outside the stadium, where fans of all nationalities gathered around 
charcoal fires and booming speakers to eat, drink, dance, drink, dance, drink, 
dance, drink, dance, drink, dance ...

Somersaults in Kumasi

"Don't be confused, people don't know," declared the hand-painted daubing on 
the back of a van spotted on the way to Kumasi, Ghana's second city, the seat 
of the Ashanti kingdom and the venue for yesterday's meeting betweenEgypt and 
Zambia 
<http://football.theguardian.com/breakingnews/feedstory/0,,-7268892,00.html>.

Over 350km north of Accra, this is considered the footballing centre of this 
football-mad country.Asante Kotoko <http://www.asantekotokofc.org/> are the 
pride of the region and regularly draw crowds of over 40,000, particularly for 
the visit of Accra'sHearts of Oaks <http://www.accraheartsofoak.com/index.php> 
- between them these sides have dominated the domestic league since 
independence and when Hearts come to Kumasi, they and the referee are given 
armed escorts on to the pitch.

The most menacing thing about yesterday's match, however, was Zambia's 
nickname - 'Chipolopolo', the Copper Bullets. The defending champions Egypt 
were backed by less than 100 travelling fans while the Zambians didn't appear 
to have any compatriots in the crowd but could count on the support of the 
5,000 or so Ghanaians who paid to get in. Why? "Because they play more 
attacking football," reasoned Emmanuel Oseh, an art student sitting beside me. 
"Because we always support the African teams!" exulted a trumpeter from the 
Asafo brass band, just one of the many combos making sure the atmosphere was, 
here too, wonderful despite the many empty seats.

"Are Egypt not African?" I asked, my question provoking knowing chortles from 
the throngs around me. "Ask them," chirps one bloke with a wink, as others 
explained that though Egypt and Tunisia have won the last two tournaments, 
people north of the Sahara consider themselves Arab or Mediterranean more than 
African. Whether that's true I don't know, but the perception means that the 
Kumasi crowd winced at Egyptian mastery and shoddy Zambian defending, howled 
when an Egyptian was suspected of diving (ie every time one of them went down), 
and pleaded desperately for an equaliser after the Pharoahs cantered into a 
deserved early lead.

After that, every time Zambia were awarded a corner the crowd lept to their 
feet and giddily roared "GOOOOOOAAAAAAAAALLLLLLLLLL, GOAAAAAAAAAAALLLLLLLL!!!", 
hoping their pre-emptive rejoicing would lead to the delivery being nodded into 
the net. When it didn't, everyone collapsed back into the seats, laughing 
hysterically. Meanwhile when Egypt got a corner, the crowd, through yet more 
laughter, yelled in unison "AWAY! AWAY! AWAY!" and made vigorous repelling 
motions with their arms as if trying to cast a spell. When the delivery was 
cleared, they cheered before, naturally, laughing hysterically again.

When Chris Katongo finally equalised for Zambia just before the end, the crowd 
erupted. A few delirious fans attempted to repeat the goalscorer's celebratory 
sextuple somersault, but ended up crashing into each other or seats. And 
laughing hysterically.

The bands just kept playing.

Today sees the culmination of Group D, the most open group in the tournament. 
While Angola and Tunisiacould conspire to play out a draw 
<http://football.theguardian.com/breakingnews/feedstory/0,,-7267884,00.html> in 
Tamale that would ensure both teams progress, that seems unlikely given the 
tremendous spirit the tournament has been played in so far. That'll mean the 
match I'll be at, between Senegal and South Africa here in Kumasi, should be 
intense and meaningful. I'd predict a Senegal win if they hadn't been so 
profligate so far. One thing that's guaranteed, however, is this: lots of 
hysterical laughter.

The European Championships might be better organised and corporately slicker 
this summer, but they'll be hard pressed to produce more fun than their African 
forerunner.
 