
Why do it? Why put my head on the chopping-block by writing a book 
hubristically entitledThe 101 Greatest Plays 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323576/s/101-greatest-plays/>
? The answers are many and complex.

An idea that I’d been loosely kicking around as a way of making myself sound 
more interesting at parties suddenly became a reality when enthusiastically 
endorsed by my editor at Faber. I also wanted to challenge both myself and the 
reader by pinpointing the highlights of western drama. And, deep down, I was 
driven by a desire to assert the enduring power ofthe playwright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2015/jan/13/is-playwright-dead-david-edgar>
. I’ve lately taken part in a number of panels that argued the future lies with 
group creation rather than the solo author. I admit theatre is rapidly 
changing, but passionate advocates of the devised play assume that 
democratising the work process automatically leads to work of radical intent. I 
cherish an obstinate belief in the subversive voice of the individual dramatist.

What is true is that the form of drama has changed over the centuries. If my 
book does anything, I hope it demolishes the myth there is a golden, immutable 
recipe for great drama. Alain Robbe-Grillet once said thatHamlet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/25/hamlet-barbican-review-benedict-cumberbatch-imprisoned-prince>
 would not be a great play if it were written today: in other words, a 
digressive five-act verse-drama about a putative revenge killing would seem a 
quaint throwback if produced by a living writer. Conversely, it is impossible 
to imagine a Beckett or Pinter emerging in an Edwardian world where audiences 
demanded crises be conclusively resolved. Great plays are products of their 
time as well of individual imperatives.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fchoosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440605367368%2Fa23bd0a2-faf9-4684-b452-84e593a70d9e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choosing%20my%20101%20greatest%20plays%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20I%20left%20out%20King%20Lear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fchoosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choosing%20my%20101%20greatest%20plays%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20I%20left%20out%20King%20Lear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fchoosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440605367368%2Fa23bd0a2-faf9-4684-b452-84e593a70d9e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Benedict Cumberbatch as Hamlet: ‘It would not be a great play if it was 
written today’ Photograph: Johan Persson 
But, as I wrote the book, I noticed there were certain qualities that recurred 
in drama from ancient Athens to modern Britain. One was a palpable moral 
ambivalence: my opening choice wasAeschylus’s The Persians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/aug/14/national-theatre-wales-aeschylus-the-persians>
, which even today has scholars arguing over whether it is a patriotic 
celebration of Athenian victory at the battle of Salamis or a compassionate 
study of a vanquished enemy. Although we tend to think modern drama has made a 
bonfire of the categories, I also noticed how tragedy and comedy started to 
intertwine long before Chekhov and were visibly coming together in the work of 
Euripides and the Elizabethans.

This may be my personal prejudice but another unifying factor was work that 
displayed a fierce delight in language. This is tricky territory since roughly 
half the plays chosen are seen through the prism of translation: amongst the 
heroes of my book are a whole tribe of living translators includingTony Harrison
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/26/tony-harrison-celebration-winner-2015-david-cohen-prize>
,Christopher Hampton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2009/aug/02/my-week-christopher-hampton>
 andTimberlake Wertenbaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/07/timberlake-wertenbaker-jeffersons-garden>
. But I would still argue that one ingredient of great drama is a distinctive 
authorial voice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fchoosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440605497324%2F4b173f25-9bd7-4d45-9f94-3cb05f0a5905-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choosing%20my%20101%20greatest%20plays%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20I%20left%20out%20King%20Lear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fchoosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choosing%20my%20101%20greatest%20plays%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20I%20left%20out%20King%20Lear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fchoosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440605497324%2F4b173f25-9bd7-4d45-9f94-3cb05f0a5905-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Homecoming: shows Pinter’s distinctive authorial voice. Photograph: Manuel 
Harlan 
It’s there in a work like John Marston’s Jacobean The Malcontent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/14/malcontent-review-globe-young-players>
, where the sharp-tongued satirical hero warns the courtiers: “I’ll come 
amongst you, you goatish-blooded toderers, as gum into taffeta, to fret, to 
fret.” Turn to Harold Pinter’sThe Homecoming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/aug/04/the-homecoming-review> 350 years 
later and you find a similar vitality as the chauvinist ex-butcher, Max, says 
of his late wife: “Even though it made me sick just to look at her rotten 
stinking face, she wasn’t such a bad bitch.”

In short, I found common qualities rather than a single, fixed definition of 
greatness that applies down the ages. But how, people will inevitably ask, did 
I choose my final 101? I freely admit that I confined myself largely to work 
from the western canon simply because of my ignorance of Asian drama. At the 
same time, I tried to provide a wide historical spread starting in Athens in 
452 BC and ending in London in 2014 AD. Above all, I chose plays that I had 
experienced in the theatre and that I knew, in many cases, were susceptible to 
endless reinterpretation.

My choices are subjective, fallible and arguable; but then so is all 
criticism. UnlikeRobert McCrum in his fascinating choice of the top 100 
English-language novels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/17/the-100-best-novels-written-in-english-the-full-list>
, I also decided to represent certain writers by more than a single play. Even 
this has already created controversy. I included six Shakespeares, cheekily 
countingHenry IV Parts One and Two 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/apr/17/henry-iv-parts-i-and-ii-review-antony-sher-falstaff>
 as a single work. I remember a lunch with Greg Doran, shortly after he took 
over the RSC directorship, and he asked me which Shakespeares I’d settled on. 
“But you’ve missed outKing Lear <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/king-lear>,” 
he said in shocked amazement. A few weeks later I was in Stratford-upon-Avon 
where the head of theShakespeare Institute 
<http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/schools/edacs/departments/shakespeare/about/index.aspx>
, Michael Dobson, greeted me warmly only to say, in similarly horrified tones, 
“I hear you’ve dropped Lear!”

I could offer a robust defence of my omission: the play touches great heights 
but is structurally unwieldy, shows a punishment disproportionate to the 
original sin and contains in Edgar one of Shakespeare’s most unfathomable 
characters. But this is one of only several attempts I’ve made to revise the 
accepted canon of great plays: hence I’ve included Racine’sAndromache 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/02/andromache-review-torrid-love-rectangle-gets-live-revival>
 rather thanPhèdre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jun/26/national-theatre-live-phedre>, 
Strindberg’sThe Father 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Father_%28Strindberg_play%29> rather than 
Miss Julie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/apr/17/miss-julie-royal-exchange-review>
, Beckett’sAll That Fall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/14/all-that-fall-review-pit-barbican-london>
 rather thanWaiting For Godot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/may/28/waiting-godot-beckett-1955>
, Osborne’sThe Entertainer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/06/laurence-olivier-in-the-entertainer-great-performances>
 rather thanLook Back In Anger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/30/how-look-back-in-anger-john-osborne>
. This is not perversity on my part: simply a determination to test plays 
against my theatrical experience.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fchoosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440605927863%2Fe42cb4c3-0112-4b31-985c-f6003e298644-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Choosing%20my%20101%20greatest%20plays%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20I%20left%20out%20King%20Lear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fchoosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Choosing%20my%20101%20greatest%20plays%20%E2%80%93%20and%20why%20I%20left%20out%20King%20Lear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F26%2Fchoosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F26%2F1440605927863%2Fe42cb4c3-0112-4b31-985c-f6003e298644-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Kathryn Wilder and Stefanie Martini in Andromache by Jean Racine: revising the 
accepted canon Photograph: Tristram Kenton for the Guardian 
In a way, the dead can look after themselves. The real problem comes with the 
choice of living writers, of whom there are 15 in my book. I should say that I 
could easily come up with another 15 whom I admire deeply and who hovered on 
the brink of inclusion. Already I can see a storm brewing in that only one of 
the living I’ve chosen –Caryl Churchill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jun/29/her-work-haunts-me-caryl-by-those-that-have-worked-with-her>
 – is a woman. I can only say in my defence that I felt it would be patronising 
to start allowing questions of gender and ethnicity to dictate my choice, that 
I’m already beginning to regret there was no room forOur Country’s Good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/feb/05/our-countrys-good-review> or 
Chimerica <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/29/chimerica-review> and 
that I’ve tried to offset any built-in male bias by including a series of 
dialogues in which my opinions are challenged by a female critic. To avoid any 
Dark Lady of the Sonnets-style speculation, I should add that she is invented 
though not, I hope, unreal.

In the end, the book is inevitably a reflection of my own tastes, experiences 
and prejudices. But, if it does nothing else, I hope it draws attention to 
areas of world drama, and individual authors, to whom we still pay scant 
attention. Readers will discover my love of the plays of the Spanish golden age 
byLope de Vega 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/oct/21/punishment-without-revenge-review>
 and Calderon, of the astonishing Italian comedies of Carlo Goldoni, of the 
pioneering American expressionism ofSusan Glaspell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/oct/11/alisons-house-susan-glaspell-review>
 andSophie Treadwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/oct/11/alisons-house-susan-glaspell-review>
. I also hope the book emerges as a celebration of the imaginative power of the 
individual dramatist- the true starting point of the theatrical process - at a 
time when his or her authority is under serious threat from the 
pseudo-democracy and improvised mish-mash of the devised play. The book was 
written not out of scholarly omniscience or in a spirit of truculent assurance 
but as a way of initiating a debate. Greatness, like beauty, is in the eye of 
the beholder.


I’ve had my say. I hope readers, once they’ve digested the contents, will have 
theirs.

 * We will reveal the full list next week. The 101 Greatest Plays by Michael 
Billington 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/323576/s/101-greatest-plays/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 is published by Guardian Faber on 3 September, at £18.99. Buy it for £12.99, 
with free UK p&p, atbookshop.theguardian.com <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/> 
or call 0330 333 6846

Guardian Live event

On 30 October, join the audience for our discussion, The Greatest Plays Ever 
Staged with Michael Billington, Josie Rourke and John Lahr 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/event/guardian-live-the-greatest-plays-ever-staged-with-michael-billington-josie-rourke-and-john-lahr-18307450076>
, at The Tabernacle in Notting Hill, London
 