
Last year, recognising that April is the cruellest month, we stuck the boot 
into our least favourite books 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/mar/26/choose-april-reading-group-book>
. But this year, we're going to do something far more constructive, following a
suggestion from Reading group regular, Dylanwolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/comment-permalink/19738214>:

I'm currently reading Empire Rising by Thomas Kelly – a novel set in 1930s New 
York and dealing with the construction of the Empire State Building. It gave me 
a suggestion for a future Guardian Reading group theme: great feats of 
construction and engineering.

There must be a huge number of possible books, both fiction and non-fiction, 
dealing with the Trans-Siberian Railway, the Great Wall of China, the Titanic, 
the Large Hadron Collider, the Panama Canal, the Pyramids, the … well, you get 
the idea. Books such as William Golding's The Spire and Primo Levi's The Wrench 
come to mind.

Several years ago, I bought William Golding's The Spire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2011/sep/16/william-golding-spire-craig-raine>
 fromPriestpopple Books 
<http://www.librarything.com/venue/50644/Priestpopple-Books> in Hexham (and 
yes, the shop is almost as pleasing and strange as its name). "Good luck," said 
the owner as he handed the book over, eyebrows raised. I assured him I'd have 
it licked within the week. It's still sitting on my shelf now, spine unbroken, 
mocking me from beneath an equally unread copy of Against the Day. I'd love to 
have a good reason to finally nail it. Just look at this for an opening:

"He was laughing, chin up, and shaking his head. God the father was exploding 
in his face with a glory of sunlight through painted glass, a glory that moved 
with his movements to consume and exalt Abraham and Isaac and then God again. 
The tears of laughter in his eyes made additional spokes and wheels and 
rainbows."

I don't know what it means either, but I am intrigued. As for other books 
about construction, the first two that jumped out at me wereMichael Ondaatje's 
In the Skin of a Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780330301831/in-the-skin-of-a-lion>
 andEL Doctorow's The Waterworks 
<http://www.salonfutura.net/2010/09/notes-on-the-waterworks/>. The first for 
its descriptions of the building of theRC Harris water treatment plant 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R._C._Harris_Water_Treatment_Plant> in Toronto. 
The second because although it's not intimately involved with the construction 
process there is a great deal of incredible material about the march of 
technology and Dylanwolf's "great engineering feats".

After that I was temporarily stumped, and even considered abandoning the idea. 
The boundaries seemed too limiting. But then, I realised we don't have to focus 
on actual buildings. And once you start looking outside the physical world, the 
possibilities are endless. We could include practically everything Arthur C 
Clarke ever wrote, for a start. There'sthe Dyson Sphere  
<http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?DysonSphere>in Larry Niven's astounding but 
unfortunately titledRingworld 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/jul/02/larry-niven-ringworld>
. There's the terraforming of the red planet inKim Stanley Robinson's Mars 
trilogy <http://kimstanleyrobinson.info/w/index.php5?title=Mars_trilogy>. The 
only limit is the imagination … So I'm hoping the nominations are going to be 
very interesting this time. Just post yours below the line. I'll pull one out 
of the hat over Easter weekend so (and I wish I was strong enough to resist 
this) we've got a good platform to build on from next Tuesday …
 