
Chris Coleman <https://www.theguardian.com/football/chris-coleman> has 
expressed his dismay that Aaron Ramsey is still not fit to play for his 
country, with the Wales manager revealing the midfielder broke down in training 
with Arsenal last week and is not certain to be back in time to face Serbia in 
November.

Ramsey injured his hamstring in Arsenal’s opening game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/14/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 against Liverpool and has not featured since, ruling him out of the opening
World Cup qualifier against Moldova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/05/wales-moldova-world-cup-2018-qualifier-match-report>
 early in September and next week’s double header against Austria and Georgia.

Arsène Wenger confirms Aaron Ramsey is ‘struggling with his hamstring’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/arsene-wenger-confirms-aaron-ramsey-is-struggling-with-his-hamstring-injury-arsenal>
Coleman’s disappointment stems from the fact that Ramsey, who had a shorter 
pre-season because of his involvement atEuro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016>, arguably should not have 
started against Liverpool – Wenger admitted afterwards that he “pushed” the 
player – and the Wales manager’s frustration has been exacerbated by the 
initial prognosis proving inaccurate.

“I had an indication he would only be out for three weeks when he initially 
did it,” Coleman said. “That was six weeks ago. So I don’t know now. I have had 
more information from Sean Connelly, our head physio, who is liaising with 
Arsenal, that he has broken down in training. That came fromArsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> to Sean. We have not yet been 
given a date on when he will definitely be back.”

Last week Wenger ruled Ramsey out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/23/arsene-wenger-confirms-aaron-ramsey-is-struggling-with-his-hamstring-injury-arsenal>
 of Arsenal’s matches leading up to the international break but Coleman fears 
the situation could be worse. He was asked whether he thought Ramsey would be 
available for the home game against Serbia on 12 November and replied: “I can’t 
be sure. I was sure in the last camp that I would have him for this camp. I 
spoke to Rambo two or three days before the press conference and he said: 
‘Yeah.’ I thought we’d have him back for this camp at least. It is frustrating. 
It is preventables.

Chris Coleman questions whether Aaron Ramsey’s injury was preventable
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/24/chris-coleman-aaron-ramsey-wales-arsene-wenger-arsenal>
“I don’t know the exact history of what he has been doing the last six weeks. 
So it is hard to comment on whether he was pushed too hard or not enough. I am 
disappointed because we are without him again. Could that have been prevented 
in the way he was looked after when he got back from the tournament? I don’t 
know. But you can’t help but think, if only. It is disappointing. For us to be 
without him for 30% of the campaign [three of 10 games so far] it’s tough.”

While Coleman is clearly annoyed, he sees no value in paying a visit to 
Arsenal to try to get to the bottom of the situation. “That would maybe not be 
building bridges with them. He belongs to them. I can have my say because he is 
aWales <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> player and I can say what I 
think. There is nothing wrong with being honest. I am not insulting anyone, 
people can understand our frustration. But ultimately he belongs to them and we 
have to be mindful of that.”
 