
Shadow culture minister Chris Bryant has accused James Blunt of missing the 
point about the dominance of privileged performers in the arts after the singer 
wrote a letter accusing him of being a “classist gimp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/19/james-blunts-letter-chris-bryant-in-full>
”.

The public spat broke out after Bryant gave an interview to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/16/arts-diversity-chris-bryant-eddie-redmayne>
 saying he believed the arts world should provide more opportunities for people 
from poorer families.

“I am delighted that Eddie Redmayne won [a Golden Globe for best actor], but 
we can’t just have a culture dominated by Eddie Redmayne andJames Blunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/james-blunt> and their ilk,” he said. “Where 
are the Albert Finneys and the Glenda Jacksons? They came through a 
meritocratic system.”

The 40-year-old Brit award-winning singer subsequently fired off a letter to 
Bryant arguing that his private education and background worked against his 
success in the British music industry, where he was thought to be “too posh”.

In the forthright message, Blunt accused the Labour MP of being a “prejudiced 
wazzock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jan/19/james-bluny-classist-gimp-chris-bryant-diversity-privileged-arts>
” teaching the politics of jealousy, rather than celebrating success like in 
America, where the singer got his first big break.

He argued that it is Bryant’s “populist, envy-based, vote-hunting ideas which 
make our country crap, far more than me and my shit songs, and my plummy 
accent”.

The letter began: “Dear Chris Bryant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chris-bryant> MP, You classist gimp. I 
happened to go to a boarding school. No one helped me at boarding school to get 
into the music business.”

He then made the case that his public school gave him a head-start by teaching 
him to aim high. “Perhaps it protected me from your kind of narrow-minded, 
self-defeating, lead-us-to-a-dead-end, remove-the-‘G’-from-‘GB’ thinking, which 
is to look at others’ success and say: ‘It’s not fair’,” he added.

Blunt, who attended Harrow school in west London, initially joked on Twitter 
about the idea that he was dominating the arts, saying: “Really? I thought we’d 
got rid of me years ago 
<https://twitter.com/JamesBlunt/status/556755353317433344>.”

After seeing the letter, Bryant suggested Blunt should “stop being so blooming 
precious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/19/chris-bryant-letter-james-blunt-in-full>
”, while stressing that he was not knocking the success of either Blunt, whose 
album he has bought, or Redmayne, who he admired as Richard II.

“If you’d read the whole of my interview, you’d have seen that I make the 
point that the people who subsidise the arts the most are artists themselves,” 
he said. “Of course that includes you. But it is a statement of the blindingly 
obvious that that is far tougher if you come from a poor family where you have 
to hand over your holiday earnings to help pay the family bills.

He added: “I’m delighted you’ve done well for yourself. But it is really tough 
forging a career in the arts if you can’t afford the enormous fees for drama 
school, if you don’t know anybody who can give you a leg up, if your parents 
can’t subsidise you for a few years whilst you make your name and if you can’t 
afford to take on an unpaid internship.

“You see the thing is I want everyone to take part in the arts. I don’t want 
any no-go areas for young people from less privileged backgrounds. And I’m 
convinced that we won’t be Great Britain if we waste great British talent in 
the arts. You seem to think talent will always out. My fear is that someone 
like Stanley Baker, the son of a disabled miner in the Rhondda, who rose to be 
one of Britain’s greatest film actors (Zulu), would have found it even harder 
to make it today.”

The Labour politician is not the only person to have called on the arts world 
to do more to increase diversity in recent months. The actor David Morrissey 
has said youngworking-class people are being priced out of the profession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/sep/16/david-morrissey-working-class-actors-priced-out>
 and argued that the creative industries should do more to end their “economic 
exclusion”.

“Television is doing very well for itself, but the trickle-down effect isn’t 
working,” he told the Radio Times at the time. “We’re creating an intern 
culture – it’s happening in journalism and politics as well – and we have to be 
very careful because the fight is not going to be there for people from more 
disadvantaged backgrounds.”

Actor Dame Judi Dench has also said financial barriers to training have made 
the profession more elitist.
 