
Cabinet minister Christopher Pyne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/christopher-pyne> has declared the 
Coalition has won the federal election with 74 seats “in the bank”, claiming a 
win is “very likely” in three more.

Labor’s deputy leader, Tanya Plibersek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tanya-plibersek>, has refused to 
concede defeat. Although she agreed it is likely the Coalition will form 
government, she claimed it was still likely to fall short of winning 76 seats 
to give it a majority.

Speaking on Channel Nine’s Today program on Friday morning, Pyne said: “We’ve 
won the election.

'Mediscare' campaign didn't worry my electorate, says Christopher Pyne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/mediscare-campaign-didnt-worry-my-electorate-says-christopher-pyne>
“We’ve got 74 seats in the bank and very likely to win Herbert, Capricornia 
and Flynn.

“We’re even an outside chance still in Hindmarsh and Cowan, so we will form a 
majority government and we’re also making arrangements with some of the 
crossbenchers for supply and confidence.”

On Thursday crossbench MP Bob Katter declared he will guarantee confidence and 
supply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/election-2016-bob-katter-promises-to-support-coalition-in-hung-parliament>
 in the event the Coalition has to form a minority government.

Pyne, the industry minister, said the size of the victory was “not unlike the 
victory of Bob Hawke in 1990” and guaranteed “a solid government”.

“We have won again,” he said. “That’s our sixth victory out of eight 
[elections] in the last 20 years. You have to say that we are an 
election-winning machine in theLiberal party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/liberal-party>.”


Guardian Australia’s count has awarded the Coalition 72 seats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/ng-interactive/2016/jul/02/live-australian-election-results-track-the-votes>
. It is ahead in Forde and Gilmore, which account for Pyne’s claim it has 74 
seats “in the bank”.

Labor has won 66 seats and independents and minor parties have won five.

The remaining five seats in doubt are:

 * Capricornia, where the Labor party leads by 476 votes 
 * Cowan, where Labor leads by 534 
 * Herbert, where Labor leads by 449 
 * Hindmarsh, where Labor leads by 68 
 * Flynn, where Labor leads by 646 
Wins in Herbert, Capricornia and Flynn would take the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> to 77 seats.

Pyne’s claim the Coalition was “very likely” to win those three seats is based 
on the fact on Thursday it cut Labor’s margins due to a strong flow of postal 
votes to the Coalition.

Asked on ABC’s AM on Friday if Labor had lost, Plibersek said “we need to let 
the Australian Electoral Commission complete its work”.

“But if you were a betting person you’d have to say it’s more likely that the 
Turnbull government, as probably a minority government, a very unstable 
minority government, will be returned.”

“The idea that Christopher [Pyne] could suggest this is anything but a 
complete repudiation of the agenda set by Tony Abbott, Joe Hockey and then 
Malcolm Turnbull and Scott Morrison is extreme.”

Bob Katter raises funding for Galilee basin railway in talks with Turnbull
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/07/bob-katter-raises-federal-funding-adani-galilee-basin-railway-in-talks-with-turnbull>
Plibersek said Labor may still win the two-party preferred vote, which it 
currently leads by just 651 votes out of more than 10m counted so far.

Speaking on Radio National on Friday, Anthony Albanese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/anthony-albanese> also refused to 
concede defeat.

Albanese, who was a potential challenger for the Labor leadership until he 
ruled it out on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/04/anthony-albanese-rules-out-challenging-bill-shorten-for-labor-leadership>
, said he would movea motion at Friday’s caucus meeting backing Bill Shorten as 
leader and allowing him to negotiate with the crossbench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/labor-mps-meet-on-friday-to-install-bill-shorten-as-leader>
.

“We are in circumstances whereby the election still hasn’t been determined, 
votes are still being counted, and we want to make sure we get that certainty 
there for Bill Shorten and for the Labor leadership team,” he said.

“Whether there is a majority or minority government remains to be seen.”

Albanese said “nobody has ever said they’re about to challenge Bill Shorten”.

“Bill Shorten will be elected unopposed, that was always going to happen after 
this election result.”
 