
It’s hard to get three howlers into one paragraph, but the Australian’s rookie 
media columnist Chris Mitchell managed to do just that on Monday in apiece 
about why politicians should ignore Twitter 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/opinion/politicians-journalists-using-social-media-obscure-real-issues/news-story/877417373bf26960324d781d8d4b258c>
 and its left-wing slant. “At my age most of my gay friends think the idea of 
applying conventional heterosexual marriage to the once strongly 
countercultural principals [sic] of Stonewall in 1973 [it was 1969] is an 
appalling sellout,” the former editor-in-chief of the Oz wrote. “But try saying 
that on Twitter without a mass pile-on, a la Sonya [Sonia] Kruger.”

Unfortunately for Mitchell the mass pile-on on Twitter came not for his views 
on marriage equality but for the quality of the column itself. It’s clear 
Mitchell is enjoying himself in his new role as commentator, free to lambast 
all his pet hates. Such as Twitter. Mitchell: “Twitter is the worst. I would 
call it little more than a left-wing echo chamber for various highly 
politicised activists, including many journalists. This is not surprising since 
it was actually invented as a way for pop stars to talk to their fans rather 
than to discuss serious issues.” We don’t know where he got the pop star theory 
from but we rather like it.

Jonathan Green (@GreenJ) 
Reading Chris Mitchell’s takedown of twitter just now has really made me 
question my life choices. Like reading Chris Mitchell for example.
 <https://twitter.com/GreenJ/status/762432654444630020> August 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/GreenJ/status/762432654444630020> Je Suis Paris 
(@DavidParis) 
Chris Mitchell says politicians should ignore 12 million Australians on 
Facebook. Focus on the 75000 subscribers to the Australian I guess.
 <https://twitter.com/DavidParis/status/762465385782267904> August 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/DavidParis/status/762465385782267904> 
He also suggested readers might like to see for themselves just how biased 
lefty journos such as Paul Bongiorno or Crikey’s Bernard Keane are on Twitter. 
Helpfully, he provided instructions on how to use the social media platform if 
you’re like him and don’t want to engage.

“If you have never done so, Google their names with the word Twitter, call up 
their feeds and check for yourself.” Genius.

SBS women’s sports site dropped

In January SBS launched a dedicated women’s sport site 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/topics/zela>, saying it was time for attitudes towards 
women in sport to evolve. In a piece on the site, SBS sports reporter Lucy 
Zelic said Zela was “just one step towards change”. “It’s a place where you are 
free to express your opinions, where the courage of your conviction is 
applauded not reprimanded and where you can be yourself with the hopes that one 
day, the world too,can share our views 
<http://www.sbs.com.au/topics/zela/article/2016/01/22/welcome-wonderful-world-zela>
.”

But just eight months on – in the middle of the Rio Olympics – we hear the 
spirit of Zela has died. The spin fromSBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sbs> management is that it was always a 
trial and was intended for review at the end of the financial year. “We’ve 
decided that whilst we won’t continue the site in its current form, women’s 
sport continues to be a priority for the network and best-placed to be 
incorporated within our other successful cross-platform sports offering,” a 
spokeswoman said.

Insiders say it sadly didn’t get the hits it deserved, but the timing of the 
decision, as interest in women’s sport surges, is disappointing.

‘Australians aren’t stupid’ officially hyperbole

 Andrew Bolt’s presentation of global warming in a segment on the Bolt Report 
might have been “hyperbolic” but was not inaccurate, thebroadcasting watchdog 
has found 
<http://www.acma.gov.au/theACMA/ACMAi/Investigation-reports/Television-investigations/2016-television-investigations>
. A viewer of Bolt’s show, when it was on Ten last year, had complained to the 
Australian Communications and Media Authority that a graph used by the global 
warming sceptic was “neither accurate nor scientific”. Acma said: “Much of Mr 
Bolt’s language was hyperbolic, such as, ‘great global warming scare campaign’, 
‘Australians aren’t stupid’, ‘can’t be fooled for long’, ‘all that propaganda’, 
‘scaremongers’, ‘there’s been no Armageddon’ and ‘no wonder’. The use of 
hyperbole indicated that Mr Bolt was giving his subjective personal opinion 
about the matters being discussed and was not presenting a concluded scientific 
position about global warming in the segment.”

Flight from the dailies

 The exodus of journalists from daily journalism to PR continues. The former 
editor-in-chief of the Age Andrew Holden, with 30 years’ experience in the 
newsroom, has been appointed head of communications for Cricket Australia. 
Holden started his new gig this week. Also jumping to the dark side is one of 
the Australian newspaper’s Shanahans. Not political writer Dennis Shanahan but 
one of his sons, Leo. He is joining political pollsters Crosby Textor Group 
after a stellar run covering courts for the paper in Sydney, as well as 
business investigations and a stint on the now-defunct News Corp opinion site 
The Punch.

ABC on the back foot over Gaza

 The ABC’s coverage of Gaza is a particularly sensitive area, and this week a 
story by Middle East correspondent Sophie McNeill 
<http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2016/s4482633.htm> from June had to be 
corrected because mistakes crept in after the reporter filed her story. The ABC 
apologised for the errors, which included 7.30 host Leigh Sales saying it was 
“almost impossible” for Palestinians in Gaza to seek urgent medical attention 
in Israel.

“The ABC concedes this exaggerated the real difficulties of Palestinians 
seeking medical treatment in Israel,” the correction said. The other error was 
referring to Gaza as occupied in an online version of the story. “The errors 
were introduced as a result of editing in Sydney.”

Wombat and Roosters stories prove costly

 It’s been a bad week for media companies and defamation payouts. Fairfax 
Media was ordered to pay $300,000 to personal trainer Sean ­Carolan and Channel 
Ten was ordered to pay “substantial damages” and legal costs to former Liberal 
politician Michael Yabsley. Yabsley successfully sued Ten for a story by Adam 
Walters which was broadcast on the network in July last year. Yabsley, who now 
runs theWombat Hollow <http://www.wombathollow.net.au/wombat-hollow-forum> 
political discussion forum in the NSW southern highlands, described the story 
Walters did on him as “fast and loose”. “The inescapable fact is that the 
material broadcast by Channel Ten about the Wombat Hollow Forum was full of 
lies, provided by the spasmodic, give away, tabloid publicationLatté Life 
<https://www.facebook.com/lattelifeSH/>. Channel Ten fell for Latté Life’s 
lies, perversions and distortions hook, line and sinker.”

Walters, whose previous story about Sydney businessman Charif Kazal was 
extensively covered by Media Watch 
<http://www.abc.net.au/mediawatch/transcripts/s4411599.htm> and later corrected 
by Ten, recently left the network.


 In the Fairfax defo case, columnist Peter FitzSimons and the publisher were 
sued for defamation for stories in 2013 that implied Carolan’s personal 
training business Nubodi had conducted tests on Sydney Roosters rugby league 
players without their consent, passing them on to organised crime. In the 
supreme court, Justice Lucy McCallum said: “Inexplicably, however, Fairfax did 
not seek to prove that contention by calling a single football player to give 
evidence that he did not consent to have his blood tested in the manner that 
occurred.”

60 Minutes losses 

Channel Nine’s 60 Minutes has taken a couple of hits recently and they had 
nothing to do with the reputational damage the show suffered from thekidnapping 
stunt in Lebanon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/27/60-minutes-producer-sacked-and-reporters-warned-over-child-abduction-story>
 for which Tara Brown and the crew were jailed for two weeks. Producer Stephen 
Rice left the network after the fiasco, and now two more staffers have 
followed, although for very different reasons.

Last month award-winning producer Rebecca Le Tourneau left the network 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/60-minutes-parts-ways-with-producer-rebecca-le-tourneau/news-story/eba7a56ac58fa5baa30b1315267be99e>
 after pleading guilty to a drink driving charge. This week the rival Seven 
network announced it had poached 60 Minutes reporter Michael Usher. Known 
affectionately as Musher, he was the public face of the show in the midst of 
the Beirut crisis. But now he has nabbed his ideal job as a senior reporter 
with Seven News, a job which apparently wasn’t available at Nine.

Although 60 Minutes may seem like the dream job for a TV reporter, the travel 
is less than conducive to family life, and most roving correspondents 
eventually find it too hard to keep up.
 