
Chris Coleman has admitted he was “surprised” Arsène Wenger selected Aaron 
Ramsey forArsenal’s opening game of the season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/14/arsenal-liverpool-premier-league-match-report>
 and also questioned whether the hamstring injury the Welshman picked up 
against Liverpool could have been prevented if he had been given more time to 
recover following Euro 2016.

Win a 15-seater executive box for Arsenal v Milan legends match
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/win-a-15-seater-executive-box-for-arsenal-v-milan-legends-match>
The Wales manager said that Ramsey’s injury, which has ruled him out of the 
opening World Cup qualifier against Moldova in Cardiff on Monday week, was a 
major disappointment. Wenger has since admitted that he “pushed Ramsey” for the 
Liverpool match, leaving Coleman wondering why other players returning from 
Euro 2016, atArsenal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/arsenal> and 
elsewhere, have been given more opportunity to rest.

Ramsey is the only Arsenal outfield player who featured at Euro 2016 and 
started against Liverpool, and that decision has proved a costly one. It seemed 
a strange one on Wenger’s part, given that Ramsey anticipated missing the start 
of the season. He said afterWales lost to Portugal in the the European 
Championship semi-final, a game for which he was suspended, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/06/portugal-wales-euro-2016-match-report>
that the Arsenal manager likes to give players “a little break and I’ll be 
getting the same treatment”.

Coleman sounded a little bemused by what has gone on. “I think we all expected 
him to [miss the start of the season], so I don’t know what happened between 
then [when Ramsey made the comment] and when he ended up on the pitch,” theWales
 <https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> manager said. “I think, to a man, 
if you were looking at that [team-sheet against Liverpool], it was a bit of a 
surprise he started. I think Aaron said himself [in France] that he wasn’t 
expecting to.

“If you look at Rambo’s physical stats, they’re higher than anybody on the 
pitch in terms of his high-intensity sprints and the kilometres he covers. But 
he’s still a human being, and it’s not like we were knocked out in the group 
stage – it was a long tournament for Aaron, after a long hard season. So I 
don’t know why he was treated differently. For me as a manager, when I’m 
missing one of my best players, I think anybody would understand my 
disappointment.”

Patrick Vieira: I admire Wenger’s prudence but Arsenal lack personality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/22/patrick-vieira-arsene-wenger-arsenal-paul-pogba>
Germany’s Mesut Özil and England’s Jack Wilshere have both made only one 
substitute appearance for Arsenal so far,against Leicester on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/20/leicester-city-arsenal-premier-league-match-report>
. Granit Xhaka, the Switzerland international, came off the bench against 
Liverpool and started against Leicester, when Laurent Koscielny, who was part 
of the France team that reached the Euro 2016 final, made his first appearance 
of the season. Olivier Giroud, another Frenchman, kicked his first ball for 
Arsenal as a substitute in the draw at Leicester.

Asked about how Ramsey has been handled, Coleman said: “I think Arsenal have a 
certain way of doing things. A lot has been said about their injury list, 
they’re doing the same things now as what they’ve always done – they’re not 
going to change now. That’s up to them, Aaron’s Arsenal’s player.

“I’ve got to say that I look at it and I’m disappointed because we’ve lost a 
great player. I’m not going to say ‘In hindsight’, because I’m doing a job 
myself and I make decisions and sometimes look back and think I shouldn’t have 
made that decision. So I won’t use that against Arsenal. It’s disappointing 
that we haven’t got him, it’s disappointing he’s got an injury. Could it have 
been prevented? Possibly, yes. But the fact is we haven’t got him, 
unfortunately.”
 