
Hi Martin, what can you tell us about Hull UK City of Culture 2017 
<http://hull2017.co.uk/>?


The UK City of Culture project is in its second iteration. The first was 
Derry-Londonderry in 2013. It’s a project set up by the government following 
Liverpool European Capital of Culture in 2008. Since the UK won’t hold that 
title again
until 2023, the government decided to have a UK version where a different city 
would host it every four years, setting up a quadrennial celebration of UK 
culture.

How do you go about programming on such a large scale?


We spent the past year in discovery – talking to lots of people, listening and 
letting the voice of the city be heard as we start to make choices about what 
we’re going to put on. One of the temptations is that you rush in too quickly 
because you feel under enormous pressure to have a full programme two months 
into starting work. I’ve been very insistent and begged the patience of Hull’s 
communities to let us have this past year in which to plan. If you don’t take 
the time to immerse yourself in the city and in conversation, there’s a danger 
that you end up with a programme that could have been staged anywhere.

That’s not to say that everything we do is about Hull, because we’ve also 
invested time in securing theTurner Prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/dec/07/urban-assemble-win-turner-prize-toxteth>
. Larkin once produced a collection of poems, none of which he said were about 
Hull, but they all have the city’s voice. That’s what you aim for, because 
somewhere in everything you do, overtly or hidden, is the voice of this city.

You don’t force it; it arrives. The programme arrives because it starts 
telling you what it needs to be. As we head into 2016, we turn from working on 
things we might do to working on things weare doing, which is still a year 
before day one and two years before day 365.

How do you engage the Hull <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hull> 
community?


First, you come and live in this city. What you absolutely can’t do is plan 
from afar. So I’m now a resident of this city and part of its communities, as 
is everybody we’ve employed who hasn’t come from Hull – roughly half our 
current staff.

That in itself is the legacy starting to take hold. The sharing of knowledge 
between people who have lived here for a long time and newcomers – even within 
the team – means that new ideas are being born and new skill sets are being 
transferred and learned. In microcosm, you can see it start to happen.

In terms of the working with wider community, in year one you just have to get 
out there. We’ve had hundreds of meetings and conversations with people. We 
also make sure that we communicate effectively through our social media and 
twice a year we stage update events, to which up to 600 people come. We take 
everyone through what we’ve been doing and where we’re going. What that does is 
maintain confidence in the project.

The most important thing is that we turn that conversation into action. 
Two of the biggest questions from the arts community are: how do I get 
involved and is there any money available? We’re now able to say: this is how 
you get involved. The grants programme will launch next year, where you can 
apply for money, and the volunteering system will open next year for 
applications.

We’ve been very open about how we’re curating the year thematically. 
We’ve always said that nobody needs our permission. This isn’t a centralised 
project in that sense. If you want to do something, do it – just tell us at 
some point and we’ll help you market it.

What challenges have you and the team faced?


The most obvious one – and the one that will never go away – is money, but the 
more we have, the more we can do and this is still a very, very challenging 
climate in which to raise money. The argument for corporate sponsorship of the 
arts is still being made. Having said that, we’ve already engaged with BP and 
Yorkshire Water as principal partners and we’ve attracted public funding as 
well. We’ve got some more to come, but money will never stop being an issue 
because our ambition will always outweigh our pockets.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhull-uk-city-of-culture-chief-martin-green-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c52996f7a37d6c3bebbce221f1a17a945de4a04%2F0_295_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=City%20of%20Culture%20chief%3A%20we're%20latching%20on%20to%20Hull's%20unique%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhull-uk-city-of-culture-chief-martin-green-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=City%20of%20Culture%20chief%3A%20we%27re%20latching%20on%20to%20Hull%27s%20unique%20voice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fhull-uk-city-of-culture-chief-martin-green-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c52996f7a37d6c3bebbce221f1a17a945de4a04%2F0_295_5760_3457%2F5760.jpg>
 Humber Street in Hull, the site of the former docks fruit markets and now a 
bohemian arts quarter. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
The second is ensuring that you’re ready. This project isn’t about staging 365 
days of art; it’s about a city going through change. Our relationship with the 
city council is very strong and positive. The weight is on the its shoulders at 
the moment because it has chosen to refurbish the art gallery and theatre.

Right now there’s £25m of refurbishment work going into the pedestrianised 
spaces of the city. That’s got to be done on time, when council budgets and 
personnel are under pressure. The ability for a city to be ready to stage the 
work is a big challenge, but we work closely with the council to support them 
in that ambition.

What do you see as the role of culture in a project such as this?


Culture brings people together. Culture encourages people who have never 
talked to each other, to talk. It asks the right questions at the right time. 
It’s also fun, amusing and creates memories. The legacy of memories is really 
important because that ultimately all adds up to belief and confidence, and 
confident cities can do anything. That’s what this project does and that’s what 
culture can do.

It all comes back to identity. By latching on to the unique stories of Hull – 
its geography, relationships with other cities – you find its unique voice, 
which again builds its confidence. This is why I speak so passionately about 
culture, its value and why it needs to be taught in schools and properly funded.

If you treat culture not only as something you do when you’ve got a few quid 
to spare, but as welfare, to make people happy and healthy, and something that 
inspires and makes young people communicate, suddenly you’re talking about an 
incredibly important, urgent aspect of life.

Martin Green is chief executive of Hull UK City of Culture 2017 
<http://hull2017.co.uk/>

He will be speaking at this year’s Remix Summit London 
<http://www.remixsummits.com/ldn/> event, for which the Guardian is a media 
partner

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 