
This is the second book about Fin, a boy who lives on the Pirate Stream, a 
magical parallel world, and Marrill, who one day gets on a ship which ends up 
in the Pirate Stream. In the first book Marrill meets Fin, who is unable to be 
remembered by anyone except her. He grew up in an orphanage and his quest is to 
find his mother and to be remembered. Marrill goes back to the Pirate Stream in 
this second book as she gets a message that her world is in danger. She and her 
babysitter are sent to the stream in the babysitter’s car.


They meet up with Fin on the ship from the first book. It’s owned by Ardent, a 
wizard. In this story they try to find out about the mysterious Iron Tide, a 
curse supposedly set by the Iron Master. They use their ‘Map to Everywhere’, 
which tells them how to get to get to the Shattered Archipelago, the place in 
the legends where the Iron Tide seemingly originates. They also find a stone 
which mentions The Syphon of Monerva, which grants wishes.

They see the Iron ship, and to get away from it, they go down the whirlpool to 
Monerva despite the danger. While in Monerva they encounter all sorts of weird 
creatures and have to battle with the Salt Sand King; Serth, the Oracle, whom 
they thought they had killed in the first book and The Iron Master. All of 
these people want the Syphon of Monerva to grant them a wish. So do Fin and 
Marrill, who have to try and stop them or else Marrill’s world will be 
destroyed as will as the Pirate Stream.

 The book is cool because their parallel world is so well imagined and 
described. It is full of suspense and you can really feel how desperate Fin is 
to be remembered and for his life to make sense. I can’t wait for the third 
book!

How do I get involved in the Guardian children's books site?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 * Buy this book at the Guardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/348692/> 
Want to tell the world about a book you’ve read? Join the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/childrens-books/2011/mar/02/how-do-i-get-involved-guardian-childrens-books>
 and send us your review!
 