
Airline unions have called for an end to the “harassment” of a Stuttgart 
airport worker caught up in a row withJeremy Clarkson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson>, describing the former Top 
Gear presenter’s claims as “a torrent of unbelievable abuse and now disproven 
allegations”.

The International Transport Workers’ Federation 
<http://www.itfglobal.org/en/global/> (ITF) said Manuel Pereira was being 
“constantly hounded by some journalists” which “has to stop”.

Clarkson told the Sun earlier this week that Pereira had refused to let him 
and his co-presenters onThe Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-grand-tour> board a plane on 
Monday following a row over the Falklands. He also alleged Pereira had said 
“I’m Argentinian – fuck you” and said a complaint had been lodged with the 
police.

The Grand Tour review – Clarkson and co leave the BBC in their dust
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/18/the-grand-tour-review-jeremy-clarkson-james-may-richard-hammond-leave-the-bbc-in-their-dust>
It later turned out Pereira was Spanish, and airport authorities said 
Clarkson, James May and Richard Hammond hadmissed their final chance to board 
the flight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/jeremy-clarkson-row-airport-disputes-argentinian-claim-falklands>
 after repeated calls to the lounge where they were waiting. Pereira said he 
was “polite and professional” during the encounter.

German police told the Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/argentinian-air-worker-who-jeremy-9274411> 
they would not investigate further unless an official complaint was filed by 
The Grand Tour team or Pereira.

The ITF president, Paddy Crumlin, said the airport worker was merely doing his 
job ensuring the flight got to its destination “safely and punctually” by 
telling the trio they could not board. “Both the airport and the local police 
have confirmed this,” he said.

“In response, Jeremy Clarkson unleashed a torrent of unbelievable abuse and 
now disproven allegations. We now learn that Mr Pereira, the innocent party in 
this rather sordid little affair, is being constantly hounded by some 
journalists. That has to stop now.”

Katharina Wesenick, air transport national officer at Pereira’s union, ver.di, 
said the worker was being “photographed and hounded at work”. She said: “Mr 
Pereira does not have a TV series to promote; he just wants to get on with his 
job quietly and efficiently – as he was doing when he had to inform Mr Clarkson 
that he was too late to catch his flight.

“On behalf of Mr Pereira, we would ask the press to act responsibly and cease 
this unjust harassment. The airport has investigated and established that this 
was a clear-cut case of an airport worker having to refuse boarding to 
passengers who had arrived late from the lounge, where they had missed the 
urgent reminders. If the press have any questions I suggest they put them to 
Jeremy Clarkson.”

The intervention from airport authorities comes on the day The Grand Tour 
launches on Amazon amid a blitz of publicity. Amazon commissioned the programme 
following Clarkson’s departure from the BBC in March 2015 after an“unprovoked 
physical and verbal attack” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/25/jeremy-clarkson-top-gear-contract-bbc>
 that left a colleague bleeding and seeking hospital treatment.

May and Hammond followed him out of the door, and along with executive 
producer, Andy Wilman, signed up to create 36 episodes of The Grand Tour in a 
deal thought to be worth £160m.
 