
The three big national commercial radio stations will have their analogue 
licences automatically rolled over for a second time by the government, after 
the prospect of an imminent digital radio switchover disappeared over the 
horizon.

Global Radio’s Classic FM, Bauer-owned Absolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> and TalkSport, owned by UTV 
Media, along with more than 60 local and regional stations will benefit from 
culture minister Ed Vaizey’s announcement on Tuesday that they will not have to 
compete for their licences, which are due to expire by 2017.

The decision, which will be subject to consultation and could be ratified as 
early as spring next year, is likely to anger critics such as former TalkSport 
owner Kelvin MacKenzie, who threatened legal action last time the national 
licences were rolled over without going to auction.

Vaizey told the Radio Festival in Salford 
<http://www.radioacademy.org/events/radio-festival-2014/> on Tuesday that it 
would be the “second and final rollover” of licences but declined to say, when 
questioned, that it would not happen again in the event of further delays to 
digital switchover.

He said the Department for Culture, Media and Sport had “concluded there are 
benefits to commercial radio from having a period of stability and not having 
to recompete for licences which may only last a couple of years up to the point 
where switchover is likely to take place”.

The issue of digital radio switchover was effectively put on the back burner 
by Vaizey in December 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/dec/16/digital-radio-switchover-2020-ed-vaizey>
 after the growth in digital radio, now just over a third of all radio 
listening, failed to match early estimates.

Vaizey flagged up the decline in listening among young people, from 18 to 15 
hours a week among 15- to 24-year-olds, as a serious concern and said social 
media and multiplatform approaches were essential for broadcasters seeking to 
stem this decline.

He welcomed the BBC’s announcement that it was researching a new generation of 
“hybrid” radio, combining the robust, free-to-air reception of broadcast radio 
with the digital enhancements and interactivity of internet radio.

The “hybrid” radio project, a joint initiative between the BBC, UK commercial 
radio and overseas broadcasters under the umbrella of the Universal Smartphone 
Radio Project, would combine internet and broadcast radio for use in mobile 
phones.

It followed research that the majority of smartphone users wanted radio in 
their devices but were concerned about data costs, battery use and reception 
issues when using online services.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 