
¡Fiesta Sinfónica! <http://www.live.bbc.co.uk/events/rvrbj5/series>

This autumn, the BBC National Orchestra of Wales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/bbc-national-orchestra-of-wales> is going on 
tour to South America, where a week-long residency in Patagonia will be the 
centrepiece of their visit. There’s a Latin American flavour to their 
programmes back home in Cardiff, too, with a series of three concerts focusing 
on the music of Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay as well as Chile and Mexico, much 
of it rarely performed here.

 * Hoddinott Hall <https://www.wmc.org.uk/>, Cardiff, 18 September, 9 October, 
27 November. Box office: 029-2063 6464

Lady Macbeth of Mtsensk 
<https://www.eno.org/whats-on/15-16/lady-macbeth-of-mtsensk>

With the departure of both the music director and the company’s artistic 
director, it’s very much the start of a new era at English National Opera. The 
incoming music directorMark Wigglesworth 
<http://www.markwigglesworth.com/biography/> opens the season conducting Dmitri 
Tcherniakov’s staging of the work with which Shostakovich fell foul of the 
Soviet authorities in the 1930s. Soprano Patricia Racette is the fated Katerina 
Ismailova, while John Daszak take the role of her lover Sergei.

 * Coliseum <https://www.eno.org/>, London, 26 September-20 October (020-7845 
9300)

Salome <http://www.bsolive.com/richard-strauss-salome/>

Kirill Karabits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/04/kirill-karabits-conductor-interview>
 has recently extended his contract as principal conductor of the Bournemouth 
Symphony Orchestra until at least 2018. He’s certainly determined to broaden 
the orchestra’s horizons and to make is contribution to the UK’s musical life 
distinctive, and his first programme in the orchestra’s new season given over 
to a concert performance of Strauss’s lurid one-acter with Lise Lindstrom as 
the teenage princess and James Rutherford as John the Baptist.


 * Lighthouse <http://lighthousepoole.co.uk/>, Poole, 30 September (0844 406 
8666);Symphony Hall <http://www.thsh.co.uk/>, Birmingham, 2 October (0121-345 
0600)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fclassical-opera-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441727660935%2F3ef5bd80-9bfa-4805-bf3a-042fc827a44d-2060x1220.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Classical%20and%20opera%20highlights%3A%20the%20must-sees%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fclassical-opera-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Classical%20and%20opera%20highlights%3A%20the%20must-sees%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fclassical-opera-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441727660935%2F3ef5bd80-9bfa-4805-bf3a-042fc827a44d-2060x1220.jpeg>
 Riccardo Chailly brings the Gewandhausorchester Leipzig to the UK for the last 
time as its director. Photograph: PR 
Gewandhausorchester Leipzig 
<http://www.gewandhausorchester.de/en/gewandhausorchster/tours/>

Riccardo Chailly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tomserviceblog/2015/aug/14/riccardo-chailly-music-director-lucerne-festival-orchestra-abbado>
 has just announced that he is stepping down as the Leipzig orchestra’s music 
director at the end of this season, so his remaining appearances with the 
musicians he has taken to the top of the orchestral tree should be treasured.

 * Symphony Hall <http://www.thsh.co.uk>, Birmingham, 19 October (0121-345 
0600);Barbican <https://www.barbican.org.uk/>, London, 20-23 October (020 7638 
8891)

The Maiden in the Tower 
<http://www.sco.org.uk/performances/259-the-maiden-in-the-tower>

Though there have been plenty of concerts to celebrate the 150th anniversary 
of the birth of Sibelius in the UK this year, there has not so far been an 
opportunity to sample his only opera. As part of its Sibelius and Nielsen 
series, the Scottish Chamber Orchestra is filling that gap; Tuomas Hannikainen 
is conducting a concert performance of the one-acter, alongside Nielsen’s 
Violin Concerto with the inspirational Pekka Kuusisto as the soloist.

 * Younger Hall <http://byretheatre.com/>, St Andrews, 28 October (01334 
475000);Queens Hall <http://www.thequeenshall.net/>, Edinburgh, 29 October 
(0131-668 2019);City Halls <http://www.glasgowconcerthalls.com/Pages/home.aspx>
, Glasgow, 30 October (0141-353 8000)  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fclassical-opera-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441727441735%2Fffa60cba-b74f-4d46-b9f7-44deaf2def37-1328x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Classical%20and%20opera%20highlights%3A%20the%20must-sees%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fclassical-opera-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Classical%20and%20opera%20highlights%3A%20the%20must-sees%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fclassical-opera-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441727441735%2Fffa60cba-b74f-4d46-b9f7-44deaf2def37-1328x2040.jpeg>
 Leila Josefowicz plays the protagonist in the UK premiere of John Adams’s 
Scheherazade 2. Photograph: Chris Lee 
Scheherazade 2 <https://www.barbican.org.uk/music/event-detail.asp?ID=17583>

John Adams <http://www.earbox.com/>’s visits to London to conduct the LSO seem 
to have become annual events, and they generally include a new work. The latest 
to receive its UK premiere is a follow-up to Rimsky-Korsakov’s famous fantasy 
suite, in which Adamsupdates the story of Scheherazade to the present day 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/03/28/arts/music/review-john-adams-unveils-scheherazade2-an-answer-to-male-brutality.html?ref=music&_r=0>
, “imagining a woman storyteller/hostage whose strength of character and powers 
of endurance are tested over and over”. The violinist/protagonist is regular 
Adams collaborator Leila Josefowicz.

 * Barbican <https://www.barbican.org.uk/>, London, 29 October (020-7638 8891)

Turandot <http://www.niopera.com/productions/turandot.php>

Northern Ireland Opera <http://www.niopera.com> goes from strength to 
strength. After successes with its bespoke productions of Wagner’s Flying 
Dutchman and Strauss’s Salome in recent seasons, it is now importing a 
production of Puccini’s final, unfinished opera by the controversial Catalan 
director Calixto Bieito that was first seen in Nuremberg last year. As usual 
with NIO the casts mix international stars and homegrown singers, and the title 
role of the cruel princess is shared between sopranos Miriam Murphy and Orla 
Boylan.


 * Grand Opera House <http://www.goh.co.uk/turandot>, Belfast, 30 October to 1 
November (028-9024 1919) 
Morgen und Abend 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/productions/morgen-und-abend-by-graham-vick>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fclassical-opera-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441729182511%2F61faefa0-2ad1-4aad-a1e4-6c430851d85b-1825x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Classical%20and%20opera%20highlights%3A%20the%20must-sees%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fclassical-opera-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Classical%20and%20opera%20highlights%3A%20the%20must-sees%20of%20autumn%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fsep%2F09%2Fclassical-opera-autumn-arts-preview-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F8%2F1441729182511%2F61faefa0-2ad1-4aad-a1e4-6c430851d85b-1825x2040.jpeg>
 Klaus Maria Brandauer plays the central role in Morgen und Abend Photograph: 
Christof Mattes 
It’s a big deal when the Royal Opera presents a brand new specially 
commissioned work on its main stage. The latest composer to receive that honour 
is the AustrianGeorg Friedrich Haas 
<http://www.universaledition.com/Georg-Friedrich-Haas/composers-and-works/composer/278>
, whose music is far better known across Europe than it is in the UK. Based on 
Jon Fosse’s novel of the same name, Morgen und Abend depicts a man’s journey 
from life to death. The central role taken by the great Austrian actor Klaus 
Maria Brandauer, and the production also sees the return to Covent Garden of 
director Graham Vick.


 * Royal Opera House <http://www.roh.org.uk>, London, 13-28 November (020-7304 
4000)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhbtw4smYCV4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhbtw4smYCV4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dhbtw4smYCV4&media=>
 Georg Friedrich Haas discusses his new work Morgen und Abend 
Huddersfield contemporary music festival <http://www.hcmf.co.uk/>

Every year Huddersfield fills in some of the gaps in the new-music spectrum 
that other ensembles and festivals tend to miss out. There’s the usual mix of 
the mainstream and the unfamiliar this year, with a host of premieres and 
features on Polish, Swiss and Austrian composers who are little known here. The 
festival ends with the first UK performance of Harrison Birtwistle’s third 
string quartet, The Silk House Sequences, played by the indefatigableArditti 
Quartet <http://www.ardittiquartet.co.uk/>.


 * Various venues <http://www.hcmf.co.uk/>, Huddersfield, 20-29 November 
(01484 472900)

The Rime of the Ancient Mariner 
<http://www.thsh.co.uk/event/bcmg-the-rime-of-the-ancient-mariner/>

Howard Skempton 
<http://ukcatalogue.oup.com/category/music/composers/skempton.do> is best known 
for the exquisite understatement of his music, for pieces that seem to punch 
well above their emotional weight. So it’s quite a surprise to discover that he 
has been working on a setting of Coleridge’s epic poem for the baritone 
Roderick Williams, which the Birmingham Contemporary Music Group will premiere 
alongside works by Dominic Muldowney, who will also conduct the concert.


 * CBSO Centre <http://www.thsh.co.uk/>, Birmingham, 4 December (0121-345 
0600);Wigmore Hall <http://wigmore-hall.org.uk/>, London, 5 December (020-7935 
2141)  