
The rain has started to come down over Stade Bikuy, a smart facility just 
outside Bata, and Claude LeRoy has seen enough for today. Republic of the Congo 
have been practising penalties but it is probably best that nobody’s confidence 
is eroded any further: the last of an inauspicious set was sent three goals 
high by the 6ft 5in striker Férébory Doré, and his French manager shuffles 
towards the sideline inscrutably. “That was just for the goalkeepers,” he says 
with the hint of a smile, anticipating any raised eyebrows, and you decide to 
believe him.

LeRoy has achieved enough to be allowed the benefit of any doubt. This is the 
Frenchman’s eighthAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>, the 2006 and 2013 
editions of which he entered in separate stints as manager of Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (DR Congo), his current employers’ close neighbours.

He left DR Congo in June 2013, crossing over to Brazzaville six months later. 
Few foreign coaches have engaged with the continent as deeply as LeRoy, but new 
experiences keep on presenting themselves. On Saturday his side will face DR 
Congo in a rare “derby” fixture between the Congos, and the coach will be 
confronted with a team that he believes he created.

“This is David against Goliath,” he tells the Guardian. “We are four million 
[inhabitants] and they are 70 million. But sometimes the small guy can create 
problems for the bigger one and we’ll try, tactically, to cause them trouble.

“Remember, I know their team perfectly. I keep hearing that it’s a new team, 
but it’s almost the same one I built four years ago. There was a great 
atmosphere between us and I’ll be very happy to see them again. I still wish 
the president of their federation all the best by SMS before every game, and 
this will be the one time that I don’t.”

LeRoy, who turns 67 two days before next Sunday’s final, can undersell his 
outsiders all he likes, but he is fooling no-one. They played out a stuttering 
draw against an Equatorial Guinea side in the first match of the tournament, 
but the response was decisive. Gabon were beaten 1-0 before a late Fabrice 
N’Guessi goal secured a 2-1 victory against a highly fancied Burkina Faso side 
that put Congo through as Group A winners – with more points than any of their 
15 rivals managed in the first round. The old master is doing it again.

“It’s a dream for us to be in the last eight,” he says. “We have come so far. 
This is a diligent team that loves to work; they worked hard during our 
training camp at Diambars [the Senegalese academy part-owned by Patrick Vieira] 
and we knew that we were ready on a physical and mental level. It’s more about 
finding tactical solutions at this stage.

“We know we have already achieved some fantastic things for this country. They 
had not qualified for 15 years; we’ve won two group games for the first time in 
41 years; in qualifying we won in Nigeria for the first time in 40 years. Now 
the reward is this fantastic game against DR Congo and everything is beautiful 
for us. Anything from now onwards is a bonus – but we want more and more 
bonuses.”

LeRoy is charming and relaxed in conversation, but his default setting in the 
dugout and on the training pitch sits somewhere between incredulity and 
exasperation. Yannick Bolasie, the Crystal Palace winger to whom LeRoy gave a 
debut for DRC in 2013, said on Thursday that his former manager “does not take 
any crap from anyone”. You can well believe it, and his willingness to speak 
truths to those in the Confederation of African Football’s (Caf) corridors of 
power in the last two weeks has been evidence enough of that. But he wears kid 
gloves too. Barely a minute of his training session passes without LeRoy being 
in conversation with one or other of his players, quietly pulled to one side, 
and many of those who have worked with him believe that his knack for 
man-management has contributed greatly to his longevity in Africa.

“Whatever the job, you have to bring all your character, your passion and 
always be the same coach for yourself,” he says. “But you are the never the 
same man for 23 players. You are 23 times a different coach to them depending 
on the background, the socio-cultural education of the player – their culture, 
their life and footballing habits. You have to be clever and smart, and manage 
a player depending on his sensibilities. That’s what I am passionate about.”

His formula has worked in other corners of the world. He and his protege, 
Hervé Renard, the coach of Ivory Coast, worked together at Shanghai Cosco 
before pulling Cambridge United out of the League Two relegation mire in 2004 
(“That few months was a huge pleasure. I had to leave because I was offered the 
DR Congo job but I enjoyed it so much and had good contact from some 
Championship clubs at the time too – I had to take a very fast decision, and 
sometimes it got me thinking – but I would like to work in England”). Under his 
managership Oman won their first ever Gulf Cup title in 2009, and he has also 
managed in Syria, Malaysia, UAE and France. But his relationship with Africa, 
where he has managed five countries in seven spells, is profound.

“Everywhere I have worked is close to my heart, because you build your life 
like that. Point by point, some faces, some smiles, some eyes – if you have 
good relations you don’t forget them.

“I love this continent and the people. My wife loves it and my children do 
too. They grew up in Cameroon and Senegal, they went to school there, they have 
close friends on this continent. My father fought as a political leader for the 
independence of countries like Algeria and Congo, so I’ve been concerned by 
Africa ever since I was a kid.”

“Concerned” was the right word when Congo arrived in Equatorial Guinea for 
this tournament. A number of LeRoy’s players and staff went without hotel rooms 
before the opening game against the host nation, while Caf officials appeared 
to be staying in luxurious accommodation.

Their Vistamar apartments are indeed a sight to behold but, a few mutterings 
aside, LeRoy has calmed down now. He still provides a stark picture of 
facilities in remote Ebibeyin, where Congo played against Burkina Faso.

“We’re OK now, we’ve got a normal hotel. It’s not a thing for me, it’s for the 
players. They have to be fed and rested, and while we don’t want luxury we 
expect at least the minimum, like water. We didn’t have any water in our four 
days in Ebibeyin.” He mimics pouring water over himself from a bottle.

“But on the whole everything has seemed better since that first match. The 
preparation for the first game was unbelievable, but that’s football. Well, no, 
it’s not football – but it was the reality of the situation.”

The reality now is that Congo, nine of whose squad are based in the obscure 
domestic league and whose only real star is Thievy Bifouma, who spent time with 
West Bromwich Albion last season, are a game away from their best African Cup 
of Nations result since 1974. That year, they came fourth; two years previously 
they had won the competition for the first and only time. DR Congo, in those 
days, was known as Zaire.

“Republic of Congo is a small country with some potential, but DR Congo has 
huge potential in African football,” says LeRoy. “There are similarities with 
Nigeria. If things are one day organised at a normal level I think they can 
achieve a lot of things. There have always been so many possibilities, so many 
good players, so much talent and now you have to help them.

“I am sure it will be a bit of a confrontation between the two Congos – but 
it’s a football game and we will try to show perfect behaviour. We made a good 
tactical plan for Gabon and Burkina Faso, and now the players and I must put 
something together for DR Congo.”

They surely will. But for all his preparations, you remember LeRoy’s walk away 
from the training ground penalty shoot-out and wonder whether he knew he had 
just witnessed the kind of eventuality that not even one of Africa’s master 
tacticians can control.
 