
Over a million Clevelanders crammed into downtown on Wednesday, celebrating 
something the they knew very little about: a title. It was an unrecognizable 
scene inside a city well-studied in sporting pain, where a drive here, a 
seeing-eye single there and “The Shot” once added up to 147 seasons passed 
without a championship.

Now the Cavaliers, their city, their fans are finally winners, and judging by 
the enthusiasm of the folks soaking up the Forest City sun, more regular 
opportunities to express championship exhilaration would be welcome.

Suddenly, Clevelanders are a much brighter bunch to be around. The notorious “
quarterbacks jersey 
<http://www.latimes.com/sports/sportsnow/la-sp-cleveland-cavaliers-browns-qb-jersey-20160621-snap-htmlstory.html>
”, which includes the 24 names of every single Browns QB since 1999 has been 
retired by its owner Tim Brokaw, as he and fellow fans seek to flush out “all 
negative energy and bad juju” around town.

Yes, it seems a curse-killing mission is on in northeast Ohio, and while 
getting the Browns their elusive Super Bowl ring trumps all, it’s the Indians 
who are in pole-position to ride Cleveland’s new found sports mojo.

Of course, the lovable losing Cubs, who’ve gone over a century without a World 
Series win, own the crown jewel of all North American title droughts. Yet since 
the Red and White Sox broke through in 2004 and 2005, the Tribe’s healthy, but 
less-celebrated 68-year ring-less streak runs a strong second.

As the oldest team in town, the Tribe bear plenty of responsibility for the 
previous 52 years of misery in the city. From 1960 to 1993 Cleveland managed 
just seven winning seasons inside their cavernous and mostly empty Municipal 
Stadium, finishing above fourth place just once. Such prodigious losing proved 
endearing, at least to Hollywood: the 1989 film Major League brought laughs and 
a less sought after lore to the franchise.

Then the organization became known for something entirely different: 
innovation. General manager John Hart took over in 1992 and became the first 
executive to sign prospects such as Sandy Alomar Jr and Carlos Baerga, to 
long-term deals. They built a championship core: Omar Vizquel, Jim Thome, 
Albert Belle and Manny Ramirez to name a few. Two World Series appearances 
followed, but still, no rings. Cleveland’s 1997 loss came in spectacularly 
agonizing fashion: Edgar Renteria’s Game 7 extra inning base hit sent the city 
into a familiar malaise.

In 2007, Terry Francona’s Boston Red Sox ousted Cleveland in a seven-game 
ALCS. Now Francona is in his fourth season as the Tribe’s skipper, trying to 
turn the same curse-crushing trick he ordered in Beantown, all while former 
BoSox GM and current Cubs President Theo Epstein tries to beat down the Curse 
of the Billy Goat in Chicago.

The Cubs, with their blistering start and 9.5 game lead in the National League 
Central are a 14-5 bet to slay their dragon and win the Fall Classic, while the 
Indians are slowly creeping up the big board, from 16-1 in February to 12-1 
today.

Vegas is beginning to believe, and perhaps now Clevelanders, who have an 
American League Central leading team, but are last in AL attendance, will begin 
to get behind their Tribe now that they know anything is possible in sports.

Cleveland fans should be in full on “why not us?” mode as they gaze upon their 
scorching hot club, one that’s ripped off a 15-6 start to June. With Tribe bats 
coming around to support their superb arms the Indians have become one of the 
most well rounded teams in the AL. And when everybody’s good luck charm,Juan 
Uribe <http://espn.go.com/mlb/player/gamelog/_/id/4657/juan-uribe>, launches 
home runs in four straight games 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/early-lead/wp/2016/06/13/juan-uribe-takes-smash-to-the-groin-must-explain-why-he-wasnt-wearing-a-cup/>
, you begin to wonder if the 37-year-old could be part of something special, 
again.

The Indians have survived the loss of their best hitter, Michael Brantley, for 
most of the season with shoulder issues and are three games up in the AL 
Central, benefiting from a Kansas City Royals team that’s struggling to find 
its feet inside a relatively weak division.

They have young stars: Francisco Lindor should be included in any best AL 
shortstops chats along with Carlos Correa and Xander Boegarts: the 22-year old 
has more than backed up his promising rookie season with even higher 
production. Danny Salazar is breaking out at age 26, leading a power-rotation 
that includesa surging former Cy Young Award winner 
<http://www.cleveland.com/tribe/index.ssf/2016/06/cleveland_indians_tampa_bay_ra_36.html>
 in Corey Kluber.

Cleveland’s relief core, steadied by closer Cody Allen isn’t as strong as the 
starters, but throw them all together they’ve allowed the fewest runs in the 
American League. That bodes well should they reach the playoffs and take on an 
offensive powerhouse such as Texas, Toronto, Boston or Baltimore.

Meanwhile, their middle-of-the-road offense, missing the doubles machine 
Brantley, have just about enough to compete nightly, with the pop of DH Carlos 
Santana and first baseman Mike Napoli, and steady play from 2B Jason Kipnis, OF 
Tyler Naquin and OF Jose Ramirez.

Do the Indians need help? Sure, upgrades are needed, specifically Yan Gomes at 
catcher and Juan Uribe at 3B, who cannot be playing everyday, and they could 
probably use a bullpen arm. Cleveland’s small market pockets mean landing a big 
piece isn’t straightforward, but they do have a deep farm system and some 
reports have linked the sizzling Carlos Beltran to Cleveland, which isnot one 
of the teams <http://espn.go.com/blog/buster-olney/insider/post?id=12928> on 
his no-trade clause list, should the Yankees eventually throw in the towel.

The Indians have most of the ingredients to make a legitimate push towards a 
division title and beyond, perhaps summoning a second title to the city in four 
months: a notion that until this week, would have been soundly ejected with a 
snide snicker from Clevelanders.

Video of the Week

Miguel Cabrera’s 461-foot moonshot on Monday against the Mariners may not have 
been the longest in Comerica Park history (JD Martinez has that record at 467 
feet), but when it leaves the park, for me at least, that trumps distance.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4Jrk5M1Y_So&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4Jrk5M1Y_So>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4Jrk5M1Y_So&media=>
 Miguel Cabrera put Nathan Karns’ offering onto Adams Street. 
Quote of the Week

Vin Scully has always had something to say about sports, but of course he’s 
not limited to balls and strikes, as viewers learned this week.

Perez, 25 years old, originally drafted by the Tigers. Lives in Venezuela. 
Boy, can you imagine, you’re a young kid playing in the United States, you’re 
from Venezuela, and every time you look at the news it’s a nightmare. A bunt 
attempt is missed—runners are holding, 0-and-2. Socialism failing to work, as 
it always does, this time in Venezuela. You talk about giving everybody 
something free and all of a sudden, there’s no food to eat. And who do you 
think is the richest person in Venezuela? The daughter of Hugo Chavez. Hello! 
Anyway, 0-and-2...

Who’s closer to victory: Donald Trump or the Cubs?

St Louis made a statement by walking into Wrigley Field and sweeping their 
three game series with Chicago, and that statement was that they needed to keep 
winning in order to earn a wild card spot. Despite the setback, a Cubs 
divisional collapse seems all but impossible at this point, especially when 
newly plucked prospects continue to make magic on the big league level. On 
Sunday, catcher Willson Contreras hit a home run on the very first pitch he saw 
from the Pirates reliever AJ Schugel.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW8z2205EwHQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW8z2205EwHQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW8z2205EwHQ&media=>
 Willson Contreras dazzled in his big league debut. 
Meanwhile, Donald Trump has no such prospects, and even less money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/jun/20/donald-trump-campaign-strategy-polls-nra-clinton-election-2016>
, at least this week: polls showpolitics’ version of 
<http://media.boingboing.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/trump-orange.jpg> Le 
Grande Orange 
<http://www.baseball-almanac.com/images/rusty_staub_le_grand_orange.jpg> being 
buried by Hillary Clinton, all during a week hefired his campaign manager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2016/jun/22/steve-bell-on-donald-trump-firing-his-campaign-manager-cartoon>
. Cubs win!

How did the kids piss off Goose Gossage this week?

Well, this week, it’s what the kids were doing years and years before Goose 
suited up...
Matt Lisle (@CoachLisle) 
Mickey Mantle. Inventor Of The Bat Flip pic.twitter.com/4JPuTycd3N 
<https://t.co/4JPuTycd3N>
 <https://twitter.com/CoachLisle/status/744940670805118981> June 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/CoachLisle/status/744940670805118981> 
Could it be that the Mickey Mantle actually invented the bat flip back when 
Gossage was just a glimmer in his dad’s eye? Is Mantle trying to show up Bob 
Lemon, or whoever threw that pitch? It’s more likely that the Mick was mad he 
got under a pitch. Still, Mantle should’ve known better and kept those 
Oklahoman emotions in check.

Nine thoughts in order

1) The Dodgers have won all but one of the 15 starts that Clayton Kershaw has 
made for LA. That means Los Angeles are 27-32 when Kershaw doesn’t start a 
game. The 28-year-old southpaw has outdone himself again, making all those 
comparisons to Sandy Koufax I once thought silly now seem less off base. His 
WHIP, ERA, and FIP are all career bests, never mid his 20.14 strikeout to walk 
ratio. Kershaw, who is 11-1 and almost singlehandedly keeping LA in the playoff 
hunt, struck out Bryce Harper three times on Monday in a 4-1 win and must be a 
shoo-in for yet another Cy Young Award, even as Jake Arrieta approaches what he 
did last season in Chicago.

Of course it helps to have a wild horse on your roster as well. On Wednesday, 
Yasiel Puig (via Michael Taylor) helped deliver an unlikely sweep of the 
Washington Nationals in one of the most exciting walk-off plays (Vin Scully’s 
call here <http://m.mlb.com/video/v847912183/?affiliateId=clubMEGAMENU>) of the 
season.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwxbsl-Izx5w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwxbsl-Izx5w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dwxbsl-Izx5w&media=>
 The wild horse loves to roam. 
2) Houston have finally woken up. The Astros’ walk-off win against the Angels 
Tuesday meant that the team that tanked to start 2016 have rallied from 11 
games below .500 to break even and methodically climb back into the wild card 
race. Their pitching staff, rocked in April, has been gradually steadying, with 
the team posting an ERA second to Cleveland in the AL this month. The entire 
rotation, from struggling Cy Young Award winner Dallas Keuchel to Lance 
McCullers to Collin McHugh have been dominant over the past week. It also 
doesn’t hurt that Carlos Correa is starting to heat up, as Houston head to 
Kansas City for a rematch of the ALDS starting Friday.

3) Globe Life Park in Arlington is only 22 years old but that’s not stopping 
the Rangers from looking for new digs. The city of Arlington, which help 
subsidize Jerry Jones his Cowboys AT&T Stadium, is now looking to keep the 
Rangers in town with yet another sweetheart deal. ABC TV affiliateWFAA in Dallas
 
<http://www.wfaa.com/news/local/investigates/experts-new-arlington-stadium-deal-among-the-worst-in-the-country/251473853>
 say that the reported 50-50 public partnership between the city and the 
Rangers is more like 80-20, in Texas’ favor. “This is all about not physical 
obsolescence. It’s really about economic obsolescence,” said Robert Baade, who 
studies the economic impact of sports stadiums. “So who derives the benefits 
from building this new stadium?”

That’s not tough to figure out, especially when you look at the debacle in 
Cobb County 
<http://www.si.com/mlb/2016/06/06/cobb-county-redirected-funds-public-parks-build-braves-stadium>
 where the Atlanta Braves are also in the process of leaving a perfectly 
suitable stadium for greener pastures in the suburbs while locals pick up the 
tab. Meanwhile, the Rangers are perfectly suited for their current stadium, 
posting a 25-11 record, second best in the AL.

4) Knowing how may outs there are in a baseball game may seem like one of the 
easier tasks of the game, but this week, two of the sport’s best couldn’t 
figure it out. On Monday, Washington’s Daniel Murphywore a dunce cap 
<http://m.mlb.com/cutfour/2016/06/21/185323982> and a night later Marlins ace 
Jose Fernandez lost count.
Cut4 (@Cut4) 
Jose Fernandez had to pull out his Homer Simpson impression on this one: 
https://t.co/cWp98nEu2k <https://t.co/cWp98nEu2k> pic.twitter.com/rqtdiKp8mq 
<https://t.co/rqtdiKp8mq>
 <https://twitter.com/Cut4/status/745466671863762944> June 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Cut4/status/745466671863762944> 
5) Jose Reyes may be heading back to New York, which shows you just how much 
trouble the injury-plagued and offensively starved Mets are in. Reyes, a player 
in decline, a player fresh off breaking in MLB’s new domestic violence policy, 
a player who probably cannot replace David Wright at third base because he 
never played third base, and a player who would also face adjustments back at 
second base, is damaged goods. Yet he’s a tempting proposition for New York 
because he can be had for very little on Saturday when he is officially free 
from his deal in Colorado. It shows you how much GM Sandy Alderson needs help 
right now, not at the trade deadline in five weeks, and how he would prefer not 
to pony up for free-agent Cuban infielder Yulieski Gourriel. The Mets have 
always been careful about their image, while also possessing a knack for 
bumbling their public relations. Jose Reyes represents their latest test.

Meanwhile, the spate of bad news continued to snowball on Wednesday when 
slugger Yoenis Cespedes was removed from New York’s game against Kansas City 
with left wrist discomfort. Postgame it was revealed that ace hurler Noah 
Syndergaard suffered elbow pain during the Mets win 4-3 win. And that came just 
24 hours after the team announced that pitching prospect Zack Wheeler had
suffered a setback 
<http://m.mlb.com/news/article/185361624/mets-pitcher-zack-wheeler-has-injury-setback>
 in his rehab from Tommy John surgery. The good news? The Mets said late 
Wednesday that Syndergaard’s elbow is structurally sound, while the line drive 
that knocked pitcher Bartolo Colon out of the game on Tuesday would not prevent 
him from taking his next turn on Sunday.

6) MLB commissioner Rob Manfred refused to rule out Las Vegas for expansion in 
the week it was confirmed NHL hasbroken the ice 
<https://i.ytimg.com/vi/5lc8_B5Eyjg/maxresdefault.jpg> in Sin City. The sport 
already counts Draft Kings as the “Official Daily Fantasy Baseball Game ofMLB”, 
and so it seems they’ve moved past some casino/gambling issues during the very 
same period that Pete Rose seemed to be permanently stuck to the ineligible 
list. Regardless of whether you believe that’s hypocritical, MLB want 32 teams: 
Montreal are in the forefront of expansion, but the list of potential big 
league cities thins out from there. If the NHL experiment goes well and the 
Oakland Raiders hit the desert next, MLB will already have their market 
research completed, free of charge.

7) Alex Rodriguez may have found a niche on Fox’s MLB coverage last fall, but 
don’t expect his career path to expand into baseball’s front office. The 
Yankees DH was recently asked byNJ.com 
<http://www.nj.com/yankees/index.ssf/2016/06/yankees_alex_rodriguez_on_who_is_the_lebron_of_bas.html#incart_river_index>
 which MLB player transcends the sport “Look, I don’t know that answer” said 
A-Rod, who also claimed “that in the next 5-10 years we’re going to become No1 
again.”

8) Journeymen third-string catchers don’t often make headlines on back-to-back 
nights, but Erik Kratz has. On Monday, Kratz, playing in Pittsburgh with his 
fourth organization this season, somehow managed to go deep against the Giants 
Madison Bumgarner, much to the disgust of left fielder Angel Pagan. The solo 
shot was the only run of the game.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmDUlZD2l58Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmDUlZD2l58Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DmDUlZD2l58Q&media=>
 Erik wasn’t Kratz-ing around against MadBum. 
The next night, Kratz found himself on the mound, amazingly for the second 
time of his career, and struck out Brandon Belt in a garbage-time at-bat with 
the Bucs down 15-4. Kratz reportedly reached 86.4mph on his heater, which is
reportedly faster than any pitch Jered Weaver 
<https://twitter.com/darenw/status/745447049651494912> has recorded all year. 

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkJLqHn6zI4E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkJLqHn6zI4E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DkJLqHn6zI4E&media=>
 Brandon Belt takes an extra-long walk to the Giants dugout after being whiffed 
by a third-string catcher. 
9) And finally, spare a thought for the Brooklyn Cyclones of the minor NY-Penn 
League. Last Friday, the Brooks opened their season against their hated rivals, 
the Staten Island Yankees. Some 20 innings later, the Cyclones were on the 
short end of a 3-2 loss. On Saturday, they lost again to the Bombers, this time 
in just 10 innings. On Sunday Brooklyn got their first win of the season 
against the Tri-City ValleyCats in their first nine-inning game. Monday brought 
yet another marathon and yet another crushing defeat, 10-9 in 17 innings. So in 
their first four games of the season, the Cyclones racked up some 56 innings of 
play, going 1-3. On Tuesday, spontaneous celebrations throughout the boro were 
witnessed following their 8-3 win over Tri-City.
Brooklyn Cyclones (@BKCyclones) 
Do you believe in miracles???? Yes!!!!! Cyclones win 8-3 in regulation 
pic.twitter.com/3EWSblJZMm <https://t.co/3EWSblJZMm>
 <https://twitter.com/BKCyclones/status/745435683708297216> June 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BKCyclones/status/745435683708297216>  