
Apart from the federal cabinet itself, Australia’s defence planners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-military> are a 
relatively small group – no more than two dozen decision-makers – and after 
Tony Abbott abolished the office of the National Security Adviser held by Dr 
Margot McCarthy, they are almost exclusively white, middle-aged, Anglo-European 
males. Many have a military background; all have been initiated into the 
operations of the intelligence agencies; all are respectful of the American 
alliance. While some have had diplomatic experience in the region – notably in 
Indonesia and China – almost all view the world through the reassuring prism of 
our “Five Eyes” intelligence relationship with the US.


They are not altogether homogenous. There are variations of age, background, 
education and personality. There are traditionalists to whom the communist 
menace lives on. There are rock-ribbed racists who conceal their atavism behind 
a clubby politesse. There are warriors to whom the resort to arms is the only 
credible response to international disagreements. Happily, they are balanced by 
a well-read, highly intelligent and perceptive brigade who abhor human combat 
except in the last degree.

As the 21st century gathered momentum through its second decade, they were 
confronted by the defence planner’s ultimate nightmare: international disorder 
caused by climate change. For despite the views held by former prime minister 
Tony Abbott and a motley combination of rightwing extremists, greedy miners and 
professional controversialists, the ice is melting, the seas will rise, 
tornadoes are becoming more powerful, droughts longer and more intense, 
bushfires ever more destructive, and adequate food and water supply ever more 
problematic.

“[Climate change] has generated little interest in either the ADF or the 
Defence Department."
2013 Australian Strategic Policy Institute report 
An Australian Strategic Policy Institute report published in March 2013 warned 
that global warming “has generated little interest in either the ADF or the 
Defence Department, [yet] climate change is transforming the conventional roles 
of security forces. As a threat multiplier, it has the potential to generate 
and exacerbate destabilising conditions that could reshape the regional 
security environment”.

The report confined itself to generalities. But it was plain to the planners 
and environmental scientists alike that no one could tell exactly how the 
Australian mainland will fare. As tropical conditions move south, for example, 
they might well bring higher rainfall to some marginal areas, while other more 
settled country crumbles to dust.

But Australia is so big that in all likelihood it will be able to sustain 
itself almost indefinitely. The threat will come from those countries thrown 
into chaos around the globe with hundreds of millions of refugees in search of 
a place to live. Australian sovereignty will be under continuous hazard. 
Indeed, nationalism itself will be disputed in a world where the ravages of 
climate ignore all man-made borders.

In such a world, Australia’s security – as descendants of an invading force 
that dispossessed its original owners, with barely a backward glance a mere two 
centuries ago – is less manifest and incontestable than we might have hoped. 
This means that we must secure our coastline with a substantial and 
well-equipped navy and air force. But even more important, it seems, are 
international alliances with the great powers who would underwrite – with force 
if necessary – the right of nations such as Australia to decide (in John 
Howard’s immortal phrase) “who comes to this country and the circumstances in 
which they come”.

The first of those great forces would, of course, be the US, but unfortunately 
the words of President Barack Obama in a frank interview with the New York 
Times in August 2014 were already looking prophetic. “Our politics are 
dysfunctional,” he said. Gerrymandering, the Balkanisation (ie fragmentation) 
of the news media and uncontrolled money in politics – the guts of his 
country’s political system – were sapping America’s ability to take big 
decisions.

China, Indonesia and India: momentum for change
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fclimate-refugees-and-china-will-dictate-the-future-of-australias-military%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f186d1a6b62f9305fbaf7ae43dc950a987c5288%2F0_159_2400_1441%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%2C%20refugees%20and%20China%20will%20dictate%20the%20future%20of%20Australia's%20military%20%7C%20Robert%20Macklin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fclimate-refugees-and-china-will-dictate-the-future-of-australias-military%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%2C%20refugees%20and%20China%20will%20dictate%20the%20future%20of%20Australia%27s%20military%20%7C%20Robert%20Macklin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fclimate-refugees-and-china-will-dictate-the-future-of-australias-military%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f186d1a6b62f9305fbaf7ae43dc950a987c5288%2F0_159_2400_1441%2F2400.jpg>
 ‘It would be foolish indeed to rely solely on the US to guarantee our national 
security at a time of unbridled global turbulence.’ Photograph: Xu 
Haijing/Xinhua Press/Corbis 
Clearly, Australia must seek alternatives, and they must be as close to home 
as possible. The big three in the planners’ focus are China, Indonesia and 
India. But there are obvious impediments to Australia seeking the firm 
alliances required. Most are historical rather than practical. China is 
decidedly at the wrong end of the Five Eyes telescopes. But as the two 
economies become ever more complementary, the momentum for change might well 
become difficult to resist.

During his first journey there as prime minister, Tony Abbott promised a new 
urgency in negotiations for a free trade agreement. It is a complex document 
but among the most serious sticking points was China’s call for an investment 
regime comparable to that applied by Australia to the US. Americans could 
invest up to $1bn without referral to the Foreign Investment Review Board 
(Firb), whereas most Chinese investments were subject to Firb disapproval. 
While the effect is more symbolic than real – since the board waved through 
almost all investment proposals – it was an important issue of face to the 
Chinese.

Similar problems needed to be overcome in the developing relationship with 
Indonesia. Though good progress had been made behind the intelligence curtains, 
and a new “understanding” negotiated, SBY had departed. No doubt he warned his 
successor, Joko Widodo, a foreign policy tyro, that their southern neighbour 
was at best politically unreliable.

This was reflected in Jokowi’s refusal to bow to Australia’s plea for the 
commutation of the death sentences on reformed drug smugglers Andrew Chan and 
Myuran Sukumaran carried out in April. And the subsequent revelation of 
Australian payments to people smugglers to return their human cargo to 
Indonesia only confirmed it. But at least the Americans would favour a closer 
relationship with a newly democratised country that to date had kept its Muslim 
extremists in check.

It involves a profound reordering of our self-perception, from a colonial 
regime to an enduring Asia-Pacific nationality

India was an unknown quantity; work had begun to remedy the situation but, in 
any major climate change disruption, the populous subcontinent might well 
provide a source of Australia’s unwanted immigrants rather than an official 
bulwark against their unregulated intrusions. The Aspi report highlighted the 
250 million people living in the river deltas of Asia, a large proportion in 
the Ganges–Brahmaputra deltas where they were at “extreme risk” from rising sea 
levels.

Dr David Brewster, a visiting fellow at the ANU’s College of Asia and the 
Pacific, says, “Australia recognises India as an important new security partner 
in the Indo-Pacific, but India is only beginning to see Australia as a useful 
partner. For India, in some ways, Australia represents a difficult case. India 
has no direct security interests in our immediate area and Australia’s close 
relationship with the United States sometimes creates political unease in New 
Delhi”.

Both countries, he says, have “concerns” about China. But these “should not be 
elevated as the moving cause of the relationship ... in short, if Australia 
wishes to enhance its security and defence relationship with India it must be 
prepared to act outside its comfort zone”.

Should we face an existential crisis, the experience of the second world war 
has taught us that the old Anglophone ties are tenuous at best, and at worst a 
serious impediment to our territorial integrity. It would be foolish indeed to 
rely solely on the US to guarantee our national security at a time of unbridled 
global turbulence.

But that requires an intense reassessment of our national priorities. It 
involves a profound reordering of our self-perception, from an Anglophile 
colonial regime to a more realistic and enduring Asia-Pacific nationality 
blessed with a firm institutional foundation and an adventurous cosmopolitan 
population.

The future of Australia’s special forces
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fclimate-refugees-and-china-will-dictate-the-future-of-australias-military%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F629187437a0a5920e05ea3de40bcedd13c9fe1d9%2F0_151_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%2C%20refugees%20and%20China%20will%20dictate%20the%20future%20of%20Australia's%20military%20%7C%20Robert%20Macklin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fclimate-refugees-and-china-will-dictate-the-future-of-australias-military%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%2C%20refugees%20and%20China%20will%20dictate%20the%20future%20of%20Australia%27s%20military%20%7C%20Robert%20Macklin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fclimate-refugees-and-china-will-dictate-the-future-of-australias-military%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F629187437a0a5920e05ea3de40bcedd13c9fe1d9%2F0_151_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘Within the ADF the movement towards a greater role for special forces is 
gaining traction.’ Photograph: Corporal Raymond Vance/Handout 
At the same time, the convergence between the special forces pillars has 
continued. Duncan Lewis’s appointment as director general of the Australian 
Security Intelligence Organisation (Asio) marks the first time since the 
legendary Colonel Spry that a military careerist steeped in the special forces 
ethos has headed Australia’s top intelligence agency.

Within the ADF the movement towards a greater role for special forces is 
gaining traction. General Angus Campbell’s elevation to the command of 
Operation Sovereign Borders had opened the way for the special operations 
commander Gus Gilmore to be appointed deputy chief of army. He immediately took 
the opportunity to engage with Peter Jennings at the Australian Strategic 
Policy Institute.

The result was one of the more significant documents in the evolution of 
Australia’s armed forces. Published in April 2014, it recognised that the 
traditional “Big Army” was not well suited to a security environment where the 
great set battles of the 20th century had been replaced by smaller and more 
concentrated global operations in disparate terrain:

Over the past decade the Australian special operations capability has proven 
to be a major asset for the Australian government. Its specific skill set, 
developed over the years, is likely to become more, not less, important to the 
new strategic environment. Looking to the future, special operations capability 
could be further upgraded relative to the regular Army, which might be cut as 
part of a ‘peace dividend’.

It recommended that Special Operations Command (SOCOMD) be given control of 
much of its own budget, “In the same way that other specialist organisations, 
such as the Australian Signals Directorate, have a capability development 
budget that’s managed in house”.

It also recommended the creation of a joint capability manager within the ADF 
– preferably the vice-chief of the defence force – to ensure that major ADF 
projects, such as the future submarines and amphibious equipment purchases, be 
coordinated with the needs of special operations. The regular army should 
retain control of conventional combat operations, it said, but:

Special Forces offer the best value in unconventional operations and in 
so-called Phase Zero missions which focus on building and shaping defence 
relationships with key partners in a pre-crisis environment. SOCOMD has a lot 
to offer in Defence’s regional engagement strategy ... Augmentation of its 
capacity to contribute to regional and (limited) global defence engagement 
would be a valuable investment. It needs to have knowledge of allied and 
friendly country practices.

This would require a SOCOMD presence in selected headquarters in Australia’s 
near region. “That’s where our security interests are most closely engaged,” 
the report said, “and proximity would make it easier for other ADF elements to 
provide support for operations as required.”

It recommended establishing special forces liaison officers in selected 
Australian embassies in Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore and the Philippines, “of 
which Indonesia is the most important”. In the South Pacific, fostering special 
forces cooperation with Papua New Guinea and Fiji should be a priority.

In the South Pacific, fostering special forces cooperation with Papua New 
Guinea and Fiji should be a priority.

Increased special forces engagement with South-East Asian nations could lead 
to the establishment of a special forces regional training centre in Australia. 
“The centre could also link to existing training centres beyond the 
Asia-Pacific region, such as Nato’s Special Operations Headquarters.”

And in a groundbreaking recommendation it advocated “an intensification” of 
cooperation with Chinese special forces. “Defence should promote cooperation 
between SOCOMD and its Chinese counterpart,” the report said.

“This would be a confidence-building measure in Australia–China 
military-to-military relations as well as a burden-sharing contribution to the 
US alliance. Exercises related to counterterrorism and humanitarian assistance 
and disaster relief would be well suited for this purpose.”

Nevertheless, it said, “maintaining and strengthening special forces 
cooperation with our US ally is vital ... while an agreement was recently 
signed for a SOCOMD liaison post at US Pacific command, similar arrangements 
could be considered with US central command and US Africa command to facilitate 
Australian special operations in the Middle East and Africa.”

It was a powerful contribution, generally well received within the 
establishment, except by the usual “Big Army” traditionalists with their 
obvious self-interest.

Africa and Islamism: the challenge ahead
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fclimate-refugees-and-china-will-dictate-the-future-of-australias-military%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3785586b03a8674f482aba5e91218b4f3053f5f7%2F0_130_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%2C%20refugees%20and%20China%20will%20dictate%20the%20future%20of%20Australia's%20military%20%7C%20Robert%20Macklin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fclimate-refugees-and-china-will-dictate-the-future-of-australias-military%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%2C%20refugees%20and%20China%20will%20dictate%20the%20future%20of%20Australia%27s%20military%20%7C%20Robert%20Macklin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2015%2Foct%2F20%2Fclimate-refugees-and-china-will-dictate-the-future-of-australias-military%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3785586b03a8674f482aba5e91218b4f3053f5f7%2F0_130_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘Australia’s defenders will themselves have to become as nimble and adaptable 
as their enemy.’ Photograph: Australian Department Of Defence/Handout 
However, mention of Africa raised the vexed issue of the “secret” SAS 4 
Squadron 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/secret-squadron-sas-elite-operate-at-large-as-spies-in-africa-20120312-1uwro.html>
 with its longstanding African focus. The paper neatly avoided confirming their 
existence by implying that such missions “might be needed in the future”.

“Clandestine operations which involve military personnel in ways other than 
uniformed and declared military operations could become important for 
Australia’s special forces,” it said. “If the government decides to use SOCOMD 
in this way, we need an unambiguous legislative framework and robust oversight 
mechanisms.”

Ironically, it is America’s global rival, China, with no declared special 
forces operatives on the African continent, whose economic initiatives might 
well become a more effective weapon against the prophets of disorder.

However, growth among the various economies is uneven. Inequality is rising in 
many areas and violence continues to simmer in the Central African Republic, 
South Sudan and elsewhere. In Kenya, where Australian special forces have long 
enjoyed a close association, economic advances have been patchy and violence is 
increasing. The scourge of Aids has taken a terrible toll across the continent; 
outbreaks of Ebola and other killer diseases have ravaged communities and set 
back tentative economic advances. And nowhere is climate change more obvious, 
as the Sahara advances south at frightening speed.

Clearly, Africa will become a battlespace in the war against Islamist 
fundamentalism.

Clearly, Africa will become a battlespace in the war against a loosely allied 
grouping of terrorists fired by the zeal of Islamist fundamentalism and 
simmering resentment against Western colonial exploitation. While it will be 
hard fought – and Australia’s contribution will be strictly limited – it is by 
no means a lost cause.

It is only one of the fronts on which the battle will be joined. Already, the 
US has been drawn back into Iraq to confront the vicious Isis advances, with 
Australia once again in full-throated support from the government if not the 
people. In China, the Uighurs have begun armed attacks in their native Xinjiang 
Province, while terrorist teams have conducted knife-wielding outrages as far 
south as Yunnan. Yang Shu, the director of the Institute for Central Asian 
Studies at Lanzhou University, says more attacks can be expected.

“For Islamist extremists in China,” he says, “there’s also this issue of 
ethnic identity and that adds to extremist hatred.” In Indonesia, returning 
fighters from Syria and Iraq are already organising terrorist cells in West 
Java and Northern Sumatra.

Malcolm Turnbull supports US decision to leave troops in Afghanistan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/16/malcolm-turnbull-supports-us-decision-to-leave-troops-in-afghanistan>
Australia’s defenders will themselves have to become as nimble and adaptable 
as their enemy. The stakes can hardly be overstated. It is a task that will 
demand nothing less than the best of us. And the most perceptive of the 
planners have already reached the view that the most effective response lies 
within the pillars of our special forces.

They draw their inspiration from the critical nature of the battle itself. But 
they are sustained by the knowledge of all those who went before, from the 
independent companies such as Sparrow Force who struggled against the Japanese 
tide when all contact with the home base was lost; to the jungle fighters of 
Borneo and Vietnam and East Timor; and to the troopers in the hellfire of 
ambush in the dusty mountain passes of Oruzgan. All served Australia well. They 
did what was asked of them and more. Now they, the warrior elite, stand on 
those broad shoulders as they face the longest, toughest fight of all.

 * This is an edited extract from Warrior Elite by Robert Macklin 
<https://www.hachette.com.au/books/detail.page?isbn=9780733632914>, published 
by Hachette Australia, RRP $35.00.
 