
Monday

Happy new year. Possibly. Or possibly not. It increasingly seems to me that 
making new year resolutions is a young person’s game, as I made most of the big 
lifestyle changing decisions decades ago. I haven’t drunk, smoked or done drugs 
for near on 30 years and I’ve been a gym bunny for about as long. Not out of 
any moral superiority, I should point out, but because it took me until I was 
30 to realise my desire to live was greater than my desire to die.

My therapist once called me the second most self-destructive person she had 
ever met. My initial reaction was to be gutted not to have headed that 
particular leader board, which I suppose rather proved her point. All this 
clean living may have helped keep me breathing, but it hasn’t staved off mental 
illness, and I still suffer periodic episodes of crippling anxiety and 
depression that seem to operate to cycles of their own. So I now feel rather 
past making resolutions and have settled instead for making vague plans; 
anything more definite than that seems way too stressful.

'Have you seen the idiots we’re up against?' - year in politics digested
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/year-in-politics-digested-brexit-westminster>
Tuesday


A YouGov survey <http:// 
https://d25d2506sfb94s.cloudfront.net/cumulus_uploads/document/upts71m2pt/TimesResults_161219_VI_Trackers_EndofYear_W.pdf>
 suggests that most of the country has as little faith in Brexit coming up 
roses asSir Ivan Rogers, who resigned as Britain’s ambassador to the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/european-commission-praises-ivan-rogers-after-resignation>
 because he felt the government was totally clueless. In December 2015, 21% of 
people felt they would be better off in the next year. By December 2016, the 
figure had fallen to just 11%. Those thinking they would be worse off has risen 
from 25% to 38% in the same period. This doesn’t sound like the kind of Brexit 
bonanza that Vote Leave politicians were promising before the EU referendum. 
The survey also shows that the percentage of people believing in God has fallen 
from 32 to 28. It’s hard to know what to make of that. Either Brexit is turning 
the UK into a more rational, secular society, or 4% of the country has just 
realised that Nigel Farage is not the Messiah.

Man of 2016? Nigel Farage – my alternative New Year awards | John Crace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/30/man-of-2016-nigel-farage-alternative-new-year-awards>
Wednesday


It was often difficult to know which was the more surreal event of 2016. 
Andrea Leadsom <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom> coming 
second in the Tory leadership election or Theresa May appointing Leadsom to be 
minister for the environment, food and rural affairs. After theabsurd march of 
a handful of MPs and other supporters on parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/07/andrea-leadsom-tory-leadership-supporters-march-parliament-video>
 - “Who do we want?” “Andrea Leadsom”. “When do we want her?” “Some time in 
September” - followed by her abrupt resignation from the leadership campaign, 
Leadsom must have expected to return to deserved anonymity. Instead, she found 
herself in the cabinet. Wisely, though, she decided to use her first six months 
in post to do absolutely nothing. That way nothing could go wrong. Until now.At 
a speech to the Oxford Farmers’ Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/andrea-leadsom-vows-to-scrap-eu-red-tape-for-farmers-after-brexit>
, the pro-Brexit Leadsom announced that, as far as she was concerned, farmers 
could carry on employing cheap, unskilled labour from the EU. No one appears to 
have told her thatstopping unskilled labour from coming to the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/30/ministers-want-controls-on-skilled-and-unskilled-eu-workers-say-sources>
 was one of the key Brexit promises. Left hand, meet right hand.

John Crace's 2016 UK politics quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/john-craces-2016-uk-politics-quiz>
Thursday


I’m still in a state of shock after Spurs beat Chelsea to end the west London 
club’s 13 match winning streak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/tottenham-hotspur-chelsea-premier-league-match-report>
. It wasn’t so much the result as the manner of the victory that was so 
surprising. Normally when Spurs take the lead in a big derby game, they put 
their supporters through hell by reverting to playing like headless chickens 
and doing their best to lose the game before going on to – sometimes – win it. 
But on Wednesday night they closed out the game comfortably and never looked 
like giving it away. It was all most confusing. Mind you, I still spent as much 
of the second half looking at the scoreboard clocks, willing them to reach 90 
minutes, as I did on the game itself. Call it cognitive dissonance. Or old 
habits die hard.

Friday

The future’s not so bright, the future isn’t orange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/the-futures-bright-the-futures-orange-in-trumptastic-uk>
. At the end of last year, Nigel Farage was touting himself as the next 
ambassador to the US after receiving Donald Trump’s endorsement. When that 
turned to dust, he was quick to put himself in the frame as a possible 
replacement for Ivan Rogers. That, too, turned to ashes. ButFarage has now 
landed himself a proper job hosting an hour-long radio chat show from Monday to 
Thursday on LBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/nigel-farage-to-host-lbc-radio-talkshow>
. From being the US president-elect’s right hand man in Britain to Alan 
Partridge is quite a come down. Just before Christmas, Farage stood in for 
Katie Hopkins on LBC to produce two of the most dreary hours of radio yet 
aired, because Farage was incapable of talking about anything except himself. 
The entire show centred on whether or not Nigel was or was not the greatest 
living Englishman. Callers were divided, but Farage got the casting vote. 
Whether Farage has any other topics of conversation must be in question, as 
must how often he calls in sick. Farage had the lowest voting attendance record 
of any active MEP in the European parliament. LBC should also watch his 
expenses.

Digested week: All we’ll hear is Radio Ga Ga

 