
The US-led coalition fighting Islamic State in Syria has killed at least 300 
civilians in airstrikes, and must do more to prevent further civilian deaths as 
the battle for Mosul intensifies in neighbouring Iraq,Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> has warned.

More than half of the victims identified in a new report by the rights group, 
which looked at deaths over the two years since western forces joined the fight 
against Isis inSyria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, were killed 
during the fight for the city of Manbij.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20important%20is%20Mosul%20for%20Isis%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20important%20is%20Mosul%20for%20Isis%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fhow-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer&media=>
How important is Mosul for Isis? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/25/how-important-is-mosul-for-isis-video-explainer>
It is important the lessons from those deaths are learned as a broad coalition 
of troops backed by US air power and special forces push towardsMosul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/mosul>, a much bigger city that is still 
home to about 600,000 civilians, the group says.

“In its backing of anti-Isis ground forces during this summer’s Manbij 
campaign, the US-led coalition killed some 250 or more civilians, and yet it 
does not acknowledge them,” said Neil Sammonds, Amnesty’s researcher for Syria.

“We fear that since it is not recognising or learning from such mistakes that 
in the campaign for Mosul, which is far greater than Manbij, the coalition is 
on course to kill even greater numbers of civilians and risk a serious 
backlash.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fsyria-coalition-airstrikes-civilian-death-toll-amnesty-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61288b234b32a8699f771cd67c8e33e6017fbc72%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coalition%20airstrikes%20in%20Syria%20have%20killed%20300%20civilians%2C%20says%20Amnesty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fsyria-coalition-airstrikes-civilian-death-toll-amnesty-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coalition%20airstrikes%20in%20Syria%20have%20killed%20300%20civilians%2C%20says%20Amnesty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fsyria-coalition-airstrikes-civilian-death-toll-amnesty-international%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61288b234b32a8699f771cd67c8e33e6017fbc72%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
 Syria Democratic Forces fighters greet civilians evacuated from an 
Isis-controlled neighbourhood of Manbij. Photograph: Reuters 
The rights group spent months carrying out witness interviews, collecting 
photographic and video evidence, analysing satellite images and reviewing 
reports from local activists to determine the total number of deaths.

It is a conservative toll compared with estimates from other monitoring groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/29/us-airstrikes-isis-death-toll>, 
which put the number of deaths from coalition bombing at 600 to 1,000. The 
monitoring groups include the Syrian Network for Human Rights, the Syrian 
Observatory for Human Rights and the Violations Documentation Centre.

Only a handful of deaths have been acknowledged by the coalition  
<http://www.defense.gov/News/Article/Article/741155/centcom-releases-civilian-casualty-assessments>
in its attacks in Syria. Amnesty is calling for more precautions before 
attacks, and independent investigations into possible violations of 
international law.

“We fear the US-led coalition is significantly underestimating the harm caused 
to civilians in its operations in Syria,” said Lynn Maalouf, deputy director 
for research at Amnesty International’s Beirut office.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fsyria-coalition-airstrikes-civilian-death-toll-amnesty-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4db54db6987d57a933335a7d789060f597667b0%2F32_48_5736_3441%2F5736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coalition%20airstrikes%20in%20Syria%20have%20killed%20300%20civilians%2C%20says%20Amnesty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fsyria-coalition-airstrikes-civilian-death-toll-amnesty-international%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coalition%20airstrikes%20in%20Syria%20have%20killed%20300%20civilians%2C%20says%20Amnesty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Fsyria-coalition-airstrikes-civilian-death-toll-amnesty-international%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff4db54db6987d57a933335a7d789060f597667b0%2F32_48_5736_3441%2F5736.jpg>
 Smoke plumes rise after a series of airstrikes in Mosul. Photograph: 
Feher/Zuma/Rex/Shutterstock 
“Some of these attacks may constitute disproportionate or otherwise 
indiscriminate attacks … It’s high time the US authorities came clean about the 
full extent of the civilian damage caused by coalition attacks in Syria.”

Three attacks near Manbij this summer were particularly deadly, killing more 
than 100 civilians, at least a third of them children. One of the attacks is 
beinginvestigated by US authorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/us-military-syria-investigation-july-airstrike-manbij>
.

The scale of deaths is lower than from bombing raids by Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/reality-check/2016/oct/12/reality-check-are-us-led-airstrikes-on-syrians-as-bad-as-russias>
, the other foreign power to have sent its jets to Syria. Russian raids have 
killed at least 3,600 civilians in just over a year and appear to have targeted 
civilians, while the coalition has been trying to avoid or limit civilian 
casualties, although it could do far more, human rights groups said.
 