
The special minister of state, Scott Ryan, has played down the prospect of 
achieving major reform of the political donations regime and says the 
government has no interest in “stacking” the system to advantage one political 
party at the expense of another.


In his first comments on the subject, the government minister responsible for 
the electoral system told Senate question time on Monday he was considering 
specific issues to be put to the joint standing committee on electoral matters 
after theprime minister last week expressed interest in reforming the donations 
system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/malcolm-turnbull-says-ideally-donations-should-be-limited-to-australian-voters>
.

Ryan suggested the first test of any reform would be ensuring a level playing 
field between Australia’s political combatants.

Nick Xenophon Team marshals crossbench support for political donations inquiry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/12/nick-xenophon-team-marshals-crossbench-support-for-political-donations-inquiry>
Answering a question from the Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, Ryan said: “If 
there is to be any movement on the issue of donations and disclosure, it can’t 
be to try and stack the electoral field one way, like when you [the Greens] 
come out and say corporations can’t make donations but unions and non-profits 
can.”

He also pointed to the constitutional difficulty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/10/australian-political-donations-how-hard-would-it-really-be-to-clean-up>
 associated with trying to limit participation in the political process. “You 
correctly point to comments from the prime minister [last week] who also 
correctly outlined the recent high court decisions that do impact on the 
ability of this parliament to limit political contributions and donations,” 
Ryan said.

“It is only appropriate that if [reform of the system] is to be considered 
then those judgments be considered and the first test has to be creating a 
playing field that doesn’t stack [the system] for one side of politics or the 
other.”

Ryan was on parental leave last week when political controversy erupted over 
the Labor senator Sam Dastyari’s decision to ask a Chinese businessman to 
settle an overspent travel claim –a controversy that culminated in Dastyari 
quitting the Labor front bench. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>

The government used question time in the House of Representatives to resume 
its political attacks against Dastyari’s conduct and various ministers 
criticised the Labor leader,Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, for failing to 
remove him from the frontbench.

Labor then attempted to return fire on the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> by asking the foreign 
affairs minister, Julie Bishop, questions about $500,000 worth of donations 
made to the West Australian branch of the Liberal party from companies with 
links to the Chinese government.

Bishop said all donations made to the party in WA were subject to Australian 
Electoral Commission rules and requirements, and were subject to audit. She was 
then asked about sponsored travel from the Chinese firm Huawei and the gift of 
a tablet. Bishop said she donated the tablet to a school.

“Mr Speaker, if you want to see an example of money buying influence, look no 
further than Senator Sam Dastyari. That’s where we have an example of money 
buying influence,” Bishop said.

Over in the Senate, both Ryan and the attorney general, George Brandis, 
taunted the Greens about their disclosure policyafter different accounts of it 
were provided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/lee-rhiannon-contradicts-di-natale-to-clarify-greens-position-on-donations>
 in public statements last week from the Greens’ democracy spokeswoman, Lee 
Rhiannon, and Di Natale.

Last Tuesday Di Natale told Radio National that all donations from foreign, 
corporate and third-party entities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/06/cory-bernardi-joins-calls-ban-foreign-corporate-union-donations>
 should be banned.

The statement, which was also tweeted from an official Greens account, 
contradicted Greens policy and a letter Di Natale had sent to the government 
and opposition that not-for-profit organisations should still be allowed to 
donate, subject to caps.

John Howard says politicians have 'panicked' about donations and ban isn't 
needed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/11/john-howard-says-australia-has-panicked-about-donations-and-ban-isnt-needed>
The Di Natale statement sparked consternation from unionists, who pointed out 
that limiting donations to individuals on the roll would effectively ban union 
donations, and it was later corrected by Rhiannon, who said: “The Greens are 
long-term advocates for a ban on overseas donations and donations from 
for-profit corporations, and strict caps on donations from individuals and from 
not-for-profit organisations.”

Brandis also declared in the chamber the Greens were the recipients of the 
“largest single corporate donation in political history”.

The jibe prompted a retaliation from the Greens senator Peter Whish-Wilson, 
who said the donation from the web entrepreneur Graeme Wood was a personal 
donation, not a corporate one. “You are full of shit,” the Greens senator 
shouted at Brandis across the chamber.

The Nick Xenophon Team is meanwhile trying to build cross-chamber support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/12/nick-xenophon-team-marshals-crossbench-support-for-political-donations-inquiry>
 for a motion in the Senate on Tuesday calling for a wide-ranging parliamentary 
inquiry into the donations and disclosure regime, reporting by March.

The NXT motion, to be moved by senator Stirling Griff, already has the support 
of Pauline Hanson and the One Nation Senate bloc.
 