
A secret Coalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> plan 
to create a class of provisional visas with less access to social services may 
undermine resettlement of refugees, reduce social cohesion and increase the 
risk of violent extremism, according to a leaked government document.

Speaking at question time, Malcolm Turnbull acknowledged the authenticity of 
the “protected” document,first revealed by Fairfax Media 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/leaked-cabinet-papers-warn-secret-visa-overhaul-would-create-twotier-society-increase-violent-extremism-20161129-gt0h7s.html>
 on Wednesday, and said the leak had been referred to the Australian federal 
police.

The minute dated 23 November, prepared for the Department of Social Services 
(DSS) secretary, Finn Pratt, records a meeting with immigration officials at 
which DSS raised numerous concerns with the plan.

Question time resumes after refugee protest disrupts parliament – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/nov/30/malcolm-tunbull-george-brandis-bill-shorten-nick-xenophon-building-watchdog-politics-live>
Consideration of the proposal began on 1 March when the national security 
committee of cabinet agreed to a “new simplified visa framework”.

The minute said the immigration minister, Peter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton>, was seeking cabinet 
agreement for a new system with eight types of visas.

It discusses a visa change proposal including a “provisional visa system”, and 
warns that removing or altering the social safety net for those under this 
system may impact social cohesion and productivity.

“DSS is concerned that the proposed reforms risk undermining Australia’s 
social cohesion and potentially increase the risk factors that may lead to 
violent extremism,” it said.

DSS is working with the immigration department “on costing six options for 
access to social security payments and identifying associated savings and 
social impacts”.

In the document, DSS recommended that “humanitarian entrants be excluded from 
any social security changes”, indicating that the proposal under consideration 
is to alter or remove social security payments or services from visa holders 
including refugees.

It said delayed access to welfare would be harmful to the most vulnerable 
migrants, such as refugees and those who experienced domestic violence.

Social security support was “key to [the] successful long-term settlement” of 
people on humanitarian visas, it said.

The note said the immigration department had begun engaging with other 
departments on the plan “which will reframe temporary, provisional and 
permanent migration and citizenship”.

But it noted DSS’s concern that “changing the longstanding national narrative 
to one which treats all migrants with suspicion does not best leverage 
migrants’ willingness and potential to contribute”.

DSS argued that people who opted for a “provisional pathway to permanence” are 
not the same as temporary residents and should receive “better treatment in 
terms of payments and supports than those not making any ongoing commitment to 
Australia”.

The minute noted DSS’s concern the proposed timeline for the reform is “too 
short”. It said that savings may be “not as significant” as the immigration 
department expected, but the costs would be “huge”.

Asked about the document in question time, Turnbull said it was “not a cabinet 
document” but it was a document “exchanged between bureaucrats” that dealt with 
matters “to be submitted to cabinet”.

“The secretary, Mr Pratt, is conducting an investigation,” he said.

Turnbull said the leak should be referred to the AFP then, after question time 
was delayed by 15 minutes by a noisy and well-coordinated protest by refugee 
activists, he added he was advised it had now been referred.

The Greens immigration spokesman, Nick McKim, said the proposed visa changes 
discussed in the document are “deeply xenophobic” and a continuation of 
Dutton’s “attack on multiculturalism in Australia”.

Peter Dutton did not appear out of thin air. He represents consistent 
Australian policy | Omar Bensaidi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/peter-dutton-did-not-appear-out-of-thin-air-he-represents-consistent-australian-poli>
“This is nothing less than a blueprint to return our country to the divisive 
days of the White Australia Policy,” he said.

Revelation of the proposed plan comes two weeks after Dutton said it was a 
“mistake” for Malcolm Fraser to let in certain groups of refugees in the 1970s,
later specifying Lebanese Muslims in particular 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/21/peter-dutton-most-terrorism-charges-lebanese-muslims>
.

During the election, Dutton controversially suggested that migrants were 
illiterate and would take Australian jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/18/peter-dutton-says-illiterate-refugees-would-be-taking-australian-jobs>
.

Senior government figures including Turnbull and deputy Liberal leader, Julie 
Bishop, defended the remarks, arguing the immigration minister was simply 
acknowledging the high cost of resettlement services including English classes.
 