AAron Ontiveroz (@aaronontiveroz) 
photo: tom tancredo supporters listen as he concedes to bob beauprez via 
telephone.#copolitics <https://twitter.com/hashtag/copolitics?src=hash> w/ 
@denverpost <https://twitter.com/denverpost> pic.twitter.com/NOHverflzB 
<http://t.co/NOHverflzB>
 <https://twitter.com/aaronontiveroz/statuses/481620810314956800> June 25, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/aaronontiveroz/statuses/481620810314956800> 
The Colorado GOP is no doubt giddy about Tom Tancredo's defeat 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/governor-races/210478-republicans-avoid-a-headache-for-colorado-governor>
 in Tuesday's Republican gubernatorial primary. The former Congressman, failed 
presidential candidate and notoriously unselfconscious zealot's comeback had 
been propped up by Democrats witha $200,000 advertising buy 
<http://kdvr.com/2014/06/05/democrats-enter-colo-gop-gubernatorial-primary-aim-to-tip-race-to-tancredo/>
 criticizing his moderate opponent, Bob Beauprez, in hopes of continuing the 
relative moderation of incumbent Democrat governor John Hickenlooper as a blue 
streak across the most purple-ish state in America.

But Beauprez pulled it out, Tancredo said he was looking forward to more walks 
with his dog 
<http://www.denverpost.com/news/ci_26026264/colorado-gop-pick-nominee-contest-hickenlooper-tuesday>
, and, hey, Colorado might have a chance of blushing red come November – even 
thoughpolls showed Hickenlooper ahead of Beauprez 
<http://www.quinnipiac.edu/news-and-events/quinnipiac-university-poll/colorado/release-detail?ReleaseID=2033#.U1e8uPs2eiU.twitter>
 by even more than his hard-core conservative challenger.

The temporary resurgence of the legend of Tancredo, though, leaves embers 
burning on both sides: Sure, Democrats can only use their "Not as Embarrassing 
as the Other Guy" campaign slogan for so long, but more worrisome for 
Republicans is that they can't get rid of fear and zealotry on the rocky 
battleground trail.

Indeed, the GOP was already supposed to have vanquished Tancredo – an 
ideologue on abortion, immigration, guns, the death penalty and, yeah,the birth 
certificate 
<http://thinkprogress.org/politics/2010/04/28/94156/tancredo-obama-birther/> – 
back when his comically inept presidential campaign stuttered to a close.

In 2007, then-Rep Tancredo was just a single-issue – anti-immigration – 
candidatewith a theory <http://www.wnd.com/2006/11/38951/>: President Bush was 
"an internationalist" who backed immigration "amnesty" in order to "create a 
place where the idea of America is just that – it's an idea. I mean this is 
where this guy is really going." Another of Tancredo's theories: Pope 
Benedict's entreaty for Americans to welcome immigrants wasjust a cover 
<http://www.denverpost.com/ci_8960784> for "recruiting new members of the 
church". Tancredo barely cracked the single-digits during his run at the White 
House, and a last-ditch effort toappeal to spending hawks 
<http://thehill.com/homenews/news/12884-tancredo-slams-katrina-spending> by 
calling for an end to aid for post-Katrina New Orleans did not do much to 
further endear him to voters.

After that, Tancredo further distinguished himself by hiring, and then 
refusing to fire, Marcus Epstein, as the executive director of his Pac (called 
Team America – the "fuck yeah" is silent), even after hepled guilty 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/dc/tancredo-aide-pleads-guilty-to-karate-chopping-pedestrian-calling-her-nigger>
 to attacking a black woman by yelling "nigger" and delivering a "karate chop" 
to her head.

Tancredo's second life as a statewide candidate – and his near-win on Tuesday 
night – attests not only to the depth of GOP base voters' frustration but 
especially to the dizzying arc available to what can now only euphemistically 
be called "swing states".

Political polarization breeds political polarization and, at the legislature 
level, Colorado is thesecond-most polarized state in the country 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/monkey-cage/wp/2014/01/14/how-u-s-state-legislatures-are-polarized-and-getting-more-polarized-in-2-graphs/>
, with the schizoid legislative and social past to prove it. They've got a
turbulent 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recognition_of_same-sex_unions_in_Colorado> 
now-you-see-it-now-you don't history on gay marriage, they're the the first 
state to legalize the recreational sale of marijuana, and they sportthe first 
university system to name a professor of "conservative thought and policy" 
<http://www.theblaze.com/stories/2013/03/16/univ-of-colorado-begins-bold-experiment-appoints-professor-of-conservative-thought-and-policy/>
. The state is home to both the "least religious community in America 
<http://blogs.westword.com/latestword/2013/04/least_religious_cities_in_america_boulder_colorado.php>
" (Boulder) and its "holiest 
<http://www.menshealth.com/best-life/holy-hometowns?cm_mmc=MagURL-_-Dec2010-_-metrogrades-_-holytowns>
" (Colorado Springs). In the wake of the Aurora shootings, the state legislature
moved quickly 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/what-has-changed-since-aurora-theater-shooting-in-colorado-2013-7>
 to rein in gun ownership – and the state's gun owners then movedjust as 
quickly to recall the state legislators involved 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/colorado-recall-elections-chill-push-gun-laws/story?id=20227650>
.

Is this really a state turning purple, or one changing lanes from red to blue 
in such a hustle that it justlooks purple?

A recent Columbia University study 
<http://www.columbia.edu/~jrl2124/democratic%20deficit.pdf> put scientific 
support to the intuitive notion that politicians elected in ideologically 
divisive states "overshoot" the policies desired by the majority of voters. 
They mistake even a small-margin win over a political opposite as a defeat of 
an entire way of thinking about government and attempt to govern accordingly – 
only to be thrown back against the other side of the pendulum. It's this pump 
action that nearly resuscitated Tancredo's career. As another famous Coloradan 
– Hunter S Thompson – said, "When the going gets weird, the weird turn pro."

Tancredo made a third-party run for governor in 2010 and wound up with a 
respectable37% take <http://data.denverpost.com/election/results/governor/2010/>
. This time around, commentators insisted that he was far from fringe: Michelle 
Malkinpraised him 
<http://townhall.com/columnists/michellemalkin/2014/06/13/a-true-maverick-for-colorado-whos-afraid-of-tom-tancredo-n1851058/page/full>
 as "a patriot who stands firmly in the mainstream – and voters of all 
backgrounds, including hardworking, law-abiding Democrats and independents, 
stand with him." He was endorsed by the National Rifle Association and gotstump 
support 
<http://mediamatters.org/blog/2014/03/05/tom-tancredo-latest-republican-candidate-to-tap/198354>
 from the newly omnipresent Ted Nugent. He only lost by a few percentage points.

Beauprez was supported by the outside group "Republicans Who Want to Win", a 
political organization monicker that seems redundant until you realize that 
we're coming up on a whole generation of GOP candidates who arenot interested 
in winning, who actually do value purity over victory. (Looking at you,Ted Cruz 
<http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2014/06/30/140630fa_fact_toobin>.)

But the brand of ideological purity brandished by the Tom Tancredos of today's 
GOP comes at a cost to a party trying to maintain its own. And the only way 
Democrats can stop this particular state from spinning, or swinging, is to 
actually address the majority of voters' needs. Of course, the last candidate 
to honestly assess those needs might have been Hunter S Thompson himself, who 
ran for sheriff of Pitkin county on a platform that promised both legalized 
drugsand weaponry: "I hate to advocate drugs, alcohol, violence or insanity to 
anyone, but they've always worked for me."

 