
Does Amy Schumer’s new tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/31/amy-schumer-review-edinburgh-playhouse>
 justify the hype? I caught up with it at the O2 in London on Sunday night and 
one of the aspects that struck me most was the unresolved tension – a creative 
tension, probably – between Schumer’sSarah Silverman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/mar/21/sarah-silverman-jesus-is-magic>
-style faux-arrogance (“I’m a superstar, you’re lucky to be near me”) and her 
self-loathing (“I am trash”). The reason it struck me so forcibly was because 
I’d just spent three weeks atthe Edinburgh festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/edinburgh-festival-2016>, watching comedians 
foreground their personal problems. Schumer is a comic with challenges of her 
own but – in time-honoured comedian fashion – she chooses to keep them at arm’s 
length rather than putting them centre-stage.

Amy Schumer review – sex, neuroses and gun control from a sure-footed star
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/31/amy-schumer-review-edinburgh-playhouse>
That’s not to say Schumer is evasive about her body-image issues. There’s the 
routine where she parts her legs ever further until she identifies the moment 
her thighs stop touching. There are multiple jokes about women’s magazines, 
Hollywood and the pressure on women to be thin. She is by turns defiant of 
these pressures, and vulnerable to them. She knows she’d be (only) the third 
best-looking bartender in the bar, she says. She shows us paparazzi shots of 
her and her sister, and tells us that (generally, not just in these pictures) 
she looks like “garbage”.


At that moment, the audience intervenes; there are cries of “no!” to rally 
Schumer’s self-confidence. That’s an odd moment, but also the moment Schumer’s 
show intersects with what we’ve just seen at Edinburgh: an outpouring of 
emotional candour from clowns no longer prepared to conceal their tears. For 
years, cynics have been caustic about the preponderance of “dead dad” shows at 
Edinburgh – a catch-all complaint about the supposed obligation to make shows 
with an emotional or narrative arc that’s anathema (some would say) to standup 
comedy. Until this year, that phenomenon was greatly, and tediously, 
exaggerated. But dead dads weren’t the half of it at the fringe in 2016: in the 
work ofSofie Hagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/08/sofie-hagen-edinburgh-festival-review-shimmer-shatter>
, Jayde Adams,Chris Gethard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/30/chris-gethard-depression-standup-comedy>
,Rachel Parris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/11/rachel-parris-review-comedian-best-laid-plans-depression>
,Scott Agnew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/25/scott-agnew-review-gilded-balloon-edinburgh>
 and more, dead siblings and brain haemorrhages, histories of abuse, bad 
breakups and lifetimes of depression were all fair game.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcomedy-oversharers-amy-schumer-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F701851272227e55cc01bd87b95445b4e7e3824c2%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Comedy%E2%80%99s%20new%20oversharers%20make%20even%20Amy%20Schumer%20look%20coy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcomedy-oversharers-amy-schumer-edinburgh-festival%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Comedy%E2%80%99s%20new%20oversharers%20make%20even%20Amy%20Schumer%20look%20coy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F05%2Fcomedy-oversharers-amy-schumer-edinburgh-festival%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F701851272227e55cc01bd87b95445b4e7e3824c2%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Chris Gethard’s Edinburgh show focused on his depression. Photograph: Murdo 
Macleod for the Guardian 
Is this the Oprah-fication of comedy? It sometimes felt like it. Or is it a 
valuable airing of feelings that society prefers us to deny or suppress? Well, 
it’s that too. It certainly enriches or complicates our expectations of what a 
comedy show can deliver. In that Schumer moment, when the audience collectively 
gave her a supportive hug, or the closing stages ofRichard Gadd’s award-winning 
show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/12/richard-gadd-review-banshee-labyrinth-edinburgh>
, where hetalks frankly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/22/richard-gadd-edinburgh-festival-fringe-comedy>
 about the sexual assault he’s spent four years running from, the 
audience-performer relationship is more about emotional intimacy and support 
than it is about laughter.


The difference is, Schumer stumbled upon that connection seemingly by 
accident. Her show wasn’t structured to foreground her distress or 
self-loathing – which were present only as a subtext or low drumbeat beneath 
the sassier shtick about her sex life, schmoozing with Hillary Clinton, or 
indeed gun crime. That’s how comedians’ real-world problems traditionally 
operate in their work: as something occasionally alluded to (although you’re 
never sure if they’re joking or not); as something to speculate about, or read 
about in interviews. Maybe the bottling-up of broiling feelings that couldn’t 
be expressed, gives some acts their comic charge? Or maybe it denied us 
intimate, insightful comedy shows that those acts never felt it appropriate to 
make?


Amy Schumer: ‘I'm not trying to be likable’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/27/amy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable>
I really enjoyed Schumer’s show – and she’s perhaps a bad example to hang 
these thoughts on because, by any normal standards, she’s an emotionally 
intelligent and candid comic. But Edinburgh imposed (however temporarily) 
abnormal new standards, by which Schumer might easily make a whole 
heart-on-sleeve show fronting up about her body-image anxieties – or indeed (as 
perEmma Brockes’ recent interview with her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/27/amy-schumer-not-trying-be-likable>
) the difficult childhood that contributed to them. Instead, we’ve got this 
intriguing clash of swagger and self-disgust, these slightly awkward asides 
implying low self-esteem, that sit there unresolved. As an audience member, I’m 
happy with that. I don’t (always) need the full story: I think the hints, loose 
ends and contradictions add up to something complex and human, and funny too. 
But a new context has been established for emotional candour in comedy, and 
next to its oversharing figureheads, Schumer looks positively coy by comparison.
 