
One network’s pain is a rival network’s joy. Seven’s Sunday Night program has 
filmed an exclusive interview with Adam Whittington, the bloke who organised 
for Sally Faulkner’s children to be abducted from a street in Beirut after they 
were taken to Lebanon by their father. The doomed abduction – organised with 
the help of Channel Nine – ended up with Faulkner, Whittington and two of his 
colleagues, the 60 Minutes reporter Tara Brown and three other Nine crew 
members being jailed in Beirut on kidnapping charges. The head of Child 
Abduction Recovery International,Whittington was released from jail in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/60-minutes-child-abduction-case-adam-whittington-released-from-beirut-jail>
, months afterthe 60 Minutes crew made it out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/sally-faulkner-and-ali-al-amin-reach-deal-before-beirut-court-hearing>
, and he is really angry about being left behind by the network.

Cue scenes with Whittington strolling on a Gold Coast beach, after being 
reunited with his family. But Seven was quick to dispel the notion that any 
chequebook journalism was involved, saying: “Sunday Night made no payment to Mr 
Whittington, his family or any other party for the interview. The fact that he 
wasn’t paid will be disclosed in the program.” Nine revealed in its financial 
results that the 60 Minutes incident along with two other court cases had cost 
the network an additional $7m in legal fees.


There’s no such thing as a free launch

BuzzFeed’s political editor, Mark Di Stefano, thought he was a very lucky 
first-time author when the politician he chose weeks ago to launch his book, 
the Labor senator Sam Dastyari,became the man of the moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
 and his launch was suddenly attracting more attention than it deserved. On the 
morning of the unveiling of Di Stefano’s campaign diary, What a Time to Be 
Alive: That and Other Lies of the 2016 Campaign, Dastyari spoilt the party by 
pulling out. He was replaced by the Labor MP Terri Butler at the last minute. 
But Butler, who won Kevin Rudd’s old seat of Griffith at the election, was so 
funny the crowd soon forgot all about Dastyari. BuzzFeed Australia’s editor, 
Simon Crerar, revealed that when Di Stefano was the ABC’s Darwin reporter he 
applied for a job at BuzzFeed by sending through his CV with a list of “nine 
reasons why you should hire me”.


Triple J, aka the decline of western civilisation

 In other publishing news, the new book by the Australian’s former 
editor-in-chief Chris Mitchell will be launched by Malcolm Turnbull in Sydney 
this month. If it’s anything as entertaining as his Monday media columns we 
can’t wait to grab a copy. This week’s column in the Oz explored Mitchell’s 
theory that Triple J is to blame for everything that is wrong with the media 
today, like young reporters having no corporate memory and the legacy of the 
“skinny-tie political chic” of Triple J alumni Steve Cannane, Angela Catterns, 
Dr Karl Kruszelnicki, Wil Anderson, Roy and HG and Robbie Buck. The Lateline 
host Tony Jones didn’t work at Triple J, Mitchell says, but he is still 
annoying because he affects a “Triple J kind of radical chic”. Mitchell: “Like 
[Chris] Kenny, I blame the ABC. In my view, the ABC has been slowly taken over 
from the inside, culturally at least, by Triple J. The anti-establishment ethos 
of the ABC’s home of alternative music eventually infiltrated television and 
radio.”

Press Council declines to sanction the Australian for Bill Leak cartoon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/06/press-council-declines-to-sanction-the-australian-for-bill-leak-cartoon>
All mouth

 In his book, which we hear was dictated rather than typed, Mitchell is very 
keen to paint himself at the centre of national life, sharing his tales of 
dealing with the powerful elites while editing newspapers for Rupert Murdoch, 
who is, of course, pictured on the front of the book, Making Headlines.

Male, pale and stale

 It would have to be one of the ABC’s strangest commissions, a program that 
gives Andrew Bolt a platform to argue against recognition for Indigenous 
Australia. The one-off documentary, Recognition: Yes or No?, which also stars 
the new Labor MP Linda Burney arguing in favour of recognition, will screen on 
the ABC on 20 September. But Aunty’s star recruit from the Murdoch empire is 
already talking down the show, implying it is stale in comparison with Sky News 
programs which are made on the smell of an oily rag but are live and dynamic. 
“I did a show for the ABC,” Bolt said on stage at theAstra pay TV conference  
<http://www.astra.org.au/conference>in Sydney this week. “We stopped filming in 
January. It was finished and edited in July and it will be on air in a few 
weeks. You think, where is the freshness?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcoming-soon-on-channel-seven-the-one-channel-nine-left-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffded773162909f7ddfaf202a31cbeb36c6eb7b06%2F0_0_5460_3810%2F5460.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coming%20soon%20on%20Channel%20Seven%3A%20the%20one%20Channel%20Nine%20left%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcoming-soon-on-channel-seven-the-one-channel-nine-left-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coming%20soon%20on%20Channel%20Seven%3A%20the%20one%20Channel%20Nine%20left%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcoming-soon-on-channel-seven-the-one-channel-nine-left-behind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffded773162909f7ddfaf202a31cbeb36c6eb7b06%2F0_0_5460_3810%2F5460.jpg>
 Linda Burney and Andrew Bolt filming their ABC documentary. ‘Where is the 
freshness?’ asked Bolt. Photograph: Mark Rogers/ABC 
Stop me if think you’ve heard this one before

 Warming to his theme, Bolt then went on to trash another ABC show, Barrie 
Cassidy’sInsiders <http://www.abc.net.au/insiders/>, on which he used to 
feature before picking up his own TV show The Bolt Report. “I was [on Insiders] 
for 10 years as the token guy on the far right of the screen. Now they have 
dropped all pretence of being balanced – you will get a show with four people 
on the left agreeing with each other. Don’t think you will find that on our 
shows. You have a broad range of opinions and so do I. I don’t think anyone 
could say, fairly, the other side is excluded from the argument. That is my 
beef with the ABC. We don’t have a law saying we have to be balanced [at Sky 
News] – they do, but they are not.”

Cool … for cats 

Do you remember all those ads on Channel Seven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel-7> while you were watching the 
Olympics: “After the Olympics on 7”? Well the strategy behind laying down $170m 
for the rights to the Olympics through to the 2020s was that showing the 
Olympic games lends exposure to your programs and high ratings and advertising 
revenue will flow.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcoming-soon-on-channel-seven-the-one-channel-nine-left-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b9371921a280f551030ed32d8c234048b859891%2F525_0_771_1080%2F771.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Coming%20soon%20on%20Channel%20Seven%3A%20the%20one%20Channel%20Nine%20left%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcoming-soon-on-channel-seven-the-one-channel-nine-left-behind%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Coming%20soon%20on%20Channel%20Seven%3A%20the%20one%20Channel%20Nine%20left%20behind&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fcoming-soon-on-channel-seven-the-one-channel-nine-left-behind%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b9371921a280f551030ed32d8c234048b859891%2F525_0_771_1080%2F771.jpg>
 Adriano Zumbo’s Lovenbouche, which contestants of Zumbo’s Just Desserts had to 
recreate. Photograph: Channel Seven 
Unfortunately for Seven, The Durrells 
<https://au.tv.yahoo.com/plus7/the-durrells/> – “the biggest new series since 
Downton Abbey” – andZumbo’s Just Desserts 
<https://au.tv.yahoo.com/plus7/zumbos-just-desserts/?utm_source=Marketing&utm_medium=SEM&utm_campaign=LongForm>
 have failed to sustain interest. After a good start Zumbo has bounced around, 
dropping to just 657,000 on Monday and then back up to 794,000 on Wednesday. 
The Durrells is no Downton Abbey after all and dipped below 600,000 for the 
first time, with just 523,000 viewers this week. The home-grown drama 800 
Words, which was heavily promoted during the Olympics too, has also fallen to 
793,000 this week, well behind the figures it enjoyed in season one.


But living up to its name for screening cutting-edge television, Seven has two 
upcoming shows you can look forward to this month: All-New CATS MAKE YOU LOL 3 
next Thursday followed by DOGS MAKE YOU LOL 3 the week after.

 