
The emerging movement of social enterprise around the world has compelled a 
growing number of businesses to consider their social impact. Both traditional 
businesses and citizen-sector organisations are increasingly taking on the 
mantra of making money while making the world a better place.

The creation of the "triple bottom line" – that of people, planet and profit – 
is becoming more and more part of the traditional business model. Central to 
understanding the triple bottom line is the desire to create impact. But how do 
social enterprises ensure impact?

1. Communicate clearly

You influence your contacts through the stories you tell. "It's all about the 
snowball effect," says Navroze Mehta,Ashoka <https://www.ashoka.org/> support 
network member. "Be clear about what you do, how you do it, and what you want. 
Repeat it over and over, so you don't even have to think about it."

By being confident in your own story, it lets others experience your impact 
for themselves, so don't be vague about your vision. Engage listeners by using 
vivid examples to activate as many senses as you can. Show and tell people 
about your journey and invite them to join.

2. Stay on target

As entrepreneurs, what you start with and what you end with are rarely the 
same. Throw out the notion of complex business plans and five-year budget 
projections. Stay focused on your vision and the impact you want to create, 
even as your business model changes. Have clear goals and work together 
constantly with your mentors and advisers to make them a reality.

3. Create a shared vision with your partners

"It's a two-way street. If there's a disconnect, the magic doesn't happen," 
says Kovin Naidoo, Ashoka fellow. Whatever you are working on, you will be 
working with other people. Especially in social enterprise, collaboration is 
key. Create your vision with your partners and mentors, not in spite of them. 
You are all partners together in creating impact.

4. Rewire the empathetic feelings

If you want to make an impact, keep empathy at the forefront of your mind. The 
real people you are working for are not investors but beneficiaries. Never 
forget why you started and whom you are helping. Empathy is the fuel that will 
keep you and your team motivated in the hard times.

5. Stop doing everything, start doing something

Don't fall into the trap of being a superhero and trying to do everything 
yourself. This will ultimately result in you being mediocre at everything. Use 
your supporters and team to help you focus on the big picture. Stop working in 
the business and start working on the business.

June 10th-14th saw the Ashoka Change Week 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23ChangeWeek&src=hash> host the Ashoka Support 
Network Global Summit <http://asnglobalsummit.org/>, where leading social 
entrepreneurs and business leaders from around the world came together to share 
their stories of how to create real impact in business.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/guardian-professional>. To join the Guardian Social 
Enterprise Network, <http://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/> click here. 
<https://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/en/accounts/join>
 