
These are worrying times for civil society around the world as governments 
seek to demonise NGOs and their foreign funders. In the United States, an 
unpredictable and populist new administration appears poised toabandon the 
global fight against climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/11/trump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change>
 anddisengage from global platforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/26/donald-trump-environmental-policy-climate-change-keystone-xl>
.

In Russia, a sustained government campaign to demonise NGOs and their foreign 
funders threatens to put the country’s civil society in a fatal stranglehold.
According to a new report by Amnesty International on the effects of the 
“foreign agents” act in Russia 
<http://www.amnestyusa.org/research/reports/agents-of-the-people-four-years-of-foreign-agents-law-in-russia>
, it is not just human rights and environmental groups that have fallen foul of 
government: a Russian philanthropic foundation supporting science, and 
education and consumer rights groups, are also on the list. Similar crackdowns 
have been taking place in Egypt, Uganda, Ethiopia and China, to name but a few.

But as worrying as some of these developments undoubtedly are, maybe they will 
also be a chance to refocus the development agenda towards doing more with 
less. Although the idea of local participation in development has been explored 
since the 1980s, efforts to build local ownership have been consistently 
hampered by the demands of external actors (donors and other implementing NGOs) 
and their top-down systems of accountability and control. This has created a 
civil society sector that lives from project to project, following the ebbs and 
flows of donor resources and interests and with often weak local 
constituencies. This has done little to strengthen local organisations that 
local people recognise and support and that form part of the local fabric for 
civic action – and which will ultimately allow those external actors to leave.

Does Trump's election mark the end of compassion in aid?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/nov/11/trump-us-election-victory-end-compassion-aid>
Enter community philanthropy 
<http://www.globalfundcommunityfoundations.org/information/the-case-for-community-philanthropy-how-the-practice-builds.html>
. Over the last twenty years a quiet revolution has been taking place in 
communities around the world, outside the machinery and beyond the radar of big 
development.Community foundations 
<file:/C:/Users/User/Documents/Consulting/Global%20Fund/communityfoundationatlas.org/>
 have been part of the fabric of philanthropy in the United States and Canada 
for the past century and were introduced in the United Kingdom in the 1980s. 
But most of this recent development has been taking place in the global south. 
This new set of organisations – community foundations, women’s funds, 
environmental funds and other grassroots grantmakers – has emerged in countries 
as diverse as Romania and Zimbabwe, Vietnam and Mexico. They have been shaped 
by local context and culture and by individuals often frustrated by the 
failures of traditional development aid, anxious about the sense of alienation 
and disenchantment in their communities, and inspired by the belief that 
without local resources, local leadership and local buy-in, development 
projects will continue to land like fireworks – to flash spectacularly and then 
die. Although many of these organisations were established as one-off 
experiments in their local environments, there is now clear evidence of a 
distinct “community philanthropy field” characterised by some unique 
characteristics and ways of working.

Without local buy-in development projects will continue to land like fireworks 
– flashing spectacularly and then dying

Firstly, while external resources may form part of their funding structure, 
they all seek to build a culture of local philanthropy, especially local giving 
by ordinary people. This emphasis on local assets (money and others) is a 
critical strategy for growing local ownership and participation, a deliberate 
rebuke of the traditional “beneficiary” mentally that development aid often 
imposes. Building a local support base is about building a local constituency 
for civil society action, getting people to think, engage with and care about a 
cause. It is much harder to designate an organisation a “foreign agent” when 
its donors include hundreds of local citizens.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fcommunity-philanthropy-a-brave-new-model-for-development-funding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F120ea40d569fa93c26f8b53274a6ed71c7a69ef6%2F0_0_4500_3600%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Community%20philanthropy%3A%20a%20brave%20new%20model%20for%20development%20funding%3F%20%7C%20Jenny%20Hodgson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fcommunity-philanthropy-a-brave-new-model-for-development-funding%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Community%20philanthropy%3A%20a%20brave%20new%20model%20for%20development%20funding%3F%20%7C%20Jenny%20Hodgson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fcommunity-philanthropy-a-brave-new-model-for-development-funding%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F120ea40d569fa93c26f8b53274a6ed71c7a69ef6%2F0_0_4500_3600%2F4500.jpg>
 Community philanthropy encourages local giving by ordinary people. Photograph: 
ranplett/Getty Images 
Secondly, these organisations deliberately seek to support local community 
groups working on all manner of different issues that represent the fabric of 
local civil society. Such groups are often beyond the reach or imagination of 
donors who prefer – for a variety of reasons – to channel their funds through 
big institutions who look and sound like them. Community philanthropy 
organisations deliberately use grants to local groups as a way to strengthen 
and invest in the community around them, to feed the pipeline and strengthen 
the capacities of organic, people-led action, and in that sense, they are often 
not “specialists” working on a particular issue but rather work holistically 
responding to a range of different issues that their community might encounter.


At a very profound level community philanthropy organisations are building 
trust in the communities they serve

And finally, at a very profound level, community philanthropy organisations 
are building trust within, between and among the communities they serve, 
through the transparent stewardship and flow of resources, by deliberately 
fostering multiple relationships at the local level, with those who have 
resources and can be convinced to give, those who have ideas and aspirations 
whom a small grant can make all the difference and those who for the first time 
are made to realise that they too possess assets too. A three-legged stool of 
assets, capacities, and trust.

In Kenya, lack of access to water was the entry point for the Kenya Community 
Development Foundation <http://www.kcdf.or.ke/>’s (KCDF) engagement with a 
community in West Makueni County, some 75 miles from Nairobi. Through a series 
of dialogues and consultations the community came to realise that if everyone 
contributed a small amount, not only could the community start to address some 
of its own water problems but it could also demand that government play its 
role too. This model, which KCDF has replicated across the country seeks to 
challenge a dependency mindset which still runs deep, by tapping into the 
intrinsic nature of “horizontal philanthropy” that is deeply embedded systems 
of giving and reciprocity that form the backbone of local communities.

What is the future of foreign aid?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/27/what-is-the-future-of-foreign-aid>
In this model, Pamoja4Change 
<http://www.kcdf.or.ke/index.php/our-work/livelihood-environment-and-climate-change-adaptation/pamoja4change>
, communities are encouraged first to value their own assets, to pool them 
together and then approach others – local government, wealthy or middle class 
Kenyans – as “co-investors” in local development processes. KCDF was 
established twenty years ago as the country’s first public foundation by local 
civil society leaders – and with support from the Ford Foundation and Aga Khan 
Foundations – not only offers a platform through which Kenyans and 
international donors can give, but it has also helped communities across the 
country to build their own long-term funds which generate interest to 
reinvested by community members.

In Nepal, over the last twenty years, Tewa <http://www.tewa.org.np/>, a 
women’s fund, has built up a network of over 5,000 individual Nepali donors: 
many of these are ordinary women who themselves have benefitted from Tewa’s 
grants in the past and want to give back. Until very recently, although 
international donors supported staff costs and the building of offices, on 
principle Tewa only used resources it had raised locally for its grant-making 
as way of demonstrating the power of local assets and local buy-in. After the 
2015 earthquake, two decades of working with local women’s groups across the 
country meant that Tewa was able to respond immediately, leveraging its 
networks to identify and reach those worst affected with money and emergency 
supplies (food, temporary shelters, sanitary items etc), that they really 
needed while serving as a touch point for outpourings of help both from local 
and international sources.

The trouble with philanthropy is that money can't buy equality
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/02/philanthropists-revolution-libraries-grassroots>
The Dalia Association <http://www.dalia.ps/> is the first Palestinian 
community foundation. Like KCDF and Tewa, Dalia Association does not focus on a 
particular issue – such as health or the environment – but rather on 
demonstrating how local development processes can be done in more participatory 
ways.

“We believe in the community’s right to control its resources and its 
development,” says Dalia’s director Aisha Mansour. The stories go on but the 
themes are the same: “mindset change,” “putting people in control”, “connecting 
people with each other around shared issues,” “building trust,” “restoring 
hope.”

These all serve as examples of the rapidly growing field of community 
philanthropy, a source of sustainable local funding for local priorities which 
has been largely overlooked in conversations around local ownership and 
financing for development.

There is clearly a need to think differently about how international aid 
programmes are designed and delivered and for tough questions to be asked about 
whether the current approaches and institutions are still fit for purpose. 
Community philanthropy offers a way to re-evaluate our work. As the global 
space for civil society shrinks and it becomes clear that external donor 
funding can become toxic for local civil society groups, local constituencies 
become more critical than ever. And local supporters, no matter how small their 
contributions, become more important than ever. By encouraging “ordinary” 
people to give and feel as though they have a stake, community philanthropy 
organisations offer essential spaces to build voice, resources and power – in 
fact, claiming back philanthropy as something for us all, perhaps.

The remarkable growth of the community philanthropy field is being marked in 
December with the sector’s first international summit. On December 1st and 2nd, 
350 people from 60 countries will gather in Johannesburg for the firstGlobal 
Summit on Community Philanthropy <http://cpsummit.ngo/>.

The summit will bring together a range of local community philanthropy 
organisations, public and private donors and other civil society actors under 
the rallying cry to#ShiftThePower 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/shiftthepower?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Ehashtag>
. 2016’s political events around the world have shown that the social fabric of 
communities is weakening and trust is sorely lacking. Community philanthropy, 
with its emphasis on local resources and local accountability offers exactly 
the kind of bottom-up leadership and hope that we so badly need.

Jenny Hodgson is the executive director of the Global Fund for Community 
Foundations <http://www.globalfundcommunityfoundations.org/>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.

 