
A long-term plan to cut the company tax rate from 30% to 25% is the 
centrepiece of the Coalition’s economic plan for jobs and growth. The Coalition 
maintains the change will boost GDP by more than 1% in the long-term, at a 
budgetary cost of $48.2bn over the next 10 years.

But the very Treasury research papers relied on by the Coalition tell a more 
modest story than the headlines. Using these papers, we show that the net 
benefit to Australians in the real world will be only about half of the 
headline benefit, and it will be a long time before we are any better off at 
all.

Australian election 2016: David Feeney faces more questions over investment 
portfolio – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/may/19/australian-election-2016-david-feeney-faces-more-questions-over-investment-portfolio-politics-live>
The short story

The government has made two claims about the economic impacts of its plan to 
cut the company tax rate.

On budget night Treasurer Scott Morrison said 
<http://sjm.ministers.treasury.gov.au/media-release/055-2016/> that the tax 
cuts would:

… mean higher living standards for Australians and an expected permanent 
increase in the size of the economy of just over one percent in the long term.

Later last week, Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull said 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/federal-election-2016-pm-bolstered-by-160bn-reform-promise/news-story/e5fe769c97a196959b6e34e14bcc273d?nk=21bd5293c6c9bf91e73e578611f79538-1463363505&login=1>
:

The Treasury estimated last year … that for every dollar of company tax cut, 
there was four dollars of additional value created in the overall economy.

Sound in theory, but there’s a back story

In theory, cutting the company tax rate boosts the economy in the long term. 
All taxes distort choices, and thereby drag on economic activity. Taxes on 
capital often have especially large economic costs because they discourage 
investment, which is mobile across borders. By some estimates, roughlyhalf of 
the economic cost 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/1467-8462.12127/abstract>s of 
Australian company tax ultimately fall on workers, as lower company 
profitability leads to lower investment, and therefore lower wages and higher 
unemployment.

But while the theoretical argument for company tax cuts is straightforward, 
the real story is more complicated.

The twist: a tax cut for foreign investors

The twist in the tale comes from Australia’s system of dividend imputation, or 
franking credits. The effect of this system is to make the company tax rate for 
Australian resident shareholders effectively close to zero. Innearly every 
other country <http://www.copsmodels.com/ftp/workpapr/g-260.pdf>, company 
profits are taxed twice: companies pay tax, and then individuals also pay 
income tax on the dividends, albeit often at a discount to full rates of 
personal income tax.

But in Australia, the shares of Australian residents in company profits are 
effectively only taxed once. Investors get franking credits for whatever tax a 
company has paid, and these credits reduce their personal income tax. 
Consequently, for Australian investors, the company tax rate doesn’t matter 
much: they effectively pay tax on corporate profits at their personal rate of 
income tax.

As a result, although Australia has a relatively high headline corporate tax 
rate compared to our peers, in practice the comparable tax rate is lower – at 
least for local investors. As a result, many of the international studies about 
the impact of cutting corporate tax rates are not readily applicable to 
Australia.

Local shareholders do get one small benefit from cutting corporate tax rates. 
If companies pay less tax, then they have more to reinvest, so long as the 
profits are not paid out to shareholders. Yet in practice,most profits are paid 
out 
<http://www.treasury.gov.au/PublicationsAndMedia/Publications/2016/~/media/ACCEB9F5E157439AAE854A9702D1136C.ashx>
. Therefore a company tax cut will generate little change in domestic 
investment.

By contrast, foreign investors do not benefit from franking credits. They pay 
tax on corporate profits twice: first at the company tax rate, and then as 
income tax on the dividends. This means that a cut to the company tax rate 
provides big benefits to them.

This week The Australia Institute 
<http://www.tai.org.au/sites/defualt/files/P256%20-%20Comapny%20Tax%20Gift%20to%20US%20IRS%20-%20Richardson%20May%202016.pdf>
 pointed out that foreign investors from the United States and other countries 
that have tax treaties with Australia may not benefit from the company tax cut, 
because their home governments will collect the gains from any cut to Australia 
company tax as additional company tax. Yet this would only occur when foreign 
firms repatriate profits earned in Australia to the home country.

The big reductions in net tax revenue – and therefore the large benefits to 
companies – are expected when the corporate tax rate is cut from 30% to 25% 
between 2022 and 2027 for larger companies, including the bulk of businesses 
that are foreign-owned.

The headline from the Treasury modelling for the 2016-17 budget 
<http://www.treasury.gov.au/~/media/Treasury/Publications%20and%20Media/Publications/2016/Budget%20Modelling/Downloads/PDF/160503_Economy-wide%20modelling.ashx>
 is that this cut will ultimately increase GDP by up to 1.2% meaning larger 
foreign companies are attracted to invest more in Australia. The finding is 
based on work contained in aTreasury research paper 
<http://www.treasury.gov.au/PublicationsAndMedia/Publications/2016/working-paper-2016-02>
 that modelled the long-term impact of a company tax cut.

Activity is not income

However, it is a mistake to assume that all the increase in economic activity 
will make Australians better off. We often use gross domestic product – the sum 
of all economic activity – as a short-hand measure for prosperity. But when the 
benefits disproportionately flow to non-residents, GDP can be misleading. It’s 
much better to look at Gross National Income (GNI), which measures the increase 
in the resources available to resident Australians.

Treasury expects that cutting corporate tax rates to 25% will only increase 
the incomes of Australians – GNI – by 0.8%. In other words, about a third of 
the increase in GDP flows out of the country to foreigners as they pay less tax 
in Australia. And because most of the additional economic activity is financed 
by foreigners, the profits on much of the additional activity will also tend to 
flow out of Australia.

You don’t get something for nothing

Yet even this increase in GNI of 0.8% is not the best estimate of the 
improvement in living standards Australians can expect from the government’s 
company tax plan. If company taxes are lower, other taxes have to be higher, 
all other things being equal. In the modelling discussed so far, Treasury first 
assumes that these revenues can be collected by a fantasy tax that imposes no 
costs on the economy.

But that’s not what happens in the real world. So the Treasury research paper 
also models the scenario in which personal income taxes rise to offset the 
reduced company tax revenue. On this more realistic assumption, Treasury 
estimates that GNI will increase by just 0.6% in the long term, or roughly 
$10bn a year in today’s dollars.

Other wrinkles in the story

Even this more modest Treasury figure may well over-estimate the long-term 
boost to GNI. In the real world, progressive income taxes imposehigher costs 
<http://taxreview.treasury.gov.au/content/html/commissioned_work/downloads/kpmg_econtech_efficiency%20of%20taxes_final_report.pdf>
 than the hike to a hypothetical flat-rate personal income tax that Treasury 
modelled. Companies may also not increase investment as much as Treasury 
expects, and those firms that are part of oligopolies in Australia may not 
increase wages by as much as Treasury assumes.

While these are reasons to expect that the Treasury modelling overestimates 
the economic benefits of a company tax cut, they are offset by some more 
conservative assumptions. Treasury believes that tax cuts modestly change how 
much firms shift profits overseas; it may overstate how much tax cuts flow into 
additional profits rather than higher wages in those industries that it does 
recognise as oligopolies; and it may discount the benefits of investors making 
less distorted choices between debt and equity funding.

The verdict on the first claim

The bottom line is that, on Treasury’s own modelling, a corporate tax cut will 
increase Australian incomes in the long term by up to 0.6%. The Treasury 
research paper doesn’t commit itself to a timeframe, but it cites other work 
that expects the economic benefits of company tax cuts to take 20 years to bear 
fruit, with half the benefit in 10 years. Given that the important (and 
expensive) part of the corporate tax cuts only starts to take effect from 2022, 
Australia will be waiting 25 years for a 0.6% increase in incomes.

This economic benefit needs to be seen in context. If Australian per capita 
GDP and GNI increase at 1.5% a year (as the budget papers routinely assume), 
then over 25 years, incomes will rise by 45.1%. Corporate tax cuts mean that 
instead, incomes will rise by 45.7% – or perhaps a bit less. It may still be 
worth doing, but it’s not a plot twist that dramatically changes Australia’s 
story.

Others 
<http://www.tai.org.au/content/company-tax-cuts-report-shows-lack-evidence-%E2%80%98growth-dividend%E2%80%99>
 claim that in the past, company tax cuts have had no measurable effect on the 
economy. This isdisputed 
<https://theconversation.com/Library/Caches/TemporaryItems/Outlook%20Temp/cis%20corporate%20tax%20cut>
 – there may well be a link between corporate tax cuts and economic growth. But 
it’s inevitably hard to see in practice because on Treasury’s own modelling the 
economic effect of company tax cuts is small relative to other changes.

Not four-to-one, more like dollar for dollar

This brings us to the government’s second claim. Late last week, Turnbull said 
that each dollar in company tax revenue cut would deliver an extra four dollars 
in GDP.

His claim appears to be drawn from an earlier 
<http://www.treasury.gov.au/PublicationsAndMedia/Publications/2015/working-paper-2015-01>
 2015 Treasury research paper that modelled the economic impact of major 
Australian taxes, including company tax. The morerecent 
<http://www.treasury.gov.au/PublicationsAndMedia/Publications/2016/working-paper-2016-02>
 Treasury working paper, released in budget week, implies a slightly larger 
$4.30 increase to GDP from each $1 in revenue cut.

But again this misses a big part of the story.

First, this claim is about GDP, and therefore includes the disproportionate 
increase in the income of foreigners. Our analysis of the Treasury modelling 
shows that the increase to Australian incomes, or GNI, is only $2.80 per dollar 
of revenue lost from a corporate tax cut.

Second, when corporate tax is replaced by a still hypothetical but marginally 
more realistic flat rate income tax – rather than a complete fantasy tax that 
has no impact on the economy – the increase to Australian incomes is less 
again: only $1.80 per dollar of revenue lost.

Third, the prime minister has framed the boost to the economy in terms of the 
long-term increase to GDP per dollar of company tax cut. Treasury calculates 
the revenue “dollar” lost after considering the additional tax revenue that the 
government hopes to collect from all taxes in 20 years time as incomes rise 
because of greater investment.

Many people 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/federal-election-2016/federal-election-2016-pm-bolstered-by-160bn-reform-promise/news-story/e5fe769c97a196959b6e34e14bcc273d?nk=21bd5293c6c9bf91e73e578611f79538-1463363505&login=1>
 would interpret the prime minister’s statement to compare the ultimate benefit 
per dollar of tax revenue given upin the shorter term. On this basis, the 
increase to Australian incomes in the long term is only $1.20 for every dollar 
given up in the short term as a result of corporate tax cuts.

This story ends the same way. Corporate tax cuts may be worth doing, but the 
outcome is unlikely to set pulses racing.

The journey matters

You're not a 'bludger' if you pay no net tax in Australia | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/may/12/youre-not-a-bludger-if-you-pay-no-net-tax-in-australia>
So far, as the Treasury research paper does, we’ve focused on the long-term 
economic boost from a company tax cut once the economy has fully adjusted. But 
the journey to get there also matters.

For a decade, a cut to corporate taxes will reduce national income. Foreigners 
will pay less tax on the profits from their existing investments in Australia, 
reducing Australian incomes. Foreigners own about 20% of all capital in the 
economy, so it’s a big windfall gain for them. We estimate that when a 5 
percentage point tax cut for big business is first implemented, national 
incomes will be reduced by about 0.5%, as a result of the immediate loss in 
company tax revenues formerly paid by foreign investors.

The benefits to Australians from a corporate tax cut only accumulate slowly as 
foreigners make additional investments. Treasury cites a paper that estimates 
that the benefits of corporate tax cuts take 20 years to flow through. Assuming 
that these benefits increase at a constant rate, Australian income will only be 
larger than otherwise after about 10 years.

Of course, the upfront costs of a company tax cut over the first decade must 
be offset against the long-term gains. On our estimates, the loss of income 
incurred over the first decade will only be offset by higher incomes after 
about 19 years. If Australians want the modest economic benefits of a corporate 
tax cut, they will be waiting a long time.

The moral of the story

Company tax cuts are not a knight in shining armour to save the Australian 
economy <https://www.theguardian.com/business/australia-economy>. On the basis 
of the modelling that the government uses to support its case, corporate tax 
cuts can make a modest contribution, and then over the very long term. That 
story won’t sell as many copies. Truth, on this occasion, is duller than 
fiction.
 