
Questions persist over the government’s explanation for the failure of the 
census as the minister responsible scrambles to reassure Australians of the 
security of their data.

The Australian Bureau of Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-bureau-of-statistics> 
shut down the census website on Tuesday night after hundreds of thousands of 
people attempting to complete the five-yearly snapshot received error messages.


Census 2016: ABS says deliberate attacks were to blame for website crashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/09/the-great-australian-census-fail-of-2016-website-crashes-under-load>
David Kalisch, the chief statistician, said later the site had been subjected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/09/the-great-australian-census-fail-of-2016-website-crashes-under-load>
 to a series of distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks from outside 
Australia over the course of the day.

The aim of a DDoS attack is to overwhelm an online service with traffic from 
multiple sources, rendering it unavailable.

The eventual decision to shut down the website was a precautionary measure 
taken to protect personal information from the “malicious” attacks, said 
Kalisch.

Michael McCormack, the minister responsible for the census, gave a less clear 
cut version of events at a press conference he held with Kalisch later on 
Wednesday morning.

He said it was “neither an attack nor a hack” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/census-2016-website-was-not-hacked-or-attacked-government-claims>
, but an attempt to frustrate the ABS, compounded by the failure of a router 
used to geoblock submissions from outside Australia.

 Both Malcolm Turnbull and his special adviser on cyber security, Alastair 
MacGibbon, then said that it was a “confluence of events” that caused the 
problem.

Census 2016: outage due to 'overcautious' response, not hacking, government 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/census-2016-website-was-not-hacked-or-attacked-government-claims>
Clarification on whether the government is backtracking from its initial 
diagnosis of a DDoS – which is an attack – has been sought by Guardian 
Australia from the ABS, but the explanation has been the subject of some 
scepticism.

Cybersecurity and infrastructure engineering commentators have argued there is 
no evidence to show there was a deliberate DDoS, and that the failure was the 
result of inadequate web infrastructure.

A screenshot of Google Ideas and Arbor Networks’ digital attack map 
<http://www.digitalattackmap.com/#anim=1&color=0&country=ALL&list=0&time=17022&view=map>
 – a live data visualisation that tracks DDoS’s worldwide – showing no 
significant activity in Australia on Tuesday has been widely shared on Twitter.
Matthew Hackling (@mhackling) 
hmmm. nothing unusual DDoS wise for australia and yesterday #censusfail 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/censusfail?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/x7rQ0jzI1F 
<https://t.co/x7rQ0jzI1F>
 <https://twitter.com/mhackling/status/763122057307525120> August 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mhackling/status/763122057307525120> 
The creator of the map – which manufactures equipment to protect against such 
attacks – warned that, while it draws from “one of the most complete data sets 
available, it was an incomplete picture”.

Geordie Guy, an infrastructure engineering manager who oversees the operation 
of web applications, said it was “deeply unlikely” there was a DDoS that went 
unrecorded on the map.

He also noted that abnormal activity had not been remarked upon by members of 
the Australian Network Operators Group email list – a network of engineers and 
capacity planners at every internet service provider in Australia.

“If this was a DDoS and not just rubbish capacity planning for a rendezvous 
condition [everyone doing the same thing at once on a website], I’ll eat my 
hat,” he said.

Census controversy shows ABS 'needs to do better', says Statistical Society
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/09/census-controversy-shows-abs-needs-to-do-better-says-statistical-society>
Regardless of whether the census was subjected to a DDoS, questions persist as 
to whether the ABS was adequately prepared for traffic volume and the 
possibility of such attacks.

Many products and services exist to protect large networks from DDoS attacks 
and prevent network resources from being used to amplify attacks.

The census was delivered using IBM’s SoftLayer cloud, which has a DDoS defence 
that protects its entire infrastructure. IBM was awarded the contract by the 
ABS through open tenders in 2014.

It is possible that this protection was triggered by legitimate traffic, 
causing an “avalanche” as users refreshed the site – but commentators argue 
that this and other eventualities should have been foreseen.
sortius (@sortius) 
So, I contacted Softlayer support, this was their response @ABSCensus 
<https://twitter.com/ABSCensus> #CensusFail 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/CensusFail?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/7N3zRqtf3u 
<https://t.co/7N3zRqtf3u>
 <https://twitter.com/sortius/status/763181521201049600> August 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/sortius/status/763181521201049600> 
The failure of the website shows there were not enough back-up systems in 
place – for example, the router used to geoblock that reportedly failed should 
have been deployed in a pair, “as is best practice”, said Guy.

“It’ll be an interesting witch hunt,” he added.

Patrick Gray, host of the information security podcast Risky Business, shared 
“trusted” analysis on Twitter that suggested the website’s servers had not been 
coded to “load balance to other servers” in the event of overload.

“Someone’s getting fired”, he added.
Patrick Gray (@riskybusiness) 
Analysis from trusted source of trusted source. Someone's getting fired. I'm a 
fucking journo and I'm not this dumb:pic.twitter.com/gyQajFDQcQ 
<https://t.co/gyQajFDQcQ>
 <https://twitter.com/riskybusiness/status/763189895292555264> August 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/riskybusiness/status/763189895292555264> Patrick Gray 
(@riskybusiness) 
There's never been a more exciting time to be in DDoS mitigation.
 <https://twitter.com/riskybusiness/status/763195145936211969> August 10, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/riskybusiness/status/763195145936211969> 
Danny Bishop, a Melbourne-based digital media strategist, wrote in a blog post 
<https://dannybishopcreative.wordpress.com/2016/08/10/census-fail-and-the-dangers-of-estimating-traffic/>
 that it was self-evident that “the technology failed”.

Fifteen million households were expected to complete the census.

An ABS spokesman had told Fairfax Media the census site 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/consumer-affairs/census-2016-chaos-for-australians-ahead-of-august-9-20160802-gqizw5.html>
 had been tested to one million form submissions per hour, which was twice the 
anticipated load – suggesting that 500,000 forms per hour were expected.

Bishop pointed to this as evidence that, with five million households on the 
east coast of Australia, the ABS had underestimated the demand the site would 
be put under between key hours of 7pm and 9pm on census night.

Others had reached the same conclusion – even before Tuesday night.
Census Australia (@ABSCensus) 
@JennyEjlak <https://twitter.com/JennyEjlak> The online Census form can handle 
1,000,000 form submissions every hour. That’s twice the capacity we expect to 
need.
 <https://twitter.com/ABSCensus/status/755588601656725505> July 20, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ABSCensus/status/755588601656725505> Kim Burgess 
(@_______kim) 
"1,000,000 form submissions every hour. That's twice the capacity we expect to 
need."

Lol. #CensusFail <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CensusFail?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/_______kim/status/762973491670814721> August 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/_______kim/status/762973491670814721> 
The ABS’s move to a digital format this year was in part a cost-saving 
measure, with about $100m expected to be saved on salaries of census collectors 
out of the 2011 total of $440m.

Close to $10m was spent 
<http://eftm.com.au/2016/08/census-2016-the-10-million-online-census-what-went-wrong-30681>
 on the design, development and implementation of the “eCensus Solution 2016” 
by IBM.

A further $470,000 was spent on load testing – most of it on licences for the 
necessary equipment – carried out by an Australian company, Revolution IT Pty 
Ltd, over three separate tenders.
Kim Burgess (@_______kim) 
"License for Census load testing" and "Load Testing Services for Census 2016"

$469,367.50#CensusFail <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CensusFail?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/sDNzlhKA7y <https://t.co/sDNzlhKA7y>
 <https://twitter.com/_______kim/status/762982313223344129> August 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/_______kim/status/762982313223344129> 
Professor Greg Austin of the University of New South Wales’ Australian Centre 
for Cyber Security said information security is “not cheap or easy”, and 
questioned how much the government was prepared to spend on “this new 
challenge”.

“Maybe we need some institutional innovation in the structures of government 
and a different conversation with the public about the threats,” he said.

The most outlandish theory for the failure is that the census was sabotaged by 
supporters of the Olympic swimmer, Sun Yang, who was described as a “drug 
cheat” by the Australian, Mack Horton.


Census 2016: Labor urges all Australians to include their names
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/09/census-2016-labor-urges-all-australians-to-include-their-names>
Kalisch would not speculate on the exact source of the attack early on 
Wednesday to ABC radio but did say that in the past Australian government sites 
had been subject to attacks from hackers in China.

McCormack said at the press conference on Wednesday that most of the traffic 
was coming from the US – but most internet users in China use virtual private 
networks (VPNs) to appear as being in different countries to get around the 
firewall in the People’s Republic.

His priority, as evidenced by his rejection of the terms “attack” and “hack”, 
was to reassure Australians their data was secure and the security of the 
system had not been compromised.

The ABS said Australians would be able to reattempt the census “to well into 
September”, and that fines would not be imposed for completing the 
questionnaire after census night.

Whether there has been an uptick in requests for paper forms is not yet known.
 