
Andrea Leadsom’s appointment as environment secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/andrea-leadsom-repeal-fox-hunting-ban-climate-change>
 has raised significant concerns among senior environmental and agricultural 
figures over her suitability for the role.

Leadsom’s lack of top-level political experience, absence of track record in 
farming or environmental areas and ideological approach to policy are all cited 
as fears. However, her junior ministers are viewed more favourably in terms of 
tackling the enormous challenges faced by her department.

The Department of Environment, Food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> and Rural Affairs (Defra) is one 
of the ministries that will feel the greatest impact from Brexit. It has a very 
wide brief - from farming to fishing to floods and from pollution to protection 
of the natural world - the vast majority of which are currently governed by EU 
rules.

Leadsom, who is taking on her first cabinet role, is a supporter of “reducing 
burdensome EU red-tape 
<http://www.andrealeadsom.com/parliamentary/eu-referendum/fresh-start-rewards-of-leave-8-a-better-deal/917>
, saving farmers time and making food cheaper” and in 2007 argued that farming “
subsidies must be abolished 
<http://www.andrealeadsom.com/working-for-you/andrea%27s-blog/does-britain-need-its-own-farming-industry/64>
”.

“It was very bad day for the environment when Leadsom was appointed secretary 
of state,” said Tom Burke, at green thinktank E3G and adviser to three previous 
Conservative environment secretaries. “She has no instincts for it and no 
knowledge of it. All her instincts are that it gets in the way of the economy 
and she will want to remove all those things. It really is putting a fox in 
charge of the hen house.”

“She also doesn’t have a lot of experience and these are complex issues that 
require a lot of nuance and balancing of conflicting interests,” Burke said.

Most of the major farming and environmental groups need to develop a working 
relationship with Leadsom and are unwilling to speak publicly of their 
concerns, but senior figures were extremely critical of her track record and 
her performance during the referendum campaign and subsequent Tory leadership 
contest. A common concern was that she will take an ideological approach to the 
brief.



However, Stanley Johnson, a former Conservative MEP and co-chair of 
Environmentalists for Europe <http://www.environmentalistsforeurope.org/> 
(E4E), which campaigned against Brexit, said: “I have absolutely no reason not 
to imagine that she will be a first-rate secretary of state.”

He said lack of a track record on Defra issues need not be a problem: “That’s 
what all ministers are meant to be able to do, to pick up on the background.”

He said E4E “will be absolutely concerned to ensure that the substance of the 
environmental achievements that have been put in place during Britain’s 40-year 
membership of the EC and EU will be retained as far as conceivably possible.”

Owen Paterson, a previous Tory environment secretary, said he wished Leadsom 
well but did not wish to comment further. Caroline Spelman, Paterson’s 
predecessor in the role, said: “Having worked in the agricultural industry 
before entering parliament, I was lucky to possess some prior knowledge of how 
to tackle these problems, but I soon realised that I also needed to draw upon 
the wealth of knowledge and expertise that exists within the department.”

Spelman said: “Currently, around 80% of the UK’s environmental legislation has 
been set and is regulated through our membership of the EU - much to the 
benefit of Defra’s partners. Therefore, I would urge Andrea to engage with 
these organisations, as well as our international colleagues, at the earliest 
opportunity. I wish her good luck in her new role.”

John Sauven, Greenpeace executive director, said: “Andrea Leadsom will be 
responsible for the safety of the food we eat, the water we drink and the air 
we breathe. Her advisers at the late Department of Energy and Climate Change 
were able to persuade her that climate change was a real threat. We hope that 
she’ll be an equally fast learner when her new advisers give her the talk about 
the necessity of protecting our birds and the bees.”

Defra’s junior ministerial appointments have been more warmly received. George 
Eustice, who campaigned to leave the EU, has been reappointed as farming 
minister. He alarmed environmentalists in May by saying that Brexit would see 
the end of “spirit-crushing” EU directives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/30/brexit-spirit-crushing-green-directives-minister-george-eustice>
 that protect habitats and birds habitats.

But, after frequent changes in that post, the senior farming figure told the 
Guardian: “What is reassuring is that there has been some continuity with 
Eustice.” The senior environmentalist said: “He does strategy and detail, which 
is rare and he does know agriculture, which is important. But he has to 
renegotiate the common fisheries policy, so good luck to him.”

Therese Coffey, a member of the Free Enterprise Group 
<http://www.freeenterprise.org.uk/> of Tory MPs and who voted in favour of the 
ill-fated attempt tosell off the nation’s public forests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/feb/17/forest-sell-off-abandoned-sorry-caroline-spelman>
 in 2011, replaces Rory Stewart as environment minister. “I have always been 
impressed with her,” said the farming figure. “She strikes me as a very 
thoughtful, sensible and pragmatic.” Coffey campaigned to remain in the EU.

Burke said Defra was going to be a very difficult ministry to run during 
forthcoming Brexit negotiations. “The [Brexiteers] have made enormous promises 
about the environment and farming that are going to be very difficult to meet. 
The idea that the Treasury is going to let the farming community keep the money 
it currently gets from the EU is la-la land. Defra is going to be at the front 
in terms of broken promises.”

Leadsom is unlikely to achieve one policy she backed while campaigning for the 
Conservative leadership: therepeal of the ban on fox hunting with dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/andrea-leadsom-repeal-fox-hunting-ban-climate-change>
. “There is no way that is going to get through the House of Commons,” said to 
one former environment minister.
 