
A hush fell over the square in front of St Petersburg’s Winter Palace as 224 
red balloons took off into the night sky, one for each passenger who died on 
the Russian airliner that went down in Egypt’s Sinai Peninsula on Saturday. 
Hundreds of mourners gathered in a large circle in the light rain to watch 36 
white doves as they rose above the angel and cross that top the central 
Alexander Column to commemorate the deaths of the travellers.


Many were crying and several told journalists that the tragedy had made them 
want to be closer to their own loved ones. One young woman told a television 
channel she had come to commemorate her friend Lilia Vasilyeva, who had been 
coming back to St Petersburg after a vacation with her mother. She had died 
aged 15.

The Kogalymavia Airbus 321 had been flying from Sharm el-Sheikh to St 
Petersburg when air traffic control lost contact with it. Debris and bodies 
were still being discovered miles away from the crash site on Sunday, but the 
causes of the disaster were yet to be determined. A group declaring an 
affiliation with Islamic State claimed responsibility for the crash, butexperts 
have said this is unlikely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/russian-plane-crash-investigators-seek-cause-of-a321-crash>
.

Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, meanwhile, has been plunged 
into a state of grief. President Vladimir Putin declared a national day of 
mourning. Television channels cut entertainment programmes, concerts were 
canceled and sporting events began with a moment of silence. Flags were flying 
at half mast around St Petersburg and on the ships of Russia’s Black Sea fleet 
in Sevastopol, its headquarters in Crimea.

Yevgeniya Beryozina, who lost her friend Viktoria Sevryukova, 24, on the 
downed plane, told the Guardian that she and other friends remained in a state 
of shock on Sunday. Sevryukov, 24, worked at a local restaurant chain and had 
been holidaying with friends in Sharm el-Sheikh. “We’re not forgetting her for 
a second,” Beryozina said.

Mourners gathered outside St Isaac’s Cathedral in St Petersburg, which held a 
memorial service, and steady flow of people continued to lay flowers and light 
candles at a makeshift memorial in front of Pulkovo airport. Among them was 
governor Georgy Poltavchenko, who arrived with an armful of red roses 
<http://www.fontanka.ru/2015/11/01/026/>. Teddy bears and other toys 
commemorated the 24 children on board.

Poltavchenko declared a three-day period of mourning and said the city was 
ready to create a special memorial site with the graves of those who died in 
the catastrophe if relatives approved. “This is a tragedy and it yet again 
showed that we’re together, in happiness and in sorrow,” he said.

A woman at the airport who would give her name only as Tatiana told state 
television that she had lost her daughter on the flight. “She had just turned 
32, she still hadn’t had children. In a single moment, life ends,” she said 
through tears.

In an indication of the many couples and families who perished, a large number 
of those on the list of the plane’s passengers shared the same last name. 
Besides young families, social network profiles showed that many students had 
been relaxing in Egypt with friends. Among the victims was Alexander Kopylov, 
the deputy mayor of Pskov, and his wife, Yelena Melnikova.

Several Russian media outlets and television channels ran the list of victims 
<https://www.facebook.com/tvrain/videos/10153408002988800/>, as well as their 
photographs. Many of these pictures showed passengers in far-off locations or 
engaging, carefree, in activities such as skiing, boating and sightseeing.

Oksana Zhuravlyova posted on the Russian social media site VK that a little 
over a week ago, she had run into Valeria Bogdanova, who had been traveling 
with Sevryukova. “She was enthusiastically telling me about how she was going 
to fly to Egypt with Vika (Sevryukova), so bright and cheerful,” Zhuravlyova 
wrote. “Girls, we are praying for you. Why is life so unfair and you ended up 
on that exact plane? Come back to us please.” 
<https://vk.com/oksanasun?w=wall57385240_8039>

Two weeks ago, Tatyana Gromova posted a photograph of the air tickets and 
passports of herself, her husband Alexei and daughter Darina, who would have 
turned one in December. “Hooray! We’re flying off to get some sun,”she wrote. 
<https://vk.com/id72829?w=wall72829_592> Gromova also posted a photograph of 
the infant looking out at the Pulkovo runway,her tiny hands pressed up against 
the glass of a window <https://vk.com/id72829?w=wall72829_593> in the waiting 
area.

Churches around Russia held prayer services for those lost. At a Sunday 
service in Moscow, Orthodox Patriarch Kirill prayed for the victims of the 
tragedy, saying that “many of us could have been in that airplane”.

Egypt plane crash: BA to continue flying over Sinai despite disaster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/01/british-airways-continue-flying-over-sinai-despite-crash>
Several companies took measures to help friends and relatives. Russian mobile 
broadband services provider Yota said it wasmaking all calls and text messages 
between Russia and Egypt free 
<https://tjournal.ru/c/16662-v-svyazi-s-aviakatastrofoi-yota-otmenila-platu-za-zvonki-i-sms-mezhdu-rossiei-i-egiptom?from=club>
, and Uber said it was not taking payment for trips to St Petersburg’s Pulkovo 
airport so those who had lost loved ones could make it to help centres there.

Well-wishers in other countries expressed their condolences, laying flowers 
outside Russian embassies in capitals including London, Berlin, Riga, Baku and 
Yerevan. The political rancour between Russia and Ukraine was put aside as 
state television showed images of Kiev residents bringing flowers to the 
Russian embassy there. The Vatican said Pope Francis was offering the 
“assurance of his prayers” to those who died.

Putin thanked leaders of other countries for their commiseration, the Kremlin 
press service announced. Normally a fixture on state television, the president 
did not appear in public on Saturday or Sunday, although the Kremlin press 
service said he expressed his condolences to the victims.
 