
Ayn Rand <https://www.theguardian.com/books/ayn-rand> is one of those people 
whom you just want to go away, but won't. 

I say this not with hate or ignorance, but with deep familiarity.

When, as a self-absorbed college freshman, I first came across the Russian 
emigre author of The Fountainhead and Atlas Shrugged, she seemed like the 
coolest thinker ever – what selfish person doesn't want to hear that being 
selfish doesn't just feel good, but actuallyis good, too? 

I quickly devoured nearly all of her atrocious tomes with a sort of blind 
hunger – that ferocious pseudo-intellectual reading you do only to confirm your 
beliefs, if you will. Indeed, I devotedly hung on her every word, even becoming 
an officer of my university'sObjectivist 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Objectivism_%28Ayn_Rand%29> club. At one point, I 
may even have been president.  

Much to the lament of my philosophy classmates, I was that girl who frequently 
(and loudly!) argued in favor of Rand's illogical claims that altruism doesn't 
exist; that selfishness is a virtue; and that "rational egoism" is the only 
right way to live.

Thankfully, I grew out of that phase. Not surprisingly, but a few years of 
minimum-wage work cleaning up cat faeces, without benefits, and other 
thankless, unstable odd jobs made me question Objectivism's foundations and 
rekindled an earlier interest in anarcho-syndicalism. 

Eventually, leaving Rand was no more different or difficult than, say, leaving 
a friend who had grown to annoy me over time – sure, I was very intimate with 
her ideas, but that just gave me more insight into their outright 
dysfunctionality, and the strength to say "sayonara!"

What's scary is that so many Americans have not grown out of that mentally 
puerile phase. Instead, this contingent – now largely comprised of Tea Party 
radicals – remains mired in her pop philosophy. 

(Only now has Republican Congressman Paul Ryan, perhaps realizing that 
supporting an atheist adulterer might hurt his veep chances,changed his tune 
<http://www.theatlanticwire.com/politics/2012/04/how-tell-paul-ryan-wants-be-veep-hes-rejected-his-former-idol-ayn-rand/51605/>
 from Objectivist fanboy to follower of Thomas Aquinas.) 

Granted, it's doubtful that any political group so suspicious of the 
intelligentsia wouldactually read Rand's 1,200 page magnum opus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/apr/22/tea-party-movement-republicans>
, Atlas Shrugged, but her ideas are clearly being used to justify inequality, 
giving credence to institutionalized wealth-based elitism.

This has to stop, and stop now. But not just for the reasons that typically 
get brought up. Anti-Rand commentators have long pointed out both the pragmatic 
and personal problems with Rand. As evidenced by the Great Recession, for 
example, anything even remotely close to the unfettered capitalism advocated by 
Rand plainly does not work. 

Also, as evidenced by her personal life, she was more a hypocritical, 
questionable character than a moral role model. As a teenager in Russia,"she 
watched her family nearly starve while she treated herself to the theater." 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/garbage-and-gravitas#> She railed against 
government benefits but cheerfully collected social securityand Medicare 
<http://boingboing.net/2011/01/28/ayn-rand-took-govern.html>. She championed 
integrity, but bastardized Nietzsche's best ideas.

And her writing skills aren't just mediocre; if anything, her penchant for 
200-page monologues and wooden characters suggests that they're non-existent. 
And she has this thing for rapey scenes; and her approach toBDSM 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BDSM> goes for a Mad Men-esque chauvinist chic – 
not healthy sex positivism. 

Of course, all that doesn't actually say anything about her "philosophy"; it 
just makes the case that she's a jerk and a hack. That said, her theory – and 
summarily, its corollaries – are belied by the abject sketchiness of their most 
basic premise:rational egoism <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rational_egoism>
. Far smarter, more articulate people than me have pointed this out, but what 
needs to be emphasized is that Rand conflates descriptive psychological egoism 
(people act in their self-interest) with normative ethical egoism (acting in 
self-interest is the right thing to do). Part of this "ought-from-an-is"-type 
assumption is that altruism does not exist – very much the backbone of her 
belief system. 

West Valley College's Sandra LaFave does a great job following this line of 
thought <http://instruct.westvalley.edu/lafave/Egoism.html> and pointing out 
why it doesn't work. The basic claim of egoists, LaFave notes, is that people 
"always and invariably act in their self-interest". However, most moral codes 
call for altruism, which, in egoists' account, is "demanding the 
impossible". Moral codes, so egoists' thinking goes, should not demand "the 
impossible", so we should take up a "more realistic" system such as – ta-da! – 
ethical egoism.

To accept this conclusion, you have to accept the premise that psychological 
egoism is a given fact in the first place. To date, neither Rand nor anyone 
else has been able to prove definitively that the proverbial soldier who dives 
on a grenade acts selfishly, not altruistically.

Even if, for the sake of argument, we accepted that all acts were selfish, 
there certainly seem to be a great many unselfish-looking selfish acts (diving 
on the grenade to save your comrades), as well as selfish-seeming selfish acts 
(blowing your kid's college tuition money on a shopping spree.) LaFave points 
out that this "empirical distinction" renders across-the-board selfishness more 
of a semantic trick than something that meaningfully describes ethics. Go ahead 
and claim all human acts come from self-interest, fine. This seems kind of 
silly, however, when the morality of said selfish acts willstill be measured by 
how altruistic they seem.

Another key concern is that psychological egoism 
<http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/egoism/#3> might not be final stage of an 
individual's ethical development. We start off selfish, say some theorists, but 
we must move beyond convention and toward post-conventional social contract and 
conscience for true moral growth. Even if we were to concede that these 
foundational problems do not deal a death-blow to Objectivism – which would be 
very generous of us (yet generous in a selfish way, of course) – it still seems 
perverse to peg so much on so shaky a foundation.

The kernel of this belief system is nothing more than a philosophically hollow 
shell. It should absolutely not play a role in policy-making – especially when 
the end result would be disastrous. I outgrew Rand; now I wish America would, 
too.

• This article was amended on 11 June 2012 because Ayn Rand's novel Atlas 
Shrugged is 1,200 pages long, rather than 1,200 words. This has been corrected.
 