
David Brat ran against Eric Cantor as the epitome of everything that's wrong 
with Washington. It wasn't a bad synecdoche; like the city, Cantor exuded 
southern efficiency and northern charm. By the standards of the Tea Party, 
however, Cantor simply wasn't inefficientenough. They would like less done, 
please.

On the other hand, Cantor's lack of personal charm probably didn't mean much 
in terms of the race – though you can see how years of terse brush-offs to 
reporters has already given the coverage a particularly giddy aftertaste. (See:
"DC is running out of champagne" 
<https://twitter.com/daveweigel/status/476530395656507392>.) Neither the left 
nor right will miss Cantor much, even if David Brat might. The Randolph-Macon 
College economics professor will never be more important to the Washington 
political class than he is right now, afterdefeating the House majority leader 
by double digits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/11/us-house-majority-leader-eric-cantor-loses-primary-virginia>
 in their primary on Tuesday night.

In other words, Professor Brat, I have some bad news: it's all downhill from 
here. At least for you, personally. You are neither the death knell for 
immigration reform nor the prime mover of the GOP agenda. You are the victor in
a 65,008-person vote 
<https://twitter.com/costareports/status/476560248510357504>that came down to 
rural Virginia. And your legacy as a harbinger of things to come is even more 
in doubt: there is no clean Tea Party electoral narrative at this point in the 
midterms – only Beltway political journalists believe in clean narratives 
anyway.

But as Cantor's vanquisher, Brat nonetheless became an overnight symbol for 
Tea Party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/11/david-brats-victory-over-eric-cantor-gives-pause-to-republican-moderates>
 and its future. News that Cantorspent 
<https://twitter.com/Goldfarb/status/476571129268953088> over $150,000 at 
steakhouses during the campaign had to be squared with having failed to serve 
up sufficiently red meat. And the March Madness-level magnitude of the upset 
gave the coverage an hysterical edge. Both left and right raced to be the side 
most please by the outcome. (Indeed, any more Tea Party upsets and this might 
be the election cycle when I finally learn to spellschadenfreude.)

So on the morning after, Brat is either the Tea Party's white knight or its 
motley fool – at centerstage if also at the edge of the political spectrum.

But come the fall, Brat may be an historical footnote, having beaten the first 
sitting majority leader since the position was created in 1899, only to have 
gone on to lose the general election. (Which is unlikely when running against a 
Democraticslave-trade <https://twitter.com/thegarance/status/476526791562379264>
 /disabilities <https://twitter.com/dfreelon/status/476563431823532032> / 
vampire 
<http://www.amazon.com/Jack-Trammell/e/B0039TH0AW/ref=dp_byline_cont_book_1> 
scholar in one of Virginia's most conservative districts, but possible, 
especially given how wrong all the primary polling was,by a clean 34 points or 
so <http://fivethirtyeight.com/datalab/the-eric-cantor-upset-what-happened/>.) 
Or Brat will be one of dozens of incoming freshmen Congressmen … which is to 
say, an historical footnote in the making.

Congressional seats are not made of Valyrian steel; they do not remain 
powerful no matter who holds them. When he leaves the House, Cantor will take 
much of his influence with him – probably straight to K Street, where he 
arguably can hold more sway over national policy as a lobbyist than he ever 
could as a representative from Virginia.

Brat will have to build his political capital from zero: as an economist, he 
probably has a better understanding than most of us about just how difficult 
that is. As an economist andpaid follower 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2014/06/eric-cantors-shocking-richly-deserved-defeat.html>
 of Ayn Rand, he will face the added difficulty of not being a very good 
economist.

What's more, the flukish nature of the win – even if he wins that general 
election by a landslide – sets up Brat for a primary challenge of his own.As a 
$200,000 dark horse 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/11/us/politics/eric-cantor-loses-gop-primary.html>
 against the $5.4m man, he was able to avoid the gauntlet of both media and 
donor cross-examination (andhe missed two meetings with high-level 
conservatives because of finals 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/local/virginia-politics/tea-party-challenger-to-virginias-cantor-no-shows-two-events-with-key-dc-conservatives/2014/05/14/0ef88172-dbcb-11e3-bda1-9b46b2066796_story.html>
). Progressives' hopefulness about his inexperience leading to 
politically-profitable gaffes seems well-founded; on election night,he told 
Sean Hannity <https://twitter.com/anamariecox/status/476548770222841856>, "Just 
look at my biography. There's nothing hard right or far right about anything," 
which suggests a potentially dangerous lack of self-awareness.

If nothing else, Brat's candidacy was boosted by the belligerently hyperbolic 
Laura Ingraham, whose quotes are the stuff thatMedia Matters dreams are made of 
<http://mediamatters.org/tags/laura-ingraham>. (In one Brat testimonial during 
the homestretch, the conservative hostasserted 
<http://www.breitbart.com/Big-Government/2014/06/04/Laura-Ingraham-and-David-Brat-Blast-Eric-Cantor-on-Amnesty-Flip-Flops-at-Campaign-Rally>
 that Obama should have traded Cantor for Sergeant Bowe Bergdahl.) A 
well-funded, well-vetted challenger who might come with Tea Party approval but 
establishment money would take Brat out of Congress and back to the classroom.

But this country continues to be bafflingly diverse. And voters, over and 
over, respond to the specific candidates in their specific elections in those 
specific circumstances. Eric Cantor lost. The same night, fellow immigration 
squish and (not-fellow) climate change believer Senator Lindsey Graham faced 
six (six!) Tea Party challengers andbeat them with room to spare 
<http://www.postandcourier.com/article/20140610/PC1603/140619917/1177>.

To find the Tea Party throughline in this election cycle, you have to look 
past the ballot counts and toward the policies – the radicalism of which the 
GOP establishment refuses to recognize, much less censure: voter ID, ratcheted 
down abortion access, bigotry masquerading as "religious freedom", concealed 
carry.

The Tea Party's biggest victory is best seen not as an election night upset 
but a continental drift rightward. Inexorable, mostly invisible, potentially 
disastrous.

 