
Good to see your investigative journalism exposing the links between the Tory 
right and the US radical right via the neoconservative Atlantic Bridge, backed 
by the American Legislative Exchange Council, which is doing such harm in the 
US (Lobbying links put pressure on coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/16/lobbying-links-coalition?newsfeed=true>
, 16 October). That this government is meeting primarily with corporate 
lobbyists for deregulation and slashing enforcement as a false "burden on 
business", rather than listening to the deadly effect of unrestrained business 
bad behaviour on ordinary people is no surprise toFamilies Against Corporate 
Killers <http://www.fack.org.uk/>. We represent families of people killed by 
grossly negligent employers who flouted health and safety legislation, and we 
are terrified that current government policies of slashing enforcement (35% 
cuts to theHealth and Safety Executive <http://www.hse.gov.uk/>), and 
threatening to cut health and safety laws will kill and injure even more 
workers. 

We have asked Chris Grayling at the Department of Work and Pensions to meet us 
but he has refused three times. However, he has managed to find time to meet 
all the main corporate lobbies: CBI, British Chambers of Commerce, Chemicals 
Industry Association, the EEF, the Alliance of Industry Association, the NFU, 
The UK Contractors Group, The Environmental Services Association, the 
Association of British Insurers and Zurich.The article in your sister paper, 
the Observer, illustrating Chris Grayling's links to Atlantic Bridge is also 
extremely concerning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/15/liam-fox-atlantic-bridge>.

All the cuts will hurt us, but cuts to workers' health and safety will kill 
and maim. The malign corporate influence on this government in 
redesigning the UK for their benefit only must be exposed.
Dawn and Paul Adams
(son Samuel Adams killed aged six, at Trafford Centre, 10 October 1998), 
founder members, Families Against Corporate Killers, Manchester

Other founder members of Fack:

Linzi Herbertson (husband Andrew Herbertson, 29, killed at work in January 
1998)
Mike and Lynne Hutin (son Andrew Hutin, 20, killed at work on 8 November 2001)
Mick and Bet Murphy (son Lewis Murphy, 18, killed at work on 21 February 2004)
Louise Taggart (brother Michael Adamson, 26, killed at work on 4 August 2005)
Linda Whelan (son Craig Whelan, 23, killed at work on 23 May 2004)
Dorothy and Douglas Wright (son Mark Wright, 37, killed at work on 13 April 
2005)
Louise Taggart (brother Michael Adamson, 26, killed at work on 4 August 2005)
 