
Donald Trump told Apple CEO Tim Cook that he is going to “get” the company to 
start manufacturing its products in the United States, the president-elect told 
theNew York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/us/politics/trump-new-york-times-interview-transcript.html?_r=0>
 on Tuesday.

Trump revealed that he had received a post-election phone call from Cook 
during which he said, “Tim, you know one of the things that will be a real 
achievement for me is when I getApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> to build a big plant in the 
United States, or many big plants in the United States.”

According to Trump’s account, Cook responded, “I understand that,” and Trump 
went on to promise incentives through tax breaks and reduced regulations.

Strong-arm Apple and tax China bigly: a guide to Trump's possible tech policies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/17/trump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax>
“I think we’ll create the incentives for you, and I think you’re going to do 
it,” Trump said he said.

Apple did not immediately respond to a request for confirmation of Trump’s 
characterization of the call, nor did it respond to a request for comment on 
the content of Trump’s remarks.

Though Apple markets its high-end products as being “designed by Apple in 
California”, the electronics are assembled at factories in China from 
components produced primarily in China, Japan and Taiwan, according to theMIT 
Technology Review 
<https://www.technologyreview.com/s/601491/the-all-american-iphone/>. The 
company says that its suppliers employ more than1.6 million people 
<http://www.apple.com/supplier-responsibility/>. 

Forcing American companies to bring jobs back to the US was one of the key 
themes of Trump’s presidential campaign, despite his own business’s decision to
manufacture apparel in China or Bangladesh 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/03/08/news/economy/donald-trump-trade>. 

“We’re going to get Apple to build their damn computers and things in this 
country instead of in other countries,” thethen-candidate told supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/17/trump-tech-policy-industry-leaders-apple-china-tax>
 in Virginia on 18 January.

Trump later called for a boycott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/19/donald-trump-apple-boycott-fbi-san-bernardino>
 of the company’s products unless it acceded to the FBI’s demand that it unlock 
one of the San Bernardino shooters’ iPhones, a request Apple had strenuously 
resisted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-apple-tim-cook-phone-call-manufacturing-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F288f915c5fe4b589b3df4b488b285c80f2f3cff4%2F0_216_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Could%20Donald%20Trump%20really%20get%20Apple%20to%20'build%20a%20big%20plant'%20in%20the%20US%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-apple-tim-cook-phone-call-manufacturing-us%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Could%20Donald%20Trump%20really%20get%20Apple%20to%20%27build%20a%20big%20plant%27%20in%20the%20US%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-apple-tim-cook-phone-call-manufacturing-us%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F288f915c5fe4b589b3df4b488b285c80f2f3cff4%2F0_216_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Apple markets its products as ‘designed in California’ but assembles them in 
Chinese factories from components produced in China, Japan and Taiwan. 
Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
But most experts agree that building iPhones from scratch in the US is 
impractical and economically unfeasible, largely because the company relies on 
a complex and very large supply chain and manufacturing infrastructure already 
established around Shenzhen, China.

“Geography matters,” said Seungjin Whang, a Stanford Business School professor 
who studies supply chain management. “In Shenzhen, if you need a part (how 
scarce it might be), you can find at least 10 suppliers within a day.”

“Right now the supply chain to make consumer electronics in volume does not 
exist in the US,” said Tim Wilson, a partner in venture capital firm Artiman. 
“You might tax [importing] so it costs more, but to reposition and get people 
to rebuild that supply chain in the US is not something that I would predict in 
the next few years.”

If Apple were to invest in establishing a new supply base in the US, Whang 
predicts that the delay would give its competitors – largely Korean and Chinese 
companies – time “to catch up and eat its lunch”.

Jason Dedrick, a professor at Syracuse University’s School of Information 
Studies, analyzed Apple’s supply chain for theMIT Technology Review 
<https://www.technologyreview.com/s/601491/the-all-american-iphone/> and found 
that assembling iPhones in the US would add between $30 to $40 to the product’s 
cost, largely due to labor costs and the additional cost of shipping components 
to the US.

Dedrick’s estimate did not include the capital cost outlay of building 
factories, which could be substantial.

Apple flips out with clamshell iPhone patent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/23/apple-patent-flip-phone-iphone-oled-screen-clamshell->
“It’s quite feasible for Apple to do limited volume assembly of some products 
in the US,” Dedrick said, proposing iMacs as a possibility. “I don’t think it’s 
possible to move production of hundreds of millions of iPhones to the US, at 
least not at a competitive cost.”

One possibility, Greg Linden of the Institute for Business Innovation at UC 
Berkeley said, would be for Apple to have “the parts kitted in China and 
shipped to the existing factory of one its assemblers here and voilà – you’ve 
got a US-assemblediPhone <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/iphone> with 
one extra process step plus some extra shipping and labor.”

That strategy could cost as little as $10 to $20 per iPhone, he said, but is 
limited to the capacity of those already existing factories.

As to whether Apple will attempt something like that, Linden said, “I guess it 
depends on how badly Tim Cook wants to give Trump a win.”


 * This article was changed on Friday November 25 to correct the final quote 
from Greg Linden  