
Name: Britpop <https://www.theguardian.com/music/britpop>.

Age: Twentysomething.

Appearance: A dead horse draped in a union jack being whipped with cheese 
strings.

I know this! It's the musical movement that started in London in the early 
90s, spurred on by a hatred of grunge. Before long, it was drawing in bands 
from Sheffield, Manchester …Keep going.

Blur, Suede, Elastica, Pulp, Oasis … this was the most exciting time for music 
since punk. Albarn's boys went head-to-head with the Gallaghers, more than two 
million people applied for tickets at Knebworth, Geri Halliwell pinched Prince 
Charles's bottom at a Prince's Trust concert …The Spice Girls weren't Britpop!

I'm running out of facts. Then you'll want to know why we're talking about 
Britpop today.

Well? It's making a comeback! And not as a type of music.

Then what? As some sort of drink. Blur bassist Alex James has just applied to 
trademark the name,according to the business paper City AM 
<http://www.cityam.com/article/1389585678/fancy-taste-james-britpop>. The 
annoyingly vague application covers everything from "beverages enriched with 
added minerals" to low-alcohol beer and alcopops.

I've always thought of James as a cheese bore. Don't stop just yet. Touring 
with Blur was simply "an excuse to travel the world eating obscure types of 
cheese",if we can believe the second volume of his autobiography 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2012/feb/16/alex-james-memoir-cheese>
, All Cheeses Great and Small.

Whereas you were more likely to find Noel Gallagher snorting cocaine in the 
toilets at No 10 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1060252/Oasis-star-Noel-Gallaghers-shocking-revelation-I-took-cocaine-Downing-Street-toilet-reserved-Queen.html>
?Precisely. James has since launched a range of fancy fromages that includes 
"nutty and lemony"Little Wallop 
<http://www.buycheese.co.uk/goats-cheese/little-wallop-goats-cheese/>, "spicy 
and savoury"Goddess <http://www.pongcheese.co.uk/shop/goddess.html> and "steely 
and sweet"Blue Monday 
<http://www.pongcheese.co.uk/shop/alex-james-presents/blue-monday.html>.

Can we change the subject? Was James the one who married Patsy Kensit? That 
was Liam Gallagher, among others. Back to the cheeses.

Christ. Last year Asda stopped stocking six of them <>, on the grounds that 
they were "ahead of their time".

Can a dairy product can be ahead of its time? It can if it's flavoured with 
salad cream, ketchup, tomato or tikka masala.

Bleuch. So now he's decided to diversify? That's the best-case scenario. He 
may have been inspired by the fact that there's already a drink called Oasis.

And the worst? He thinks the world is ready for drinkable cheddar.

Do say: "It's fizzy and it's fun!"

Don't say: "It's fizzy and it's feta!"
 