
MPs and council leaders have written to Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> seeking assurances after a 
delay in the publication of a government report on the UK’s flood defences.

The national flood resilience review 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/national-flood-resilience-review-government-action-to-tackle-floods>
 was established to assess how the country can be better protected from 
flooding and increasingly extreme weather events, and its report had been
expected in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/30/uk-flooding-fears-grow-danger-inquiry-prevention-shelved>
.

Chaired by the MP for West Dorset, Oliver Letwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/oliverletwin>, the review was 
commissioned after Storm Desmond last December, which caused severe flooding 
across the north of England, Wales and Scotland. Storm Eva, which came later 
that month, caused further flooding.

Politicians in the regions have expressed concern that the delay in the 
report’s publication could mean there will not be enough time to implement key 
recommendations before winter.

A spokeswoman for the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs said: 
“We’ve always committed to publishing this review this summer, so we would say 
that so far it hasn’t been delayed and we’re still working to that timeframe.” 
The spokeswoman said the end of summer was the end of September.

It is understood that the delay is in part because of the changes in the 
government since David Cameron’s resignation in June. In the subsequent 
reshuffle,Andrea Leadsom <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom> 
was appointed as secretary of state for environment, food and rural affairs, 
replacing Liz Truss who became justice secretary.

UK poorly prepared for climate change impacts, government advisers warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/12/uk-poorly-prepared-for-climate-change-impacts-government-advisers-warn>
The MP for Leeds West, Rachel Reeves, said the government was guilty of 
“dithering and delay” and had badly let down her constituents who were 
struggling to get new insurance quotes and rebuild their lives after the 
floods. “The environment secretary needs to get a grip on the situation and 
ensure the review is published as soon as possible,” she said.

The MP for Wakefield and chairwoman of the environmental audit committee, Mary 
Creagh, said: “It is disappointing that the national flood resilience review 
has been delayed and neither the flood envoys nor the minister responsible for 
leading the review have been replaced in Theresa May’s new government.

“It is vital the review is led by the Cabinet Office, which has a coordinating 
role across government. I have written to Andrea Leadsom and Ben Gummer to seek 
urgent clarification so that families and businesses at risk of flooding can 
see that the government has a plan to protect the nation’s energy, transport 
and digital infrastructure.”


The Leeds council leader, Judith Blake, and the Calderdale council leader, Tim 
Swift, have written a joint letter to May about the progress of the review.

“We are keen to understand the current status of the national flood resilience 
review,” it reads. “This review was critical to understanding how we can better 
protect our communities and businesses from future flooding and increasingly 
extreme weather events.”

The role of flood envoy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/prime-minister-announces-more-than-40m-for-flood-defences>
 was scrapped in the government reshuffle after May’s appointment as prime 
minister. The envoys had been appointed to oversee the response to flood damage 
across the north of England.
 