
Ted Cruz
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0FwT3Dt45Bw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0FwT3Dt45Bw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F0FwT3Dt45Bw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Highlight Smooth integration of spontaneous audience response to his call to 
repeal Obamacare: "Yes we can!" To which he responded, "you know along with 
hope and change, that's pretty good".

Crowd reaction Three-quarter-filled ballroom, lots of tentative applause for 
key lines.We applaud now? Okay, wait. Is now the time we applaud?

Key reference Princess Bride. Of Obama's comment about "smidgen of 
corruption": "I don't think that means what you think it means."

Zombie Reagan walks again Yup. Pointed out, smartly, that the candidates who 
have most generated the most support among young people were septuagenarians 
Ronald Paul and Ronald Reagan. ("Obviously, the key to is be named Ronald.")

Smartest move Organized entire speech around a 10-point plan.

What you wouldn't have expected Parroting of Occupy slogans: "Wall Street 
profits while Main Street suffers".

Potential campaign slogan Considering his actual agenda: "No you can't!"

Likelihood of winning the CPAC <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cpac> 
straw poll High

Likelihood of winning the nomination Low

Paul Ryan
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-ggiF5BLZEg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-ggiF5BLZEg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F-ggiF5BLZEg%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Highlight Pointing out, correctly, that "the center of gravity" of the GOP has 
moved to the right; "cutting taxes used to be controversial even within our own 
party". Today, it's blindly invoked as a one-size-fits all solution!

Crowd reaction I know this guy from somewhere….

Key reference Henny Youngman, recycling "take my wife, please" to "take 
Obamacare, but not really".

Zombie Reagan walks again Shambling through to re-assure audience that their 
legislative stonewalling is actually energetic advancement. "The GOP is where 
the action is, just like it was in the Jack kemp era during the Reagan 
revolution."

Smartest move Recasting the "GOP in disarray" narrative. "I'm Irish" – 
disagreement, discord – "that's my idea of a family reunion. I don't see a 
great divide, I see a vibrant debate."

What you wouldn't have expected Fundamental misunderstanding of Americans' 
priorities in the midst of this economy: "What they're offering people is a 
full stomach and an empty soul."

Potential campaign slogan "Let the other party be the party of personalities, 
we'll be the party of ideas" – though given the tepid response to his speech, 
this might not be much of an actual choice.

Likelihood of winning the CPAC straw poll Will lose to "none of the above".

Likelihood of winning the nomination Him?

Chris Christie
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbbOKi7kcPno%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbbOKi7kcPno%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbbOKi7kcPno%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Highlight So many! Most skillful pirouette can't be put in a video clip: 
restating his pro-life position without mentioning actual policy, instead 
accusing Democrats of intolerance, pointing out pro-choiceRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> have spoken at the GOP 
convention but, "tell me the last pro-life Democrat to speak at a convention… 
don't strain yourself, I'll tell you the answer: none."

Crowd reaction Enthusiastic! He's a celebrity!

Key reference Most references were to himself.

Zombie Reagan walks again Only present in the sense that Reagan also was a 
Republican president of a blue state that happily worked with Democrats.

Smartest move Picking on the one enemy he and the far right share: the media. 
"Don't let the media define us."

What you wouldn't have expected Implicit criticism of Republicans in 
Washington with pointed references the lack of action "across the board" and 
the most dangerous place in Washington is the ten feet "betweenanybody who 
wants to start talking and a camera".

Potential campaign slogan How you like me now?

Likelihood of winning the CPAC straw poll Will get the votes of everyone who 
votes before Rand Paul speaks.

Likelihood of winning the nomination He has bigger (bridge-sized) problems 
than CPAC.

Bobby Jindal
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fv0Y7lDOsZm0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fv0Y7lDOsZm0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fv0Y7lDOsZm0%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Highlight "There's a rebellion brewing in these United states of America"; 
someone else will have to turn on the heat.

Crowd reaction You hungry yet? I'm getting hungry.

Key reference Inadvertently morphed into Dana Carvey's Church Lady, asking of 
school choice legislation, "Wouldn't it be special?"

Zombie Reagan walks again Only in disdain for big government.

Smartest move Personal anecdote about his father arranging an informal payment 
plan with the doctor that delivered him: "no paperwork ... just two guys in a 
hospital, shaking hands", which is an awesome system for dealing with health 
care if absolutely nothing goes wrong.

What you wouldn't have expected A speech almost entirely devoted to education 
policy; possibly the least controversial aspect of the Right's agenda.

Potential campaign slogan "I'm not going to offend anyone".

Likelihood of winning the CPAC straw poll Nope.

Likelihood of winning the nomination Could make a decent running mate if you 
need someone to balance out an exciting candidate.

Marco Rubio
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbaMgkqgrGiY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbaMgkqgrGiY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FbaMgkqgrGiY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>

Highlight Ted Cruz is the former high-school debater; Rubio is the Toastmaster 
candidate. He does Sweeping Oration with Dramatic Rising Volume at the End of 
Sentences. Talks a little like he's writing for composition class: "I outline 
this to you for the following reason."

Crowd reaction We're supposed to like this guy. I'm going to try to like this 
guy.

Key reference First would-be candidate to dedicate a substantial portion of 
his speech to foreign policy; this is not to say he had any foreign policy 
ideas beyond, you know, "Leadership" and not "letting other countries walk all 
over us".

Zombie Reagan walks again Shows up to stomp all over the Evil Empire and 
generally take credit for the end of the Cold War. Because Leadership. "By the 
time I was in college, the Berlin Wall had come down."

Smartest move Weaving together conservative cultural concerns with foreign 
policy, arguing that we've lost our place in the world because Obama wears mom 
jeans. Basically.

What you wouldn't have expected Sloppy cutting and pasting from regular stump 
speech: America's awesome, and "you're going to hear that from every speaker 
tonight". Multiple mentions of "the students in the audience" (possibly 
replacing "Iowans").

Potential campaign slogan "I've still got the second-best shot."

Likelihood of winning the CPAC straw poll Needs to more fully flip-flop on 
immigration.

Likelihood of winning the nomination Needs to perform reverse flip-flop on 
immigration.
 