
The storyline of Poul Anderson's Hrolf Kraki's Saga, my second venture into 
formerBritish Fantasy award winners 
<http://www.britishfantasysociety.org.uk/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=129&Itemid=63>
 – it took the 1974 prize – is fantastic. Blood, gore, incest, trolls, witches: 
it's got 'em all. A retelling of Norse legends, it's full of thrills. The only 
problem is the execution, which doesn't live up to the subject matter.

Anderson has stitched together a collection of sagas and verses about Hrolf, 
who lived and ruled around the middle of the sixth century in a rare period of 
peace for the Norse region. Hrolf is the child of incest: his father Helgi 
rapes a warrior queen, who keeps their daughter Yrsa hidden away, only for 
Helgi to – naturally – fall in love with her when he returns, and bear her off 
to be his bride. Hrolf manages to unite a divided kingdom, bringing together a 
mighty band of warriors, only for his sister, the half-elf Skuld, to bring him 
down. (Their battle makesone fan's list of the top 10 fantasy fights 
<http://thesilverkey.blogspot.com/2009/01/top-10-fantasy-fiction-battles-battle.html>
.)

There are great moments: the story of Bjorn, cursed by his stepmother for 
refusing to sleep with her, who becomes a bear. The meeting of Helgi and the 
mother of Skuld, whom he lets into his shack on a cold night to discover she's 
an elf from beneath the sea. The berserkers ("in battle a madness came upon 
them"). Chilly, stark descriptions of the northern wilds, where fjords "stabbed 
far into ice-helmeted mountains", where "the earthquake stride of a troll" 
echoes, where witches must be suffocated in sealskin before they're killed.

Unlike Michael Moorcock's Corum trilogy, with its soppy Rhalina, there are 
also some feisty women: for instance, Olof, the warrior queen, who, when Helgi 
attempts to marry her, pricks him with a sleep-thorn, hogties him, shaves him, 
covers him with pitch and puts him in a leather sack. Go Olof.

But all this is buried beneath an enraging attempt to cloak the novel in the 
language of myth – or what Anderson has decided sounds portentous and ancient. 
Just asthe "dosts" and "thees" of the Corum trilogy irritated me 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2009/jul/10/british-fantasy-awards-michael-moorcock>
, so do Anderson's "hights" and "dwelts" and back-to-front constructions. "Long 
he sat …" "Huge was the wonder …" No, no, no: you aren't Yoda. And when 
Anderson – mistakenly, I can only assume – throws in the odd "gotten", it 
really jars.

What makes me cross is that Anderson can clearly write, and when he forgets 
what he's trying to do and just goes with the story, you catch a glimmer of how 
good this could be. He is also hugely knowledgeable about the period. But I 
can't take it seriously when, wanting to hark back to the source material, he 
throws in a snatch of verse. "The well-born were expected to be able to make a 
verse at any time, and a gift of skaldcraft ran in her blood," he writes, 
before indulging himself in eight lines of dubious, Tolkien-at-his-dreariest 
poetry. And that's only a short one. The longest runs to three pages in my 
edition.

In his introduction to the book, Anderson tells us how he had long wanted to 
reconstruct this myth, to "put together the best parts, fill in the gaps, use 
the old words where they seem right and otherwise find new ones". I think he'd 
have done better to ditch the old words altogether and stick with his own in 
order to do justice to this brutal, dark story, which is just as good as 
Beowulf.

Anderson wasn't only a fantasy author; he also won seven Hugos for his science 
fiction, and I'll be interested to see whatSam Jordison 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/series/sam-jordison-hugo-award-winners> makes 
of those books. Moorcock, by the way, lovesPoul Anderson's The Broken Sword 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/2003/jan/25/featuresreviews.guardianreview18>, 
another northern tale. Perhaps I'll give that a try; I don't want to give up on 
Anderson quite yet.

Now, the question of what to turn to next. Will it be the next BFA winner – 
Moorcock again, this time with The Sword and the Stallion? The inauguralWorld 
Fantasy award <http://www.worldfantasy.org/awards/awardslist.html> winner 
Patricia A McKillip's The Forgotten Beasts of Eld, which took the 1975 prize? 
One of the Fantasy Masterworks,as suggested by mooneym a couple of weeks ago? 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/booksblog/2009/jul/10/british-fantasy-awards-michael-moorcock>
 (I'm very tempted by ER Eddison's The Worm Ouroboros, partly because I bought 
it from a secondhand shop last week, and partly because it has such extravagant 
praise on its cover, which trumpets it as "a literary event of the first 
importance".) Suggestions welcome – I'm drowning in fantasy.
 