
In creative businesses we talk a good deal about the value of difference in 
delivering brand success. We seek different brand positionings, different 
strategies, different executions. We believe difference creates stand-out, 
preference and loyalty.


But what kind of people invent difference? And where do we find them? 

I recently watched Listen to Me Marlon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/22/listen-to-me-marlon-review-brando-in-his-own-words>
, an excellent 2015 documentary exploring Marlon Brando’s life and work through 
his privately recorded audio-tapes. There’s a clear sense that Brando was 
obsessed from the outset with doing things differently: “Never let the audience 
know how it’s gonna come out. Get them on your time ... Hit ’em. Knock ’em over 
with an attitude, with a word, with a look. Be surprising. Figure out a way to 
do it that has never been done before.”

Marketing no longer a ‘destination industry’, adland warned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jan/27/marketing-industry-adland-lack-diversity>
Although Brando comes across on film as a pillar of strength, a brooding, 
confident presence, his childhood was far from happy. The introverted Brando 
was sent to a military school in which he felt isolated and alone: “I was very 
shy, very sensitive ... I had a great feeling of inadequacy; that I didn’t know 
enough; that I didn’t have enough education. I felt dumb.”

One can’t help inferring that Brando’s quest for difference was in some way 
driven by his own sense of marginalisation. Angst-ridden, feeling out of the 
ordinary, he was at the same time fascinated by difference in others: “I was 
always somebody who had an unquenchable curiosity about people. I would walk 
down the street and look at faces ... I would watch people for three seconds as 
they went by and try to analyse their personalities by just that flick. The 
face can’t hide many things and people are always hiding things.”

So what can we learn from Brando?

He was on the outside looking in. His marginalisation gave him an enhanced 
ability to look and learn, to observe others. Outsiders look harder and see 
more. And because they are different themselves, they are better equipped to 
create difference. Difference craves difference; difference creates difference.

The best creative businesses embrace outsiders. They welcome the unorthodox 
and unusual, the idiosyncratic and individual. They respect the quiet voice, 
even when they are daily engaged in loud proclamation. The best creative 
businesses make outsiders feel like insiders.

It follows then that the creative industry should excel in diversity: of 
social background, of ethnicity and education, of ways of seeing and thinking. 
Diversity should not just be a social responsibility for creative businesses. 
It should be a strategic imperative.

But the communications profession is not particularly diverse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/womens-blog/2014/dec/11/gender-diversity-agencies-women-advertising>
. It remains a largely white, middle-class sector and its least diverse 
department tends to be creative.

I'm Muslim, female, wear a headscarf – and, believe it or not, I work in 
advertising
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2016/jan/28/muslim-female-advertising-industry-diverse-society>
The Institute of Practitioners in Advertising (IPA <http://www.ipa.co.uk/>), 
the professional body representing the advertising and marketing communications 
industry, has recently made diversity and gender equality key priorities. Its
own data 
<http://www.ipa.co.uk/news/ipa-reveals-ethnic-diversity-of-adland%E2%80%99s-biggest-agencies#.VroXXGThDAw>
 indicates that 13% of employees and 8% of senior managers are from BAME (black 
and minority ethnic) backgrounds.Women 
<http://www.ipa.co.uk/news/ipa-president-sets-adland-ambitious-diversity-targets#.VroXtmThDAx>
 are well represented in agencies overall, but account for just 27% of senior 
executive roles.

As with any business there are powerful forces of inertia at play. Recruiters 
fish in the same ponds; leaders appoint in their own image; and company life 
has a centrifugal force that drives conformity and convention.

So what’s to be done?

The creative industry needs to measure and set targets. It should be out 
talking to schools, introducing kids to a career they may never have thought 
of. Work experience and internships need to become a vehicle for diversity, not 
a perk for friends and family. Relationships need to be established with 
university associations. Recruiters need to look beyond Oxbridge, beyond 
universities. Headhunters need to be briefed differently. Diversity needs to be 
a priority of leadership and culture.

In short, the industry should review its whole approach to recruitment; it 
should actively embrace the belief that different work requires different 
people; it should do it all differently.

“I’m going to have a special microphone placed in my coffin, so that when I 
wake up in there, six feet under the ground, I’m going to say: ‘do it 
differently’.’’

Marlon Brando, Listen to Me Marlon

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 