
Once a year, around the time of Afia Olu 
<http://www.ocean-anaedo.org/Pages/Festivals.aspx>, the Igbo 
<http://www.everyculture.com/wc/Mauritania-to-Nigeria/Igbo.html> new yam 
festival, my father, who is a knight of the Catholic Church, “sacrifices” a 
chicken to his ancestors so that – in his own words – they too might enjoy it 
like the ancestors of those who still do things “in the old way”. He lets the 
blood of the animal soak into the ground outside our family home, then, unlike 
people who observe the traditions the colonisers called “paganism”, my father 
cooks and eats the chicken. As a second-generation Christian, the son of an 
adult convert, my dad is still close enough to the old ways to feel guilty at 
the thought of abandoning them, and so he compromises. He wants to be a good 
son but he also wants to be a good Catholic.

Across Nigeria there has been an explosion of evangelical Christianity which 
is ardently opposed to local traditions

In the 1970s and 80s, many in Osumenyi 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps/place/Osumenyi,+Nigeria/@5.9622958,6.9758033,14z/data=!3m1!4b1!4m2!3m1!1s0x1043a3bc33571717:0xe2049fecbc0557a9>
, my father’s village in Anambra state in south-eastern Nigeria, performed a 
similar balancing act. They initiated their sons into themasquerade cult 
<http://www.igboguide.org/HT-chapter9.htm>, with its secret language, on Friday 
nights – and on Sunday morning those sons volunteered as altar boys at the 
local church. The church then was understanding. There was Christianity and 
there was tradition; the two were not mutually exclusive.

In those days Afia Olu, held at the end of the rainy season in August, was an 
exuberant, colourful affair celebrating not just yam but a successful harvest. 
Families dressed in their finest clothes travelled from afar to take part in 
all the festivities and ate to excess: yam and chicken fried incandescent gold; 
spicy goat meat which would make your nose run;jollof rice 
<http://www.allnigerianrecipes.com/rice/nigerian-jollof-rice.html> and salad 
soaking in cream.

These days hardly anyone from outside the village bothers to make the trip, 
especially not the wealthy, who are afraid that they or their children will be 
kidnapped and held for ransom. They have good reason to be reticent. 
Kidnappings in Anambra have become so prevalent thatforeign travellers are 
warned <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/nigeria/safety-and-security> 
of the risks, and a clampdown by the state governor has been met withpraise by 
Nigeria’s president, Muhammadu Buhari 
<http://www.premiumtimesng.com/news/more-news/187087-buhari-hails-anambra-govt-for-demolishing-kidnappers-homes.html>
. A friend of mine has armed security to watch over his children. Though he 
fondly remembers his own experiences at Afia Olu – running freely as the 
masquerades chased him and other kids – he cannot see his children taking part. 
“You cannot run with a security guard behind you,” he says. “Afia Olu is no 
longer what it used to be.”

What the threat of violent crime has not destroyed, the evangelical church is 
finishing off. Across Nigeria there has been an explosion of a fervent brand of 
evangelicalChristianity <https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> which 
is ardently opposed to local traditions and culture. In Igbo land, shrines have 
been destroyed, and converts abandon traditional names that sound as though 
they might have “pagan” links in favour of biblical names. In Osumenyi, some 
churches are discouraging their congregation from taking part in Afia Olu rites 
and festivities.

Still the festival continues, albeit a version sanctioned by the church. Afia 
Olu now officially ends with Christian services in those churches that are 
respectful enough of tradition to still permit it.

Sometimes I worry that when my father’s generation passes away this beautiful 
celebration of rebirth will die with them. Yet I take solace not only in the 
fact that there are churches willing to find a good marriage between 
Christianity and Afia Olu, but also in the fact that the new yam festival is a 
common denominator in all Igbo societies. So perhaps it will continue to 
survive. After all, as the Igbo say, when a group urinates together, it foams.
 