
Cristiano Ronaldo <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ronaldo> has 
apologised for being sent off against Almeria. The Real Madrid striker was 
shown two yellow cards in a 4-2 victory yesterday.

The former Manchester United player's first caution came after he removed his 
shirt while celebrating a goal. The second yellow card was for kicking out at 
Juanma Ortiz.

"I'm human and I made a mistake," Ronaldo said after a match in which he also 
missed a penalty. "I have my flaws too, but I am a professional who doesn't 
like to miss or lose. I was sad after missing the penalty and that's why I 
didn't celebrate the goal that followed. I am a perfectionist, but I'm glad 
Karim [Benzema] scored. I was sent off because I reacted instinctively. I wish 
to apologise for that."

The world's most expensive player was starting his first home match in over 
two months after an ankle injury. He set up Madrid's first goal, scored their 
last and won and then missed a penalty, before seeing red at the end of the 
game. The Portuguese will miss next weekend's game at fourth-placed Valencia.

Real's coach, Manuel Pellegrini, said: "It's a shame that he saw a yellow card 
for taking his shirt off â€“ he should've avoided that. His double booking was 
fair because he took his shirt off and because he was involved in a series of 
fouls. He is nevertheless a creative player who doesn't deserve to be sent off; 
other players make many more fouls and never see a red card."

Pellegrini also played down Ronaldo's lack of celebration following Benzema's 
goal in the 83rd minute, which saw Real go into a 3-2 lead. Benzema scored 
after Ronaldo's penalty was saved by theAlmeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/almeria> goalkeeper, Diego Alves.

Pellegrini said: "I don't think Cristiano did anything wrong. He lamented not 
scoring from the penalty, which is normal. He always celebrates every goal with 
his team-mates. Each person interprets things as they want, but I can guarantee 
you he is a good team-mate."
 