
First-half goals from Nani and Cristiano Ronaldo gave Portugal a 2-1 win over 
Belgium in their friendly on Tuesday that was moved from Brussels after the 
attacks in the Belgian capital which killed 35 people, whichBelgium’s players 
marked with special jerseys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/belgium-training-kit-marks-brussels-attacks-portugal>
 in the warm-up.

Nani broke down the left flank and curled a right-foot shot beyond the reach 
of the goalkeeper Thibaut Courtois in the 20th minute, and five minutes before 
the interval Ronaldo got his 56th international goal with a glancing header.

Romelu Lukaku pulled one back for a lackluster Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium> side with a header just after 
the hour as a series of substitutions weakened the home team’s first-half 
dominance.

The game was switched to Leiria, in central Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal>, from the King Baudouin Stadium 
in Brussels because of security concerns following airport and subway attacks 
there.

Belgium, without injured key players Eden Hazard, Vincent Kompany and Kevin De 
Bruyne, never showed anything like the form that has made them Fifa’s 
top-ranked team. A 36th-minute effort from Dries Mertens was their first shot 
on goal.

Portugal, who like Belgium have qualified for the European Championship later 
this year, were looking to redeem themselves after asurprise 1-0 home defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/25/cristiano-ronaldo-portugal-bulgaria-match-report>
 against Bulgaria last week.

“We were in control for most of the time, even though Belgium occasionally 
caused us some trouble,” the Portugal coach Fernando Santos said.

Courtois kept Belgium in the game in the early stages, denying the home team 
four times in as many minutes. After some fancy footwork on the left by 
Ronaldo, Courtois flung himself low to his right to keep out powerful shots 
from João Mário and Adrien Silva. Then he got his fingertips to headers from 
Nani and Ronaldo, with the Real Madrid forward’s effort bouncing off the 
crossbar.

At the other end, Lukaku was a handful for Pepe but Belgium were feeling the 
absence of their injured playmakers.Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> bounced back from their weekend 
loss to England in emphatic style with a 4-1 victory over Italy in Munich – 
their first win over the Azzurri since 1995.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Finternational-friendly-roundup-portugal-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd11b9722a9a9e9ab9f4995204995c5aa5f59bd73%2F90_102_2402_1441%2F2402.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%20strikes%20to%20beat%20Belgium%20as%20Germany%20thrash%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Finternational-friendly-roundup-portugal-belgium%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cristiano%20Ronaldo%20strikes%20to%20beat%20Belgium%20as%20Germany%20thrash%20Italy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fmar%2F29%2Finternational-friendly-roundup-portugal-belgium%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd11b9722a9a9e9ab9f4995204995c5aa5f59bd73%2F90_102_2402_1441%2F2402.jpg>
 Germany’s Toni Kroos, right, scores past the Italy goalkeeper, Gianluigi 
Buffon, to open the scoring in Munich. Photograph: Michael Probst/AP 
Just as in their 3-2 defeat in Berlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/26/germany-england-international-friendly-match-report>
 on Saturday, Joachim Low’s world champions took control after establishing a 
2-0 lead, Toni Kroos striking in the 24th minute andMario Götze doubling the 
advantage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/mar/29/joachim-low-mario-gotze-germany>
 with a header just before half-time.

This time, though, there was no collapse from the Germans. Jonas Hector made 
it 3-0 just before the hour mark and Mesut Özil added a penalty with 15 minutes 
to go, before Stephan El Shaarawy registered a consolation for the visitors 
late on.

Turkey produced a comeback to see off Austria 2-1 in Vienna, Hakan Calhanoglu 
and Arda Turan securing the victory after Zlatko Junuzovic had made it 1-0 to 
the home team, andSwitzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland>
 lost 2-0 to Bosnia and Herzegovina in Zurich thanks to Edin Dzeko and Miralem 
Pjanic goals.

Albania <https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> also won by a 2-0 
margin away against 10-man Luxembourg as Armando Sadiku and Sokol Cikalleshi 
netted, while Iceland came from 2-0 down to triumph 3-2 in Greece.

Two Kostas Fortounis goals had the Greeks looking comfortable, but efforts 
from Arnor Traustason, Sverrir Ingi Ingason and Kolbeinn Sigthorsson took the 
away side to victory.

Elsewhere, there were 2-0 wins for Norway at home against Finland and for 
Bulgaria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/bulgaria> in Macedonia. Latvia 
emerged with a 5-0 victory from their trip to Gibraltar, Serbia beat Estonia 
1-0 away, Georgia drew 1-1 at home with Kazakhstan, and the match between 
Montenegro and Belarus finished 0-0.

Sweden were held to a 1-1 draw by the Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/czechrepublic> in Solna, with Marcus 
Berg’s opener for the hosts being cancelled out by the Watford striker on loan 
at Reading, Matej Vydra.
 