
"I've long harboured a literary crush on Annie Proulx. At her best she's a 
world-class stylist, her prose as richly moist as her sensibility is dry."But 
Melanie McGrath in the Evening Standard 
<http://www.thisislondon.co.uk/lifestyle/book/article-23922129-bird-cloud-is- 
proulxs-property-porn.do> didn't take to Bird Cloud, "a collection of essays 
and recollections, loosely themed around the idea of home, the largest section 
documenting Proulx's attempts over a couple of years to build her dream house" 
in Wyoming: "If property porn happens to be your thing, I'm sure you'll love 
this. Otherwise . . . Nothing you wouldn't learn ad nauseam from the property 
bore at a dinner party." "Property porn has never before risen to such literary 
heights," echoedLewis Jones in the Spectator <http:// 
www.spectator.co.uk/books/6704633/the-call-of-the-wild-.thtml>: "The best thing 
inBird Cloud is the last chapter, which she devotes to the local wildlife: 
porcupines, coyotes, deer, elk, mountain lions, and above all the birds." 
According toDavid Vann in the Sunday Times, "the book is really more of a 
self-portrait of Proulx herself, late in her career, taking stock of her life 
and her place in the world . . . She chases down the past as energetically as 
she chases the neighbours' cows off the land she's trying to rehabilitate."

Most reviewers of Nicole Krauss's Great House noted its darker hue than her 
previous, well-received novel,The History of Love. "Readers who expect the same 
extrovert playfulness . . . are likely to be disappointed," wroteAdrian Turpin 
in the Financial Times <http:// 
www.ft.com/cms/s/2/f3148c68-3564-11e0-aa6c-00144feabdc0.html#axzz1Ec1UB6mC>: 
"Written unmistakably in a minor key,Great House is peopled by a cast of 
self-flagellants whose only connection is, for the most part, their failure to 
connect. It's a credit to her formidable skills that Krauss manages to make her 
emotionally tortured crew engaging. That said, you wouldn't want to go on 
holiday with any of them."Holly Kyte in the Daily Telegraph <http:/ 
/www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/8328880/Great-House-by-Nicole-Krauss-review.html>
 felt the "novel may simply be too grief-stricken for many . . . the solemnity 
of it would be crushing if it were not so beautifully expressed." "The History 
of Love is undoubtedly the more enjoyable novel of the two," thought Ashley 
Sayeau in the New Statesman <http://www.newstatesman.com/books/ 
2011/02/house-germany-characters-love>. "And yet, at a time when market 
pressures demand that new books be both funny and heart-rending, featuring 
characters who suffer and prevail, it is encouraging to come across writing 
that does not try to distract the reader from realising that death marches, the 
Kindertransport and the attentions of the secret police do something to a 
person, and those who love them."

Ivan Fallon in the Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/henrys-demons-by-patrick- 
and-henry-cockburn-2210894.html> saluted that paper's veteran foreign 
correspondent Patrick Cockburn, andHenry's Demons, "a book of extraordinary 
candour and frankness on the most private of his family affairs: the mental 
illness which struck his 20-year-old son nine years ago . . . His co-author is 
Henry Cockburn, an apparently happy, normal arts student in Brighton who one 
night, without any warning, suddenly tried to swim across the freezing estuary 
at Newhaven because, he said, 'voices' had told him to."Nina Lakhani in the 
Independent on Sunday 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/henrys-demons-by- 
patrick-cockburn-and-henry-cockburn-2219826.html> paid tribute to "a 
frightening, gut-wrenching and fantastical story of a young man's voyage into 
madness . . . Henry's own words leap out. His descriptions . . . are so 
extraordinary and fanciful that they could be stories from a fairytale."
Cressida Connolly in the Spectator 
<http://www.spectator.co.uk/books/6704628/a-world-of-talking-trees-.thtml> also 
praised a "remarkable" book, "as important an addition to our understanding . . 
. as Oliver Sacks's extraordinary navigations through the secret realms of our 
brains . . . It would be impossible not to like Henry, who is candid, touching 
and often funny."
 