
David Cronenberg's next film looks set to be an adaptation of the Don DeLillo 
novel Cosmopolis 
<http://www.variety.com/article/VR1118006459.html?categoryid=13&cs=1>, about a 
multibillionaire fund manager who spends a long day trying to get across 
Manhattan in a swanky stretch limo and ends up losing everything.

Variety reports that Cronenberg will write and direct the film, which looks 
set to follow a Josh Hartnett-starring adaptation of DeLillo's early sports 
novel End Zone into the multiplexes. DeLillo, regularly positioned alongside 
John Updike, Philip Roth and Thomas Pynchon in the roll call of the finest 
contemporary US writers, has previously also seen his books Libra and 
Underworld optioned by Hollywood, but neither has made it past the development 
stage.

Cosmopolis <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cosmopolis> is one of DeLillo's 
worst-received novels, attracting highly mixed reviews upon its publication in 
2003. It follows 28-year-old Eric Packer as he winds his way across the Big 
Apple for a haircut, his journey obstructed by various traffic jams caused by a 
presidential visit to the city, a funeral procession for a Sufi rap star and a 
full-fledged riot.

Cronenberg, 66, has recently enjoyed a purple patch after moving into more 
mainstream fare from the body horror films with which he made his name. His 
thriller Eastern Promises was a critical hit in 2007, garnering an Oscar 
nomination for actor Viggo Mortensen, while his 2005 graphic novel adaptationA 
History of Violence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-history-of-violence> 
also gained Oscar nods for William Hurt's supporting actor turn and Josh 
Olson's adapted screenplay.

Variety reports that Cosmopolis is set for a 2010 shoot in Toronto and New 
York. No casting details have yet emerged.
 