
The Turnbull government appears poised to win the Xenophon Senate bloc’s 
support for changes that would allow media moguls such as Rupert Murdoch or 
Kerry Stokes to own television, radio and newspaper assets in the same market.


With media reform set to return to the political agenda when parliament 
resumes next week, the NXT senator Stirling Griff, who has carriage of the 
issue for the Xenophon party, told Guardian Australia he was personally 
supportiveof the government’s proposal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/13/changes-to-australias-media-ownership-laws-to-be-introduced-within-six-months>
, and he believed his colleagues would have a similar disposition.

The government is proposing to dump the media regulations known as the 75% 
reach rule and the two-out-of-three rule.

The reach rule now prevents Nine Entertainment, Seven West Media and the Ten 
Network from owning their regional affiliates. The two-out-of-three rule 
restricts cross-media ownership, preventing moguls from controlling a 
free-to-air TV station, newspapers and radio stations in the same market.

Coalition rejects Labor's call for media ownership review before changing laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/29/coalition-rejects-labors-call-for-media-ownership-review-before-changing-laws>
Labor is supportive of scrapping the reach rule but has thus far resisted 
entreaties from the government to bulldoze the cross-media ownership regime out 
of concern that Australia already has one of the most concentrated media 
markets in the developed world.

Given Labor has dug in resisting changes to the ownership regime, on current 
indications, the government will have to look to the crossbench to steer the 
media package through the parliament.

The Xenophon Senate bloc will therefore be critical to the government securing 
the parliamentary numbers to proceed. Griff said on Monday the NXT was yet to 
take a formal position but he believed the Senate group would back the changes 
on the basis that theAustralian media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/australia-media> landscape was now radically 
altered.

“The real power now is with the web, with social media, with Facebook, and 
Google,” Griff said. “I think we’ve got great diversity now.”

The NXT senator said there was a legitimate question in his mind about whether 
a comprehensive review of the media landscape was in order before a final 
parliamentary vote on the government’s proposal.

The shadow communications minister, Michelle Rowland, in an interview with 
Guardian Australia in August,urged the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/10/coalition-should-review-media-landscape-before-rushing-to-deregulate-labor-says>
 to have an independent review of media ownership in Australia to establish the 
basic facts before moving to scrap regulations that have the specific purpose 
of maintaining diversity in media ownership.

Coalition should review media landscape before rushing to deregulate, Labor 
says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/10/coalition-should-review-media-landscape-before-rushing-to-deregulate-labor-says>
The government has been reluctant to agree to that caveat, saying there have 
been a number of reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/29/coalition-rejects-labors-call-for-media-ownership-review-before-changing-laws>
 of media ownership in recent years.

Media reform will be back squarely on the political agenda when federal 
parliament resumes next week. The Senate’s environment and communications 
legislation committee will present a report into the government’s media 
legislation after a short inquiry.

The Nine Network used its submission to the Senate inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/04/australian-broadcasters-call-for-bigger-cut-in-licensing-fees>
 into the package to argue the government’s overhaul should not proceed unless 
Canberra is prepared to give further ground on licence fees.

Nine’s chief executive, Hugh Marks, warned in the company’s submission: 
“Changing any ownership rules before addressing onerous and unfair licence fees 
has the potential to distort the market and have unintended consequences.”

Nine’s hardline stance is a reversal from the network’s previous support for 
the government’s media reform package.

The government has signalled it is prepared to give ground on this point, and 
would likely win a parliamentary majority for a further cut in licence fees, 
pleasing both Nine, and the Seven Network boss, Kerry Stokes.

Labor would likely back that proposal.
 