
John Boyega’s eye teeth are distinctive, you know? His sharp canines make him 
look like a perpetual schoolboy: cute, a little mischievous, very smart. They 
gleam when he smiles – almost always slowly. It is a smile that can convey 
danger and cunning.

Like many, I first saw the 23-year-old actor in Joe Cornish’s directorial 
debut,Attack The Block 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/may/12/attack-the-block-review>, with 
aliens crash-landing on an inner-city council estate, and there wasn’t a whole 
lot to grin about. But Boyega’s performance was memorable – an inner-city boy 
let down by the system, revelling in the chance finally to be a hero.

It’s worth noting that this isn’t Boyega’s personal narrative. In April, the 
Telegraph ran a profile 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/celebritynews/11561512/Star-Wars-The-boy-from-Peckham-who-stormed-Hollywood.html?utm_source=dlvr.it&utm_medium=twitter>
 of a boy done good, the son of a Nigerian preacher who grew up on the mean 
streets of Peckham. Boyega responded with a tweet that simply said,“Inaccurate. 
Stereotypical. NOT my story” 
<http://www.digitalspy.co.uk/showbiz/news/a644159/john-boyega-slams-inaccurate-stereotypical-telegraph-profile-piece.html#~polsqCb7WvnxsQ>
.

He seems savvy, aware of his place in the industry and trying to make it work 
on his own terms. But he’s not dour: this is a guy whojoked about his dad 
making him do the dishes 
<https://twitter.com/JohnBoyega/status/593502146017918977> when he wouldn’t 
give away spoilers to his new film,Star Wars: The Force Awakens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/star-wars-episode-vii>. See? Cute.

Boyega, now immortalised on a Royal Mail stamp, 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/34228857/new-star-wars-stamps-released-ahead-of-the-force-awakens>
 is going to be everywhere soon. The new Star Wars film is out this December 
and, as Finn, a black stormtrooper, Boyega has already put a few noses out of 
joint. His reply? An Instagram post ending with:“To whom it may concern… Get 
used to it. :)” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/films/news/john-boyega-tells-star-wars-fans-to-get-used-to-black-stormtrooper-after-negative-comments-9895316.html>
 Couldn’t have put it better myself, mate.
 