
Hundreds of scientists from CSIRO 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/csiro> and other government 
agencies will begin walking off the job next Thursday as part of public 
sector-wide industrial action.

Work bans at the national research agency started in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/apr/16/csiro-scientists-to-take-industrial-action-after-negotiations-stall>
 after months of stalled negotiations over a new industrial agreement.

CSIRO is one of 16 public sector organisations and departments locked in a 
dispute over pay and conditions under the Abbott government’s public-sector 
bargaining policy, which prohibits wage increases unless they are traded for 
conditions or productivity increases.

Scientists and researchers from the Bureau of Meteorology, the Department of 
Environment, the Australian Antarctic Division, Geoscience Australia and the 
Australian Bureau of Statistics will also down tools.

Sam Popovski, the secretary of the CSIRO Staff Association, said the rolling, 
four-hour stoppages, starting on Thursday in Sydney, Darwin and Perth, 
represented “the biggest campaign of industrial action in CSIRO’s history”.

“CSIRO management’s proposed cuts include slashing redundancy by up to eight 
weeks of paid entitlements, cutting income maintenance and retention 
provisions, an increase in total working hours, shortening or removing the 
annual shut down, cancelling an additional day of Christmas leave and 
increasing the difficulty of salary progression,” he said.

Nearly $115m was cut from the agency’s funding in the 2014 federal budget, and 
job losses in the past two years have amounted to one-fifth of its staff –with 
scientists and researchers bearing the brunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/nov/24/csiro-staff-association-says-no-area-of-research-has-been-saved-from-job-cuts?CMP=soc_567>
.


New CSIRO boss Larry Marshall says scientists must think like entrepreneurs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2014/dec/05/new-csiro-boss-larry-marshall-says-scientists-must-think-like-entrepreneurs>
There are fears up to another 200 jobs could be lost 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-06-03/up-to-200-jobs-could-be-lost-as-nicta-and-csiro-merge/6519828>
 between CSIRO and National ICT Australia (Nicta) if the two organisations 
merge, as is forecast. Nicta, which employs 617 people, was defunded in last 
year’s federal budget and will run out of money in June 2016.

A spokesman for CSIRO said the agency had anticipated the industrial action 
and put “contingencies in place to ensure the vital work done by CSIRO 
continues with minimum disruption and also that the health and safety of staff 
is not compromised at any time”.

“CSIRO will continue to negotiate with staff and bargaining representatives to 
deliver the best possible pay and conditions in the current environment and we 
will work hard to put the best possible offer on the table,” he said.
 