
In March, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced the 
publication ofnew prescribing guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/17/cdc-guidelines-against-prescribing-opioids>
 aimed at reducing the use of opioid medications to treat chronic pain, an 
attempt to curb what has become a national epidemic of overdose deaths.

But history shows that merely limiting supply is not likely to solve the 
problem – the connection between chronic pain treatment and heroin and other 
opioid addiction is far less direct than Americans have been led to believe. 
And focusing on this rather than expanding effective addiction care will do 
little to stem the epidemic here. TheObama administration is announcing further 
measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/29/obama-administration-opioid-heroin-funds>
 on Tuesday to increase treatment access, but they don’t go far enough.

Here's what it's like to lose your child to heroin addiction | Lisa Cote Johns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/22/heroin-addiction-drugs-death>
The statistics look stark: the rise in opioid prescribing was directly 
paralleled <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/pds.1276/abstract> by a 
rise in overdose deaths, and misusers of prescription pain medications are40 
times <http://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns/heroin/infographic.html> more likely to 
become addicted to heroin than those who don’t. But the primary source of 
prescription opioids for new misusers of these drugs is not doctors – it’s not 
necessarily those with prescriptions who are getting addicted.

The National Survey on Drug Use and Health consistently shows 
<http://www.samhsa.gov/data/sites/default/files/NSDUH-DetTabs2014/NSDUH-DetTabs2014.htm#tab6-47b>
 that 75% or more of those who start taking opioid medications for non-medical 
reasons obtain them not from their own prescription, but from friends, family 
members, dealers or other illicit sources.

Moreover, studies have found that the majority of people who misuse 
prescription opioids take other recreational drugs, too: for example, onestudy 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2981660/> of over 1,000 people 
tracked from grade school into their 20s found that 75% of regular prescription 
opioid misusers had also taken cocaine, and two-thirds had taken psychedelics; 
earlierresearch <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17974941> on adults with 
Oxycontin addictions found similarly high proportions of other illegal drug 
use. The same research also showed that nearly 80% had previously been in 
addiction treatment. This suggests immersion in a drug-using subculture, not a 
life of doctor’s appointments and pain management.

In addition, looked at from the chronic pain treatment perspective, studies 
find thatvery low 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD006605.pub2/abstract> 
percentages of people who do not have previous drug abuse histories become 
addicted during pain care. In a largestudy 
<http://archinte.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?articleid=1918924> of overdose 
victims, only 13% had a chronic pain diagnosis.

International comparisons can also shed light on the limits of blaming pain 
prescriptions for opioid misuse. Astudy 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25190034> published in 2014 in the 
International Journal of Drug Policy compared the US to the UK and found that 
both countries saw opioid prescribing roughly quadruple in the last two 
decades. But in Great Britain, death rates stayed stable or fell when 
prescribing rose most sharply. In the US, meanwhile, opioid overdoes deaths 
increased 200% between 2000 and 2014 alone, and admissions to treatment for 
opioid problems skyrocketed.

So why didn’t increased prescribing have such terrible effects on addiction 
and overdose in the UK? The authors note several possible reasons. For one, 
according to author Cathy Stannard, the British National Health Service has 
much tighter oversight on doctors. This minimizes “doctor shopping” and 
severely outlying patterns of excess prescribing. Secondly, this system is not 
commercialized: there is no consumer advertising of prescription drugs and 
fewer demands on doctors to prioritize “customer satisfaction.”


The strange history of opiates in America: from morphine for kids to heroin 
for soldiers | James Nevius
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/15/long-opiate-use-history-america-latest-epidemic>
Perhaps most importantly, any Brits who do become addicted have cheap and easy 
access to maintenance treatment with methadone or buprenorphine, the most 
effective therapy. Here, 80% of people whoneed treatment 
<https://www.drugabuse.gov/publications/drugfacts/treatment-approaches-drug-addiction>
 don’t get it – and if they do, they are often limited to abstinence-only 
treatments.

This matters a great deal: research 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/add.13193/full> conducted on all 
patients treated for opioid addiction in England found that those who took 
medications indefinitely had half the death rate of those who received 
abstinence-based rehab.

Given the utter failure of prior efforts to stop illegal drug addiction by 
restricting supply – and the clear evidence that cracking down on pill mills 
has fueled heroin addiction – America’s focus on changing prescribing patterns 
without immediately expanding access to treatment is worrying.

Also worrying is a failure to reckon with why so many people are turning to 
potentially deadly drugs. While the rise in opioid prescribing can be 
attributed to a push for more compassionate pain care by both pharma and 
genuine patient advocates, an almostequally steep rise 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-health-rxdrugs-benzodiazepine-overdos-idUSKCN0VZ2TU>
 has been seen simultaneously in prescriptions of benzodiazepine anti-anxiety 
medications without a similar PR push. Worse, benzodiazepines make opioids far 
more fatal – a New Yorkstudy 
<http://www.nyc.gov/html/doh/downloads/pdf/epi/databrief50.pdf> found that 94% 
of overdose deaths included more than one substance and 6o% included a 
benzodiazepine.

The Obama administration, to its credit, has increased funding for maintenance 
treatment 
<http://wvpublic.org/post/obama-administration-doubles-down-efforts-reduce-opioid-abuse>
. And the president is announcing Tuesday that federal insurance programs will 
be required to expand access to buprenorphine and that the limit on the number 
of patients that a doctor can treat with the drug is rising from 100 to 200.

But that’s not enough – the administration hasn’t even proposed eliminating 
the mass of bureaucratic constraints that restrict methadone prescribing to 
isolated, specialty clinics. IT has made no provisions to help pain patients, 
many of whom already have horror stories of being suddenly denied drugs that 
are working for them because their doctors, fearing the new scrutiny, have 
stopped prescribing.

Up to 8 million 
<http://directorsblog.nih.gov/2015/01/27/managing-chronic-pain-opioids-are-often-not-the-answer/>
 chronic pain patients are estimated to currently receive opioid prescriptions; 
the vast majority of them do not have addiction problems. Certainly better 
oversight to ensure appropriate prescribing is needed to prevent future 
addictions and to target opioid treatment to those who will benefit. But today, 
simply reducing the legal supply will only increase the illegal market.

In order to really address the opioid problem, we need to rapidly expand 
evidence-based maintenance treatment – and figure out why so many Americans are 
turning to the most dangerous drugs to self-medicate.
 