
It's monday 28 January, Liberia v Nigeria, African Cup of Nations, in Mopti - 
'the Venice of Mali' says the sign on the town boundary. One minute to go, 
Nigeria lead 1-0 and their left-back goes down injured. Finidi George kicks the 
ball out, and when play resumes the Liberia captain traps the throw-in on the 
halfway line, turns and knocks it half the length of the pitch to the Nigeria 
goalkeeper. Very sporting.

That was the last touch in international football, the last touch in his last 
big game, for George Weah, world footballer of the year 1995 and the best and 
most popular player from the continent of Africa since Eusebio, the Mozambican 
who was pinched by Portugal.

Weah has given everything in the 16 years since he first appeared for the Lone 
Star, as Liberia's national team are known. Unfortunately for them, and for 
football in Africa, he has no more to give. His club career will peter out over 
the remainder of a two-year contract at Al-Jazira in the United Arab Emirates, 
then he will go to live in the US. African football has lost a man it 
desperately needs.

Ten minutes after the match, one of the kit men emerged from Liberia's 
dressing room in a T-shirt emblazoned with a dollar note and the logo 'I want 
to be a millionaire'. Appropriate enough for Weah, who followed him moments 
later to disappear in a scrum of West African football reporters. He is already 
a millionaire and he does not want to risk losing his money back home in 
Liberia.

While his team were losing a match, news came over the wires that government 
troops had regained control of a rebel-held town back in Liberia.

Who can blame him for preferring New York to the danger of Monrovia when it 
comes to enjoying the benefits of a fortune amassed from Monaco, PSG, Milan and 
others? 'I'll be a businessman in future,' said Weah, 35. 'I'll enjoy it. I'm 
not going back to Liberia again, not until there's a change of government. The 
people live in fear.'

Because of the mutual dislike between Weah, Liberia's man of the people, and 
Charles Taylor, the country's dictatorial leader who envies Weah his 
popularity, Weah refused even to train back home ahead of this tournament. As 
player-coach he insisted on a two-week training camp in Ivory Coast and, 
despite the Liberian FA's president being close to Taylor, he got his way. As 
he usually does. Most Liberians want him for president, but he said: 'I'm not a 
politician.'

The politicians - whom Weah accuses of burning down his property in Monrovia - 
responded to Monday's elimination by disbanding the national side, an empty 
gesture that they will rescind, probably without any announcement, before the 
next big tournament.

It was a sad end for a great player. He said farewell more fittingly 24 hours 
later, with a raucous, emotional party at the team hotel, where he enjoyed a 
drink before taking the microphone to display his singing skills. He sang a 
couple of numbers backed by the hotel band, then joined his friend and mentor 
Taribo West, the Nigeria defender who bankrolls his own church in Milan, to 
sing No Jesus, No Life to the tune of Bob Marley's No Woman, No Cry . Everyone 
agreed: Weah was the greatest African player of his generation. And, as Michel 
Platini said on the eve of the tournament, there is nobody to replace him. 
Maybe the continent's next world star will be Mohammed Kallon, from Sierra 
Leone, who is scoring freely for Inter. 'He is my son,' says Weah. 'I always 
give him fatherly advice. He is a great talent for Africa.'

Weah might have finished before a far bigger audience than the 8,000 in Mopti 
but for one result late last year. If Liberia had beaten Ghana in Monrovia they 
would have qualified for the World Cup finals instead of Nigeria. It would have 
been an astonishing feat, perhaps the best in World Cup history, for a squad 
comprising players drawn from nine countries, including India, on four 
continents. Three of them here do not even have a club.

'If I'm honest, we didn't deserve to qualify,' said Weah. 'But the Lone Star 
has made great progress. I have had a great career, I've no regrets. I've 
enjoyed every minute and I can still clearly remember my first international 
against Sierra Leone in 1986.

'I have achieved a great deal, yes. Perhaps the government will recognise 
that. Maybe they would like to retire the 14 shirt [Weah's number] in 
remembrance of my achievements for the national team and for the continent of 
Africa.' Maybe they will, maybe they won't. Maybe they'll retire all 22.

While Weah is a great loss, there are signs that players from his generation 
are lifting the level of the game, both on and off the pitch, in Africa. Among 
the other coaches and assistants here in Mali are Rabah Madjer, the Algerian 
who scored both goals for Porto in their famous victory over Bayern Munich in 
the 1987 European Cup final; Ghana's Abedi Pele, who twice played in the 
European Cup final for Olympique Marseille; Senegal's Jules Bocand√©, a star for 
Monaco in the late 1980s; and Stephen Keshi, the Nigerian who had eight years 
at Anderlecht.

West and Sunday Oliseh of Nigeria, as well as Senegal's Khalilou Fadiga, Keshi 
himself, and Platini have all spoken here of the need for the big names to 
return. 'They can offer so much,' said West. 'The experience of playing in 
Europe, and the experience of being African. Their contribution to African 
football after they finish playing can only lift the game higher.'

Much of what West said was related directly to Nigeria's coaching team of 
Keshi and his boss, Shuaibu Amodu, who will become the first black African to 
coach a team at the World Cup finals.

Nigeria are one of four or five teams good enough to win the Nations Cup, a 
tournament that started slowly and is getting better. It needs to. The first 
round of group games lacked not only goals, but goalmouth excitement. Teams 
have been afraid of losing; the standard of attacking play has been poor, and 
the pitches even worse. The tackling, particularly by Nigeria, has been 
awesome. Left-back Udeze Ifeanyi, who has displaced Chelsea's Celestine 
Babayaro, and central defender Isaac Okoronkwo, who plays in Ukraine, have been 
outstanding.

There will surely be better play in the knockout stages because, despite 
Africa having more than 50 teams, there are not 16 good enough to produce 
top-quality football from the off.

The most welcome surprise has been Mali, the hosts having followed up some 
impressive junior achievements in a very young senior team. They brought more 
than 250,000 celebrating fans on to Bamako's streets after beating Algeria to 
reach the quarter-finals.

Weah said: 'Don't be misled about the World Cup by what you have seen here. 
The African teams will do well there.

'The standard of football on this continent has improved a whole lot. The 
future is full of hope.'

African Cup of Nations

Quarter-finals:  1 Today  4pm,  Nigeria v Ghana  Bamako, Eurosport  2 Today  
7pm, South Africa v Mali  Kayes, Eurosport  3 Tomorrow  4pm,  Cameroon v Egypt  
Sikasso, Eurosport 4 Tomorrow  7pm,  Senegal v DR Congo Bamako, Eurosport 

Semi-finals:  Thursday  4pm,  Winner 1 v Winner 4 Bamako, Eurosport  Thursday  
7pm, Winner 2 v Winner 3  Bamako, Eurosport 

Third-place play-off:  Saturday  4pm, Mopti, Eurosport 

Final:  Sunday  4pm, Bamako, Eurosport/BBC2 

Odds:  13-8  Cameroon, 5-2  Nigeria, 4  Senegal, 6  South Africa , 10  Egypt, 
14 Mali, 20  Ghana, 25  DR Congo
 