
Australia has consistently led the world with its funding of fossil fuel 
research and consistently lagged other nations when it comes to developing 
renewable energy, according analysis by the Australia Institute.

The only time in Australia’s recent history that research and development for 
renewables outstripped R&D for fossil fuels was when the Australian Renewable 
Energy Agency (Arena) began making grants to renewables in 2013, the study of 
InternationalEnergy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Agency 
figures found.

The federal parliament is considering the “omnibus” bill, which includes all 
the savings both Labor and theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> costed into their 
election promises. It includes a $1bn cut to Arena over the forward estimates 
($1.3bn to 2018), which will remove its ability to make grants, essentially 
abolishing the agency.

Uncertainty about Arena halts renewable energy projects
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/biogas-projects-suspended-amid-uncertainty-about-renewable-energy-grants>
If the cuts go through, grants made by Arena last week which will result in 
Australia tripling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/08/large-scale-solar-to-triple-after-what-could-be-arenas-final-renewable-energy-grants>
 the electricity it can get from large solar farms, will the be the last it 
will make.

Labor has indicated it might consider blocking the bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/labor-says-coalition-has-lied-and-included-additional-cuts-in-omnibus-savings-bill>
 in the Senate.

“Australia has a long history of prioritising fossil fuels over renewables in 
R&D funding. Arena turned this around, briefly making Australia a world leader 
in renewables,” said Ben Oquist, the executive director of the Australia 
Institute.

Among members of the International Energy Agency, Australia has been in the 
top three nations for its funding of fossil fuel R&D most years since 1979, 
when measured as a percentage of the country’s GDP. And in absolute dollar 
terms, Australia has been in the top three six times.

But when it comes to funding for renewable energy R&D, Australia was only once 
in the top three in 2013-14 – the year Arena first started making grants.

“Australia’s renewable energy R&D performance has made the podium just once 
since 1979 – and that was thanks to Arena, which the government now wants to 
abolish,” Oquist said.

“Abolishing Arena’s grant funding will send Australia back towards the bottom 
of the international pack in terms renewable energy funding.”

Energy companies call on MPs to save Australia's renewables agency funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/08/energy-companies-call-on-mps-to-save-australias-renewables-agency-funding>
In 2014-15, Australia’s ranking dropped back down. Report author, Tom Swann 
from the Australia Institute, wrote that although the Senate blocked the 
Coalition’s attempt to abolish Arena, the government didn’t update its 
reporting to IEA accordingly.

The comparisons were made with the 28 other members of the International 
Energy Agency, which are all net oil importers and have programs to reduce 
demand for oil. They include the New Zealand, US, Canada, the UK, Japan, Korea, 
and 21 European countries.

“It appears that when reporting to the IEA the government assumed Arena would 
be abolished, which the Senate refused,” Swann wrote.

“Current government policy risks sending Australia back to an energy research 
policy from the 1980s and 90s. This is not what the public wants and it is not 
in the nation’s interest. The Senate should oppose the government’s proposal to 
cut renewable energy funding,” the report concluded.

The report follows several other open letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/08/energy-companies-call-on-mps-to-save-australias-renewables-agency-funding>
 from researchers and energy companies, calling for the cuts to Arena to be 
blocked.
 