
Theatregoers will occupy a space once packed with tea chests, in the hold of 
one of the most famous ships ever built, theCutty Sark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/cutty-sark>, whose tall masts towering 
above the drydock at Greenwich are a landmark on the London skyline.

The lower hold of the ship will continue to be displayed by day as part of the 
historic interior of the visitor attraction, but by night it will become an 
85-seat theatre intended to showcase cabaret, music, lectures, small-scale 
drama and local performers.

The space <http://www.rmg.co.uk/cuttysark/studio-theatre?show=nav.4690> will 
launch next week with an eclectic opening season of standup comedy including 
nights by Alan Davies – trying out his new one man show, Little Victories – 
Richard Herring and Ross Noble, and suitably salty one-man performances 
including Sir Robin Knox-Johnston, who in 1968 became the first man to sail 
non-stop and single-handed around the world – avoyage he repeated in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/may/05/sailing.world>, becoming the oldest 
man to achieve it. Other stars of the first season include Griff Rhys Jones, 
appropriately talking about his love for old wooden boats, and an evening by 
Matthew Stirling, who claims to be the UK's only "professional 
magician/hypnotist-mentalist & professional stuntman", a boast unlikely to be 
challenged. There will also be a showcase evening of harp music from the nearby
Trinity Laban conservatoire <http://www.trinitylaban.ac.uk/>, directed by the 
internationally renowned Italian harpist Gabriella Dall'Olio.
 The renovated Cutty Sark looms out of the fog beside the Thames at Greenwich. 
Photograph: Luke MacGregor/Reuters 
The lower hold of the ship was originally designed to be crammed with tea, 
while the clipper raced the competition back from China to get the precious 
first harvest of the year back to English merchants. The ship is regarded as 
the last great flowering of the age of sail, built at a cost of £16,000 in 
Scotland in 1869, with a curvy hull of greyhound sleekness which gave her a top 
speed of over 17 knots. Within a decade the era of the beautiful tea clippers 
was over, and repeatedly adapted, rerigged and renamed, the Cutty Sark carried 
a variety of cargoes including wool around Europe, and set a record time of 73 
days from Sydney to London in 1885. The ship was floated into the dock at 
Greenwich in 1954, and has remained there ever since. Major restoration work 
seven years ago was delayed for years by a fire on board which eventually 
doubled the cost to £50m, but the ship reopened to the public in 2012, and is 
now part of theNational Maritime Museum 
<http://www.rmg.co.uk/national-maritime-museum> group.
 