
The Daily Record <https://www.theguardian.com/media/daily-record> published an 
interesting article today in which a Rangers footballer, Sébastien Faure, “hit 
out at the stricken club and its fans.”

It carried many direct quotes from the French player in which he aired his 
grievances about being omitted from the team, criticised his teammates’ diet, 
objected to fans booing during matches and praised the outgoing managerAlly 
McCoist <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ally-mccoist>.

So well done to reporter Steve Goodman for obtaining (especially by current 
British footballing standards) a revealing interview. But... and it’s a big 
but...

It was not the scoop it purported to be because Goodman’s piece had been 
lifted entirely from a French football website, Hat-Trick. All the quotes were 
contained in a Q&A interview with Faure by the site’s owner, the enterprising 
French journalist Romain Molina.

There was no attribution to him or his website. Indeed, it would appear to any 
reader as if Faure had spoken to Goodman. Now an angry Molina is planning to 
sue the Record.

After seeing the Record piece, he tweeted to the paper: “Can you explain me 
why my interview with Sébastien Faure became your interview?”

He says he received no reply from the paper despite contacting them several 
times. But his tweet did elicit a series of dismissive and sarcastic responses 
from the Record’s senior football writer, Keith Jackson.

He referred to Molina as a “drama queen” and thought his complaint “a pathetic 
overreaction”. He followed up by tweeting that if Molina “has his knickers in a 
twist then he should take it up with Steve Goodman.”

Jackson then pointed out that Goodman is a freelance, based in England, who 
“regularly translates articles in foreign papers and submits to UK papers.”

But that hardly excuses him failing to credit Molina and revealing the 
provenance of the interview.You can read the original, in French, here 
<http://www.hat-trick.fr/sebastien-faure-lame-des-rangers-cest-jimmy-bell/> to 
compare the two versions.

Molina also manages a blog about British football for L’Equipe (
www.kickoff.blogs.lequipe.fr <http://www.kickoff.blogs.lequipe.fr/>) and says 
the Faure incident is not an isolated example of the Record “borrowing” his 
pieces. He cites his interview of Tony Andreu last year (see Record piecehere 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/hamiltons-french-midfielder-tony-andreu-3604644>
 and Molina’s piece, two days’ earlier,here 
<http://www.hat-trick.fr/joueurs/anthony-andreu/>).

By the way, according to Google Translate, the French for plagiarism is 
plagiat. It’s a good resource for translating single words but, after reading 
Goodman’s re-working of Molina’s original, it is possible he may also have used 
it.

Molina agrees: “The worst thing of this story is the translation”, he tweeted. 
“Don’t tell me you used Google Translate mister Steve Goodman... It’s crazy.”

It’s a sad episode that, incidentally, reminded me of this blogpost in August 
2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2013/aug/19/daily-record-rangers>
about Jackson’s reporting of Rangers.
 