
From a perch about 300 yards to the east of the Texas school book depository 
where Lee Harvey Oswald took his fateful aim in 1963, another American sniper 
this week fired shots on to the streets ofDallas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dallas> that have echoed around the United 
States.

The assassination of five police officers by a black army veteran who told 
authorities he “wanted to kill white people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/09/obama-visit-dallas-shootings-fresh-protests-police-violence>
” threatens to snap tense relations between law enforcement and African 
Americans that have now been at breaking point for almost two years.


“Dallas had a tragedy when President Kennedy was shot here in the 60s,” Texas 
attorney general Ken Paxton said this week. “And this is as close to that 
feeling, I think, as the city’s had in decades.”


Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> will abandon a 
European tour and travel to Dallas early next week before hosting a crisis 
summit at the White House between senior police officials and community group 
leaders. Aides described the talks as a new attempt to “find common ground” and 
tackle “the persistent racial disparities in our criminal justice system”.

Why we can't stop listening to the families of police shooting victims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/09/family-philando-castile-alton-sterling-police-victims-girlfriend>
The president will return to lead a nation grappling with a racial divide 
wider than it has been for at least a generation, and struggling with the 
frequent boiling over of unrest that has been simmering since the fatal police 
shooting of anunarmed black 18-year-old in Ferguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/12/ferguson-missouri-shooting-michael-brown-civil-rights-police-brutality>
, Missouri, in the summer of 2014.

After a week earlier marked by two more controversial killings of African 
Americans by police inLouisiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/alton-sterling-gun-baton-rouge-new-video>
 andMinnesota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/facebook-live-video-appears-to-show-black-man-shot-police-minnesota-philando-castile>
, demonstrations against the use of excessive force raged again this weekend in 
cities such as Baltimore, Atlanta and Philadelphia. Thousands of protesters 
marched and blocked traffic on highways to their self-proclaimed new civil 
rights movement.


The five officer deaths in Dallas were the first of law enforcement personnel 
around such demonstrations. The Dallas police chief, David Brown, said the 
25-year-old gunman, Micah Xavier Johnson, said he was “upset about the recent 
police shootings”, “upset about Black Lives Matter”, and “upset at white 
people”.


“The suspect stated he wanted to kill white people, especially white 
officers,” Brown said. Detectives later uncovered “bomb-making materials, 
ballistic vests, rifles, ammunition, and a personal journal of combat tactics” 
at Johnson’s home,police said in a statement 
<https://dpdbeat.com/2016/07/08/investigative-update-regarding-the-deadly-attack-on-police-officers/>
.


Rightwing conservatives who have raged against his leadership for more than 
seven years suggested Obama had blood on his hands for delivering remarks just 
hours before the Dallas shootings in which he urged white Americans to take 
seriously the Black Lives Matter protest movement’s grievances over racism in 
the criminal justice system.


“Shame on politicians and pundits giving credence to thugs rioting against 
police officers and the rule of law in the name of ‘peaceful protests’,” said 
Sarah Palin, the 2008 Republican nominee for vice president. “It is a farce. 
#BlackLivesMatter is a farce.”

Donald Trump, the presumptive Republican nominee, declared that “racial 
tensions have gotten worse, not better” under Obama’s leadership. “We must 
restore law and order,” he said.

Obama had in fact struck a careful balance, stressing that despite legitimate 
concerns, American should have an “extraordinary appreciation and respect for 
the vast majority of police officers”, describing their job as dangerous and 
difficult. He spoke again on Friday after the Dallas shootings to call the 
attack “vicious, calculated and despicable”.


The reaction, however, reflected a consistently sharp divide on the subject 
among Americans. A Pew poll last month found 84% of black Americans believe 
police treat blacks unfairly, compared with 50% of white respondents. While 
more than two-thirds of African Americans support the Black Lives Matter 
movement, a minority of white people – and just 20% of Republicans – feel the 
same way.


Black Lives Matter activists face familiar anxiety in aftermath of Dallas 
shooting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/09/black-lives-matter-dallas-protest-shooting>
The president’s comments were prompted by fresh anger over the fatal shootings 
by police of Alton Sterling inLouisiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/protests-in-baton-rouge-after-louisiana-police-shoot-alton-sterling-dead>
 and Philando Castile inMinnesota 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/remembering-philando-castile-everything-mr-phil-did-was-for-the-kids>
. Sterling was shot while being pinned down by officers during a struggle in 
which a pistol remained in his pocket. Castile was shot during a traffic stop 
over a broken headlight while reaching for his ID, and after warning the 
officer that he was legally carrying a firearm, his girlfriend said.


Both deaths were partially captured on mobile phone video footage that was 
widely shared online, amplifying public concern, drawing condemnation from 
political leaders and cultural figures such as the singer Beyoncé Knowles, and 
prompting new demonstrations across the country.

It was during one such march through downtown Dallas that Johnson, who was a 
member of the New Black Panther party, opened fire from a college parking 
garage. Using an AR-15 rifle, heshot dead the officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/dallas-protest-shooting-police-victims-named-brent-thompson-patrick-zamarripa>
 Lorne Ahrens, Michael Krol, Michael Smith, Brent Thompson and Patrick 
Zamarripa, and wounded seven other people.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fdallas-shooting-police-race-protests-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b40524ce675f935f7ebd1f45a9d49430f008289%2F0_249_2784_1670%2F2784.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dallas%20shooting%3A%20tensions%20over%20race%2C%20guns%20and%20policing%20threaten%20to%20boil%20over&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fdallas-shooting-police-race-protests-obama%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dallas%20shooting%3A%20tensions%20over%20race%2C%20guns%20and%20policing%20threaten%20to%20boil%20over&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fjul%2F09%2Fdallas-shooting-police-race-protests-obama%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b40524ce675f935f7ebd1f45a9d49430f008289%2F0_249_2784_1670%2F2784.jpg>
 Three officers speak with a man in Dallas. Photograph: Tom Dart 
After battles in which 12 officers are understood to have fired back at 
Johnson, he was cornered by officers in the garage and delivered the remarks 
about his motivations. When negotiations failed, officerscontroversially 
deployed a bomb-carrying robot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/08/police-bomb-robot-explosive-killed-suspect-dallas>
 to detonate an explosive device, which killed the 25-year-old.

Law enforcement officials said Johnson was now believed to have acted alone. 
Three other suspects had been held in custody, but authorities in Dallas had 
provided mixed signals about their importance to the investigation, and their 
status remained unclear.


Use of police robot to kill Dallas shooting suspect believed to be first in US 
history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/08/police-bomb-robot-explosive-killed-suspect-dallas>
The Pentagon confirmed that Johnson was in the army reserve until last year 
and had served in Afghanistan from November 2013 to July 2014. A military 
attorney told reporters that Johnson was accused of sexual harassment by a 
female soldier, who tried to obtain a protective order against him and 
suggested that he needed “mental help”.


Those who lived near him and his family in the blue-collar Dallas suburb of 
Mesquite expressed astonishment at his involvement. “I would have never 
believed that someone from this neighbourhood could have had feelings like 
that,” said Robert Olsovsky, 55, who lives close to the large detached house 
where Johnson resided with his mother.


This weekend, the city remained in a shocked state of mourning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/dallas-police-shooting-video-vigil>
. Candles were laid out on concrete posts in front of the Dallas police 
headquarters and Stars and Stripes stickers sat in a box waiting to be taken. 
An inscription scribbled on the box in cursive read: “7-7-2016, Remember our 
fallen heroes; honor our DPD heroes still among us”.


Many residents of this northern Texan metropolis said they were determined not 
to let Johnson’s shootings define their home.

“For years people around the world saw our city through the lens of the 
Kennedy assassination,” said Mayor Mike Rawlings. “Those of us who love this 
city always knew there was so much more to Dallas than what happened on that 
day in 1963.

“All I know is that this must stop, this divisiveness between our police and 
our citizens,” said Brown, the police chief.


The streets surrounding El Centro community college, from which Johnson 
mounted his attack, remained cordoned off, with police stationed along nearby 
roads. FBI agents wearing blue shoe covers worked the area as investigators 
tried to judge bullet trajectories.


Yellow evidence-markers dotted the ground in Rosa Parks plaza in front of a 
statue of the civil rights activist and a fountain with words from Martin 
Luther King’s I Have a Dream speech etched into a stone behind the flowing 
water: “Until justice rolls down / like waters / and righteousness / like a 
mighty stream.”

 