
Three days in America. Three mobile phone videos depicting violent deaths. 

The killings of Alton Sterling and Philando Castile, and then a bloody 
shootout in Dallas, join a growing canon of brutal imagery either instantly 
broadcast or rapidly distributed onFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook>.

It’s a long way from exploding watermelons 
<https://www.facebook.com/BuzzFeed/videos/10154535206385329/> and Chewbacca 
masks <https://www.facebook.com/candaceSpayne/videos/10209653193067040/>, the 
videos that brought Facebook’s nascent live video streaming service into the 
popular consciousness when it launched in April. “When you interact live, you 
feel connected in a more personal way,” Facebook founderMark Zuckerberg 
announced at the time 
<https://www.facebook.com/photo.php?fbid=10102764094429401&set=a.612287952871.2204760.4&type=3&theater>
. “This is a big shift in how we communicate, and it’s going to create new 
opportunities for people to come together.”

The Guardian view on shootings in the US: time to tackle problems shamefully 
ignored | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/08/the-guardian-view-on-shootings-in-the-us-time-to-tackle-problems-shamefully-ignored>
His optimism gave no hint of the distress and outrage that would follow as the 
service inevitably grew to reflect the death, as well as the lives, of some of 
its users. But social media companies encouraging users to broadcast live video 
are now facing a new, complex and particularly fraught set of ethical questions.

By late Wednesday night, the video filmed by Diamond Reynolds of her 
boyfriend’s murder had been viewed 2.5m times when it briefly disappeared. 
After an outcry that the video – just the latest evidence of African Americans 
being killed by police officers in the US – had been removed, Facebook 
reinstated it.

A spokesperson told the Guardian that it was “temporarily down due to a 
technical glitch for about an hour” and that Facebook “restored the video as 
soon as [they] were able to identify the mistake”. In addition, it put a 
warning on the video and marked it as “disturbing”, which means that rather 
than playing automatically, a user must click on the video in order to agree to 
watch it.

Likewise Michael Bautista’s Facebook Live video of the Dallas shootout 
<https://www.facebook.com/michaelbautista86/videos/vb.100003576517454/899698650159344/?type=2&theater>
, in which five police officers were fatally shot, had been viewed 5.1m times 
at the time of writing but with a warning about graphic imagery that had been 
added overnight.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ffacebook-live-video-violence-dallas-castile-sterling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b998df9d8528a57ba9b06fc4abdb4a2268b26d%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dallas%2C%20Alton%20Sterling%2C%20Philando%20Castile%3A%20should%20Facebook%20show%20violent%20videos%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ffacebook-live-video-violence-dallas-castile-sterling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dallas%2C%20Alton%20Sterling%2C%20Philando%20Castile%3A%20should%20Facebook%20show%20violent%20videos%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ffacebook-live-video-violence-dallas-castile-sterling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b998df9d8528a57ba9b06fc4abdb4a2268b26d%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Diamond Reynolds, girlfriend of Philando Castile, broadcast the aftermath of 
his shooting on Facebook. Photograph: Adam Bettcher/Reuters 
Facebook’s community standards appear to recognize the political significance 
of these types of videos. “In many instances, when people share this type of 
content, they are condemning it or raising awareness about it,” it reads.

Zuckerberg posted his own statement about Castile’s shooting, saying: “The 
images we’ve seen this week are graphic and heartbreaking, and they shine a 
light on the fear that millions of members of our community live with every 
day. While I hope we never have to see another video like Diamond’s, it reminds 
us why coming together to build a more open and connected world is so important 
– and how far we still have to go.”

But these videos call up old debates about the ethics of representation. Does 
increasing the visibility of violence lead to justice for the victims of 
violence? Does the video itself constitute a form of redress? Does consuming 
such imagery sensitize and politicize viewers? Or does it exhaust us – or 
worse, encourage a perverse kind of voyeurism?

In short, should these kind of videos be produced, watched and circulated? 

Addressing the risks

Since Twitter launched Periscope Live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/26/twitter-periscope-live-video-app-meerkat>
 in March 2015, Facebook Live started in April 2016 and new live streaming app
live.ly 
<https://techcrunch.com/2016/06/28/live-ly-shoots-to-the-top-of-the-app-store/> 
reached the top of the iTunes App Store, it is clear these companies will need 
mechanisms to address the risks of showing certain kinds of content.


How Facebook plans to take over the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/23/facebook-global-takeover-f8-conference-messenger-chatbots>
“We do understand and recognize that there are unique challenges when it comes 
to content and safety for Live videos,” a Facebook spokeswoman said. “It’s a 
serious responsibility, we work hard to strike the right balance between 
enabling expression while providing a safe and respectful experience.”

She added that Facebook notifies law enforcement officials when a piece of 
reported content is violent or indicates someone’s life is in danger. “We also 
suggest people contact law enforcement agencies or emergency services 
themselves if they see something about to happen that might require the 
authorities to intervene,” although she said the company will not discuss 
specific cases.

One Facebook employee who worked closely on Facebook Live, who asked not to be 
named, said the company had been extremely concerned about maintaining 
community standards from the beginning.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ffacebook-live-video-violence-dallas-castile-sterling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa219b1b4790697875190f66665967ea1ac3f0829%2F0_130_5080_3049%2F5080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dallas%2C%20Alton%20Sterling%2C%20Philando%20Castile%3A%20should%20Facebook%20show%20violent%20videos%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ffacebook-live-video-violence-dallas-castile-sterling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dallas%2C%20Alton%20Sterling%2C%20Philando%20Castile%3A%20should%20Facebook%20show%20violent%20videos%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ffacebook-live-video-violence-dallas-castile-sterling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa219b1b4790697875190f66665967ea1ac3f0829%2F0_130_5080_3049%2F5080.jpg>
 A Facebook video of the Dallas shootout, in which five police officers died, 
was viewed millions of times within hours. Photograph: Ron Jenkins/Getty Images 
“There was general consensus that we did not need to introduce new standards,” 
he said, explaining that Live would be governed by Facebook’s general community 
standards for video. However, he added: “Because of the viral nature of live 
video everyone felt that we needed to have a quicker turnaround time in how 
fast stuff gets detected and taken down.”

The Counted: people killed by police in the United States – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
“We needed to get to it as quick as possible even while it was still being 
streamed.” Most video content takes about 24 hours for moderators to check. 
Facebook has three mechanisms for moderating live and pre-recorded videos, the 
employee said. First, ordinary users can flag content as inappropriate. Second, 
the company employees a “huge” enforcement team – which was actually increased 
to deal with the introduction of live video. Finally, Facebook has various 
automated systems for detecting inappropriate content.

The Facebook Live team discussed whether live video needed more moderation 
than pre-recorded video, concluding that there were two main differences: 
distribution is different because people are notified when friends “go live” 
and tend to share the content more rapidly, and secondly the content is often 
more “raw”.

Periscope relies on similar mechanisms to enforce its community standards 
<https://medium.com/@periscope/introducing-comment-moderation-df09439de956#.3t965b2j9>
, but also recently shifted to a moderation process where users can vote on 
whether material is inappropriate or not. “The team found that the community 
aspect seemed to be most effective. If it’s offending a group of people, that’s 
more reliable than if it’s offending just one,” said a company spokesperson.

Is more visibility better? 

Anna Lauren Hoffmann, a postdoctoral fellow at the University of California at 
Berkeley who researches and teaches information studies, stresses that the 
conflict over live video and community standards reflects a broader 
characteristic of the Facebook worldview: their “ideology of radical 
transparency”.

The videos are crucial for documenting this violence, but insufficient for 
changing it
Mychal Denzel Smith, activist and author 
“They believe that a world that is transparent is a better world,” said 
Hoffmann. “They would argue that these videos cause change in the world by 
creating more visibility.” While she recognizes the merits of this argument, 
she also stresses: “At the same time that fails to recognize the position of 
those who would be most vulnerable to that kind of content, the most 
traumatized. And that’s not really a point of view that Facebook is good at 
assuming.”

She feels Facebook could find better, more considered ways to deal with these 
complex cultural and ethical issues. “There are ways that might be slower than 
Facebook would like, they might not yield results that Facebook would like but 
they would ultimately be more humane and thoughtful.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ffacebook-live-video-violence-dallas-castile-sterling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F816f0ef18bd6a15001cf8d02418e9b70f1245f13%2F0_66_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dallas%2C%20Alton%20Sterling%2C%20Philando%20Castile%3A%20should%20Facebook%20show%20violent%20videos%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ffacebook-live-video-violence-dallas-castile-sterling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dallas%2C%20Alton%20Sterling%2C%20Philando%20Castile%3A%20should%20Facebook%20show%20violent%20videos%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fjul%2F08%2Ffacebook-live-video-violence-dallas-castile-sterling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F816f0ef18bd6a15001cf8d02418e9b70f1245f13%2F0_66_5000_3000%2F5000.jpg>
 Anna Lauren Hoffmann: ‘Facebook would argue that these videos cause change in 
the world by creating more visibility.’ Photograph: Stephen Maturen/Getty Images
Jade Davis is a scholar of media, technology, and culture based in New York 
who has written critically about howthe murder of African Americans is depicted 
in the media 
<https://medium.com/matter/black-men-being-killed-is-the-new-girls-gone-wild-da5c150b70c4#.3t6c0ni4e>
. “The shadow archive has gone mainstream and people are eating it up in front 
of [other] people,” she said. “Community standards online don’t matter. The 
images have permeated culture beyond digital spaces by moving to mainstream 
news sites and now, as of this morning, the local news stations who also choose 
to show the videos with three-second warning for people preparing for their 
morning commute.”

“It is disgustingly evocative for both those who get a thrill out of it and 
those who are disgusted by it,” she said. “It is the sort of thing humans have 
always gone out of their way to see. We just get to see people ... push it on 
to us more clearly now that it is tied to money making platforms.”

Mychal Denzel Smith,activist and author of Invisible Man, Got the Whole World 
Watching, expressed ambivalence about the usefulness of such documents of 
extrajudicial killing. “The videos are crucial for documenting this violence, 
but insufficient for changing it. Black communities have known this is the way 
police deal with black people for generations, so it isn’t enlightening for us 
... But even for the white people who may be sympathetic, what these videos 
seem to do is reaffirm the distant from their lived experience. This becomes 
the tragedy and trauma of black life in America, the thing that keeps happening 
to black people.

“And so long as sympathetic white people feel no more responsibility than 
watching the videos, then nothing changes.”
 