
Bring the Dallas murderers to justice. And the killers of black people too | 
Gary Younge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/08/dallas-murderers-killers-black-lives-matter>
A horrific week of violence in the US has cast into sharp relief the troubled 
relationship between black communities and law enforcement. This latest cycle 
of violence began with the police shooting death of 37-year-old Alton Sterling 
in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, outside a convenience store. A video surfaced 
showing Sterling being shot by a police officer several times in the chest 
during a struggle on the ground.

The next day, police near St Paul, Minnesota, shot Philando Castile, a 
32-year-old cafeteria supervisor with no criminal record, after a routine 
traffic violation. Castile’s girlfriend, Diamond Reynolds, live-streamed the 
shooting’s aftermath on her Facebook page. Her calm, shell-shocked narration 
offered stunning documentary evidence of Castile’s last gasps of life, her own 
efforts to make sense of the events and her being comforted by her 
four-year-old daughter who witnessed the shooting.

The dual impact of both videos, which quickly went viral on social media, 
forced public officials to confront the continuing crisis of institutional 
racism in law enforcement publicly, with Minnesota’s governor, Mark Dayton, 
admitting that Castile would not have been killed if he had been white and 
Barack Obama calling the shootings an “American problem”.

The problem grew exponentially in Dallas last night, where a peaceful rally in 
memory of Sterling and Castile turned into an unprecedented movie-style assault 
on police officers that left five dead and eight wounded. The shooter,
25-year-old Micah Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/micah-xavier-johnson-dallas-shooting-suspect>
, told negotiators “he wanted to kill white people, especially white officers”. 
He was allegedly angry over the recent shootings of Sterling and Castile.

Dallas is a tragedy for all of us – and shouldn't shut down calls for justice 
| Ijeoma Oluo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/08/dallas-shooting-tragedy-black-americans-justice>
A week that started with black people feeling under siege at the hands of law 
enforcement has come full circle, with police officers feeling equally 
embattled. The cycle of racial violence, oppression, grief and loss has 
resulted in the creation of a feedback loop.

We see activists passionately make their case that black lives are being taken 
by a system of racially biased policing. And then we see law enforcement 
advocates insist they are heroic civil servants engaged in difficult and 
dangerous work. This work, they argue, is made even more difficult by protests 
and demonstrations that endanger their lives and the public’s.


Some of the roots of this week’s crisis can be traced back to Ferguson, 
Missouri, a tiny suburb outside of St Louis that, although two-thirds black, 
featured an overwhelmingly white police force and leadership in municipal 
politics. This unequal power relation came to a head almost two years ago after 
the fatal shooting of 18-year-old black teenager Michael Brown.

Dallas doesn't represent 'civil war', but a society that needs fundamental 
change | Barret Holmes Pitner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/08/dallas-civil-war-society-flaws-tragedies>
Brown’s uncovered body lay for hours on the street, sparking protests around 
the nation that were galvanized by a hashtag, #BlackLivesMatter, that would 
grow into a national anti-racist movement. BLM founders Alicia Garza, Opal 
Tometi and Patrisse Cullors helped to innovate a movement that has flourished 
nationally led by local activists and leaders.

The movement has argued that America’s criminal justice system is a gateway to 
multiple systems of oppression, linking mass incarceration and the drug war to 
what Michelle Alexander has called the “New Jim Crow” of punitive treatment 
against black people to failing public schools, unemployment, residential 
segregation and poverty that grips much of the black community.

Over the past roughly 24 months, Black Lives Matter emerged as the face of a 
new movement for racial, economic, gender and sexuality justice in American 
society. What critics labeled as “identity politics” supporters characterized 
as “intersectionality” – a word used to described how the personal (including 
race, gender, class, sexuality) always impacts and shapes the political.

The movement for black lives has profoundly shaped contemporary civil rights 
activism, with a broad array of demonstrations and protests organizing 
themselves under the BLM banner. Some of the movement’s key activists and 
fellow travelers have become well-known activists who met with Barack Obama at 
the White House in 2014.

The movement achieved its biggest success last year, when Obama became the 
first sitting president to visit a federal prison, in Oklahoma, and called for 
prison reform during a speech to the National Association for the Advancement 
of Colored People. Much of these grassroots efforts have been emboldened by the 
justice department, which under attorney generals Eric Holder and Loretta Lynch 
have negotiated consent decrees with the cities of Ferguson and Cleveland (in 
the aftermath of the police shooting of 12-year-old Tamir Rice) and ushered in 
federal prison reform for juveniles and new rehabilitation and reentry programs 
for inmates.

However, backlash against the BLM started almost as soon as it began. Like 
their civil rights predecessors who were painted as communists, Black Lives 
Matter activists have been smeared as violent anti-police hooligans and thugs. 
Hashtags such as #BlueLivesMatter have been utilized by conservatives not only 
as a shield against needed reform, but also to bolster a narrative that law 
enforcement represents a real and metaphorical wall preserving civilization 
from the dark-skinned barbarians at the gate.

This narrative ignores the devastating impact of federal criminal justice 
policy and the drug war on the black community over the past half-century. 
National criminal justice policy dates back to the Great Society programs of 
the 1960s and provided the federal government with new resources to distribute 
to states to reduce crime.

By the 1970s, then New York governor Nelson Rockefeller enacted punitive 
sentencing – including mandatory minimums for minor drug offenses – that would 
become enshrined in national law during the Reagan revolution of the 1980s. 
That era amplified a drug war initially launched by Richard Nixon and one that 
barely contained its anti-black racial impulses.

The cumulative effect of crime policies across the US were to criminalize 
black offenders through ostensibly colorblind policy that targeted the exact 
kinds of crimes more likely to be found in chocolate cities than vanilla 
suburbs.

By the 1990s, the young Bill Clinton enacted welfare reform and a crime bill 
that fed on darker impulses categorizing young black juveniles as 
“super-predators”, stripping ex-offender of access to public housing, food 
stamps and the ability to reunite with family, including children, virtually 
assuring hopeless futures for generations of predominantly poor and 
working-class black women and men.

This is the larger context for the unfolding tragedies that culminated in the 
shock and horror witnessed in Dallas. Neither peaceful activists nor heroic 
police officers deserve to be scapegoated and blamed for the actions of rogue 
cops or mentally ill vigilantes. The larger responsibility rests with American 
civil society, its citizens, politicians, thought leaders and activists.

America remains the most powerful nation on Earth. The inability to forcefully 
confront the current crisis of race and democracy makes us appear smaller than 
we are. We can find a way to protect black lives and the lives of law 
enforcement and first responders if we make this a priority. We must understand 
why everyday black humanity is denigrated and demonized. Proactive policy steps 
are needed to end this deep inequality, one whose reverberations continue to 
haunt American democracy’s very soul.
 