
Silky-skilled Steven Motlop slotted four goals as Geelong overwhelmed Adelaide 
by 26 points in Friday night’s AFL encounter. The Cats won 13.20 (98) to 11.6 
(72) atAdelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> Oval to bank their 
sixth consecutive victory.

Ex-Crow Patrick Dangerfield was among Geelong’s best, collecting 33 disposals, 
laying 11 tackles and being booed throughout his first match against his old 
club. His new teammates Motlop, Cam Guthrie (36 disposals) and Shane Kersten 
(three goals) were influential asGeelong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geelong> overcame the first-term loss of Tom 
Lonergan to concussion.

AFL players' association pushing for a share of league revenue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/12/afl-players-association-pushing-for-a-share-of-league-revenue>
Adelaide slipped to a 4-4 win-loss record despite the feats of Rory Sloane (28 
disposals), the lively Charlie Cameron and emerging Rory Atkins (22 
possessions). The Cats almost paid for woeful kicking at goal: they dominated 
the opening half but suffered dreadful yips – 3.8 at quarter-time and 5.13 at 
half-time.

By half-time, Geelong led the inside-50 count 30-16 but were just 12 points 
up. Before a 53,141-strong crowd – the second highest for anAFL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/afl> game at Adelaide Oval – the Crows then 
scored the initial two goals of the third term to draw level. Geelong responded 
with a three-goal burst for a seemingly comfortable 19-point buffer some 14 
minutes into the third term.

But Adelaide again challenged with Josh Jenkins booting two goals to leave the 
home side two points down at the last change. In a frenetic final quarter, 
Adelaide’s Paul Seedsman blew a regulation 20m set-shot which would have put 
his side in front some 10 minutes in. And Geelong soon made the most of the 
reprieve, with veteran Corey Enright goaling on the run from 50m three minutes 
later before Motlop and Darcy Lang added two more to ice the result.

Geelong coach Chris Scott praised the spirit of his side to win despite their 
goalkicking inaccuracy. “We were working really hard to get our chances ... and 
we kept missing,” he said. “When you’re missing goals there’s not much you can 
do ... most of the ones we missed early were really gettable.”

Crows coach Don Pyke lamented poor skills and decision-making by his players. 
“Some of our options tonight were wrong, or execution - clearly we turned the 
ball over in bad areas,” he said. “Geelong’s effort and pressure around the 
contest was really strong and didn’t give us time and space.”
 