
Daniel Radcliffe <https://www.theguardian.com/film/daniel-radcliffe> has 
spoken of his shock and outrage at the lack of parity between the pay packets 
of male and female stars in Hollywood.

“It is nuts to me,” he told the Australian Daily Telegraph 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/rendezview/daniel-radcliffe-how-can-this-still-be-happening/news-story/5dfd0f355cd23fd220b6a6cee15896e5>
, saying that he was thankful the debate had beenreawakened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/22/patricia-arquette-oscars-speech-equal-pay-women>
 last year, “because I had just fucking naively thought this was not an issue 
any more. Because how can this still be happening?”

The real Hollywood scandal: why Jennifer Lawrence, Angelina Jolie and other 
female stars get ripped off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/american-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism>
Radcliffe added: “It’s crazy. It is definitely the time for our industry to 
step up. Especially if we want to pride ourselves on being a liberal, 
progressive industry then you can’t be doing that.”

The actor, whose farting corpse drama Swiss Army Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/23/swiss-army-man-review-dead-daniel-radcliffe-farts-paul-dano-to-safety>
 was one of the buzziest films out of this year’s Sundance film festival, said 
he found therevelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/12/sony-email-hack-jennifer-lawrence-paid-less-american-hustle>
 that Jennifer Lawrence and Amy Adams were paid less than their male co-stars 
in American Hustle “shocking”.

“The thing I can’t help but think is: ‘Who? Who’s doing that? What guy is 
sitting in a studio somewhere thinking, ‘Let’s fuck the girls out of some 
money?’”

Swiss Army Man review: dead Daniel Radcliffe farts Paul Dano to safety
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/23/swiss-army-man-review-dead-daniel-radcliffe-farts-paul-dano-to-safety>
Radcliffe went on to say that he felt one of the key issues behind such 
inequality was the dearth of substantial roles for women, but that he had 
perceived positive changes over the last year.

“I just did a film with Toni Collette,” he said, “and she’s fucking bad-ass in 
this film, and it’s a fucking awesome role.”


The actor drew a comparison between Collette’s role in forthcoming thriller 
Imperium – about an undercover FBI agent trying to disrupt terrorist efforts to 
make a dirty bomb – and that ofCharlize Theron in George Miller’s Mad Max: Fury 
Road <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/07/charlize-theron-unequal-pay>
; a film whose prescience Radcliffe praised.

“I feel like that was made long before a lot of this stuff was talked about. 
Its release was very timely, but it was made long before this was a hot topic.

“It’s very cool, and I feel like there’s such a wealth of amazing actresses in 
the world right now and we’ve got to start writing better parts for them and 
paying them equally.”
 