
Do you remember Alex James's festival, which Lost in Showbiz christened 
Worstival 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2011/sep/15/day-the-festival-dream-died>
, after seeing a picture of the former Blur bassist framed by fellow attendees 
Jeremy Clarkson and David Cameron?

Anyway, its official name was Alex James 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alex-james> Presents Harvest, and it took 
place in September on Alex's estate in the Cotswolds. There was music, there 
were food stalls, and Alex broke off from boring on about cheese on panel shows 
to gad about in tweed as the genial host.

It is therefore with some consternation that Lost in Showbiz discovers that 
the festival's organiser has abruptly ceased trading. It is bad enough that Big 
Wheel Promotions – co-run by a former EMI executive – are now uncontactable, 
but it seems that tickets for next year's festival had already been sold.The 
Alex James Presents Harvest website <http://alexjamespresentsharvest.com/> 
offers no information about refunds, and Alex has remained silent on the matter 
in the weeks since things went tits up. My attempts to contact him via his 
publicist have failed, though I note he is more than happy to discourse on his 
favourite dairy product – he's"working on a new mozzarella" 
<http://menmedia.co.uk/manchestereveningnews/tv_and_showbiz/s/1462108_blurs-alex-james-takes-oasis-inspiration-for-his-cheesy-wonderball>
 – and his"foodio" 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/features/cordon_blur_how_alex_james_rocked_the_cheese_world_1_3930479>
, the converted outbuilding in which he develops his curd-based brainwaves. He 
has also made several appearances to promote his Alex James Presents line of 
cheese at Asda. "It's generated something like £2m worth of publicity," he 
trilled recently. "It even made the New York Times! But I suppose that's what I 
set out to do." Ah, and here's another media outing, in which he explains he 
comes up with all his best ideas while out running – or as he puts it, "Biffing 
around the woods in the dark, with a head torch on."

But what of those who contributed to September's festival? Alas, the ticketing 
company has been left "heavily" out of pocket, while some performers and 
stallholders have not been paid and are most upset about it. But perhaps our 
greatest sympathy should be reserved for the local school, Kingham primary. The 
school organises its own annual music festival, and was asked to use its 
contacts to book performers for the Friday night at Harvest. It duly provided 
seven bands. (How quaint that the acts at Alex James's festival were being 
provided by the local primary. Does he not have a contacts book of his own?)

The school now feels unable to comment, but a couple of weeks ago, headteacher 
Ed Read told the Cotswold Journal 
<http://www.cotswoldjournal.co.uk/news/local/chippingcampden/9302191.EXCLUSIVE__Primary_school_owed___7_000_after_promotions_company_goes_bust/>
 that it was owed £7,000 for the entertainment it organised. "There are 200 
children at this state school who rely on that money," he lamented. "It's going 
to have a huge impact. With the national austerity measures, budgets in schools 
have been reduced. Our music teacher is paid largely by the music festival we 
do ourselves. We are either going to have to lose the music teacher, or take it 
from other budgets which will reduce other parts of the curriculum."

What a sorry tale. Perhaps Alex could closet himself away in his foodio and 
come up with a solution, or biff about in the woods for as long as it takes to 
work out how to make it right for those kiddies. Failing that, a period of 
silence from him would be most welcome.
 