
When Charles Darwin visited Australia on the Beagle in 1836 and reeled from 
the abundance and variety of the fauna, he thought that "surely two distinct 
Creators must have been at work". The same thought has been hard to stave off 
over the last six weeks: how else to explain how two teams can play brands of 
cricket so different in standard, consistency and tempo?

Yet in some respects, the test is still to come. With the retirements of Shane 
Warne, Glenn McGrath and Justin Langer, and the twilights of Adam Gilchrist and 
Matthew Hayden, it will be seen how good is Australian cricket, as distinct 
from a particular group of Australian cricketers.

Australia was favoured in this series by the dynamics of the Ashes cycle, 
which turn on a series every 1½ then 2½ years. What if it had been the other 
way round? Would Warne, McGrath and Langer have held on to revenge the 
indignities of 2005 had it meant waiting until 2007-08? For that matter, what 
would the England team have looked like a year hence with Michael Vaughan and 
Simon Jones fit?

The long part of the cycle leaves time for Australia and England to rise and 
fall before 2009. Shane Warne was bullish in the aftermath of the fifth Test. 
There was a big gap between Australia and England: "That's not arrogance. 
That's just facts." The big gap in the Australian team would be easily 
replaced: "It's a good feeling to be leaving the game in such good shape."

It is Warne's nature, however, to move easily between "facts" and "feelings". 
For the rest of us, the fact is that nobody really knows how the next 
Australian XI will shape up, while the feeling is that these are not simply 
practitioners being replaced, but presences. Warne himself is not merely a 
once-in-a-lifetime player, but an embodiment of his country's intuitive, 
self-starting, self-propelling cricket culture. It was not only Warne's leg 
breaks that won the Adelaide Test, but his ability to galvanise a team, to 
persuade them, in the words of Australia's opening bowler Fred Spofforth at The 
Oval in 1882, that "this thing can be done".

Warne suggested that English cricket should consider whether central contracts 
have gone too far; that young cricketers would benefit from playing alongside 
established Test players in county cricket. Good point, although he could make 
the same suggestion to his own masters. Australians have a healthy domestic 
first-class scene, but it is not quite the crucible of competition they would 
have you believe.

Make no mistake, there are handy cricketers in the offing, some of whom 
England have glimpsed this summer, from the right-hander Adam Voges to the 
left-arm quick Mitchell Johnson. The difference is in the Australian dressing 
room where, as Darren Lehmann observed in his auto- biography, "the rookies 
tend to absorb the body language and attitudes of the senior players". That 
being so, the changeover of senior players becomes all the more important, and 
so does the position of coach, which falls open when John Buchanan's contract 
ends after the World Cup.

Buchanan this summer has been an enigmatic presence. In his "Captain's Diary", 
published just before the Gabba Test, Ponting gave him rather equivocal 
endorsement. The testimonial was gushing: "I love everything that Buck has done 
as coach, especially the fact that he has taken the Australian cricket team to 
a level it has never been before." But the description of what he actually 
added was strangely ambiguous: "As good a coach as Buck has been for us, 
despite all his thoroughness and his fantastic man-management skills, in my 
view he is not a coach with the technical knowledge to be able to tell each 
batsmen how best to play their shots within the framework of their individual 
techniques. He's certainly not able to best advise the bowlers about the ins 
and outs of their bowling actions."

Those wondering exactly what role the coach performed were little enlightened. 
Asked for the essence of Buchanan's advice before play yesterday Ponting 
remembered three kernels of wisdom: "Control the controllables", "Play the 
moment" and, actually, the third one had slipped his mind. Asked later how hard 
it was to lead the current Australian XI, Ponting conceded: "Pretty easy." 
Coaching it can't be that much more difficult.

The rawer Australian dressing room of the future, however, seems to require a 
more skills-oriented coach, rather than the "high-performance manager" tag that 
Buchanan has preferred for himself, and the pop philosopher reputation he 
carries.

One of Australia's chief advantages in the Ashes rivalry, however, is the 
nature of its opponent. Andrew Flintoff proved himself again the grandmaster of 
understatement yesterday: it was "obviously not nice" to have lost 5-0, while 
captaincy "had its ups and downs". But he was right to observe that every 
member of his dressing room will potentially be available for the Ashes of 
2009. The question must be: is that really an advantage?

There has been a sense on this tour that England were glad enough to have won 
in 2005, and, er, that's it. A visiting journalist yesterday asked Flintoff: 
had expectations of his team been too high? It seemed a very English idea. When 
expectations and outcomes are a mismatch in Australian cricket, people try to 
improve the outcomes; in England, it seems, they lower expectations. Australian 
cricketers know their Darwin: when only the fittest survive, being second best 
is pointless.

The rising generation

Adam Voges 27 Western Australia

Consistent in Pura Cup; hit 62-ball one-day hundred

Chris Rogers 29 Western Australia

A tough, ginger-haired left-handed opener

Ben Hilfenhaus 23 Tasmania

Swings the ball at brisk pace

Brad Haddin 29 New South Wales

Understudy to Gilchrist with first-class average of 39

Daniel Doran 25 Queensland

Leg-spinner, needs accuracy to go with his variations
 