
Sam Dastyari has a talent for vanishing. He can materialise, and then 
disappear, sometimes in the blink of an eye – one of his party tricks.


At 5.45pm on Wednesday, it was time to vanish and he resigned from the 
frontbench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
. The word inside Labor is that there was more uncomfortable material to come, 
and second-chance Sam was already on his last warning.

So bye-bye Sam – suddenly less second chance than surplus to requirements.

Stories like this tend to follow a predictable arc. An imbroglio breaks, 
deepens, starts cartwheeling across the landscape. When the cartwheeling gets 
out of control the protagonist falls on his or her sword.

Dastyari's donations reveal a bigger story of links and largesse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/dastyaris-donations-reveal-a-bigger-story-of-links-and-largesse>
The ritualised humiliation, then exit, is meant to stop the blood-letting. 
It’s like a full stop applied emphatically at the end of a florid sentence.

But in this instance, two really important conversations have begun in 
Australia this week, and we need both of them to continue for the health of the 
democracy.

We need to focus more on soft power forays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/dastyaris-donations-reveal-a-bigger-story-of-links-and-largesse>
 by interests connected with the Chinese government, not because there’s 
anything necessarily wrong, but because the activity warrants acuity, and 
scrutiny. And we need to make Dastyari’s departurea catalyst for significant 
reform of the donations and disclosure regime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/06/sam-dastyaris-labor-party-liberal-party-donations>
.

For once, the high-octane events of Wednesday evening need to be less about 
media management, and more about the public interest. We cannot allow a set of 
circumstances where the resignation of a bone-headed Labor senator becomes the 
end of the conversation.

Because the can of worms the good senator has opened up takes us to the heart 
of whether or not our parliament works in the interests of the citizens it is 
supposed to serve.

We all have a stake in that discussion. It’s not an arcane abstraction, it’s a 
pressing point of concern.

So yes, Dastyari is very foolish. Yes, Bill Shorten held on to him not because 
he’s a young pup in need of training by wiser heads (which was the 
too-clever-by-half construction the Labor leader put on it on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/06/sam-dastyari-admits-mistake-asking-donors-to-pay-for-travel-expenses>
) but because he’s a significant institutional figure, and moving him on would 
be no small thing.

Moving him on would have stirred up the internal power balances between 
Victoria and New South Wales, and that’s a fight Bill Shorten didn’t want to 
have. Not if he could help it.

Donations, Dastyari, and why all MPs need a pair: lessons from the first week 
of parliament | Kristina Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/donations-dastyari-and-why-all-mps-need-a-pair-lessons-from-the-first-week-of-parliament>
Of course I can do the theatre criticism. Dastyari should have known better. 
Shorten should have acted more decisively.

But it’s not the most important take-home point about the events of this past 
week.

I’ve said it several times, and I’ll say it again.

We need to fix the system of donations and disclosure. We need a serious 
conversation about institutional politics chasing institutional money. We need 
a refashioned system that helps our parliamentarians understand very clearly 
where to draw lines.

And we need it now.
 