
Carol Ann Duffy has been flying the flag for poetry as the UK’s poet laureate 
for the last five years, while children’s laureate Malorie Blackman has been 
championing kids’ books since last summer. Now there’s a new laureate in town 
in the shape of Dave Gibbons, the bestselling graphic novelist and Watchmen 
artist who has just been named the UK’s first comics laureate.

Gibbons, who collaborated with Alan Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-moore> on the critically acclaimed 
graphic novel Watchmen and who has also worked on 2000AD and Doctor Who, was 
appointed to the biennial role by new comics charity Comics Literacy Awareness. 
He will spend his two-year stint, which starts in February, acting as an 
ambassador for comics and their potential to improve literacy. He will be 
championing the role of comics in getting children to read as well as visiting 
schools and attending training events for staff and education conferences.

Gibbons is regarded as one of the UK’s best comics artists, most famous for 
co-creating the seminal graphic novel Watchmen with Moore. He has also worked 
on Green Lantern, Batman and 2000AD, as well as Doctor Who comics, with his 
strip appearing in the first ever issue of Doctor Who Magazine. Author Lev 
Grossman described him as “a genius” inTime magazine 
<http://content.time.com/time/arts/article/0,8599,1857823,00.html>, and as “one 
of the major comic book artists of the 21st century, or the 20th, or really any 
other century you care to name”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Foct%2F20%2Fdave-gibbons-comics-laureate-child-literacy-watchmen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F20%2F1413814120159%2F4057ec1c-c7a6-41c1-bd40-a8436d08ae2b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dave%20Gibbons%2C%20first%20comics%20laureate%3A%20%E2%80%98They%E2%80%99re%20not%20just%20cheap%2C%20lurid%20entertainment%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Foct%2F20%2Fdave-gibbons-comics-laureate-child-literacy-watchmen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dave%20Gibbons%2C%20first%20comics%20laureate%3A%20%E2%80%98They%E2%80%99re%20not%20just%20cheap%2C%20lurid%20entertainment%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Foct%2F20%2Fdave-gibbons-comics-laureate-child-literacy-watchmen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F20%2F1413814120159%2F4057ec1c-c7a6-41c1-bd40-a8436d08ae2b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons’ Watchmen Photograph: Bob Kelly/PR 
The comics medium, said the author, is often “sidelined” in the UK – something 
which is not the case internationally. “In France, comics are called the ninth 
art, they stand alongside music and literature,” said Gibbons. “But one of the 
problems comics have always had in this country – and this isn’t so prevalent 
in Europe – is they have always been associated with very cheap and somewhat 
lurid entertainment.”

Gibbons said that he has “vivid memories of the prefects at my school going 
through my desk and confiscating comics and burning them”.

“There were scares in the 50s about trashy American horror comics, and there 
has been this notion that comics are very low culture,” said the author. “I’ve 
never believed that at all. The idea of telling stories or imparting 
information with a combination of words and pictures is a fairly universal 
thing, geographically and historically. I loved comics from the age of three or 
four. I learned to read before I went to school so I could see what was going 
on and they inculcated in me a lifelong love of reading.”

According to Gibbons, “comics are a very vibrant art form in their own right 
... part of the continuum from novels through to movies and computer games”, 
and are also ideally suited to encouraging children to read.

“They are very accessible. I think children naturally gravitate to their 
particular mix of brief words and exciting, interesting pictures. They can do 
everything from spin yarns of derring do to things which are very educational 
in the sense of history and science - virtually everything,” he said. “What we 
have to do is show what is out there, not just the Beano and Dandy and Batman 
stuff, but to show the range of the medium.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Foct%2F20%2Fdave-gibbons-comics-laureate-child-literacy-watchmen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F20%2F1413814503367%2F1abb02a9-1f8b-4ef1-9d23-cca513386942-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dave%20Gibbons%2C%20first%20comics%20laureate%3A%20%E2%80%98They%E2%80%99re%20not%20just%20cheap%2C%20lurid%20entertainment%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Foct%2F20%2Fdave-gibbons-comics-laureate-child-literacy-watchmen%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dave%20Gibbons%2C%20first%20comics%20laureate%3A%20%E2%80%98They%E2%80%99re%20not%20just%20cheap%2C%20lurid%20entertainment%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2014%2Foct%2F20%2Fdave-gibbons-comics-laureate-child-literacy-watchmen%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F20%2F1413814503367%2F1abb02a9-1f8b-4ef1-9d23-cca513386942-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Hollywood adaptation of the Watchmen, which drew heavily from Gibbons’ 
artwork. Photograph: REX/Moviestore Collection 
And even in the UK, things are changing for comics, said Gibbons. “My son went 
to the same school as me, 30 years later. When they discovered his dad did 
comics, they got me in to talk about them, and asked me for a recommended 
reading list. I saw a recent prospectus for the school, and it included a page 
of famous old boys. As well as Tim Rice, and Stephen Hawking, it also had Dave 
Gibbons, the comics guy. To go from burning books to being proud of that fact 
is a big step.”

The creation of the laureate role, which will go to a comics writer or artist 
in recognition of their “outstanding achievement” in the field, is just one of 
a range of activities planned by new charity Comics Literacy Awareness with the 
intention of improving children’s literacy by raising awareness of the “variety 
and quality of comics and graphic novels today, particularly in the education 
sector”. The charity’s board of trustees include publishers, authors, 
librarians and academics.

“In many other countries, comics and graphic novels have been used extensively 
in literacy drives,” said charity trustee and graphic novelist Bryan Talbot, 
winner of the 2012 Costa Award for best biography forDotter Of Her Father’s Eyes
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/03/dotter-of-her-fathers-eyes-extract>
, on which he collaborated with his wife Mary Talbot. “The sheer accessibility 
of the medium, the way in which complex information can be easily absorbed 
through its combination of words and pictures, actively encourages reading in 
those intimidated by endless blocks of cold print.”

Gibbons said he would also be encouraging children to “express themselves and 
their own stories in words and pictures - because children naturally take to 
expressing things in these ways”.

He added that he would “do all that I can to promote the acceptance of comics 
in schools”. “It’s vitally important not only for the pupils but for the 
industry too,” said the author, describing it as a “great honour” to be 
nominated as comics laureate.

“They haven’t actually given me anything yet, though,” he revealed, “like a 
medal or a hat or a cape. Although I understand the poet laureate gets some 
wine from the Queen” – the poetry role is rewarded with a “butt of sack”, 600 
bottles of sherry – “so that may not be far behind.”
 