
A glance across the new music scene, from the stark songstress Chelsea Wolfe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/aug/24/new-band-chelsea-wolfe> to the 
dislocated 50s pop ofDirty Beaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jul/01/new-band-dirty-beaches>, shows 
an odd but unifying influence at work: the surreal and unsettling films of the 
man behindBlue Velvet <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76694/blue.velvet>
 and Eraserhead <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2008/sep/06/davidlynch>.

Nowhere is David Lynch <https://www.theguardian.com/film/davidlynch>'s 
presence more keenly felt than in the music ofLana Del Ray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/may/13/new-band-lana-del-ray> (aka 
Lizzy Grant, pictured), whose trackVideo Games 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HO1OV5B_JDw> caused music critics to 
self-combust with delight this summer. Blurring the boundaries between 
old-school glamour and sleek modern pop (think Patsy Cline gone R&B), it came 
with a video of drunken, stumbling starlets that, likeMulholland Drive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/90677/mulholland.drive>, alluded to the 
dark side of the Hollywood dream.

Grant is based in Los Angeles, as is Wolfe, whose skeletal post-punk is the 
very definition of foreboding; she even covers Norwegian black metallersBurzum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/49cd96a6-42c3-44f6-ba2a-cd9301046b96>
. Wolfe says she is drawn to "the dark surrealism" of Lynch's films. "They're 
like reality to me – life is strange, and full of dark corners," she says. 
"Also, he talks about the special light in LA, and that was the first thing I 
noticed there – a bright darkness, like those days when the sun is hiding 
behind the clouds and you can look at it and see its circle shape perfectly."

Canadian drone popster Alex Zhang Hungtai – aka Dirty Beaches – also claims a 
kinship with the director. His song True Blue sounds like a lost Roy Orbison 
track that has been tampered with, and paints a picture of 50s America as 
disturbing as that in any Lynch movie. (Lynch himself revealed twisted new 
dimensions to Orbison's musicwhen he recontextualised it in Blue Velvet 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=clZNwja8M3A>.)

In many ways, Lynch's influence on underground musicians seems logical. The 
overriding mood of two recent trends –chillwave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/dec/14/vaccines-kings-leon> 
andwitch house  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/sep/26/witch-house-how-dress-well>– has 
been one of unease, with artists such asSalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/dec/10/new-band-salem> and Perfume 
Genius 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/artist/c4ff10e0-ae5a-467d-a409-6e0b4bf241eb> 
finding a sadness in things that, on the surface, seem sterile or innocent. Yet 
Lynch's connection to modern pop doesn't end here. Like a topsy-turvy scene 
from one of his own movies, the director recently embarked on a pop career of 
his own, starting with last year's gently pulsing electro-pop singleGood Day 
Today <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IugOfDBWcGc>. This November, he puts out 
Crazy Clown Time 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/movies/news/david-lynchs-first-solo-album-is-on-crazy-clown-time-20110817>
, a full-length album that featuresKaren O 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/aug/26/karen-o-psycho-opera>. During a 
Twitter interview with @guardianmusic last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2010/dec/08/david-lynch-twitter-interview>
, Lynch talked of his love for Captain Beefheart and the guitar. But it was a 
four-word answer to one question that revealed why so many musicians might 
connect to him right now. When asked how he viewed most pop music, Lynch 
replied simply: "All pop is magical."
 