
David Cameron has reminded voters that a vote to leave the EU may lead to a 
secondScottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> referendum and 
increase the UK’s instability, in a fresh effort to bolster support for the 
remain campaign.
Brexit explained: referendum debates 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=referendum_debates>
The prime minister told a live referendum debate on ITV on Tuesday night that 
he worried about the prospects of a further Scottish vote, saying: “You don’t 
strengthen your country by leading to its break-up.”


There was a “deeply patriotic” case for the UK remaining intact and within the 
EU, he insisted.

Cameron’s remarks contradicted his assertion last year that there was no case 
for a further Scottish referendum, but also raised a crucial question for 
Scottish voters: what will the vote on 23 June mean for their future?

If the leave campaign wins on 23 June against the wishes of a majority of 
Scottish voters – dragging Scotland out of the EU “against its will”, in the 
words ofNicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> 
and her predecessor as first minister, Alex Salmond – that in turn would 
trigger substantial demands from nationalists for a second independence 
referendum.

That raises huge questions about Scotland’s economic security, and how the 
country would manage the competing and challenging demands of the EU and the UK 
and it would threaten to plunge the Scottish National party’s government in 
Edinburgh into crisis.

Even so, the EU referendum campaign in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is only now starting in earnest, even 
while the rest of the UK has been immersed in Brexit and remain events, 
battle-bus tours and high-street hustings.

The contrast with the Scottish independence campaign in 2014 is striking. That 
was vigorous, combative and live; there were impassioned public meetings that 
spilled out on the street; open-air rallies colonised central Glasgow; Yes 
Scotland pop-up shops on numerous high streets and a flurry of outspoken 
celebrity endorsements for both yes and no.

The ambivalence this time is due partly to fatigue. The parties have just 
fought their fourth national campaign in little over two years (there was a 
European election in May 2014; the Scottish referendum in September 2014; a UK 
general election last May and this May, a Holyrood election).

Until this week, Scotland’s political leaders have been preoccupied by 
domestic debates on fracking, policing sectarianism in football, cutting air 
passenger duty and lengthening first minister’s questions from 30 to 45 
minutes. “It really isn’t a subject that is thetalk of the steamie 
<http://scotlandwelcomesyou.com/your-sayings/>. We’ve been so subsumed by the 
Scottish election and making sure we’re properly performing our role in the 
Scottish parliament,” said one senior party official.

Unlike most other parts of the UK, Scotland’s result is widely assumed to be a 
comfortable win for “in”. TheScottish EU polls 
<http://whatscotlandthinks.org/questions/should-the-united-kingdom-remain-a-member-of-the-european-union-or-leave-the-eu#table>
 show a consistent, if slightly shrinking, lead for remain of 20 to 50 points, 
depending on the pollster.

EU referendum: our panel on Nigel Farage and David Cameron's TV debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/eu-referendum-our-panel-nigel-farage-david-cameron-tv-debate>
The latest EU poll in Scotland, by TNS on Tuesday, showed a substantial lead 
for remain, at 51%, with 21% voting to leave. A full 29% did not yet know. 
Scotland is more Eurosceptic than those headline figures suggest, but softly 
so. There is a pervading sense that this is not Scotland’s fight.

Even so, the SNP is now taking the most visible, proactive stance of 
Scotland’s mainstream parties, if only for the final weeks of the campaign. 
Sturgeon is taking part in the live ITV UK-wide debate on Thursday as part of 
the remain team; Salmond is embarking on a pro-EU speaking tour at Oxford 
University, Wales and Northern Ireland. Its activists are already out 
leafleting, its ministers speaking at pro-EU hustings and photocalls.

The Scottish Tories are unable to take part formally since its deep splits on 
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> leave it officially 
neutral.

Scottish Labour and the Lib Dems are diminished, cash-strapped and bruised, 
both ceding the referendum campaign to the official UK-level remain and party 
organisations. The UK Independence party, which sits on the fringes ofScottish 
politics <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scotland>, has very little 
traction or reach, unlike in its English heartlands.

The SNP’s very active presence in the final stages of the campaign will be 
influential, for both sides. The wealthiest and most popular Scottish party, 
its ranks also include the largest cohort of pro-Brexit voters in Scotland 
measured against the size of the SNP vote. So Sturgeon and Salmond’s 
intervention matters.

Up to a third of SNP and pro-independence voters favour leaving the EU: they 
see it as wholly consistent with wanting full Scottish sovereignty. Sturgeon 
cannot alienate that loyal SNP vote but she is in a far more comfortable 
position than Cameron, she has no pro-Brexit ministers campaigning for the 
other side andno open rebellion in her party’s ranks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/scotland-blog/2016/may/12/eurosceptic-snp-voters-could-influence-eu-referendum-result-polling-data-shows>
.

With that in mind, Sturgeon knows she would face intense pressure to call 
quickly for a second Scottish vote in the event of Brexit. She has repeatedly 
said a leave vote – against the wishes of a Scottish majority– would be one of 
the “material changes” in circumstances needed to trigger a fresh independence 
referendum.

But she also knows the economics of Scottish independence are the worst in 
decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/09/scotland-finances-referendum-year-nicola-sturgeon>
: the global oil crash has left a putative Scottish chancellor with a £15bn 
black hole in the country’s day-to-day finances. Scotland’s unemployment 
figures are above the UK’s and its GDP is far weaker, with a £15bn trade 
deficit with the rest of the UK.



So would a Brexit vote strengthen public support for Scottish independence?

Voters would be torn between the strong emotional desire to quit a British 
union dominated by English Tories – most probably those like Boris Johnson who 
led the Brexit campaign – against fear of the risks of quitting the UK, with 
its financial safety net and deeply enmeshed social, economic and cultural ties.

And then Scots must confront the huge complexities of designing an independent 
state that may need to use the euro, and would need to negotiate new 
relationships with two competing entities – the UK and EU – with conflicting 
interests.

The remain camp is nervous. With polling in England now neck and neck, and 
since the UK is voting as a single constituency, not region by region, every 
pro-EU vote counts.
 