
David O Russell's latest film, the Jennifer Lawrence-starring biopic Joy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/31/jennifer-lawrence-david-o-russell-miracle-mop>
, is being pitched for a tilt at the 2016 Oscars after producers revealed it 
will hit US cinemas next Christmas.

Deadline reports the film, in which Lawrence stars as the creator of the 
Miracle Mop, will bereleased during the end-of-year window often set aside for 
awards season candidates 
<http://m.deadline.com/2014/06/david-o-russells-joy-gets-christmas-2015-release-date/>
. With Russell and Lawrence ubiquitous in the Oscars race in recent years with 
collaborations such as Silver Linings Playbook and American Hustle, the timing 
indicates that Joy is hoping to follow suit. Annie (Bridesmaids) Mumolo has 
written the script.

Joy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joy> Mangano is a mother of three who 
became one of the most successful American entrepreneurs with the invention of 
the self-wringing Miracle Mop. She eventually sold her company Ingenious Design 
to the Home Shopping Network in a multimillion-dollar deal but stayed on as 
company president. Mangano is currently one of the channel's most successful 
presenters and also invented Huggable Hangers.

Russell's film The Fighter saw Christian Bale take home the best supporting 
actor Oscar at the 2011 ceremony, with Lawrence taking best actress in 2013 for 
her turn inSilver Linings Playbook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/silver-linings-playbook> and receiving a best 
supporting actress nomination for American Hustle earlier this year. Russell, 
meanwhile, picked up best director nominations for all three films; he also 
received a best adapted screenplay nod for Playbook and a best original 
screenplay nomination for Hustle.

• Sandra Bullock may open Tupperware movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/29/sandra-bullock-tupperware-biopic>
 