
David Warner <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-warner> has started the 
third Test with a record-breaking ton, propelling Australia to an astonishing 
total of 0-126 at lunch on day one of their SCG clash with Pakistan.

Warner raced to three figures in just 78 deliveries and 118 minutes, exposing 
the tourists’ impotent attack in ruthless fashion.

The dashing opener became just the fifth batsman in the history of the sport 
to celebrate a hundred in the first session of a Test – and first ever in 
Australia to achieve the fabled feat.

Australia v Pakistan: third Test, day one - live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2017/jan/03/australia-v-pakistan-third-test-day-one-live>
Warner celebrated wildly in the final over before the meal break, having 
scampered back for a third run to complete his 18th Test ton.

Not even Don Bradman ever managed to score a ton before lunch in Australia, 
though he did at Headingly in 1930 on his way to his legendary 334 not out.

It is the first time any batsman has achieved the feat since Majid Khan in 
Karachi more than 40 years ago.

Warner is no stranger to scoring a century in a session of Test cricket, 
having famously belted a ton in just 69 balls against India at the WACA.

That 2011 innings was produced with sheer aggression, as was expected from a 
slugger who made his international Twenty20 debut before playing first-class 
cricket.

This time the vice-captain did it with panache, placement and pace instead of 
raw power – as has been his way in recent years.

There wasn’t a single six or dropped catch in the session. Warner opted 
largely for classical strokes, creating singles with his athleticism and 
regularly hammering the ball through covers.

Warner was in his element after Steve Smith won the toss, feasting on the many 
loose balls delivered by Pakistan’s pacemen.

The visitors were also guilty of sloppy fielding, the most cringe-worthy 
culprit being Misbah-ul-Haq.

Captain Misbah watched a ball sail through his legs and to the rope in the 
third over. It was the fourth of Warner’s 17 boundaries in the session.

Youngster Matt Renshaw was made to look decidedly unremarkable in the first 
100-run partnership between Australia’s new-look opening combo.

Renshaw scored a single run in the same time it took Warner to score 38 of 
them. The Queenslander hadn’t reached double figures when Warner brought up his 
half-century in 42 balls.

Misbah threw the ball to legspinner Yasir Shah after just 10 overs, frustrated 
by his quicks’ lack of control, but it made little difference.

Australia were 0-69, already in a perfect position to push for a 3-0 series 
win.

Test hundreds scored before lunch on Day One: 

1902: 103* Victor Trumper v England, Manchester

1926: 112* Charles Macartney v England, Leeds

1930: 105* Don Bradman v England, Leeds

1976: 108* Majid Khan v New Zealand, Karachi

2017: 100* David Warner v Pakistan at SCG.
 