
David Oyelowo <https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-oyelowo> will play James 
Bond. Although his performance will be heard rather than seen – in an audiobook.

The announcement on Thursday follows long-standing rumours that Idris Elba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/idris-elba> is in line to replace Daniel 
Craig when the latter’s run playing James Bond on the big screen comes to an 
end, potentially in two movies’ time.

Oyelowo’s previous roles include Henry VI for the Royal Shakespeare Company – 
which made him the first black actor to play an English king in a major 
Shakespeare production. He also played the MI5 officer Danny Hunter in the BBC 
TV drama Spooks and was acclaimed for his performance as Martin Luther King in 
Selma.

Why Idris Elba shouldn't give up on playing James Bond
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2015/apr/09/why-idris-elba-shouldnt-give-up-on-playing-james-bond>
Oyelowo will play Bond, and other characters, in the audiobook version of 
Trigger Mortis, written by Anthony Horowitz and commissioned by theIan Fleming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ian-fleming> estate. 


Describing himself as “very honoured”, Oyelowo said: “I am officially the only 
person on planet Earth who can legitimately say: ‘I am the new James Bond’ – 
even saying that name is the cinematic equivalent of doing the ‘to be or not to 
be’ speech.”

He added: “I was asked specifically by the Fleming estate, which is really 
special.”

Born in Oxford to Nigerian parents, his performance as Henry VI drew critical 
acclaim, but also “very real resistance”, particularly from one academic. 
Oyelowo said: “He said that we open ourselves to ridicule if we allow black 
people to play English kings when English kings have never been black. But I’ve 
never seen an Egyptian play Cleopatra ... so it’s a nonsensical statement.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fdavid-oyelowo-first-black-actor-james-bond-trigger-mortis-audiobook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd6eaa7f0a725cd48e279656c332aaf8408f2d9a%2F0_66_2704_1622%2F2704.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Oyelowo%20to%20play%20James%20Bond%20...%20after%20landing%20audiobook%20role&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fdavid-oyelowo-first-black-actor-james-bond-trigger-mortis-audiobook%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Oyelowo%20to%20play%20James%20Bond%20...%20after%20landing%20audiobook%20role&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fdavid-oyelowo-first-black-actor-james-bond-trigger-mortis-audiobook%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd6eaa7f0a725cd48e279656c332aaf8408f2d9a%2F0_66_2704_1622%2F2704.jpg>
 Oyelowo, centre, as Martin Luther King in Selma. Photograph: Paramount/Everett 
Collection 
The actor received hate mail that came “in the guise of fan mail”. He said: “I 
had to have my agent filter mail ... it was hate mail. It was: ‘How dare you 
enter a realm that is not yours to enter?’ One slipped through the net … it’s 
upsetting ... I had letters coming through to the stage door.”

He added: “This was over 10 years ago -so you’d hope that wouldn’t be the case 
now.”

But Oyelowo believes black actors still have huge obstacles to overcome. He is 
not alone. The director Rufus Norris has said thatthe UK still lags behind the 
US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jun/13/black-actors-casting-uk-us-rufus-norris>
 in casting black actors, while the comedianLenny Henry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/dec/30/lenny-henry-guest-editing-radio-4-today-twitter-bbc>
 has spoken of work having “dried up” for home-grown black, Asian and minority 
actors. David Harewood, who stars in the hit drama Homeland, is among black 
actors who have left Britain to find work.

New James Bond novel Trigger Mortis resurrects Pussy Galore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/28/new-james-bond-novel-trigger-mortis-pussy-galore-anthony-horowitz>
Oyelowo also left the UK – in 2007 – and lives in Los Angeles. He said: “Part 
of the reason I moved to America was I could feel my head bobbing against this 
glass ceiling that wasn’t going to break.” Yet when black actors are given the 
opportunity, some “great work” happens, he said, adding: “That should be 
rewarded with more opportunity.”

Part of the problem lies in the disproportionate number of negative roles that 
are offered to black actors. Oyelowo is disturbed by the focus on white 
protagonists within dramas. He said: “It’s how few times we get to be the 
protagonist ... and how few times the world is seen through our eyes.”

Oyelowo said things will change for the better when a “white kid in 
Birmingham” can watch a TV show or film through a black actor’s eyes and “feels 
as much like him as the next person”.

He added: “If that young boy is always seeing [black characters] as on the 
periphery ... that’s going to be his world view, that someone like [that] is 
always on the periphery – and, by virtue of that fact, less important.”

Oyelowo acknowledges the industry is aware of the need for change, but he 
said: “It is [aware] verbally, but not in action. There is a cerebral desire to 
do it, but that’s not worked its way down to the heart yet. Because, if it did, 
then things wouldn’t be regressing, which they are.”

Asked why there is a resistance to change, he said: “It’s the status quo. A 
lot of it is subconscious. Some of it I do think is racism.”

David Oyelowo: 'No one says to Oliver Stone: white characters AGAIN?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/01/david-oyelowo-selma-martin-luther-king-benedict-cumberbatch-interview>
Elba, who rose to fame in The Wire, has been rumoured to be among the 
frontrunners to replace Craig, and would be the first black actor to play the 
spy on screen if he secured the role. Although Elba appeared todistance himself 
from the rumours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/30/idris-elba-says-never-say-never-as-he-calls-james-bond-role-a-rumour>
, Oyelowo said he was “ripe” for the role.

He said: “A titan on screen, he has all the qualities that you’d want in a 
James Bond <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jamesbond>. Because films and TV 
affect culture, a black Bond would be a cultural event ... a statement ... 
beyond just entertainment.”

More than 100m Bond books have been sold worldwide. Fleming wrote 14 and his 
estate has since commissioned new adventures from various authors, including 
Kingsley Amis.

Horowitz has written more than 40 books and, as a television screenwriter, 
created the Bafta-winning Foyle’s War. Oyelowo described his Bond as “a man who 
is very self-assured” but not perfect.

In a statement, Horowitz said: “What an honour to have an actor as talented as 
David to read my take on Bond. He has a brilliant voice and talent for bringing 
out the nuances of dialogue and characters.”

 * This article was amended on Thursday 13 August 2015. The original article’s 
headline and opening paragraphs stated that David Oyelowo would be the first 
black actor to play James Bond, across any medium. In fact, Hugh Quarshie 
played the character when he read the audiobook version of Dr No in 2012. This 
article has been corrected accordingly.  