
When David O Russell makes movies, he gets down and dirty. Behind-the-scenes 
stills show him crouched alongside his actors, just out of shot, full suit and 
tie,akimbo on the lino  
<http://media.portable.tv/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/David-O-Russell-American-Hustle-Portable.jpg>
or crammed in a footwell 
<http://cdn1.ssninsider.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/american-hustle-david-o-russell-on-set.jpg>
. This is not a man afraid of the floor.

Same deal when he mops. “I tend to be more a hands-and-knees guy,” he says. “I 
was typically a sponge-mopper. But I am very familiar with mops and have mopped 
many a floor and had the satisfaction of that.”

He mopped a lot in his 20s, as a waiter and a cleaner; today it’s more for 
meditation than necessity. “In azendo <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zendo>, 
where I practise regularly, part of the thing is to clean the floor; that’s as 
important as winning the lottery.” A chuckle with a bit of husk. “Seriously, in 
the poetry of zen. They’re like: ‘Yeah, they’re a little different but … 
they’re also the same.’ There’s this detachment and commitment to work and 
meticulousness and perseverance.” He smiles serenely. “I was also a vacuumer.”

This Russell shares with Jennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/jennifer-lawrence>, who, he says, dodged 
mopping growing up: “Her mother was so OCD that she knew if she waited long 
enough she’d do it.” Russell chucks his head back, squints and grins. “That’s a 
great hustle if you can work it as a kid.”

Russell and Lawrence are one of the great, symbiotic, cinematic collaborations 
of our time –each other’s spirit animals 
<http://masterherald.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/david-russsell-and-jennifer-lawrence.jpg>
, no-filter friends. In conversation, and giving alecture 
<http://www.bafta.org/press/press-releases/bafta-david-lean-lecture-david-o-russell>
 the next day, he speaks about her frequently, fiercely fond, endlessly 
defensive – witness the“douche face” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=we6LEHiejFs> (his words) he pulled at the 2013 
Baftas, when she lost out on an award forSilver Linings Playbook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/silver-linings-playbook>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fdavid-o-russell-i-relate-to-joy-jennifer-lawrence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdececf14f802d3307730365f441ae839957dbc04%2F0_233_3508_2104%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20O%20Russell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20relate%20to%20Joy%20%E2%80%93%20she%20manages%20a%20lot%20of%20commerce%20that%20is%20unforgiving%20and%20nasty%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fdavid-o-russell-i-relate-to-joy-jennifer-lawrence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20O%20Russell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20relate%20to%20Joy%20%E2%80%93%20she%20manages%20a%20lot%20of%20commerce%20that%20is%20unforgiving%20and%20nasty%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fdavid-o-russell-i-relate-to-joy-jennifer-lawrence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdececf14f802d3307730365f441ae839957dbc04%2F0_233_3508_2104%2F3508.jpg>
 Jennifer Lawrence and Robert De Niro in Joy. Photograph: Allstar/20th Century 
Fox 
That was the first of three films together; a fourth will see her play the 
mother of Robert De Niro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/16/jennifer-lawrence-robert-de-niro-mother-david-o-russell>
 – another regular in Russell’s rolling rep company. She says it’s a 
death-till-they-part partnership; he that he intends to keep working even if he 
has to stagger on set in an oxygen mask. (Actually, he’s only 57, looks 
younger.)

It is easy to mistake Joy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joy> as their most 
mundane movie, maybe because Lawrence dials it down from the nutty heights of 
Playbook andAmerican Hustle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/american-hustle>. 
Actually, it’s their most intricate and exhilarating. A loose biopic of Miracle 
Mop inventor Joy Mangano, this is a female empowerment fable that starts as 
whacked-out fairytale, then swerves into a ball-busting western. Its heroine 
evolves from doormat to godmother – the mobster type, not the Cinderella 
version (think Marlon Brando in marigolds).

Joy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/joy> is really a collage, bits filched 
from the biography of its lead as much as its subject. “It’s an echo of what 
I’ve watched Jennifer live in the last five years,” he says. The sum of these 
parts is a manifesto on how to survive success as well as failure. About 
keeping sweet as you skip through the brickbats.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fjoy-video-review&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F22%2F1450800099614%2FKP_877534_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joy%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fjoy-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joy%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F23%2Fjoy-video-review&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F22%2F1450800099614%2FKP_877534_crop_640x360.jpg>
 Watch a video review of Joy 
Yes, Joy began a gunslinger as well as becoming one, he says. But whether an 
assassin or entrepreneur or actor, you’re only as good as your last hit. “In 
karate you may have a black belt, but if you don’t use it they don’t consider 
you to have it any more. I think Joy was born the unanxious presence in the 
room. But that’s the tricky mystery of life; you still gotta live the journey, 
go through the trolls and the giants and the beasts and the goblins. For some 
reason that’s how somebody designed the software of this place.”

Two years ago, Russell helped Lawrence unpack when she bought her first house. 
She opened a box of trinkets she hadn’t seen since she was six; the scene was 
airlifted direct into Joy. The whole film, too, is highlyalive with the 
furnishing and definition of one’s own territory. Joy lives with her mother, 
grandmother, two children, ex-husband and estranged father. She tries to impose 
order by divvying it up and keeping it clean, but it’s still a prison. Not only 
are family the people least likely to instil self-belief, says the film, but 
also most likely to erode your sense of yourself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fdavid-o-russell-i-relate-to-joy-jennifer-lawrence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b5f2ddb8bfcbf6744906db1c7248ade2ceaef29%2F0_0_3276_1966%2F3276.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20O%20Russell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20relate%20to%20Joy%20%E2%80%93%20she%20manages%20a%20lot%20of%20commerce%20that%20is%20unforgiving%20and%20nasty%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fdavid-o-russell-i-relate-to-joy-jennifer-lawrence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20O%20Russell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20relate%20to%20Joy%20%E2%80%93%20she%20manages%20a%20lot%20of%20commerce%20that%20is%20unforgiving%20and%20nasty%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fdavid-o-russell-i-relate-to-joy-jennifer-lawrence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b5f2ddb8bfcbf6744906db1c7248ade2ceaef29%2F0_0_3276_1966%2F3276.jpg>
 I Heart Huckabees (2004) with Jude Law, Naomi Watts, Dustin Hoffman and Lily 
Tomlin. Photograph: Allstar/Fox Searchlight 
Russell quotes Sartre: “We only become what we are by the radical refusal of 
that which others have made of us.” He continues: “You can wake up and find 
yourself defined by their space or the world’s space. And then the question is, 
if you’re going to try against the odds to change that. There’s a beautiful 
loneliness and sadness in people who dare to do things, which I find cinematic 
and cool.”

Joy, then, is a three-parent product. Do a little digging and it’s obvious 
Russell’s DNA is the most dominant. “I relate to her deeply,” he says – more, 
even, than to his go-to alter-ego, the QVC wrangler played by Bradley Cooper. 
“She manages a lot of bare-knuckled commerce that’s unforgiving and nasty,” 
says Russell, with relish. “You will lose it in the blink of an eye. It will be 
taken from you. You gotta be able to roll off it and move on. I just dig that 
in her.”

So the whole film is really about making a film? It is – it always is. “It’s 
always gonna get fucked up 10 ways till Sunday. Ten people will try to take it 
away from you, 10 will try to take credit, 10 will try to sue you for it. There 
will be someone in another city you have to confront. You have to bleed for it.”

Russell has haemorrhaged more generously than most. After a hard-scrabble 
career start, he was in his mid-30s before scoring a couple of indie hits at 
Sundance:Spanking the Monkey <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spanking_the_Monkey>
 (1994) and Flirting with Disaster <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=767CFFqGsiU>
 (1996). He upscaled in 1999 toThree Kings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/three-kings>, an Iraq war drama with man of 
the moment George Clooney. The rumbles of dark days began aroundthen, building 
to thunderclaps during Marmite comedyI Heart Huckabees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/i-heart-huckabees> (2004); both movies earned 
more press for theiron-set spats <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7SG43wa7Alo> 
than their sporadic brilliance. came a divorce, the realisation his young son 
suffered multiple disorders and, says Russell, his own diagnosis with “a 
syndrome which can happen to anybody, especially writers and directors – it’s 
called head-up-your-ass”.

He didn’t make a movie for six years. The drought was finally ended after Mark 
Wahlberg pushed for Russell to head up family boxing sagaThe Fighter  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-fighter>in 2010. The director came back 
fleet of foot and on form; he followed that film with the one-two sucker punch 
of Playbook and Hustle. Russell had finally struck gold with salty movies about 
damaged scrappers – and he wasn’t keen to jump back into limbo.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fdavid-o-russell-i-relate-to-joy-jennifer-lawrence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca3d2ae748cf342eedd969b638f485000320d109%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20O%20Russell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20relate%20to%20Joy%20%E2%80%93%20she%20manages%20a%20lot%20of%20commerce%20that%20is%20unforgiving%20and%20nasty%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fdavid-o-russell-i-relate-to-joy-jennifer-lawrence%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20O%20Russell%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20relate%20to%20Joy%20%E2%80%93%20she%20manages%20a%20lot%20of%20commerce%20that%20is%20unforgiving%20and%20nasty%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F31%2Fdavid-o-russell-i-relate-to-joy-jennifer-lawrence%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca3d2ae748cf342eedd969b638f485000320d109%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 American Hustle (2013), starring Bradley Cooper, left, and Christian Bale. 
Photograph: Francois Duhamel/AP 
In Joy, Lawrence reads her daughter a children’s book about cicadas, many of 
which hibernate for 17 years <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Periodical_cicadas>
, before discarding it because it’s too disturbing. The book is not a real 
book, just a resonating metaphor the director banked long back. “I grew up with 
cicadas. We never saw them or their shells. I considered them almost aliens or 
monsters, so when it was explained they would go underground for 17 years, it 
only made it scarier.That made even less sense to me.”

The best films of 2015: Guardian readers' choice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/18/the-best-films-of-2015-guardian-readers-choice>
Joy is crushed the needs of her family for 17 years; Russell’s burial was only 
a little briefer. “It did seem to beperfect to me that she would go 
underground. I wanted her to be haunted by dreams. I’ve woken up many times 
from a nightmare where you’re in church: it’s beautiful, there’s a choir 
singing, it’s a funeral – it’s my funeral. These are wake-up telegrams from the 
great beyond.”

The film shows us what it is to choose life in a coffin. Joy’s mother, 
defeated by divorce, entombs herself in her bedroom, a man-fearing Miss 
Havisham addicted to soap operas. “That is a way of living I endorse,” says 
Russell. “I say: ‘I understand the world is too much for you. You’re in your 
room and you’re taking solace from narrative. You’re not hurting anybody. You 
might be helping, in calling forth great forbearance and patience from Joy to 
treat her mother as a third child.’ My mother in heaven is saying to me: ‘I 
made you be as strong as you need to be by the ways I challenged you, and the 
ways you had to try to take care of me.’”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fdavid-o-russell-joy-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20O%20Russell%20on%20Joy%3A%20'If%20you're%20going%20to%20live%20a%20fairytale%20you've%20got%20to%20go%20through%20the%20goblins'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fdavid-o-russell-joy-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20O%20Russell%20on%20Joy%3A%20%27If%20you%27re%20going%20to%20live%20a%20fairytale%20you%27ve%20got%20to%20go%20through%20the%20goblins%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F28%2Fdavid-o-russell-joy-video-interview&media=>
So this is the zen era of David O Russell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/david-o-russell>. He has chosen, like the 
woman whose story he nominally tells, to forgive those with whom he went into 
combat, and to mop for succour as well as sanitation. A man happy in his second 
act, who even looks a little reborn: clear eyes, teen sneakers, goes 
cross-legged without creaking. The reinvention of the one-time bad boy to 
proto-buddha might be a narrative curveball, but it is a sincere one.

“The sublime can happen very unexpectedly, as Yeats said. You can be sitting 
in a teashop and all of a sudden you can feel blessed and blessing. Why at that 
moment? It can be a very banal moment. These are things to look for in our 
cinema of the ordinary, which aspires to be extraordinary.”
 