
NOT DEL BOY, NOT INSPECTOR FROST, BUT ... DON MITCHELL!

Come Rain Come Shine, ITV1, 8.30pm – David Jason, back on ITV for the first 
time since the final Touch of Frost in April, co-starred withAlison Steadman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/alison-steadman> in the family drama 
watched by 5.548 million viewers on ITV1 and another 178,000 on ITV1 HD, a 
total share of 21.9%.

It predictably had the better of BBC1's Panorama about the banking system, 
Carry On Banking!, which drew 2.845 million viewers, a 10.4% share, and the 
last of BBC1's Jimmy McGovern drama series Accused, which came to an end with 
3.188 million viewers, a 12% share.

But the David Jason drama was given a run for its money by hit BBC2 sitcom 
Miranda, starring Miranda Hart, which ended its six-part with an impressive 
4.281 million viewers on BBC2 with another 86,000 on BBC HD, a combined 16% 
share.

BUT DOES IT HAVE SATELLITE?

The Nativity, BBC1, 7pm – Tony Jordan's four-part take on the biblical tale, 
starring Neil Dudgeon and Peter Capaldi, began with 5.207 million viewers, a 
20.3% share, between 7pm and 7.30pm.

Emmerdale pulled in 8.5 million viewers at the same time on ITV1 with another 
253,000 on ITV1 HD, a total share of 34.1%.

BBC2's new documentary series Yellowstone, about the US national park, began 
its three-part run with 2.001 million viewers, a 7.6% share between 7pm and 8pm.

BANG!

Ruth Jones's Christmas Cracker, BBC2, 9pm – the Gavin & Stacey star's 
talkshow, which debuted in Wales last Christmas and last night went nationwide, 
picked up 2.455 million viewers, a 9.1% share between 9pm and 9.40pm.

It was up against Jamie's Best Ever Christmas on Channel 4, which drew 2.68 
million on Channel 4, a 10% share, with an extra 256,000 viewers on Channel 4 
+1. Oliver's share of the audience was more than 50% up on the slot average 
over the past 13 weeks.

Channel 5's Extreme Fishing with Robson Green came to the end of the line with 
1.202 million viewers, 4.5% of the audience.

SNOW NEWS LIKE GOOD NEWS (AGAIN)

Frozen Britain: BBC News Special, BBC1, 7.30pm – the BBC News special about 
the recent weather averaged 4.767 million (17.5%) between 7.30pm and 8pm. It 
predictably lost out to ITV1's Coronation Street, which had 11.04 million 
viewers with another 468,000 viewers on ITV HD, also between 7.30pm and 8pm.

All ratings are Barb <http://www.barb.co.uk/> overnight figures, including 
live and same day timeshifted (recorded) viewing, but excluding on demand, +1 
or other – unless otherwise stated. Figures for BBC1, ITV1, Channel 4 and 
Channel 5 generally include ratings for their HD simulcast services, unless 
otherwise stated

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 