
This week, DC Comics <https://www.theguardian.com/books/dc-comics> presses the 
reset button on its universe of characters … yet again. From today, everything 
will be slightly different in the world of Batman, Superman and Wonder Woman 
just so it can, paradoxically, stay the same for just that bit longer.

The DC Rebirth event is masterminded by writer Geoff Johns and is introduced 
in a special comic book that will set the stall out for the equivalent of a 
digital remastering ofthe DC Universe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/mar/24/batman-v-superman-warner-dc-comics-zack-synder-dawn-of-justice>
. Many are waiting to be pleasantly surprised by what Johns has in store, but 
news of some of the headline changes “leaked out” (for which read: somebody 
busted the embargo on the DC press release) at the weekend, so DC made its 
announcements a little early.

What can DC do to save its struggling comic book cinematic universe?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/20/dc-comics-cinematic-universe-struggles>
Therefore, spoilers ahoy if you’re trying to avoid the major plotlines. The 
biggest one is that the world of the Watchmen – created byAlan Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alan-moore> and Dave Gibbons and a 
standalone superhero story not connected with the rest of DC’s oeuvre – will be 
folded into the DC Universe.

The rest of it (or at least what’s come out so far) includes the return of Kid 
Flash, the Blue Beetle, the Justice Society of America and the Legion of 
Super-Heroes, and essentially the wiping out of a lot of what happened in the 
five years since DC last rebooted its universe and set up the New 52 comics. 
None of which will hugely matter to anyone but the most hardened fan of DC 
comics, and that’s kind of the point.

The unstoppable conquest of the multiplexes by superhero movies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/17/margot-robbie-harley-quinn-suicide-squad-dc-marvel-comic-book-films>
 means any casual reader tempted to check out the source material might find 
themselves mired in the knotted continuity of a world they just don’t have the 
time or inclination to explore. The idea of comic universe reboots is about 30 
years old, and properly began with DC’s Crisis on Infinite Earths in 1985, a 
storyline that spanned all the company’s titles and was the first attempt to 
streamline and simplify a universe that had just got out of hand.

Some of DC’s characters dated back to the 1930s and their backstories had 
changed and altered over the years at the hands of many writers, yet readers 
were still asked to accept that the Bruce Wayne in his 30s in the mid-1980s was 
the same guy who had fought Nazis in the second world war.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fdc-comics-reboot-batman-superman-wonder-woman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97379a18b000996b0ec88296cfb0d999dfbef5c5%2F0_113_1031_618%2F1031.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=DC%20Rebirth%3A%20Batman%2C%20Superman%20and%20Wonder%20Woman%20get%20rebooted%20%E2%80%A6%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fdc-comics-reboot-batman-superman-wonder-woman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=DC%20Rebirth%3A%20Batman%2C%20Superman%20and%20Wonder%20Woman%20get%20rebooted%20%E2%80%A6%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fdc-comics-reboot-batman-superman-wonder-woman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97379a18b000996b0ec88296cfb0d999dfbef5c5%2F0_113_1031_618%2F1031.jpg>
 Suicide Squad. Photograph: DC Comics 
But rather than say, “OK, this isn’t working – we’re just going to switch the 
DC Universe off and on again,” the writer Marv Wolfman brought the readers in 
on the act by writing a credible (in superhero terms) explanation for why and 
how this was all going to happen. That meant the use of parallel worlds and in 
some cases different versions of the same heroes inhabiting alternative 
universes which all folded into one easy-to-manage continuity.

And it kind of worked. Things were a lot simpler. For all of nine years. 
Because with the best will in the world, when you’ve got dozens of different 
writers spinning tall tales about outrageous characters, things are going to 
get weird. So in 1994, DC did it all again with Zero Hour, which tried to iron 
out some wrinkles that stubbornly refused to be smoothed over. And there it 
was, job finally done. Or was it?

Fast forward to 2006, two decades after Crisis on Infinite Earths, when along 
came Infinite Crisis – because, like soap powder, each reboot has to be better 
than the previous one on a quantum level. By this point, DC’s editors must have 
been getting really annoyed at the fact that they couldn’t keep their universe 
under control because they had quite literally sent Superboy into the 
space-time continuum to repeatedly hit the actual flow of time with his fists 
until things were sorted. At least, I think that’s what happened.It was all a 
bit confusing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/apr/30/has-dc-killed-batman-and-joker-endgame-scott-snyder>
.

Remember how Crisis on Infinite Earths got rid of all the infinite earths? 
Well, they were brought back again, but this time the number of parallel worlds 
was capped at 52, because that’s a nice, manageable number. And DC bosses could 
say, “Yeah, Batman in the second world war, that happened over here, and 
Superman wearing jeans and a red T-shirt, that happened over there.”

But of course, that wasn’t good enough, so in 2011, DC did its last reboot and 
created the New 52, which was kind of like the post-Infinite Crisis Old 52 
universe, but the company started all its comics from issue number one again 
and created a world where superheroes were new and exciting and hadn’t been 
smashing things up for seven decades.

Confused? You will be, because now DC’s at it again. But fear not; if you’re a 
casual reader and not a dedicated fan, this is all for you. Seriously. DC wants 
people to be able to pick up its comics and get in on the ground floor of 
adventures, not struggle to wonder on which planet everything’s happening. It’s 
a new broom to sweep away the accumulated detritus of continuity and lay 
everything out clean and simple. It’s a fresh jumping-on point for new readers.

You don’t even need to read DC Rebirth issue one – that’s really for the 
hardcore to be able to say: “OK, I see what’s changed.” You can just start 
reading from the new, rebooted titles in June, and – hopefully – everything 
will all make sense once again. But enjoy it while you can: I figure you’ve got 
about five years before someone’s finger hovers over that big, red reboot 
button at DC’s Burbank HQ.
 