
Norway is many things to many people who have never set foot on its shores. It 
is the Land of the Midnight Sun, of 1,000 fjords, where thenorthern lights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/northernlights> dance across endless skies. 
It is also the home of Harry Hole and Hanne Wilhelmsen, where headless corpses 
litter the woods.

The popularity of Nordic noir has brought welcome attention to Scandinavian 
writing, but that is just one of several dishes on its literary smorgasbord. In
Norway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> alone – a nation of readers, 
according to a recent report that found one in four Norwegians pick up a book 
on a typical day – there are scores of celebrated authors whose work falls 
outside the crime fiction genre, alighting somewhere between bestselling 
non-fiction and the clean, controlled prose I particularly love. The most 
affecting books, for me, capture something of the country's character in their 
attention to its nature, which has such bearing on its inhabitants. The 
community I describe in The Last Boat Home lives off the land and sea, so its 
surroundings, in all their beauty and ruggedness, are central to the story.

Here are 10 of my favourite Norwegian books available in English translation. 
Each is worthy of being pored over and admired.

1. Hunger by Knut Hamsun (translated by Sverre Lyngstad) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/history/9780857861795/hunger>

Norwegians have never forgiven Knut Hamsun his politics 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knut_Hamsun#Political_sympathies>, but his work 
earned him the Nobel prize in literature in 1920 and established him as one of 
the country's most important authors. Published in 1890 and hailed by many as 
an early example of modernism, Hunger follows the trials of a destitute writer 
who wanders the streets of Kristiania, his thoughts shifting between lucidity 
and daydream as starvation gnaws away at his sanity. Uncomfortable but 
essential reading.

2. Out Stealing Horses by Per Petterson (translated by Anne Born) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/data/book/fiction/9780099506133/out-stealing-horses>

After suffering a personal tragedy, Trond retreats from the world, until a 
chance encounter sets him off into memory. In 1948, during a summer spent with 
his father in the countryside near the Swedish border, the 15-year-old Trond 
follows his friend into a field to steal horses, unaware of a shooting accident 
that has left a young boy dead. A tale of Norway during and after the second 
world war, of innocence lost and families destroyed, Petterson's portrayal of 
rural life is mesmerising, as is his pitch-perfect prose.

3. Dina's Book by Herbjørg Wassmo (translated by Nadia Christensen) 
<http://scandinavianbooks.com/fiction-book/norwegian-author/herbjorg-wassmo.html>

Dina's Book begins with a murder: a bleeding woman sends an injured man and 
his sledge careening off a cliff to certain death. On her return to the farm 
they shared as husband and wife, the muteness that saves her from 
accountability is attributed to shock. Dina is a hoot of a heroine, delightful 
and infuriating, in this epic novel set in the mid-19th century. She deals with 
the trauma of having caused her mother's death when she was a child by wreaking 
havoc on the lives of everyone around her.

4. The Ice Palace by Tarjei Vesaas (translated by Elizabeth Rokkan) 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/book-review--frozen-secrets-stranded-in-a-waterfall-the-ice-palace--tarjei-vesaas-tr-elizabeth-rokkan-peter-owen-1095-pounds-doris-lessing-applaud-the-reissue-of-a-classic-novel-about-rural-intensity-by-the-norwegian-writer-tarjei-vesaas-1455730.html>

A strange bond unites Siss and Unn, two young girls living in the frozen 
Norwegian countryside. Siss is outgoing, the leader of the pack, in every way 
unlike the shy newcomer Unn, and yet their friendship changes both indelibly. 
When Unn disappears, Siss is left to find a way of keeping her memory alive. A 
haunting story, full of ice and wind and poetry.

5. The Half Brother by Lars Saabye Christensen (translated by Kenneth Steven) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/may/24/featuresreviews.guardianreview10>

The protagonist's parents name him Barnum after the circus impresario in the 
first of several misfortunes that will set his course through life. As a boy in 
Oslo in the 1960s, Barnum looks up to and fears his erratic half-brother, Fred, 
the product of their mother's rape on the day of Norway's liberation from Nazi 
troops at the end of the second world war. The Half Brother is a doorstopper 
whose every page bursts with colour in this portrayal of four generations of 
Barnum's remarkable family.

6. Child Wonder by Roy Jacobsen (translated by Don Bartlett) 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/books/reviews/child-wonder-by-roy-jacobsen-trans-don-bartlett-with-don-shaw-2295271.html>

Another story of half-siblings in the 60s, Child Wonder is told by Finn, who 
lives alone with his mother in a working-class suburb until a sister he has 
never met steps off the Grorud bus. Six-year-old Linda moves in with them while 
her own mother undergoes treatment for morphine addiction, just as Kristian the 
lodger takes up in the spare room with his TV. An endearing coming-of-age novel.

7. My Struggle by Karl Ove Knausgård (translated by Don Bartlett) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/07/karl-ove-knausgaard-my-struggle-hari-kunzru>

In mid-January, a 37-year-old man was arrested in Malmö for entering a 
bookshop and setting fire to a copy of the fourth book in Knausgård's My 
Struggle oeuvre. When arrested, he explained to police that he did it because 
he felt Knausgård was the worst writer of all time. The My Struggle books have 
certainly proven to be incendiary in Knausgård's native Norway, where readers 
have questioned the morality of writing about real people, even as book sales 
have soared. Love him or loathe him (my feet are firmly planted in the "love" 
camp).

8. The Seducer by Jan Kjærstad (translated by Barbara Haveland) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jan/17/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>

"So how do the pieces of a life fit together? Or, to put it another way, do 
they fit together at all?" So asks the narrator of this sweeping story moments 
before its hero, the famed TV producer Jonas Wergeland, comes face to face with 
a polar bear in an outdoor privy in the middle of Greenland. Kjærstad's 
playful, circuitous tale begins with Jonas's discovery of his wife, Margrete, 
lying dead on their living-room floor, before jumping from event to adventure, 
making time along the way for Jonas to seduce the best and brightest of 
Norway's female citizens.

9. The Bookseller of Kabul by Åsne Seierstad (translated by Ingrid 
Christophersen) <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/aug/31/travel.features>

In February 2002, after reporting on the offensive against the Taliban in 
Afghanistan in the months following 9/11, the Norwegian journalistÅsne Seierstad
 <https://www.theguardian.com/books/asne-seierstad> moved into the home of Shah 
Muhammad Rais, the bookseller of the title (who appears under the pseudonym 
"Sultan Khan"), to learn firsthand about family life in Kabul. The book based 
on her observations was met with international acclaim, although the bookseller 
was none too pleased. In 2003, his second wife sued Seierstad for invasion of 
privacy in a Norwegian court. The case was settled in 2011 in Seierstad's 
favour, only to be filed anew with the European Court of Human Rights earlier 
this year.

10. Naive. Super by Erlend Loe (translated by Tor Ketil Solberg) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jul/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview19>

The protagonist of Naive. Super has been hailed as Norway's answer to Holden 
Caulfield. A 25-year-old university dropout, he is unable to pinpoint the cause 
of his depression, but he is in crisis nonetheless: he relieves his anxiety 
about the nature of time by sending faxes, making lists and pounding pegs into 
a board with a toy hammer. In the process, our hero poses some of life's big 
questions in ways that are by turns funny and touching.
 