
The federal government is significantly reducing the volume of prescription 
painkillers that can be manufactured in the United States, citing a decreased 
demand for such opioid drugs amid a public health epidemic of prescription drug 
abuse and addiction.

The Drug Enforcement Administration announced this week 
<https://www.dea.gov/divisions/hq/2016/hq100416.shtml> that the amount of most 
opioid medications that can be manufactured for sale and research in the US in 
2017 will be reduced by 25% or more from this year’s quota. The federal agency 
sets annual quotas to regulate the production of controlled substances in US.

The DEA’s new quotas for 2017 reduce the amount of several addictive 
prescription painkillers including oxycodone, hydrocodone, fentanyl, 
hydromorphone and morphine.

Pills laced with deadly opioid infiltrating drug market, DEA says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/24/counterfeit-prescription-pills-laced-deadly-opioid-fentanyl>
Deaths from opioid overdoses have increased sharply in the past two decades, 
and overdose deaths from all drugs claim about 80 lives a day in the US, 
according todata from 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/ng-interactive/2016/may/25/opioid-epidemic-overdose-deaths-map>
.

The DEA announcement reverses years of permitting an increased flow of these 
drugs throughout the country, although levels remain high compared with the 
years before the opioid crisis.

“Other than a year here or a year there where there was maybe a small cut, 
there’s never been a cut this big,” said journalist John Temple.
Trajectory of DEA limits on prescription painkillers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/10/dea-drug-numbers/>  Trajectory of 
DEA limits on prescription painkillers 
Temple, author of a book on the opioid crisis called American Pain, cautioned 
that although the drops were significant, the limits were still much higher 
than levels in the 1990s and 2000s.

For example, the 2017 quota for fentanyl, a drug similar to heroin that is 
lethal in much smaller doses, is dipping about 24% from this year’s quota. 
However, the 1,750 kg of fentanyl that will be allowed to circulate next year 
is still considerably more than the 1,428kg permitted in each year from 2006 to 
2012.

It’s unclear what impact these new limits will have on public health.

“This would have been helpful if it had happened 10 to 15 years ago when 
consumption was still rising and rising quickly,” said opioid expert Dr Andrew 
Kolodny of the not-for-profit treatment center Phoenix House. “Now that we are 
massively overconsuming opioids this is too little, too late.”

War on prescription drugs: what if you depend on opioids to live a decent life?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/12/prescription-drugs-what-if-you-depend-on-opioids-chronic-pain>
Six senators, including Amy Klobuchar and Edward Markey, had called for the 
DEA to lower the quotas in July, to stem the flow of the estimated 14bn opioid 
pills throughout the US each year.

“We remain deeply troubled by the sheer volume of opioids available – volumes 
that are approved by DEA,” the senatorswrote 
<http://www.klobuchar.senate.gov/public/2016/7/klobuchar-urges-the-drug-enforcement-administration-to-set-stricter-limits-on-opioid-pills>
 in a letter to the head of the agency.

According to the DEA, the drop in next year’s quotas is due to a decreased 
demand for opioid medications as more physicians become informed about the 
dangers of overprescribing pain medication. The exact process by which the DEA 
determines the aggregate quotas for each year is not disclosed to the public.

“Demand for these opioid medicines, represented by prescriptions written by 
DEA-registered practitioners, has decreased according to sales data obtained by 
DEA from IMS Health, a company that provides insurance companies with data on 
prescriptions written and prescription medications sold in America,” the agency 
said in a statement.

A DEA spokeswoman, Barbara Carreno, explained that in previous years, the DEA 
added a 25% “buffer” to the anticipated need for opioid medications to create 
quotas that would allow additional production in the event of a drug shortage.

“We have had a 25% buffer on opioid quotas for several years and this has not 
been used,” Carreno said. “It hasn’t been dipped into.”


 