
While you’ve been weighing up whether to expand secondary modern education to 
the levels experienced when I was at school in the 1950s and 60s, I’ve been 
thinking about what things are going to be like for someone aged eight now. 
Ahead of this person is 10 years of education redesigned by your party.

This eight-year-old is likely to be sitting in class this week at a table with 
a name such as Squirrels. This disguises the fact that all the children know 
that Cheetahs table is for the kids getting everything right and Tortoise table 
is for those getting everything wrong. At frequent intervals, the 
eight-year-olds will be tested to see if they are on the right tables. Mostly 
they are. This keeps the attainment gap permanently wide.

The eight-year-olds will spend a good deal of time practising doing the kind 
of publichigh-stakes tests they’ll do when they’re 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/03/morgan-sats-test-children-primary-school-pupils>
 (or nearly). By the time these eight-year-olds are 11, these tests may well 
have become even more difficult. You and your party call this “raising 
standards”. The children on Tortoise table know that all it means is that it’s 
less likely they’ll pass.

Dear Ms Morgan: Sats tests are putting young children through hell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/03/morgan-sats-test-children-primary-school-pupils>
The practice tests are worksheets, sometimes cunningly disguised as pages in 
booklets and given as homework. Some make sense. Some don’t, as when they ask 
things such as “underline the present perfect progressive” when nothing in the 
vicinity looks as if it’s present, perfect or progressive.

Having spent three years doing this, while useless things like reading for 
fun, painting, dancing, pottery, thinking, film-making, photography or going 
for a walk have been squeezed down to quick taster sessions, children do the 
tests.

These aren’t to measure children; they’re to measure whether the teachers have 
taught the children the things that are in the tests. That’s why it doesn’t 
matter what’s in the tests. It’s any old stuff that they think they can measure 
but sounds something like the stuff they gave us when we did the 11-plus exam 
in 1957.That system was so good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/02/nicky-morgan-grammar-schools-secondary-selection>
 it failed two-thirds of the children who did the exam. That was the point of 
it.

The point now is that if enough children fail, the government will turn the 
child’s school into an academy. This means that a bunch of people get the 
school on a 125-year-lease to run on the same site, but if they want to run a
dating agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/26/sketch-margaret-hodge-academies-public-finances-committee>
 on site at the same time, they could give that a go, too. By the way, if too 
many children fail the test when it has become an academy, it will be turned 
into an … er … academy.

Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> now move on to another 
school. If they failed any of the tests, they may have to do them again. This 
is probably one step on the route towards bringing back the “Gymnasium” system 
of 19th-century Europe, which kept children down for years.

Dear Nicky Morgan: It’s too easy to say grammar schools were good | Michael 
Rosen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/02/nicky-morgan-grammar-schools-secondary-selection>
The first two years of secondary school may be the best out of the 10. That’s 
because schools and teachers still have some control over what to do in this 
time. After that, the next three years will be preparing for exams that are now 
“world class”. “World class” means “packed with more information than many 
children can understand or remember”. Again, as with the tests for 
11-year-olds, it really doesn’t matter what much of this information is, so 
long as there’s a lot of it, enough of it is “traditional” – for example 
Wordsworth – and it can be broken down into small enough bits so that there are 
yes/no answers for it. This teaches students that life is made up of right or 
wrong facts; it’s not about empathy, invention, investigation, experiment, 
interpretation, cooperation or change. There is only “is”, never “might be”.

This three years is also important because by the time students get to this 
point, they will only be able to choose one of the following: music, art, 
drama, dance, textiles or photography. That’s because anyone who does, say, 
musicand drama is unfit to make a contribution to society. When we watch TV or 
go to the cinema, is any of it dramaticand musical? Of course not.

At the end of three years students will spend two weeks doing high-stakes 
exams that decide whether they can do A-levels or something else. The aim is 
that this is a final cutting of the cake.

In the bad old days, people were allowed a second, third and fourth chance in 
“techs’, further education and community colleges. Luckily, these are being 
closed and cut back. It’s called giving everyone a chance to improve 
themselves. Not.

Yours, Michael Rosen
 