
From an initial print run of just 300 copies to being deemed “as close to the 
perfect first novel as you can get”: Andrew Michael Hurley’s debut novel The 
Loney has had a big year. His gloomy, gothic tale of child murder and Catholic 
guilt set on “a wild and useless length of English coastline” has been 
universally praised by critics, and is now favourite to win the Costa book of 
the year award.

Kate Atkinson wins Costa novel prize for A God in Ruins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/04/kate-atkinson-wins-costa-novel-prize-for-a-god-in-ruins>
As bets close in the runup to the announcement on Tuesday evening, Hurley has 
been placed ahead of the other contenders to win by William Hill, with odds of 
6/4. At 3/1, three-time Costa award winner Kate Atkinson is second favourite 
for her novel A God in Ruins: the tale of an RAF pilot and poet navigating the 
turn of the 20th-century and Atkinson’s finest work,according to Stephanie 
Merritt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/10/a-god-in-ruins-kate-atkinson-observer-review>
.

Third in the running, with odds of 4/1 is this year’s biography winner, Andrea 
Wulf, forThe Invention of Nature: The Adventures of Alexander Von Humboldt, The 
Lost Hero of Science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/13/the-invention-of-nature-the-adventures-of-alexander-von-humboldt-andrea-wulf-review>
, followed by children’s book winner Frances Hardinge for her Victorian mystery
The Lie Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/nov/19/the-lie-tree-by-frances-hardinge-review>
 at 5/1, and poetry winner Don Paterson, also ranked at 5/1 for his collection
40 Sonnets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/26/40-sonnets-don-paterson-review-poetry-collection>
.

One of the most prestigious book prizes in the UK, the Costa book awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/costabookaward> are unique in giving prizes 
to five categories each year – first novel, novel, biography, poetry and 
children’s book – before choosing one as the overall winner as book of the year.

Since 2000, 50% of the book of the year winners also won the novel of the year 
award. The awards, known as the Whitbread prizes until 2006, have picked a book 
of the year since 1985. First novels have only won the the latter five times; 
The Comforts of Madness by Paul Sayer in 1988, Swing Hammer Swing! by Jeff 
Torrington in 1992, Behind the Scenes at the Museum byKate Atkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/kate-atkinson> in 1995, The Tenderness of 
Wolves by Stef Penney in 2006 and The Shock of the Fall by Nathan Filer in 2013.


The Loney by Andrew Michael Hurley review – a gothic masterpiece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/28/the-loney-andrew-michael-hurley-review-gothic-novel>
So who will win? Not necessarily the favourite; in oddly similar circumstances,
Ali Smith was the bookies’ favourite 
<http://www.mynewsdesk.com/uk/costa-coffee/pressreleases/william-hill-releases-latest-odds-for-costa-book-of-the-year-1109183>
 to win on odds of 6/4 last year, after winning the best novel prize, but was 
eventually pipped at the post by biography winner Helen McDonald, whose memoir 
H is for Hawk was on odds of 3/1.

Reviewing The Loney for the Guardian, Sarah Perry called it a masterpiece that 
could be held up “alongside those ofWalpole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/feb/20/horace-walpole-strawberry-hill>
,Du Maurier <https://www.theguardian.com/books/daphnedumaurier>, Maturin and 
Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/apr/18/shirley-jackson-back-garlic-in-fiction>
”, while Julie Myerson, reviewing for the Observer, said it is “a novel of the 
unsaid, the implied, the barely grasped or understood, crammed with dark holes 
and blurry spaces that your imagination feels compelled to fill. It takes both 
confidence and talent to write like this and it leaves you wanting more of 
whatever slice of darkness Hurley might choose to dish up next.”

The five Costa book award winners receive £5,000, with an extra £30,000 
awarded to the book of the year winner. The winner will be announced on Tuesday 
night. The winner of the Costa short story award, made up frominitially 
anonymous entries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/18/costa-short-story-prize-reveals-identities-of-anonymised-finalists>
 put to the public for a blind vote, will also be announced at the award 
ceremony.
 