
Andrew Michael Hurley’s slice of Lancashire-set gothic horror The Loney has 
beaten some of the year’s biggest-hitting novels to be named book of the year 
at the British Book Industry awards.

The Loney by Andrew Michael Hurley review – a gothic masterpiece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/28/the-loney-andrew-michael-hurley-review-gothic-novel>
First published in a limited print run of just 300 copies by independent 
publisher Tartarus Press, The Loney tells of a pilgrimage to the Lancashire 
coast, “that strange nowhere between the Wyre and the Lune [where] the neap 
tides would reveal the skeletons of those who thought they could escape its 
insidious currents”. Word-of-mouth success with the small Yorkshire publisher 
meant it went on to be acquired by John Murray, and towin the Costa first novel 
award in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/17/costa-category-awards-2015-tiny-presses-square-up-to-big-hitters>
.

The British Book Industry awards, for “books that have been both well-written 
and brilliantly published”, called The Loney a “true British success story”. “A 
debut novel suspended between literary gothic and supernatural horror, it was 
written by an unknown author in his 40s, who worked part-time for 10 years to 
be able to write,” said organisers of the awards, which are run by The 
Bookseller magazine. “[The Loney] quickly became the hot literary novel, with 
almost 100 times its original print run.”

The Loney beat titles including Paula Hawkins’s international hit The Girl on 
the Train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/08/the-girl-on-the-train-book-sales-record-paula-hawkins>
, and Harper Lee’sGo Set a Watchman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/ng-interactive/2015/jul/10/go-set-a-watchman-read-the-first-chapter>
 to the top prize at the British Book Industry awards this evening. The award 
for non-fiction book of the year went to Lars Mytting and Robert Ferguson’s 
guide to wood-chopping,Norwegian Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/16/norwegian-wood-lars-mytting-man-made-things-trees-robert-penn-review>
, a title which organisers said “demonstrated great publisher faith and 
vision”, while best children’s book was won by David Solomons’sMy Brother is a 
Superhero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/oct/31/my-brother-is-a-superhero-david-solomons-review>
.

Andrew Michael Hurley: how the north made The Loney a gothic horror
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/19/andrew-michael-hurley-how-the-north-made-the-loney-a-gothic-horror>
Hanya Yanagihara’s A Little Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/18/a-little-life-hanya-yanagihara-review-man-booker-prize>
, which was shortlisted for the 2015 Man Booker prize and is shortlisted for 
this year’s Baileys prize, took the fiction book of the year, ahead of 
shortlisted books by authors including EL James and Hawkins.

“It’s been a fascinating process to consider so many brilliantly published 
books and think about what it is that makes a book catch fire,” said chair of 
judges Cathy Rentzenbrink, a contributing editor at The Bookseller. “All our 
judging meetings were lively and opinionated as we looked at the stories behind 
the stories. From A Little Life, Norwegian Wood and My Brother is a Superhero 
to overall winner The Loney, these books tell an important story about British 
publishing – that originality and individuality really count.”
 