
Many people think that design is about prettification. But those people are 
horribly, dreadfully wrong.Design 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/design> is much more than that; it's 
a superpower, and with it you can change the world.

Through the RSA's Great Recovery project <http://www.greatrecovery.org.uk/>, 
I've spent the past couple of years looking at the role that design plays in 
moving us from a linear economy – where we dig up elements in Africa, process 
them in Asia, ship them to us, then throw them in a hole in the ground a few 
months later – to a circular economy, where valuable elements are kept in play 
and reused or preprocessed.

This shift entails a complete rethink of "business as usual" and we've found 
that bringing designers into the conversation is usefully disruptive. The RSA 
has developed four models to help us start to redesign products that are 
currently designed to be bought then thrown away, and we lead mixed 
disciplinary groups of designers, material scientists, policy-makers and 
marketers through a process that helps them redesign these products for 
longevity, service, remanufacture and disassembly.

The process has been accelerated by the Technology Strategy Board 
<https://www.innovateuk.org/> dangling cash carrots for those who propose 
radical redesigns of objects such as the lightbulb, kettle and paint pot.

Business must wake up to the pressing need to innovate using design. I would 
argue designers and design thinking are the most essential tools in arming 
business with the disruptive new products and services they need to stay 
competitive. I won't bore you with fact that the world's most valuable company, 
Apple, has design as the cornerstone of its business process. More importantly, 
designers can help the world move away from the negative environmental and 
social impacts associated with the increasingly expensive and inefficient 
practices of the linear economy.

The best thing we can do to achieve this is to equip our young people with the 
skills they need to enable global business to take this brave step. For 90 
years, the RSA has run theStudent Design Awards <http://sda.thersa.org/en/>, 
which prompts students right at the beginning of their careers to consider the 
world's most pressing problems. Where better to focus them than on redesigning 
our linear consumer culture?

Several of our winning projects this year focused on longevity – keeping 
materials in use for as long as possible – and if businesses are wanting for 
ideas, look no further.Aye Skipper 
<http://cargocollective.com/samuelhoh/Aye-Skipper> by Samuel Hoh is a logistics 
service and app that enables businesses to offer clean and safe waste materials 
and products to their local community, thereby reducing waste and associated 
disposal costs, and supporting reuse and upcycling of useful materials.

We also saw innovative packaging solutions, such as a new paint container by 
Alex Machinthat reduces both paint and packaging waste 
<http://sda.thersa.org/en/showcase/year/2014/page>. It has a one-way pouring 
valve that prevents paint from drying out; the paint is stored in a bag made 
from a metallised polyethylene terephthalate (PET) that maintains its 
temperature – and the cardboard outer, plastic lid and valve can all be 
recycled.

Riikka Suominen and Thea Engerdahl created a food packaging brand made from 
beeswax <http://sda.thersa.org/en/showcase/year/2014/page>, a natural material 
that is sustainable and simple to produce while effectively protecting and 
preserving food. Cleverly, production of this packaging will furthermore 
increase beekeeping and contribute to stabilising bee populations.

Ideas around the sharing economy are often my personal favourites, especially 
when you consider that the average power drill will get used for only 10 
minutes in its lifetime. This year we had some great entries, showing that the 
notion that we don't actually have to own what we want to use is taking off. 
For example,The Community Rail 
<http://sda.thersa.org/en/showcase/year/2014/page> by Lee Clarke is a system 
for leasing bulky items, such as vacuum cleaners, which is installed in 
communal areas of limited space accommodation, such as single room flats or 
student halls. The communal rail eliminates unnecessary ownership of bulky 
equipment, while providing a space for social interaction among residents.

In a similar vein, Joshua Dean designed a service that enables people to 
borrow seldom-used products <http://sda.thersa.org/en/showcase/year/2014/page> 
from their local libraries and, in the process, reinvigorates libraries as 
relevant, valuable public services.

As we all begin to wake up to the potential of redesigning our systems to a 
more circular model, not only to save valuable resources but also money, it's 
vital that we enable the next generation of designers to use their skills to 
improve their lives and those of the people around them.

They are, after all, inheriting our mess, so the least we can do is help them 
tidy it up.

Nat Hunter is co-director of design at the Royal Society of Arts 
<http://www.thersa.org/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 