
It all started in 1990. I was fighting for democracy and better conditions for 
students. Despite our nation having gained independence from France in 1960,
Niger <https://www.theguardian.com/world/niger> had been prone to political 
instability and ruled by a one-party system. As a young man all I wanted was 
freedom and democracy.

Areva's uranium mining deal with Niger receives cautious welcome
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/may/28/areva-niger-uranium-mining-deal>
These were intense times of violent clashes between citizens and Niger’s armed 
forces. I lost a cousin and a close friend as three students were shot dead by 
armed forces during one of our demonstrations in the capital, Niamey. Fighting 
for democracy was dangerous and scary, but I decided to turn my grief and anger 
from those losses into a stronger engagement to change things. With other 
activists, I set up Croisade, a human rights organisation. This time defined my 
future as an activist.

In the 90s I was calling for democracy, but the food crisis of 2005 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/world/africa/4699643.stm> made me realise that 
Niger had another big problem: corruption. Never officially declared a famine, 
the crisis was brought on by drought, sand locusts and decades of poverty. 
Looking for ways to raise funds quickly to address the crisis, the Nigerien 
government decided to impose atax on basic foodstuffs 
<http://www.alternativeniger.org/spip.php?article184> such as wheat, milk and 
sugar.

The proposed tax angered me (it would hit the poorest hardest) but also made 
me curious: as the world’sfourth largest producer of uranium 
<http://www.world-nuclear.org/info/Country-Profiles/Countries-G-N/Niger/>, how 
could there be no money in the coffers? How can uranium represent 70% of our 
exports, but only contribute5.8% to our GDP 
<https://www.oxfam.org/en/pressroom/pressreleases/2013-12-19/areva-niger-who-benefiting-uranium>
?

To understand this lack of balance between uranium extraction and its 
revenues, I looked into the company that was extracting the uranium,Areva 
<http://niger.areva.com/>. Areva is a French company in which the French 
government has an87% stake 
<http://www.world-nuclear-news.org/C-EDF-agrees-to-majority-stake-in-Arevas-reactor-business-3007156.html>
. Operating in Niger since 1971, Areva refused to comply with the 2006 mining 
code that increased mining royalties from 5% to 12%.

I have suffered from repression, intimidation and threats, which have at times 
affected my family

In 2013, when the contracts between Areva and our government were due for 
renewal, I hoped that the government would be able to get a fairer deal. With 
fellow transparency activists we had founded Rotab, the Network of 
Organisations for Transparency and Budgetary Analysis, and joined the global 
transparency movement. I hoped that Rotab, as a watchdog, would have an impact 
on the negotiations.After 18 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/may/28/areva-niger-uranium-mining-deal>
 of intense discussions, including a visit from the French president François 
Hollande, an agreement was finally reached: Areva agreed to the increased 
mining tax but wasstill exempt from paying VAT 
<http://www.mondafrique.com/lire/economie/2015/07/03/areva-fait-pression-sur-le-peuple-nigerien>
. However, no information about this deal has been published and thecontracts 
haven’t been made public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/may/28/areva-niger-uranium-mining-deal>
, which makes us concerned that Areva may have pressured the Nigerien 
government to allow it to continue its mining operations.

Asking for answers from the government has cost me and my family a lot. I have 
missed time from my children’s education and important family moments. I have 
suffered intimidation and threats, which have at times affected my family. One 
morning last year, at around 4am, armed police broke through my gate and 
arrested me in front of my bewildered pregnant wife. My neighbours, on their 
way to the mosque for morning prayer, were alarmed to see armed plainclothes 
police around my home. This happened during Hollande’s visit, when we had 
organised a demonstration demanding the publication of the Areva contract. As 
thegovernment wanted to hide dissent 
<http://www.publishwhatyoupay.org/pwyp-news/arrest-of-pwyp-activist-ali-idrissa-in-niger-on-day-of-president-hollandes-visit/>
, theydetained me for the duration of the visit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jul/18/niger-activists-arrested-areva-francois-hollande-france-uranium>
.

It has not been easy, and sometimes I have wondered if I could carry on. Much 
has changed sincethe coup of 1999 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/april/9/newsid_2463000/2463927.stm>
, as we have democracy and laws protecting human rights, but we still have a 
long way to go. On paper there may be freedom of the press and of expression, 
but as an activist I still fear for my life. But the sacrifice has allowed me 
to bring the world’s attention to issues affecting Nigeriens.

Knowing that I have the support of Niger’s citizens has pushed me to carry on. 
I’d like to see a Niger where we work together to keep our country stable and 
promote its development. But that won’t happen as long as there isn’t a fair 
distribution of natural resources, and as long as corruption prevails. But even 
if I am scared at times, fearing for my life, I won’t give up this battle for
Niger <https://www.theguardian.com/world/niger>, for my people, for my family.
 