
Before the very first time I was going to excavate in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>, back in 2012, I have to admit I was a 
little apprehensive; I mean who wouldn’t be? Thankfully the university running 
the project completely allayed my fears by sending me on a chemical, biological 
and nuclear weapons training-day, followed up with a course on unexploded 
ordnance and not stepping on landmines. After this I was so wholly put at ease 
that I thought about maybe staying at home instead.


I did come away with some useful information; I now know that landmines 
explode as soon as you step on them rather than goingclick and giving you a 
moment to look back at your friends like they do in the movies. If I’m exposed 
to mustard gas I should drink an alcohol solution and rinse myself in milk (or 
is it the other way round?). They gave me a chemical weapons testing kit for 
checking any suspicious substances I might find seeping out of munitions; I’ve 
only used it once and that was on a bottle of Iraqi-made Sir Henry’s London 
Gin, which was suspiciously cheap but free from all common nerve agents.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91ac463e2599aed3f0855b0e47f45cba2ac5026f%2F0_0_673_504%2F673.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Despite%20landmines%2C%20snakes%20and%20dodgy%20gin%2C%20Iraq%20is%20an%20archaeological%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Despite%20landmines%2C%20snakes%20and%20dodgy%20gin%2C%20Iraq%20is%20an%20archaeological%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F91ac463e2599aed3f0855b0e47f45cba2ac5026f%2F0_0_673_504%2F673.jpg>
 Testing kit in use. Of course if I did excavate munitions with suspicious 
seepage I wouldn’t have a chance to use my testing kit as I’d be too busy 
running like a person who wants desperately to live. Photograph: Mary Shepperson
The chemical precautions for this first project were thought necessary because 
we were excavating on the outskirts of Halabjah; the Kurdish town which was 
bombed with chemical weapons in 1988. There was a possibility that unexploded 
chemical shells might have buried themselves in the ground just where we 
happened to dig our trenches. I feel the balance of probabilities to be heavily 
in our favour on this particular risk, but it looks like I’ll be back there in 
the spring to have another go at getting poisoned. In three seasons of work I 
found nothing worse than some anti-aircraft rounds and a nest of baby snakes. 
The risks of archaeology in Iraq are generally overstated.

Yabba dabba don't: archaeology needs to leave the stone age behind
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/dec/14/yabba-dabba-dont-archaeology-needs-to-leave-the-stone-age-behind>
Iraq is in fact an archaeological paradise. There’s more archaeology in the 
country than archaeologists will ever be able to get to grips with or maniacs 
will be able to destroy. The five projects I work on in Iraq are spread across 
the Kurdish north and the Shia south (leaving the problematic area in the 
middle well alone) and they cover periods from the 5th millennium BC, at the 
little site of Gurga Çhiya, to the Ottoman remains on the magnificent Citadel 
of Erbil.

This spring I helped to begin a new project aimed at rediscovering a great 
classical city of Mesopotamia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3d486069f2e7f8d53d807597e557499c4919d32%2F0_84_1204_722%2F1204.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Despite%20landmines%2C%20snakes%20and%20dodgy%20gin%2C%20Iraq%20is%20an%20archaeological%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Despite%20landmines%2C%20snakes%20and%20dodgy%20gin%2C%20Iraq%20is%20an%20archaeological%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa3d486069f2e7f8d53d807597e557499c4919d32%2F0_84_1204_722%2F1204.jpg>
 Excavating in the fields around Halabjah. Photograph: Mary Shepperson 
An hour and a half’s drive north of Basra, amongst the oil fields and the 
unrelieved flatness of the southern alluvial plain, lies 
Alexandria-on-the-Tigris; a grand port city founded by Alexander the Great in 
324 BC as an entrepôt at the head of the gulf. From the 4th century BC to the 3
rd century AD overland trade flowed to the city from Syria, the Levant and the 
Mediterranean, via Petra and Palmyra, to meet trading ships coming up the gulf 
from Arabia and the west coast of India. At its height, under its 3rd name 
Charax Spasinou, the city covered over five square kilometres, minted its own 
coins and was home to a large cosmopolitan trading community.

Until now all that is known of Charax Spasinou comes from textual sources. 

Ramesses II, victor of Kadesh: a kindred spirit of Trump?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/dec/05/ramesses-ii-victor-of-kadesh-a-kindred-spirit-of-trump>
The site today feels utterly desolate. The coast lies far to the south; the 
result of centuries of silt deposited by the Tigris and Euphrates rivers. The 
city has been smothered by repeated flooding, leaving the sloping mounds of the 
massive ramparts as the only obvious features. Adding to the visual bleakness, 
the surface is littered with debris from the Iran-Iraq war when the city’s 
ancient fortifications were reused as defensive earthworks by the Iraqi army.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10605391476e3b38a0103a1436edd2703a0fe652%2F0_3_1304_782%2F1304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Despite%20landmines%2C%20snakes%20and%20dodgy%20gin%2C%20Iraq%20is%20an%20archaeological%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Despite%20landmines%2C%20snakes%20and%20dodgy%20gin%2C%20Iraq%20is%20an%20archaeological%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10605391476e3b38a0103a1436edd2703a0fe652%2F0_3_1304_782%2F1304.jpg>
 The wastelands of Charax Spasinou today, coated in salt and the remains of 
military hardware. Photograph: Mary Shepperson 
It’s hard to know where to start with such a huge site; it can feel a bit 
hopeless standing in the middle of five square kilometres of archaeology 
holding a six-inch trowel. Luckily we have Science. A small team of German 
geophysicists kindly agreed to spend nine sweaty days trudging up and down part 
of the site with a magnetometer in the hope of getting some clues about what we 
were dealing with, as well as testing if all the landmines had really been 
cleared. The results were spectacular:
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd25007755d8586503b8d1b9b4a77bb7355cbdaaf%2F0_0_739_743%2F739.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Despite%20landmines%2C%20snakes%20and%20dodgy%20gin%2C%20Iraq%20is%20an%20archaeological%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Despite%20landmines%2C%20snakes%20and%20dodgy%20gin%2C%20Iraq%20is%20an%20archaeological%20paradise&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fdespite-landmines-snakes-and-dodgy-gin-iraq-is-an-archaeological-paradise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd25007755d8586503b8d1b9b4a77bb7355cbdaaf%2F0_0_739_743%2F739.jpg>
 Magnetometry results from Charax Spasinou Photograph: Mary Shepperson 
Magnetometry measures the tiny differences in magnetic field produced by 
different materials below the surface. Results from magnetometry are often 
unclear and difficult to interpret, but not in this case. The ancient city is 
wonderfully revealed, gridded into residential blocks in the Hellenistic style 
and punctuated by monumental buildings. The geophysics shows archaeology of 
exceptional scale and magnificence below the featureless surface.

Although the magnetometry survey covered 90,000 square metres, this represents 
less than 2% of the city.

Let's celebrate US archaeology's best kept secret
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/dec/12/lets-celebrate-us-archaeologys-best-kept-secret>
You never really know anything about the archaeology until you put some holes 
in it, so using the geophysical results we dug some test trenches which 
immediately made everything much more complicated. The monumental buildings 
which were so clear on our geophysics and drone photos seem to be made up of 
layers of ephemeral phases, making them hard to define, and excavation was 
hampered by the discovery of inconsiderately-placed dead people. What looked 
like a large boundary wall on the magnetometry turned out to be a large ditch 
mysteriously lined with pots.

The test trenches yielded little more than pottery in terms of objects, and 
the highlights of surface collection were a few badly weathered coins. The real 
treasure of archaeology is of course data and we now have buckets of that to 
work with (in my view, the real treasure of archaeology is treasure but it’s 
not cool to say so).

Clearly, Alexandria-on-the-Tigris isn’t going to give itself up to 
archaeological science easily and we have many seasons of work ahead before we 
can begin to understand this lost city of ancient Iraq.

Charax Spasinou is being investigated by a team from the University of 
Manchester, with the help of the State Board for Antiquities and Heritage, 
Iraq, and the Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich. For further information, 
head tothe dig’s website <http://www.urarchaeology.org/charax-spasinou/>
 