
Australian human rights groups have raised concerns over a proposed government 
bill that would allow for the continued detention of “high-risk terrorist” 
offenders at the end of their sentence.

Under the government’s proposal, a state or territory supreme court will 
decide if a high-risk offender remains high risk at the end of their sentence.

For a high-risk prisoner to be kept in jail, the court must be satisfied that 
no other less restrictive measure would be effective in preventing 
“unacceptable risk” to community safety.

Using terror laws on alleged rightwing extremist a federal first, says minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/08/using-terror-laws-on-alleged-rightwing-extremist-a-federal-first-says-minister>
The maximum period for which a continuing detention order can be made is three 
years and the person must not be detained in the same area as the general 
prison population .

Human rights groups will present their submissions 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Joint/Intelligence_and_Security/HRTOBill/Submissions>
 to an inquiry into the proposedcriminal code amendment (high risk terrorist 
offenders) bill 2016 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Bills_Legislation/Bills_Search_Results/Result?bId=s1039>
 during hearings in Canberra on Friday.

In one of the written submissions, Prof Ben Saul, Challis chair of 
international law at the University of Sydney said the scheme violates 
Australia’s international human rights obligations by characterising continued 
incarceration as preventative detention.

“Prisons are built for prisoners, not non-prisoners … I am not aware of prison 
facilities where a person subject to a continuing detention order could be 
meaningfully separated from, and treated differently than, prisoners,” he said 
in his statement.

Human Rights Watch said in its submission there was ambiguity around what 
constituted “high risk”. Terrorism legislation provides for up to 15 years 
imprisonment for non-violent offences including possessing a “thing”, providing 
material and resources, or having membership related to a terrorist group.

“Australian law’s overly broad definition of terrorism makes the bill 
particularly worrisome,” the group said in their submission.

Human Rights Watch said existing laws already provided for control orders that 
allowed tracking and surveillance of suspects.

The Muslim Legal Network said in its submission the proposed scheme breached 
human rights obligations by providing for potentially indefinite, arbitrary and 
punitively retroactive punishment.

Zaahir Edries, president of the Muslim Legal Network, said the measures 
effectively added a criminal sanction to a prisoner’s sentence without the 
benefit of a trial.

Australian-sponsored counter-terrorism guide says military action partly to 
blame
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/australian-counter-terrorism-guide-says-western-military-action-partly-to-blame>
“Proposing this kind of legislation where there are minimal safeguards and the 
standards are lowered to prove them poses a dangerous and unacceptable 
infringement on civil liberties,” he said.

The Lebanese Muslim Association’s submission said the government’s proposed 
measures were counterproductive and risked creating “martyrs” out of those 
incarcerated while further alienating Muslim youth.

The office of the attorney general, George Brandis, has been contacted for 
comment.
 