
Deutsche Bahn is pushing ahead with plans to float Arriva, its international 
transport arm that runsmany of Britain’s train and bus services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/04/privatised-nationalised-electrified-guide-uk-railways-network-rail>
, as part of a sell-off to raise an anticipated €4.5bn (£3.6bn) for the ailing 
German railway group.

The supervisory board of the state-owned group is expected to approve plans on 
Wednesday evening for a part-privatisation of both Arriva, which operates in 14 
European countries outsideGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, 
and the international freight logistics subsidiary DB Schenker.

The final decision on an IPO is expected in the autumn, with Deutsche Bahn 
likely to sell a 45% stake in both. The company is seeking to reduceits €17.5bn 
debt 
<http://www.deutschebahn.com/file/en/2211562/RqGwENixeu1oKRXfZ9xCw4K29R4/11183754/data/ib2015_dbkonzern_en.pdf>
 and invest in modernising German railways.

Arriva started operating the Northern rail franchise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/arriva-and-firstgroup-win-northern-and-transpennine-rail-franchises>
, one of Britain’s biggest transport networks, last month. It also runs 
CrossCountry, London Overground, Chiltern and Grand Central trains, and 
thousands of bus services across the country.

The largest rail union said the sale could affect British employees of Arriva 
or DB Schenker, and services. The RMT’s general secretary, Mick Cash, said: 
“This potential fire sale of a large chunk of DB’s UK rail assets to the same 
old gang of spivs and speculators has set the alarm bells ringing for allArriva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> and DB Schenker staff who 
once again see their livelihoods traded from under them as nothing more than 
units on a balance sheet.”

He said the flotation exposed the “flakey and unstable nature of rail 
franchising”, with Deutsche Bahn allowed to win rail contracts and then hold a 
“corporate car-boot sale without any controls over who is getting a slice of 
the action”.

Rail staff terms and conditions are normally protected when franchises are 
awarded under TUPE laws, as are passenger services under franchise obligations.


An Arriva spokesman said: “Arriva has a strong track record of investment in 
the UK, investing £549m in the past five years and employing 28,000 people 
across the country.

“Deutsche Bahn is considering a third-party minority holding in Arriva which 
is intended to continue the successful development of Arriva and enable further 
investments in future growth.”
 