
The UK transport group Arriva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness> – which runs most of 
London's red buses and two major rail franchises – has confirmed that it is on 
the verge of takeover by the German transport operator Deutsche Bahn.

Responding to speculation about a £1.5bn deal, the Sunderland-based firm 
acknowledged it was in "advanced discussion" with the German state-owned 
enterprise. The deal could be the first in a series of consolidations in the 
transport industry as the European market is opened up to greater competition.

Arriva said that its German suitor was making a cash offer of 775p per share, 
with an 18.8p a share final dividend for Arriva investors for last year. The 
proposal is subject to a due diligence review, unanimous recommendation by the 
Arriva board, and approval by DB boards and the German ministries of transport, 
finance and economic affairs. The German company, which already operates UK 
services such as the Chiltern Railways route between London and Birmingham Snow 
Hill, confirmed interest in Arriva last month.

Arriva, the UK's third biggest transport firm,had attracted takeover interest 
from France's SNCF earlier this year. The statement from Arriva said: "The 
board … confirms that it is in advanced discussion with Deutsche Bahn about the 
terms of a possible recommended cash offer."

Arriva runs two rail franchises in the UK, one in Wales and the other 
CrossCountry, which covers 1,400 miles and calls at more than 100 stations 
between Aberdeen and Penzance, Bournemouth and Manchester and Cardiff and 
Stansted. The company also runs bus services in Liverpool, Leeds, Leicester, 
Glasgow and Newcastle, and 12 mainland European countries.

Deutsche Bahn is also involved in the running of the open access operator 
Wrexham, Shropshire and Marylebone Railway and is joint operator of the London 
Overground service. The company has around 240,000 employees in 150 countries.
 