
A Melbourne property developer who gave almost $70,000 to gain “access” to One 
Nation if the party regained influence inQueensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> has said he no longer 
believes in a system of political donations that has left Australia “worse off”.

Bill McNee’s company Vicland has emerged as a backer of Pauline Hanson in the 
first half of last year, paying 12 months’ rent in advance for One Nation’s 
Brisbane office as part ofa declared gift of $57,720 
<https://www.ecq.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/33284/Pauline-Hansons-One-Nation-Queensland-Division-Amended.pdf>
.

The donation, which came after Hanson’s narrow loss in the state seat of 
Lockyer in January 2015, was followed later in the year withanother $10,000 
from Vicland 
<https://www.ecq.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0003/54057/Vicland-Business-Pty-Ltd.pdf>
.

But McNee, whose company disappeared from One Nation’s donor list in the six 
months leading up to Hanson’s resurgence in the federal election, has said he 
will stop donating to political parties because “it’s wrong”.

I guess it gives you access to … people from time to time that you possibly 
wouldn’t have. That’s the purpose of it.
Bill McNee on political donations 
The prominent inner-city apartment builder, who last year paid $13m for a 
260-apartment development site in Brisbane’s Fortitude Valley,told the 
Australian 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/vicland-cemented-the-rise-of-pauline-hanson/news-story/be48364dc18f59e320941f06ddd3571d>
: “We wanted to be involved if they were to take government in Queensland.”

But McNee said he now had no dialogue with the party and would not make any 
further political donations as “it’s something I don’t believe in any longer”.

“It’s sad … it really shouldn’t be occurring,” he said. “It’s wrong. It’s 
very, very wrong. Australia is worse off for it.”

The donation by McNee, who was reportedly impressed by Hanson coming within 
204 votes of winning Lockyer, is the largest to One Nation in recent years.

One Nation in Queensland has received only four other donations since July 
2012, totalling $35,150, according to electoral commission returns.

Hanson herself was forced to lend the party $190,000 for the campaign 
<https://www.ecq.qld.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/64365/Pauline-Hansons-One-Nation.pdf>
 in the months before the federal election, where One Nation gained four 
senators and a swag of double-digit primary vote returns across Queensland 
electorates.

McNee told the Australian his company had “no allegiances politically” and had 
also donated more than $200,000 to the Coalition and Labor since 2014.

Asked why it was in his business interest to give to One Nation, McNee said: 
“I guess it gives you access to … people from time to time that you possibly 
wouldn’t have. That’s the purpose of it.”

He said Vicland had business opportunities in Queensland where “we were 
approached … We thought they [One Nation] were going to make a serious attempt 
there in the state election and given the past up there … we made a donation to 
them in the very same way we made donations to the Liberals and the Labor 
party”.

One Nation will demand ministries if LNP needs it to form government, says 
Campbell Newman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/18/one-nation-will-demand-ministries-if-lnp-wins-power-in-queensland-says-campbell-newman>
McNee said Hanson spoke to him by phone after the donation and that “my 
observation was she was willing to listen to any side of the argument, which 
was quite good”.

He said he “did not have a clue” what had been done with the money.

Access to development work in inner Brisbane construction sites usually hinges 
on signing an enterprise bargaining agreement with the Construction Forestry, 
Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU).

One Nation last month revealed its senators would support a Coalition bill to 
reintroduce the Australian Building and Construction Commission, abolished by 
Labor in 2012 and bitterly opposed by the CFMEU.

An amended return, signed by the former One Nation Queensland director Ian 
Nelson in June, states that Vicland in 2015 paid $25,740 as a year’s rent in 
advance for One Nation’s office in Albion in Brisbane’s inner north. Vicland 
also paid the $2,250 deposit.

The Greens’ deputy leader, the Queensland senator Larissa Waters, accused 
Hanson of “taking a leaf out of the old two parties’ playbook” by accepting 
support from a property developer.

“Despite claiming to stand up for marginalised Australians, One Nation is 
acting just like the other big parties who take money from property developers 
and big business instead speaking for communities,” Waters said.

“Political donations from property developers, gambling, alcohol and tobacco 
companies are banned in NSW and the Greens are the only party working to 
legislate a similar ban at a national level to get big business out of our 
democracy.”

Attempts by Guardian Australia to reach McNee on Monday were not successful.

Nelson said he was no longer a member of the party and it would be 
inappropriate to comment on details of how the Vicland contribution was spent.

Gregory Smith, another One Nation office holder who signed a subsequent return 
to the Queensland Electoral Commission, did not return calls.

A spokesman for Hanson was contacted for comment.
 