
Didier Drogba led the celebrations as Ivory Coast ended more than two decades 
without a trophy bybeating Ghana on penalties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/feb/08/ivory-coast-ghana-africa-cup-of-nations-final-match-report>
 to lift the Africa Cup of Nations on Sunday night.

The Chelsea striker, who retired from international football last year after 
earning a record 104 caps,posted a video on Instagram 
<http://instagram.com/p/y24geBOjBl/?modal=true> of the moment when goalkeeper 
Boubacar Barry scored the winning penalty with the message “Coooopaaaa faut 
marquer buuulaaaaa cooooopaaaaa!!!!!!!!!”.

Drogba featured in three finals for Les Éléphants but never finished on the 
winning side. After being drafted in as a replacement for the regular 
goalkeeper Sylvain Gbohouo, who had suffered a thigh strain, understandably it 
was Barry – a 35-year-old who plays for the Belgian side Lokeren – who was the 
toast of a nation.

“This is a great day,” Barry told the French broadcaster Canal+. It is the 
ninth birthday of my son today – God does not do things by accident. I have 
been criticised. I’m not big in talent, or size, but I want to progress and I 
have shown the critics.”

Barry then appeared to break down as he paid tribute to his mother’s support 
throughout his career. “My mum suffered. Thanks to her, thank you to all 
Ivorians. Football allowed me to travel, there is no room for everyone; but 
there is room for the work. God rewarded me.”

Another former Chelsea striker, Salomon Kalou of Hertha Berlin, also paid 
tribute to his side’s success,posting a picture of himself with the captain 
Yaya Touré <http://instagram.com/p/y3cxm-iCSF/> when they were teenagers with 
the message: “We started from the bottom now we here. With my bro #yayatoure 
#championsleagues #premiereleague #facup #carlingcup #africancup. I’m glad we 
went for everything they said we couldn’t have. And it was just a dream not 
long ago. Bravo a toi mon Frero #avecclass”.
Salomon Kalou (@salomonkalou) 
We started from the bottom now we here. With my bro #yayatoure 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/yayatoure?src=hash> #championsleagues 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/championsleagues?src=hash> #premiereleague 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/premiereleague?src=hash>… http://t.co/ehJOJz1x3F 
<http://t.co/ehJOJz1x3F>
 <https://twitter.com/salomonkalou/status/564636408221302784> February 9, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/salomonkalou/status/564636408221302784> 
The coach Hervé Renard became the first man to win the Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> with two countries 
having previously led Zambia to the title in 2012 with a penalty shootout 
victory over Ivory Coast. The Frenchman described the victory as “magic for 
everyone” in the country .

“I’m happy for the Ivorian people. They have been rewarded,” he said. “This 
victory is magic for everyone. It brings [together] even those who do not share 
the same opinions.Ivory Coast <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ivorycoast> 
will be delighted and this is the most important thing.”

Renard added: “I felt we could win this tournament after the game against a 
great Cameroon. We were in a very difficult group and the players did what we 
never imagined.

“At 2-0 down on penalties, I told myself that history would repeat itself, 
there was belief to the end. Just before Barry hits the penalty, I said: ‘A 
goalkeeper who worked with Jean-Marc Guillou is able to pull it off’.”
 