
The enigma of Mona Lisa's smile? Who cares? The mystery of Dido Belle is much 
more intriguing.The double portrait Dido Elizabeth Belle and Lady Elizabeth 
Murray 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Dido+Elizabeth+Belle+and+Lady+Elizabeth+Murray&tbm=isch&imgil=uqqFhs9GpEBVKM%253A%253Bhttps%253A%252F%252Fencrypted-tbn1.gstatic.com%252Fimages%253Fq%253Dtbn%253AANd9GcSSC8Ujxv3BdGQHHhxccEcpmez23UO2dBypPqaeZf0xUpWgzONl%253B500%253B431%253BMQOcbL7m-u3oZM%253Bhttp%25253A%25252F%25252Fwww.jasna.org%25252Fpersuasions%25252Fon-line%25252Fvol31no1%25252Fjones.html&source=iu&usg=__y7MX6OFvQfLrqyfoj2NIJDC5YWk%3D&sa=X&ei=4yyDU-CGL-mO7Aao0oDACA&ved=0CFEQ9QEwBg#facrc=_&imgdii=_&imgrc=uqqFhs9GpEBVKM%253A%3BMQOcbL7m-u3oZM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.jasna.org%252Fpersuasions%252Fon-line%252Fvol31no1%252Fimages%252Fjones.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fwww.jasna.org%252Fpersuasions%252Fon-line%252Fvol31no1%252Fjones.html%3B500%3B431>
, once attributed toJohann Zoffany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/mar/02/johan-zoffany-society-portrait-painter>
 and now hanging in Scone Palace in Perth, depicts two elegant 18th-century 
women in silks and pearls atKenwood House 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/daysout/properties/kenwood/> in London. 
Beyond them, you can just glimpse St Paul's and the rest of the Georgian 
cityscape. Nothing unusual about any of that, but for one detail – Dido is 
mixed race.

The first question that strikes the viewer is: why is Dido pointing at her 
cheek? It is a "puzzling gesture", wrote English literature lecturer Christine 
Kenyon Jones, in an article for theJane Austen Society of North America 
<http://www.jasna.org/persuasions/on-line/vol31no1/jones.html>. "Is it meant to 
draw attention to her skin colour, or simply to her smile and her dimples?" 
Might it even be, as a new theory suggests, an allusion to the Hindu deity
Krishna <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Krishna>?

These questions – and the mystery of what she was doing, both at Kenwood and 
in the painting – feel especially topical since Dido, the daughter of a former 
slave and a British aristocrat, is now the subject of a film,Belle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/11/belle-review-toronto-film-festival>
. Meanwhile,a new biography of her great uncle and benefactor Lord Mansfield 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Lord-Mansfield-Justice-Age-Reason/dp/0773541837> sheds 
more light on her 30 years at Kenwood. The painting has even inspired a novel. 
"The reason it struck me," saysCaitlin Davies, author of Family Likeness 
<http://www.caitlindavies.co.uk/current-work/familylikeness/>, "was that I grew 
up near Kenwood, so had been in and out of the house for 45 years. Then 
suddenly, in 2007, I saw this portrait when it was on temporary display, inan 
exhibition, Slavery and Justice 
<https://www.english-heritage.org.uk/discover/people-and-places/the-slave-trade-and-abolition/slavery-and-justice-exhibition-at-kenwood-house/>
."

Davies, who is white, had taken her mixed-race daughter along. "She was struck 
still by it, because pretty much all the other portraits on the walls were of 
white aristocrats – and here was someone who looked like her." Her novel is 
about a mixed-race girl growing up in a small Kent town in the 1950s, 
ostracised because of her colour.

Amma Asante <https://www.theguardian.com/film/amma-asante>, the director of 
Belle, explains why the painting inspired her film: "You see a biracial girl, a 
woman of colour, who's depicted slightly higher than her white counterpart. 
She's staring directly out, with a very confident eye. This painting flipped 
tradition and everything the 18th century told us about portraiture. What I saw 
was an opportunity to tell a story that would combine art history and politics."

And Dido's life story is an irresistible subject. She was the illegitimate 
daughter of Lord Mansfield's nephew, Sir John Lindsay, a navy captain, and 
Maria Belle, an African woman (possibly a former slave) whom he captured from a 
Spanish vessel in the Caribbean. Dido was sent to England as a child by Lindsay 
and, from the 1760s, was brought up at Kenwood House by the childless Lord and 
Lady Mansfield, along with her cousin, Lady Elizabeth Murray, whose mother had 
died.

"It is not known if Dido was willingly parted from her mother," wrote 
historian Gene Adams inher 1984 paper Dido Elizabeth Belle: A Black Girl at 
Kenwood 
<http://sharonlathanauthor.com/wp-content/uploads/Dido-Elizabeth-Belle_-a-black-girl-at-Kenwood.pdf>
, "but materially speaking, it would certainly have helped both mother and 
child."According to English Heritage, which runs Kenwood, "her position in the 
household may have been that of a loved but poor relation and she did not 
always dine with guests" 
<https://www.english-heritage.org.uk/discover/people-and-places/the-slave-trade-and-abolition/slavery-and-justice-exhibition-at-kenwood-house/>
.

But was there more to it than that? Lord Mansfield was Britain's most powerful 
judge and, as Lord Chief Justice in 1772, he presided overthe landmark case of 
a runaway slave called James Somerset 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Somerset_v_Stewart>. He ruled that a master could 
not take a slave out of Britain by force, a judgment seen as a key stage in the 
eventual abolition of the slave trade. "Slavery," he said in his judgment, "is 
so odious that nothing can be suffered to support it."

There were those in Georgian England who argued that Dido influenced her great 
uncle's decision. Francis Hutchinson, an American living in London, wrote of 
his visit to Kenwood: "A Black came in after dinner and sat with the ladies 
and, after coffee, walked with the company in the gardens, one of the young 
ladies having her arm within the other … He calls her Dido, which I suppose is 
all the name she has. He knows he has been reproached for showing fondness for 
her – I dare say not criminal."

He went on to mention the Somerset case: "A few years ago, there was a cause 
before his Lordship bro't by a Black for recovery of his liberty. A Jamaica 
planter being asked what judgment his Ldship would give? 'No doubt,' he 
answered. 'He will be set free, for Lord Mansfield keeps a Black in his house 
which governs him and the whole family.'"

In any case, was Lord Mansfield really an opponent of slavery? "He was very 
reluctant to annoy the slave owners and vested interests," saysNorman Poser, 
author of Lord Mansfield, Justice in the Age of Reason 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/04/dido-belle-slaves-daughter-who-lived-in-georgian-elegance>
. "He rather hoped things would just go on as they were.'" And while Mansfield 
was clearly fond of Dido, Poser says there is nothing to suggest she changed 
his views.

But back to the painting. Why does Dido look as if she's rushing past her 
cousin on an errand? For Davies, one possibility is that this started as a 
single portrait. "It looks like the portrait of Elizabeth came first and then 
someone wanted the two young women together, so Dido was added. The touch 
between them can seem awkward – is Elizabeth pushing her away? But perhaps the 
painter just kept Elizabeth as she was, with one arm held out."
 Film of the painting … Belle. Photograph: Allstar/Sportsphoto 
In the film, Dido's odd status in this white, stratified society is made 
plain. "I am too high to eat with the servants, too low to join you at dinner," 
Dido, played by Gugu Mbatha-Raw, tells Tom Wilkinson as the Earl of Mansfield. 
But that isn't the whole story: after Lady Mansfield died, Dido stayed on to 
care for her uncle, reading newspapers to him at breakfast as he succumbed to 
rheumatism. He died, aged 88, in 1793, providing for Dido in his will, as well 
as setting aside a substantial sum in a codicil. She married, left Kenwood and 
had three sons, dying in her early 40s in 1800.

In any case, there's more going on in the depiction of Dido than an image of 
an uprooted, lonely girl. Mario Valdes, a US historian of the African diaspora, 
suggests that her turban may be part of an attempt to Indianise Dido. Between 
1770 and 1771, he points out, her father served as His Britannic Majesty's 
Minister Plenipotentiary in India. What does that have to do with Dido's 
gesture? "One interpretation is that she is pointing to the difference in 
complexion between herself and her cousin," says Valdes. "But I would argue 
that a far more sophisticated approach is at play."

There is a sculpture that shows Krishna in a similar pose, Valdes explains, 
and a story that he was once slapped by a female deity for taking on the 
appearance of her sister and her husband. When this sister tried to console 
him, he smiled, pointed to his bruised cheek, and exclaimed: "She has shown 
that all three of us are one and the same." Valdes says: "What Dido's pose 
apparently proclaims, therefore, is that she and her cousin share the same 
humanity and innate worthiness."

Archivists at Scone have found nothing to corroborate the account, but that 
would be hard at nearly 250 years' remove, not least because the painting has 
had the Zoffany attribution withdrawn. If we can't find out who painted Dido, 
we can't know what the artist meant in his world.

There's one last question worth thinking about. "I wondered if Dido herself 
ever saw the painting," says Davies. "I was intrigued by what she might have 
thought of it. But I've been told it wasn't shown at Kenwood during her 
lifetime."

Perhaps she would have liked it. Others certainly do. At the Scone Palace gift 
shop <http://scone-palace.co.uk/taxonomy/term/16/all>, alongside reproductions 
of the double portrait, you can buy cropped images showing Dido, alone and 
smiling. It's an image that's been printed on to pocket mirrors, key rings, and 
magnetic notepads. It seems Dido Belle, for all the obscurity of her later 
life, is in 2014 something of an icon.

• Belle <https://www.theguardian.com/film/belle> is on general release on 13 
June.

• Amma Asante: I'm bi-cultural 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/18/amma-asante-belle-bicultural-ghanaian-british-director-grange-hill>

• Slave's daughter who lived in Georgian elegance 
<http://www.guprod.gnl/film/2014/may/04/dido-belle-slaves-daughter-who-lived-in-georgian-elegance>
 