
Are you wearing a polo neck? Because if not, you need to start wearing one 
now. This is not fashion hyperbole. I am being completely serious. Once in a 
blue moon, a trend comes along that is both blissfully practical (keeps you 
warm, covers up pallid winter skin) and completely on-the-money hip. It doesn’t 
happen very often, but it’s happening with the polo neck. And you don’t even 
have to shop, because there is definitely one in the back of your wardrobe 
somewhere.

Striped, sparkly and chunky: 15 of the best polo necks – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/gallery/2015/feb/03/striped-sparkly-and-chunky-15-of-the-best-polo-necks-in-pictures>
The polo neck is the most bad-ass player in fashion right now. So wrong for so 
long, it is suddenly so right. Forget the Milk Tray man, forget cheesy models 
wearing rollnecks outdoors to signal wholesome, mail-order family life. Forget 
70s skiwear. In 2015, the polo neck is Kim Kardashian in a black body-con polo 
neck dress or Alexa Chung in an oxblood polo neck sweater and leather mini. It 
is Taylor Swift channelling Funny Face, and Joaquin Phoenix in Inherent Vice. 
(No, I didn’t understand the film either. ButDoc Sportello’s tone-on-tone 
layering of polo necks under collared shirts 
<http://www.fashionone.com/news/2015/01/16/inherent-vice-changing-world/> – 
now, that made total sense.)

At the menswear and haute-couture shows in Milan and Paris last month, the 
polo neck won the contest for hottest front-row trend hands-down. What made 
this more striking was that this is traditionally the exact moment for fashion 
editors to debut their hottest new season purchases – and polo necks are 
noticeably absent from the spring/summer collections just arriving in stores. 
What sells in stores pays the fashion industry’s rent, so when the in-crowd go 
commercially off-piste with their own wardrobe, something significant is 
happening.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fpolo-neck-jackie-o-kim-kardashian-alexa-chung-joaquin-phoenix-inherent-vice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422983652333%2F42e1e1e7-4185-4dad-a4c3-480d7ec27307-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dig%20that%20polo%20neck%20out%20of%20your%20wardrobe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fpolo-neck-jackie-o-kim-kardashian-alexa-chung-joaquin-phoenix-inherent-vice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dig%20that%20polo%20neck%20out%20of%20your%20wardrobe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fpolo-neck-jackie-o-kim-kardashian-alexa-chung-joaquin-phoenix-inherent-vice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422983652333%2F42e1e1e7-4185-4dad-a4c3-480d7ec27307-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Christian Dior. Photograph: Chung Sung-Jun/Getty Images for Dior 
Judging by its ubiquity among the pre-fall collections – which go on sale 
around May – the polo neck will reach its peak later this year. Gucci, Stella 
McCartney, Valentino are all doing polo necks for pre-fall. High necks were the 
out-and-out stars of the collection atJ W Anderson, accentuated with a high, 
ring-pulled zip 
<http://www.style.com/slideshows/fashion-shows/pre-fall-2015/j-w-anderson/collection/2>
, and atDior, where they were sequinned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/dec/12/christian-dior-tokyo-sumo-raf-simons-japan>
. But please don’t wait till autumn – by then, smug hipsters will be writing 
arch pieces about how we’ve reached peak polo neck.

There are two pop-cultural factors behind the polo neck’s rise on the fashion 
stock market. The 1970s have finally displaced the 1990s as the decade most 
referenced in fashion and film, and the polo neck is to the 1970s what the crew 
neck was to the T-shirt-wearing 1990s. At the same time, the way in which 
feminism has returned from years of fringe meetings to become a mainstream 
cultural issue is being clearly mirrored in fashion. (These two factors are 
not, the eagle-eyed may have noticed, themselves unrelated.) In an era when 
page 3 is still an issue to get all sides hot under the collar, to cover up to 
the chin is to make a strong statement about what you expect to be valued for.

From Kim Kardashian to Dior: the new polo neck rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/dec/17/polo-necks-fashion-favourite-dior-kim-kardashian-celine>
When Taylor Swift wore a black high-necked, long-sleeved sweater for her 
performance on The X Factor in November 2013, it felt like a statement in 
relation to the Blurred Lines-gate raging around women and pop music at that 
moment. The polo neck has risen in tandem with the star of Leandra Medine, 
writer of the Man Repeller blog, who takes a consciously feminist stance on 
fashion. It is no coincidence that Medine looks awesome in a polo neck – she 
calls it a turtleneck, because she’s American – and her blog follows the trend 
obsessively. (Look it up for detailed guidance onhow to perfect 
tucked-into-your-sweater hair 
<http://www.manrepeller.com/2014/12/turtleneck-hair-style.html>.)

To get the polo neck right for now, wear it as a layering piece. This puts 
instant distance between you and the wholesome, catalogue-model school of 
knitwear. For tips, watch Annie Hall: skip the white-shirt scenes, and zero in 
on the parts where she wearsa black polo neck under a tunic 
<http://katherinehannaford.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/20130602-230714.jpg>, 
for an instant effortless 1977-meets-2015 style moment. Or think ofJackie 
Onassis, snapped striding out of Claridges in 1970 
<http://www.puretrend.com/media/jackie-kennedy-onassis-quittant-le_m199268>, in 
a black polo neck under a trench.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fpolo-neck-jackie-o-kim-kardashian-alexa-chung-joaquin-phoenix-inherent-vice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F4%2F1423037564578%2Fee69c69f-a319-41c0-a359-cdcb8ff3db52-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dig%20that%20polo%20neck%20out%20of%20your%20wardrobe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fpolo-neck-jackie-o-kim-kardashian-alexa-chung-joaquin-phoenix-inherent-vice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dig%20that%20polo%20neck%20out%20of%20your%20wardrobe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fpolo-neck-jackie-o-kim-kardashian-alexa-chung-joaquin-phoenix-inherent-vice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F4%2F1423037564578%2Fee69c69f-a319-41c0-a359-cdcb8ff3db52-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Taylor Swift channels Funny Face on The X Factor. Photograph: Tom 
Dymond/Thames/REX 
My tip? A white one. I know: scary. But think back to Céline autumn/winter 
2011: in hindsight, how awesome was that white polo neck under the graphic 
sweater 
<http://www.style.com/slideshows/fashion-shows/fall-2011-ready-to-wear/celine/collection/8>
? Right now I wear a polo neck more days than I don’t. I have a black one I’m 
wearing under sleeveless dresses, a navy one that goes under a loose silk 
T-shirt. A fine-cotton charcoal one that has brought back to life the 
plain-grey crew neck sweater that felt a bit over. But then I went to Paris for 
the haute couture shows, and Natalia Vodianova was front row at Dior wearing a 
pristine white one. So simple, but so quirky. I need one, now. And you do too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fpolo-neck-jackie-o-kim-kardashian-alexa-chung-joaquin-phoenix-inherent-vice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422981655823%2F51930e67-ad45-4da2-bd3f-d1954c70a419-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dig%20that%20polo%20neck%20out%20of%20your%20wardrobe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fpolo-neck-jackie-o-kim-kardashian-alexa-chung-joaquin-phoenix-inherent-vice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dig%20that%20polo%20neck%20out%20of%20your%20wardrobe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F03%2Fpolo-neck-jackie-o-kim-kardashian-alexa-chung-joaquin-phoenix-inherent-vice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F3%2F1422981655823%2F51930e67-ad45-4da2-bd3f-d1954c70a419-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Diane Keaton with Woody Allen in Annie Hall. Photograph: Everett 
Collection/Rex Feature  