
Flirtomatic <http://www.flirtomatic.com/flirto/cls!C1/ginger/static/index.jsp>
, a London-based company, claims to have sold 100,000 gifts during the past 
four weeks in the run-up to Christmas. This wouldn't normally be of interest 
but Flirtomatic is a social network on mobile phones and the goods sold were 
all "virtual". They range from roses – which only exist as pixels on a screen – 
to a virtual "supersnog". The bestselling item is a Christmas stocking filled 
with goodies for which up to 2,000 users a day are prepared to pay the 
equivalent of 75p. On other sites people have been prepared to pay up to $20 
for a virtual rose. Yes, the same generation of people not paying for music 
downloads from the web are paying real money for unreal goods.

If all this seems barmy, hang on, as we may have to rearrange our prejudices. 
Flirtomatic.com, which also sells ice cubes that melt when they reach the 
recipient's phone, is but a minnow in a potentially revolutionary change that 
is happening to the economy beneath the radar of politicians and most adults 
(including economists). While international trade in physical goods has been in 
deep recession, the trade in virtual goods is in a runaway boom with no signs 
of abating.

The key feature is that, unlike physical goods, it costs almost nothing to 
produce extra copies, so there is unlimited supply to meet unlimited demand, an 
economist's nirvana. Virtual output could also restore a level playing field 
for the west, because companies don't have to outsource actual production to 
Asian countries with cheaper labour costs.

Another recent London startup, moshimonsters.com 
<http://www.moshimonsters.com/>, an addictive game for kids which can cost 
their parents £5 a month, claims to trade a million virtual items every day – 
many included in the subscription. In the multiplayer game Entropia Universe, 
user-to-user transactions reached $420m last year. The virtual world Second 
Life, which has faded from the headlines recently, expects to nearly double 
trade in virtual goods this year, to over $500m.

But the really interesting stuff is happening in the social network Facebook, 
where the cartoony FarmVille has more than 75 million active users trading farm 
animals or buying virtual tractors or whatever. It is owned by a company called 
Zynga, which makes an estimated $250m from virtual goods on Facebook. This week 
it raised$180m from Russian investors 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/16/technology/internet/16game.html?_r=2&ref=technology>
 in a deal that values it at up to $3bn, according to analysts: all based on 
virtual goods. One of the reasons for this success is that it is now easy to 
make payments on a mobile just by typing your telephone number in, using 
companies such as Zong, which claims a turnover of $15m in the eight months 
since it started.

How big is global trade in virtual goods? It is impossible to say, partly 
because statistics are not collected from the hundreds of gaming silos and 
partly because of the difficulty of defining what is virtual. Plus Eight Star 
has valued the market in Asia, where virtual goods trade is very advanced, at 
over $5bn; but this is probably an underestimate as one company in China alone, 
TenCent, earned over $1bn last year almost entirely from virtual goods which 
are rampant in Korea and Japan.

If you count virtual games such as RuneScape, of Cambridge (the second biggest 
online multiplayer game in the world), andWorld of Warcraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2009/mar/05/virtual-world-china>, plus 
the explosive growth of casual games, then the global value of the market 
probably rises above $15bn. And if you include text messages that's another 
$5bn. The difficulty is knowing where to stop, and whether to add Google's 
searches or iTunes music downloads or the Guardian's new iPhone app. The 
important point is that trade in virtual goods, if aggregated, would be bigger 
than many countries GDP.

It is time for politicians to take seriously the emergence of a sector that 
might compensate for some of the jobs lost in the recession. But first we will 
have to break through a psychological barrier and take virtual goods seriously. 
After all, which is more "real" – a virtual rose that can sit on your mobile 
phone for years, or a piece of chocolate that melts in your mouth and is gone 
for ever?
 