
“I am always drawn to plays that inspire me, and to plays that make me angry. 
This was a play that made me angry.”


Suddenly Last Summer review - on-stage cameras capture a top notch cast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/17/suddenly-last-summer-review> 
When the Guardian speaks with director Kip Williams, he is halfway through 
rehearsals for his new production of Miss Julie forMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> Theatre Company. The 
director describes it as a “daunting” time, as he and the cast pick apart the 
play’s questions around class, gender and feminism.

First performed in 1889, August Strindberg’s play tells of a count’s daughter 
– a strong-willed woman who was raised by her mother to “think like and act 
like a man” – who dallies with her father’s ambitious servant, with tragic 
consequences. It’s a piece Williams has long wanted to tackle.

He has written a new adaptation of the play, taking apart what he describes as 
the inherent misogyny of the original, in which Strindberg damns his lead 
character for her independence. Instead, Williams throws light on the character 
of Miss Julie herself, and examines how she would fare during that period of 
history. In place of some of the character’s more hysterical monologues, for 
instance, his adaptation looks at exactly why Julie wants to leave the estate – 
and her privileged position – behind.

“[There is] this powerful desire within her to break those expectations, but 
then the crisis for her is then what lies beyond ... what is the actual future 
that [she] can forge?”
 ‘I am always drawn to plays that inspire me, and to plays that make me 
angry’: director Kip Williams Photograph: Melbourne Theatre Company 
Liv Ullmann on Miss Julie, Donald Trump and why she hates the modern age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/11/liv-ullmann-on-miss-julie-donald-trump-and-why-she-hates-the-modern-age>
The director puts the play’s enduring popularity down to the collision between 
sex and power. “Questions of gender, class, race, sexuality, all facets of 
identity – those are the questions we constantly have to come back to and 
interrogate within ourselves and society.”

At 29-years-old and only five years into his career, Williams is a rising star 
on the Australian theatre scene. He’s resident director at Sydney Theatre 
Company, was the proud recipient of last year’s Helpmann award for best 
director forSuddenly, Last Summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/feb/17/suddenly-last-summer-review>, 
and will have helmed four mainstage productions in 2016, including Miss Julie 
andThe Golden Age 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2016/the-golden-age>, as 
well as upcoming productions ofAll My Sons 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2016/all-my-sons> and 
Midsummer Night’s Dream 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2016/a-midsummer-nights-dream>
. He was also touted as a frontrunner for the STC artistic directorship, before 
Jonathan Church wasannounced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/25/jonathan-church-appointed-sydney-theatre-companys-artistic-director>
 for the top job.

His work is vibrant and exciting, and yet seems to be mostly focused on the 
classics. Does he prefer old work over new? He laughs. “Not necessarily,” he 
says. “It really depends on the conversation that’s at play in that text.”

Williams says he enjoys doing classics because they explore universal themes 
which remain relevant and fascinating. “As somebody who is interested in having 
a conversation with an audience about who we are today, [they offer me] an 
opportunity to ask big questions, and hopefully offer an experience to 
renegotiate those ideas.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fkip-williams-on-miss-julie-this-was-a-play-that-made-me-angry-sex-and-power-are-always-going-to-be-a-fascinating-way-to-explore-identity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde8115fae4f60f55331933071dbfe9f65840264b%2F0_98_3360_2017%2F3360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Director%20Kip%20Williams%20on%20Miss%20Julie%3A%20'This%20was%20a%20play%20that%20made%20me%20angry'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fkip-williams-on-miss-julie-this-was-a-play-that-made-me-angry-sex-and-power-are-always-going-to-be-a-fascinating-way-to-explore-identity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Director%20Kip%20Williams%20on%20Miss%20Julie%3A%20%27This%20was%20a%20play%20that%20made%20me%20angry%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fapr%2F12%2Fkip-williams-on-miss-julie-this-was-a-play-that-made-me-angry-sex-and-power-are-always-going-to-be-a-fascinating-way-to-explore-identity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde8115fae4f60f55331933071dbfe9f65840264b%2F0_98_3360_2017%2F3360.jpg>
 Actors Mark Leonard Winter and Robin McLeavy in discussion with director Kip 
Williams, in rehearsals for Melbourne Theatre Company’s Miss Julie Photograph: 
Melbourne Theatre Company 
It’s an interesting discussion to have with a director given the worrying 
decline of new Australian work on main stages this year. Earlier this month, 
after examining the 95 mainstage shows slated for 2016, the Australian Writers 
Guildfound 
<http://if.com.au/2016/04/04/article/AWG-report-reveals-decline-in-use-of-Australian-plays/QOBLAOOUES.html>
 the number of new works by Australian writers or devisors was down from 63% in 
2015 to 56% in 2016. Of the 53 works, 34 are original (35%) while 19 were 
adaptations of existing works, such as books.

Adaptations are pragmatic choices for theatre companies, in a time when arts 
funding isprecarious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/jul/29/the-helpmanns-honour-excellence-yes-but-also-investment-in-the-arts>
 – but does that also mean Australian audiences are unadventurous, preferring 
tried and true work over the unknown?

Williams doesn’t think so. While there is undeniably a recognition factor for 
Australian audiences, he believes it’s more about relevancy. He points to the 
run of Australian works in Sydney recently:The Secret River 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/10/the-secret-river-review-a-masterful-portrayal-of-australias-dark-past>
 and his production ofThe Golden Age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/21/the-golden-age-review-tasmanias-lost-tribe-challenges-notions-of-primitivism>
, along withJasper Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jan/08/belvoirs-jasper-jones-proves-the-enduring-appeal-of-coming-of-age-stories>
 andThe Blind Giant is Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/16/tv-stars-yael-stone-and-dan-spielman-on-bringing-their-marriage-to-belvoirs-stage>
 at Belvoir.

“What we saw in Sydney earlier this year was a number of productions which had 
a real need to talk about Australia, about our history but also where we stand 
today – particularly to do with our national identity, and our relationship to 
immigration and to Indigenous Australia,” he says. “Audiences responded to it 
in droves, they wanted to be part of that conversation.”

 * Miss Julie <http://www.mtc.com.au/plays-and-tickets/season-2016/miss-julie/>
 is on at Melbourne Theatre Company from 16 April
 