
There’s a lot to celebrate in the work of disabled artists right now.


Ramps on the Moon, for example, brings together a collaborative network of 
seven Arts Council England national portfolio theatres to create three new 
pieces of high-quality touring theatre. Each venue will co-produce shows over 
consecutive years, giving all the organisations direct experience of working 
with disabled artists and learning how to develop disabled audiences. This, 
coupled with theUnlimited <http://weareunlimited.org.uk/> commissions for 
individual artists announced earlier this year, is a testament to the 
achievements of such work so far and industry support for it.

Training to support the growth of disabled talent is also growing. There’s the 
partnership <https://www.rcs.ac.uk/shortcourse_about/research/deaf-theatre/> 
between the Royal Conservatoire of Scotland and Solar Bear Theatre Company – 
the first BA course in performance in British Sign Language and English. Then 
there’s the Central School of Speech and Drama, which is running adiploma for 
learning disabled performers 
<https://www.cssd.ac.uk/course/performance-making-diploma-learning-disabled-adults>
, and the workplace-based training for learning disabled theatre-makersprovided 
by Mind The Gap <http://www.mind-the-gap.org.uk/academy/academy_courses/> 
theatre company in Bradford andHijinx theatre company 
<http://www.hijinx.org.uk/the-academy/> in Cardiff.

Oily Cart <http://www.oilycart.org.uk/> theatre company has quietly generated 
passionate interest and engagement among a new generation of theatre-makers who 
are providing work for those with profound and multiple learning disabilities 
(PMLD).

The disability arts are also gaining ground in higher education, with the 
likes of Nicola Shaughnessy’sImagining Autism <http://www.imaginingautism.org/> 
at the University of Kent, and Northumbria University’s Matt Hargrave’s 
excellent and challenging new book,Theatres of Learning Disability 
<http://www.palgrave.com/page/detail/theatres-of-learning-disability-matt-hargrave/?isb=9781137504388>
. The widening online of reviewing and criticism beyond the broadsheets has 
also brought a better range of voices into the mix.

But this is only half the story. All this fantastic opportunity is the 
culmination of many years of hard work and investment that has led to the 
emergence of talented disabled artists. Will producers be able to continue to 
draw on a broad and deep pool of talent to meet these new opportunities?

The arts are becoming increasingly sidelined within the national school 
curriculum, with the exclusive focus of education secretary Nicky Morgan on 
Stem subjects: science, tech, engineering and maths. Add to that the pressure 
on schools to deliver progress on league tables and the EBacc, and the arts are 
merely the icing on the cake.

A key part of the ecology that can create opportunities for disabled 
performers is youth theatre. But with local authority disinvestment, this is 
increasingly becoming the preserve of those who can afford it. This matters: 
where will the disabled artists of the future first encounter the possibility 
that the arts might be something to which they can aspire?

Many leading disabled performers now now in their late thirties and forties 
learned much of their craft while working as part of theatre-in-education or 
young people’s productions. Daryl Beeton, who has just stepped down as artistic 
director ofKazzum <http://www.kazzum.org/>, which makes theatre for young 
audiences, was inspired to enter the profession after seeing Jamie Beddard – 
part of theExtraordinary Bodies <http://www.extraordinarybodies.org.uk/> 
creative team – on a poster forGraeae <http://www.graeae.org/> theatre 
company’s production of Ubu. The company’s pioneering training programme,
Missing Piece 
<http://www.graeae.org/get-involved/training-courses/missing-piece/>, is now in 
danger of being seen as engendering a golden generation.

At Action! Disability and Employment Training, the first conference on 
disability and training in theatre, held byRada <https://www.rada.ac.uk/> in 
2004, the discourse was very much around meeting legal requirements. Much has 
moved forward since then and the cultural policy focus has shifted towards the 
creative case for diversity. This is where artists want to be having the 
conversation, but changes toAccess to Work 
<https://www.gov.uk/access-to-work/overview> and the Independent Living Fund 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/independent-living-fund> mean that 
the discourse of rights and the necessity of political activism can never be 
very far away.

Government changes in the name of austerity create a form of cultural 
segregation – not just between disabled and non-disabled artists, but between 
disabled artists who need Access to Work in order to work and those able to 
manage without it. This is, of course, part of the wider issue of how diversity 
cannot simply be a“creative case” 
<http://www.artscouncil.org.uk/what-we-do/our-priorities-2011-15/diversity-and-creative-case/>
 if only an increasingly narrow cadre of people can afford to work in the arts.

The richness and diversity of disability arts – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/gallery/2015/jun/11/richness-diversity-disability-arts-in-pictures>
I want disabled artists to be able to make work that matters to them and 
connects with an audience, however that audience is defined. I want to see 
personal stories, work that addresses the experiences of being disabled, and 
work that’s just anything a disabled artist wants to make. I want to see very 
divergent points of view – from those who want to celebrate being different and 
move away from any sense of disability, to those who absolutely identify as 
disabled.

I would like to suggest a view that draws on the paradox of Schrödinger’s cat 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Schr%C3%B6dinger%27s_cat>, where something can 
appear to be both itself and its opposite. Sometimes disability arts might need 
to be seen as a single entity – a movement rich in diversity. At other times it 
might need separating out, for example when delving into the aesthetics of the 
work of some learning disabled artists, where the discourse might need to 
develop differently than that which has already evolved around work made by 
some artists with physical and/or sensory disabilities.

If 2012 generated significant further opportunities for some, once the 
Paralympics happen in Brazil in 2016 there’s a danger that the caravan really 
does move on. Will the strong presence of disabled-led work at this year’s 
British CouncilEdinburgh Showcase 
<http://theatreanddance.britishcouncil.org/projects/2015/edinburgh-showcase-2015/>
 become standard – as part of an understanding that UK disabled artists make 
work of international renown?

I’m skeptical about so-called ladders of opportunity as this presumes a simple 
vertical hierarchy of progression, but the absence of key rungs was what 
prompted Graeae to establish Missing Piece. The ecology for disabled artists is 
now more developed, scattered, varied and successful than ever. But it’s still 
vulnerable. Sustaining the gains of recent years will be tricky in the current 
economic climate. Domestic investment in culture is likely to dwindle during 
the life of this parliament. Wouldn’t it be a strange irony if our artists 
fared better abroad?

Jonathan Meth is project dramaturg on Crossing The Line 
<http://www.crossingtheline.eu/>, an EU Creative Europe-funded project with 
Mind the Gap, Moomsteatern and Compagnie de l’Oiseau Mouche. He’s an expert 
adviser to Ambitious About Autism and part of the Disability Research Centre at 
Goldsmiths, University of London.


Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 