
Welfare systems should be about human rights, not just benefits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/mar/17/welfare-human-rights-benefits-social-work>
I work as a project manager for Grace House Community Centre (GHCC) an NGO 
near Siem Reap, Cambodia.GHCC <http://www.gracehousecambodia.org> was started 
by Globalteer, a UK volunteer organisation; I have been involved from day one, 
helping to develop programmes and raise funds. In my previous life, I was a 
care needs assessor for social services, establishing care packages for young 
disabled people. In 2008, Alan, my husband, took early retirement from the 
civil service and we travelled around Europe in a motorhome. Nine months and 
numerous cathedrals later we decided to “give something back” and volunteered 
in Cambodia. Seven years later we are still at GHCC.


I wake at about 4.30am to the sound of monks chanting at the local pagoda, if 
lucky I fall back to sleep until 7am. A cup of tea and toast is followed by a 
short ride on my scooter to GHCC where I am known as “Teacher Madam” (Bridget 
is difficult to pronounce). My journey takes me past rice fields with water 
buffalo wallowing in the river, women stooped over planting rice and children 
in their blue and white school uniforms who wave as they cycle to school. All 
very idealistic except for the potholes, lorries and dust!


Last year, I visited a nine-year-old girl with cerebral palsy, kept in a 
playpen in a darkened locked room

Our work is with the poorest families in the community, keeping families 
together and preventing them placing children in orphanages. It is estimated 
that74% of children in Cambodian orphanages have one or more living parent 
<http://orphanages.no/Facts.html>. Poverty and access to education are the main 
reasons given by parents for placing their children in orphanages. Children 
often fail to attend school as they are working to help support the family.


There are extremely limited state-run social services and benefit systems in 
Cambodia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cambodia>. With approximately three 
social workers per 25,000 people, NGOs are left to fill the gaps. As a 
consequence, services are very patchy and the rural poor are the most 
disadvantaged.

 ‘My current task is to explain the benefits of respite care to local social 
workers working for other NGOs.’ Photograph: Alan Cordory 
Physical abuse is still common in the home and at school, and children with 
disabilities aremore likely to be abused 
<http://www.who.int/disabilities/violence/en/>. There are no official figures 
on the number of children with disabilities in Siem Reap province, however a 
Handicap International study found16% of children assessed had a disability 
(pdf) 
<http://cabdico.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Situational-Analysis-English-1.pdf>
.

We started a special needs day centre and take referrals from the whole 
province. Last year, I visited a nine-year-old girl with cerebral palsy who was 
kept in a playpen in a darkened, locked room. My heart ruled my head and we 
raised funds to build a small group home as no specialist facilities existed 
outside Phnom Penh. We try to help parents understand their child can make 
progress and have rights. I need to respect local belief that a child with 
disabilities has done something wrong in their previous life, but balance that 
with safeguarding the child. My current task is to explain the benefits of 
respite care to local social workers working for other NGOs.


As a team we decide where our budget is spent and have developed assessment 
and review procedures. All families are assessed and given help in the form of 
rice and support for children to attend school, and access to healthcare. If 
the money is not in the bank, we are unable to buy rice, run services or pay 
wages and rent. I strongly believe in working with the community but over the 
years there have been times when I have tried to implement projects that have 
failed; I call it having my “western” head on, not my Khmer one.

I leave Grace House about 4pm but often work in the evening writing funding 
applications or reports. Fundraising is my biggest headache and a constant 
pressure.


 It’s a continuous learning curve but the enormous smiles that greet me every 
morning make it worthwhile.

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>.

Why not join our social care community? Becoming a member of the Guardian 
Social Care Network means you get sent weekly email updates on policy and best 
practice in the sector, as well as exclusive offers.Sign up for free 
<https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/>.
 