
After the February surprise when Iran’s reformers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/25/iran-elections-struggle-theocracy-democracy-tehranbureau>
 ingeniously outmanoeuvred the fundamentalists, Iran’s 2016 elections have 
fallen off the global media’s radar screen. However, a crucial second round of 
voting on 29 April is approaching for 69 parliamentary seats in districts all 
around the country. These are the places that were too close to call in 
February, when 221 out of 290 seats were decided.

All seats for metropolitan Tehran are filled – although there will be polling 
in three of its satellite cities – and most of the run-offs are in small towns, 
scattered around 18 of Iran’s 31 provinces. The races are lively, proving that 
Iran’s provinces, even if rarely visited by Tehranis much less foreigners, are 
no longer mired in myopic local rivalries.

Few Iranians have failed to notice the polarisation and keen polemic between 
reformers and fundamentalists building up over recent years. Case in point: a 
32-secondvideo clip <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tXYFaotEiD4> has gone 
viral of a rally on 7 March in Yazd, 388 miles from Tehran, when a mere mention 
of Iran’s former reformist president Mohammad Khatami sent the crowd into a 
frenzy of chanting jubilation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Firan-runoff-parliamentary-elections-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ecc0fc2aaeae0edd22f29ee5b83f39db1ba9013%2F0_0_1280_960%2Fmaster%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Discount%20ticket%20on%20the%20bus%20to%20reform%3A%20Iran's%20runoff%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Firan-runoff-parliamentary-elections-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Discount%20ticket%20on%20the%20bus%20to%20reform%3A%20Iran%27s%20runoff%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Firan-runoff-parliamentary-elections-tehranbureau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ecc0fc2aaeae0edd22f29ee5b83f39db1ba9013%2F0_0_1280_960%2Fmaster%2F1280.jpg>
 Headquarters of a reformist candidate in the February 2016 elections, town of 
Malayer in Hamedan province, Iran. Photograph: Emad Goli 
Pundits have too long viewed Iran’s provincial life 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/tehranbureau/2010/06/irans-rural-vote-and-election-fraud.html>
 the way Karl Marx viewed India’s villages: ‘places where history stops’. 
Iran’s towns, however, are awakening. Eight years of economic stagnation, 
international isolation and corruption charges under the administration of 
President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad have made the provinces sit up and take notice. 
With this election, issues larger than the usual local horse-trading are at 
stake.


The options for voters are clear. There are two coalitions who have introduced 
well identified, unified lists: the Coalition of Reformists and Supporters of 
the Government, and the Grand Coalition of Principle-ists (the fundamentalist 
camp). A third category comprised of self-proclaimed ‘Independents’ has a 
fundamentalist bent.

Competition is keen. In the first round of elections on 24 February, 
out-and-out reformists won 86 seats, giving them and their allies around 38% of 
seats decided. Capturing a large number of the remaining seats will seal their 
February victory, a prospect that is encouraging the fundamentalists to rally 
and try to shore up their losses.

But the 29 April runoff races, despite the vetting process that favours the 
fundamentalists, bode well for the reform movement. There are 61 candidates 
running in 42 districts. There are only 8 seats for which the reformists have 
not been able to introduce a candidate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Firan-runoff-parliamentary-elections-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cbef3abd9b325269b091e3e2427456d20ed29ef%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Discount%20ticket%20on%20the%20bus%20to%20reform%3A%20Iran's%20runoff%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Firan-runoff-parliamentary-elections-tehranbureau%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Discount%20ticket%20on%20the%20bus%20to%20reform%3A%20Iran%27s%20runoff%20elections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Firan-blog%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Firan-runoff-parliamentary-elections-tehranbureau%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cbef3abd9b325269b091e3e2427456d20ed29ef%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
 Former Iranian President Mohammad Khatami, walks up the stairs, in his office 
in 2009, Tehran, Iran, Photograph: Hasan Sarbakhshian/AP 
In the past, the reform movement gave up when its candidates were 
disqualified. No longer. This time they have not given up even when their 
first-round candidate was defeated, but rather have recruited from among the 
remaining candidates. This means a candidate who ran as an independent oreven 
fundamentalist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/feb/26/iran-zibakalam-grand-reformists-coalistion-includes-intelligence-ministers>
 in the first round can end up on the ‘Second List of Hope’ running against a 
more radical fundamentalist.

One Iranian activist puts it this way: after buses leave the terminals in Iran 
they stop for a second time at the edge of the city and offer discounted prices 
on any remaining seats. This is what the reform movement is doing. Having to go 
with a half-empty bus to the elections (because ofdisqualifications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/feb/26/iran-zibakalam-grand-reformists-coalistion-includes-intelligence-ministers>
) it has acquired the habit of picking ‘in-between’ candidates, non-ideological 
moderates, or even ‘rational’ fundamentalists. This is a discounted ticket on 
the bus of reform.


Zibakalam on Iranian elections: ‘we had to choose between bad and worse’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/feb/26/iran-zibakalam-grand-reformists-coalistion-includes-intelligence-ministers>
Prospects look good. The reformists calculate that the fundamentalists have 
already reached their maximum capacity of voters. They believe that 
fundamentalist voters were more likely than others to have responded to the 
calls to vote from supreme leader,Ayatollah Ali Khamenei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ayatollah-ali-khamenei>, who has compared 
casting a ballot to a religious duty like daily prayers.

The 38% of electors who did not show up to vote in February appeared 
indifferent to Khamenei’s entreaties – and hence were either apolitical or 
politically-disposed boycotters. Reformers, then, could be right in thinking 
there are no more fundamentalists left to bring out for the second round. This 
leaves a decisive majority of potential second-round voters susceptible to the 
reformist call for incremental change along the lines PresidentHassan Rouhani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani> has been pursuing since 
elected in 2013.

How many of the 61 reformist-backed candidates will win on 29 April? The 
overall figures 
<https://fa.wikipedia.org/wiki/%D8%A7%D9%86%D8%AA%D8%AE%D8%A7%D8%A8%D8%A7%D8%AA_%D9%85%D8%AC%D9%84%D8%B3_%D8%B4%D9%88%D8%B1%D8%A7%DB%8C_%D8%A7%D8%B3%D9%84%D8%A7%D9%85%DB%8C_(%DB%B1%DB%B3%DB%B9%DB%B5%E2%80%93%DB%B1%DB%B3%DB%B9%DB%B4)#.D8.AF.D9.88.D8.B1_.D9.86.D8.AE.D8.B3.D8.AA>
 are tight. Mohammad Reza Aref, who was vice-president under Khatami and 
elected to parliament in Tehran in February has stated that 40 seats is the 
“must reach” target.

The bus is leaving soon.


Opinions are the authors’ own. This article has been updated. 
 