
At a recent discussion of childhood during the past 50 years one speaker said 
he thought everyone remembered their childhood as being like something out of 
Arthur Ransome's Swallows and Amazons. Do you think how childhood is portrayed 
in classic children's books has affected how we think childhood used to be? If 
so, has it given us too rosy a view of it?

It is interesting how most people think that childhood is so different from 
one generation to another and how universally it is thought that children are 
always getting worse!

Memories of childhood are probably pretty partial. Individually, they are 
based often based on the best bits, such as special outings or treats. Holidays 
usually feature and these are reinforced by family photos which seem to confirm 
that the sun shine a remarkable amount during childhood. Collectively, they are 
influenced by known facts of the time such as how schools were organised, what 
shopping or transport was like and the headlines of "average" family dynamics.

Beyond the individual and collective facts, stories about childhood in books 
are handed down as blueprints of collective behaviour. Enid Blyton's 
huge-selling family adventures, includingThe Famous Five 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781444910582>
 and The Secret Seven series, both of which ran into many titles, offered 
children the chance to identify with adventures in the countryside which were 
probably just as out of reach in reality as a term at Hogwarts is to today's 
children. Richmal Crompton'sJust William 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780330535342>
 and its sequels also showed children "playing out", inventing activities 
around their daily lives and well out of sight of their parents.

These tales came to epitomise childhood of the time. When asked about their 
childhood many think they spent a lot of time outdoors and without adult 
supervision. But did they really? It may be that they just identified too much 
with the children they read about.

The rosy, cosy vision of the 1950s and 1960s - often thought of as a golden 
age of children's fiction - was challenged from the 1970s onwards by an 
increasing emphasis on books showing different kinds of childhood. These 
included titles such Jean MacGibbon's Hal, one of the first multi-cultural 
children's books which featured an Afro-Caribbean girl living in a tower block, 
and Gene Kemp's award-winningThe Turbulent Term of Tyke Tiler 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571230945>
 set in a village school and with a girl as its sparky heroine â€“ a far cry from 
the boy-dominated, private school settings which lay behind Arthur Ransome's 
children, for example.

The huge success of Jacqueline Wilson's The Story of Tracy Beaker 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780440867579>
 and her very many other bestselling titles frequently showed contemporary 
children living in challenging circumstances - bed-and breakfast accommodation, 
with step-families, in dysfunctional families with ineffective parents. These 
stories gave more children the chance to find a life like their own in a story. 
They have often been attacked for being too miserable in their portrayal of 
childhood but the reality is that they probably reflected a far broader range 
of experiences more truthfully.

When set against the rosy glow of Ransome and Blyton, will historians and 
sociologists using children's stories as source material see childhood at the 
turn of the 20th century as grim? Quite possibly, as children's books certainly 
reflect the society they come from. However, I would hope that they will be 
also be viewed as the fictional representations they have been created to be.
 