
Sight & Sound magazine recently gave a stark analysis of the performance of 
foreign language films at cinemas in the UK. Last year was, it deduced from the 
figures, a “crushing disappointment” for non-English language (excluding 
Bollywood) films.

Why is the state of foreign language film distribution so depressing in this 
country? Are these poor statistics just a blip or is there something more 
profound at work?

For me, what these dispiriting stats reveal is a tremor in the geological 
shifts in the availability of diverse world film and cinema-going culture in 
the UK.

 Roll back a few decades and those of us of a certain age will talk with 
reverential enthusiasm for a time when they discovered the likes of Fellini, 
Bergman and Kurosawa on the television. Sure, they might not have been shown in 
the correct aspect ratio, but these otherworldly visions were available in your 
living room and could ignite a passion and discovery of film. These films 
seeped deep into our souls and led us to seek out the latest foreign release in 
the cinema

 What was happening here was not only a cultural awakening, but a vital cash 
injection for the distributors of those titles.


With the declining commitment from television came less money for distributors 
to take risks. While ancillaries such as DVD and Blu-ray used to provide some 
valuable cash, they are now very much in decline. Even with the advent of 
streaming and video on demand (VoD), and despite thehuge amounts 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/26/business/media/so-far-amazon-and-netflix-are-sundances-top-buyers.html?_r=0>
 of money spent by Amazon and Netflix at the recent Sundance film festival, 
this is still not a reliable source of income for the smaller players.


 For today’s young cinephiles, the internet has opened up the world of cinema 
just like TV did for my generation. They can discover classics and contemporary 
auteurs in minutes, as well as the latest news from international film 
festivals. But has access and familiarity led younger audiences to enjoy these 
films on the big screen?

I think the online accessibility argument is something of a myth. In much the 
same way cinema-going has been dominated by pre-packaged Hollywood films (easy 
to sell and hit all the entertainment buttons), the online world of streaming 
and VoD is also in danger of becoming a narrow spectrum of film culture. There 
will be niches, but are they economically sustainable? I think not

There are some glimmers of hope with initiatives across the UK that are 
reasserting both the value of the cinema as a place to experience world film 
while also contributing to their economic viability. Manchester’sHOME 
<http://homemcr.org/>, a new arts complex boasting five screens, grew out of 
the city’s appetite for world cinema.Picturehouse Central 
<https://www.picturehouses.com/cinema/Picturehouse_Central> in London provides 
the capital with another major platform for foreign language and independent 
film. OurConversations about Cinema <http://www.conversationsaboutcinema.co.uk/>
 project, which links film screenings with discussion and debate, demonstrated 
the desire of audiences to engage with ideas raised through film.

 But, as Sight & Sound points out, making the figures stack up has to be a 
priority. More must be done on the ground to engage the appetite of audiences 
for seeing foreign language films in the cinema – and trust me, there is an 
appetite. In Bristol I kept Abderrahmane Sissako’sTimbuktu 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Cs2dYAlbINY> playing for four weeks because of 
such high demand.

But making it add up to a viable business model for distributors and 
exhibitors is the challenge. The simple truth is that to make it happen we need 
more foreign language films screened in cinemas, not fewer.

Cinemas – particularly those in the heart of communities – are key to the 
profile of film culture. If these films aren’t available in your cinema, their 
presence is diminished and they risk getting lost in the noise of the internet. 
Individuals and cinemas can make a real difference by championing 
foreign-language and arthouse films.

We’re doing something about it. The BFI Film Audience Network 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/supporting-uk-film/distribution-exhibition-funding/film-audience-network>
 (Watershed is the lead for the South West and West Midlands hub) has just 
launched aninitiative 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/news-bfi/announcements/bfi-film-audience-network-boosts-distribution-foreign-language>
 to support and amplify the work of distributors on a local level. The first 
releases we’re supporting are Patricio Guzmán’sThe Pearl Button 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Atra27D18g4> and Deniz Gamze Ergüven’s Mustang 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ABNB3zw5BAo>.

This strategy is perhaps small beer when compared to the marketing clout of 
Hollywood or the big online brands, but there’s an energetic UK cinema 
exhibition community committed to getting world film culture to audiences in 
cinemas, so all may not be completely lost.

Mark Cosgrove is cinema curator for Watershed Bristol 
<http://www.watershed.co.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 