
The federal government’s decision to cut health funding in the 2014-15 budget 
is threatening to bite, with the risk of higher mortality rates in emergency 
departments increasing, doctors warn.


The Australian Medical Association is calling on the Turnbull government to 
reinstate specific funding to help state and territory hospitals meet the 
National Emergency Access Target (NEAT) to keep mortality rates down.

It says the target – which stipulates that a predetermined proportion of 
patients should be admitted, discharged or transferred from emergency 
departments within four hours of presentation – had led to fewer deaths but now 
hospitals are struggling to keep beating it.

Getup maps $57bn in Abbott-era health cuts hospital by hospital
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/10/getup-maps-57bn-in-abbott-era-health-cuts-hospital-by-hospital>
The target was set for all emergency departments by the national partnership 
agreement in 2012 
<http://www.federalfinancialrelations.gov.au/content/npa/health_reform/national-workforce-reform/national_partnership.pdf>
 in response to evidence that overcrowding and prolonged length of stay were 
associated with increased in-hospital mortality.

The goal was to incrementally increase the proportion of emergency admissions 
discharged within four hours to 90% in all jurisdictions by 2015, in line with 
the “four-hour rule” target set in the United Kingdom in 2010.

But the AMA vice-president, Stephen Parnis, says progress towards that 90% 
target had stalled in recent years.

The warning comes after a peer-reviewed article in the latest edition of the 
Medical Journal of Australia found evidence – for the first time – that 
improvements in admission processes in Australia’s emergency departments had 
led to a decrease in patient deaths.

The article, The National Emergency Access Target and the 4-Hour Rule: Time to 
Review the Target 
<https://www.mja.com.au/system/files/issues/10.5694mja15.01177.pdf>, directly 
linked the NEAT with clear reductions in in-hospital mortality of emergency 
admissions.

Parnis says hospitals’ performance against the NEAT has plateaued since the 
budget cuts in 2014-15. He is also warning the situation could deteriorate if 
funding is not restored in coming years.

He says state and territory targets for the NEAT were previously accompanied 
by specific funding to improve capacity but this funding was cut in the 2014-15 
budget.

The AMA wants the NEAT funding restored as part of a larger rescue package for 
public hospitals, he says.

“A target that was working to improve performance has stopped delivering 
further improvements,” he said. “The cuts to public hospital funding are having 
an effect on hospital performance – to the detriment of patients.”

The Abbott government cut hospital funding by $57bn – for the years 2017-18 to 
2024-25 – in its 2014-15 budget.

The Turnbull government has since announced a $2.9bn boost in funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/01/premiers-welcome-turnbulls-29bn-for-hospitals-but-reject-income-tax-plan>
 (over three years) to the states, agreed at Council of Australian Governments 
on 1 April.

The invisible aged: the people politics forgot | John Watkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/16/the-invisible-aged-the-people-politics-forgot>
The offer for public hospitals precedes a longer-term deal, which has not been 
announced.

Anthony Lawler, president of the Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 
said the recent Medical Journal of Australia article showed that increased 
compliance to access targets led to fewer patients dying.


“Previous research has linked overcrowded and under-resourced EDs with 
increased patient deaths,” he said.“This study helps close the loop, showing 
that improving hospital processes and increased compliance to access targets 
not only reduced the time patients spent in ED, but led to fewer patients 
dying.”
 