
Pharmacists talk of convenience, while doctors warn it could be a slippery 
slope: Boots has quietly slipped into a space previously occupied byGPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gps>, offering skin cancer check-ups and 
sore-throat testing, sparking debate over what the NHS can and should do and 
whether this is a new and damaging encroachment by the private sector.


For the past three months, 17 Boots stores have been offering a mole-scanning 
service to customers concerned they might have malignant melanoma, or skin 
cancer, which is diagnosed in more than 13,000 people every year. It costs £35 
per mole.

Boots staff under pressure to milk the NHS for cash, says pharmacists' union
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/boots-staff-under-pressure-to-milk-the-nhs-says-pharmacists-union>
Sore-throat testing and treatment has been available in London and 
Leicestershire for 18 months. Boots says the consultation is free; but if the 
customer wants a swab to find out whether they have “strep A” – a streptococcus 
bacterial infection that can be treated by antibiotics – it will cost £7.50. 
They can then take the prescription to the GP or pay privately.

Pharmacists have been encouraged to play a bigger role in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, giving people advice and 
recommending over-the-counter treatments for minor complaints, such as eye 
infections. In a controversial move, they are permitted to offer emergency 
contraception, including to underage girls.

Sore-throat testing could benefit the NHS if fewer people subsequently ask for 
antibiotics, but the notion of cancer screening has alarmed the British Medical 
Association.


“GPs welcome the opportunity to work with pharmacists collaboratively, which 
ultimately benefits the patients we jointly serve, but we need to be careful 
not to promote or develop systems that have the potential to fragment care and 
undermine the registered practice list system that is the bedrock of safe, high 
quality and cost-effective primary health care,” said Richard Vautrey, deputy 
chair of the BMA’s general practitioners committee. 

“In addition, whilst pharmacies can play an important role in supporting 
practices deliver NHS minor ailment schemes we should avoid the slippery slope 
that ends up with patients having to pay for things they would otherwise get 
free on the NHS.

“What we really need is significant investment in general practice to allow an 
expansion of the workforce, including the employment of pharmacists in the 
practice, to enable easier access to appointments.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fdoctors-wary-pharmacies-nhs-check-ups-treatments-boots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7202a74117be2cb7eec08d5a4ff0ddfeaf3ca174%2F0_227_5398_3239%2F5398.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctors%20wary%20as%20pharmacies%20cash%20in%20on%20minor%20check-ups%20and%20treatments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fdoctors-wary-pharmacies-nhs-check-ups-treatments-boots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctors%20wary%20as%20pharmacies%20cash%20in%20on%20minor%20check-ups%20and%20treatments&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fmay%2F09%2Fdoctors-wary-pharmacies-nhs-check-ups-treatments-boots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7202a74117be2cb7eec08d5a4ff0ddfeaf3ca174%2F0_227_5398_3239%2F5398.jpg>
 Dan Hurley, an in-house pharmacist at Gale Farm GP surgery in Acomb, York. 
Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
Vautrey’s comments came as NHS England announced that community pharmacists 
would again be commissioned to offer flu jabs on the NHS. GPs have 
reservations, saying that makes it hard for their practices to decide how much 
vaccine to order. Last year they were left with fridges full of vaccines, they 
say, as the numbers attending the GP practice for a jab dropped by 6%.

Suspicion about the commercial motivation of Boots is already running high. 
Managers have recently been exposed for pressuring their pharmacists to carry 
out unnecessary reviews of patients’ medicines and lifestyles to make the store 
more money.A Guardian investigation revealed that some managers were 
instructing pharmacists to do the reviews on other staff or patients who did 
not need them. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/boots-staff-under-pressure-to-milk-the-nhs-says-pharmacists-union>

But the Royal Pharmaceutical Society, which represents pharmacists, says the 
new services can help relieve the pressure on the NHS. Sandra Gidley, chair of 
the society’s English pharmacy board, said the NHS had limited funding and 
limited capacity because of it. Some people already bypass the NHS to get 
faster access to minor treatment and checks.

Gidley, a former Liberal Democrat MP who works as a locum pharmacist, said she 
has seen parents in urban Southampton go to their GP to get pain-relieving 
syrup for their children, which working parents in Winchester will buy from the 
chemist. “It is quicker and easier for them, if they can afford it, to buy it 
from their local pharmacist,” she said.

“So we already have a system where people could get the item if they chose to 
for free, but choose not to because it’s not convenient. This [skin cancer 
screening] is another product in that category. There are those who have a 
concern who would go to the GP and those who might find it difficult to get to 
a GP and think, ‘I might just pop along to the pharmacist and put my mind at 
rest.’

“If that is taking some of the pressure off the NHS, I don’t see a problem 
with that.”

She said patients in some parts of the country suffered long waits to see a 
GP, and gave the example of increasing numbers of women using over-the-counter 
pregnancy tests rather than going to a GP, as technology had evolved to make 
the kits easy and reliable.

However, Gidley said, might it be more sensible for the NHS to commission and 
pay for pharmacy services as required?

Boots said it was committed to the NHS and that its pharmacists were 
“partners” alongside GPs and other primary care professionals. A spokesperson 
said: “Pharmacists in community pharmacy have a professional expertise that can 
be used to help relieve pressure on the NHS and offer patients more choice and 
access to services to help them stay well, get the most out of their medicines 
and manage long-term conditions.

“As part of their professional duty of care, a pharmacist will always make it 
clear to a customer if an NHS service is available that they are eligible for.”

There are bound to be concerns, however, that people will be more likely to 
buy products from the pharmacy out of a sense of gratitude or obligation to the 
pharmacist who gave the recommendation.

Katherine Murphy, chief executive of the Patients Association, added: “I agree 
that pharmacists are an under-utilised resource … but we’ve got to be careful 
and scrutinise private providers creeping into the NHS. When they see an 
opportunity, is the opportunity for the patient or for their own gain?”
 