
The Australian Medical Association (AMA) has condemned suggestions that a 
review into Medicare would improve patients’ safety, saying the consultation is 
a “direct attack on the integrity of the medical profession”.

Sussan Ley: Medicare rebates will be reviewed in overhaul of 'bloated' system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/21/sussan-ley-medicare-rebates-will-be-reviewed-in-overhaul-of-bloated-system>
The health minister, Sussan Ley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sussan-ley>, on Sunday announced 
that the government would review all of the nearly 5,800 items on the Medicare 
benefits schedule (MBS) as part of a consultation process aimed at weeding out 
unnecessary, unsafe and outdated procedures.

She rejected suggestions that the consultation process was a cost-cutting 
measure.

“It’s definitely not about winners and losers,” Ley told reporters on Sunday. 
“It’s about patient safety. It’s about building the best possible health system 
for the 21st century.”

Ley cited figures released by the chair of the review task force, Bruce 
Robinson, which found that 30% of expenditure on the MBS was for services or 
technologies that were out of date, unnecessary or harmful to patients. A 
wholesale review of the system has not taken place since it was introduced in 
the early 1980s.


The consultation “allows us to reinvest in new technologies, new services and 
new procedures,” Ley said, despite theterms of reference of the review 
<http://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/MBSReviewTaskforce>
 saying that the addition of new services to the MBS was outside its remit.


The president of the AMA, Dr Brian Owler, said that doctors “cannot accept” 
the suggestion that they are using Medicare as a cash cow and, in the process, 
putting patients in harm’s way.

“This is a direct attack on the integrity of the medical profession. It is an 
approach that undermines the confidence that patients have in their doctors. 
It’s unacceptable,” Owler told reporters on Sunday.

Sussan Ley denies Medicare consultation will be over in two weeks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/feb/05/sussan-ley-denies-medicare-consultation-two-weeks>
The AMA had signed up for review of the remuneration paid to doctors for MBS 
services, Owler said. It had been hoped that the reviewwould recoup some of the 
money lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/apr/14/medical-rebate-overhaul-could-recoup-lost-savings-from-ditched-copayment>
 in the budget when the government wasforced to scrap its GP co-payment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/03/gp-co-payment-set-to-be-dropped-as-the-coalition-mulls-blended-system>
 in December last year.

Ley has not yet had discussions on the direction of future health policy with 
the freshly-sworn in cabinet, and denies that the new treasurer, Scott 
Morrison, has asked her to find savings in the $70bn health portfolio.

Owler said the review announced on Sunday aimed to take a scalpel to services 
provided under Medicare.

“It’s clearly a cost-cutting exercise. It’s about removing services for 
patients,” Owler said.

Ley admitted that there were savings to be found from the review.

“Yes it is about harvesting efficiencies, and we know that there are large 
inefficiencies in the system already,” the health minister said, adding that 
cost-saving was not the main point of the exercise.

Labor’s health spokeswoman, Catherine King, acknowledged that there was scope 
to undertake a review of certain procedures, but said that the wholesale nature 
of this consultation raised questions about its main goal.

“It is clear that this MBS review is only an excuse to find further savings in 
health,” King told reporters on Sunday. “[The government] can’t be trusted when 
it comes to Medicare.”

Earlier in the day, the opposition leader, Bill Shorten, tweeted his criticism 
of the review.

King said that Labor had undertaken reviews of Medicare services “quietly” 
when it was in power, and that the government needed to engage with the medical 
profession in the consultation process.

The review is being led by Robinson, the dean of Sydney University’s medical 
school, and calls for input by doctors and specialists. The taskforce has met 
with several doctors’ groups including the AMA already.

Early intervention tonsillectomies for children, high density bone scans for 
seniors and tests on lower back pain are just a few of the services that could 
be in danger when the taskforce reports back at the end of the year.

The chief executive of the Consumers Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Forum, Leanne Wells, welcomed the 
review.

“We know there are tens if not hundreds of items on the schedule that need 
revising. We can stop wasting money on items that are not effective and that 
money can be reinvested into new items. This should ensure Australians in the 
future have access to the best treatment options that are available,” she said.


As Sussan Ley tries to patch the cuts to Medicare, the question is: why?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jan/16/as-sussan-ley-tries-to-patch-the-cuts-to-medicare-the-question-is-why>
Owler said the health minister was “pre-empting” the outcome of the review by 
highlighting procedures she thought were unnecessary, effectively 
“politicising” the process.

The relationship between the AMA and the Coalition soured shortly after the 
governmentintroduced a $7 GP co-payment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/13/budget-7-gp-fee-brings-end-to-free-doctors-visits>
 in the 2014 budget.

The group waged a strong campaign against the co-payment which, paired with 
opposition from voters and the Senate crossbench, lead to the government 
dropping the payment in December of that year.

It was replaced with a plan to give doctors $5 less in rebates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jan/07/doctors-to-demonstrate-in-protest-at-plan-b-proposed-medicare-changes>
, leaving it up to them as to whether they passed on charges to their patients.

A subsequent plan, to cut short visits to the GP by $20, was also scrapped in 
January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jan/15/medicare-rebate-changes-scrapped-by-government>
after it faced fierce backlash.

Ley, who came into the health portfolio in December, promised to consult more 
with doctors and patients before formulating policy.
 