
Doctors at Sydney’s Royal Hospital for Women have reportedly complained to the 
board about the decision to appoint supermodel Miranda Kerr ambassador because 
she has been associated with views promoting a more “natural” approach.

Kerr was appointed an ambassador of the Royal Hospital for Women Foundation in 
December 
<http://www.royalwomen.org.au/news/event-news/miranda-kerr-ambassadorship> and, 
in a large photo onthe foundation’s homepage <http://www.royalwomen.org.au/>, 
invites visitors to “join me and save a baby today.”

In the accompanying video, Kerr explains that she was born premature and 
encourages people to donate to pay for more humidicribs, saying, “as a mother, 
I know every baby’s life is worth it.”
Miranda Kerr (@MirandaKerr) 
Proud 2 b ambassador 4 @royalforwomen <https://twitter.com/royalforwomen>. I 
was a premature baby myself & was saved.Donate @https://t.co/RX8BImk0bd 
<https://t.co/RX8BImk0bd> pic.twitter.com/b0OxIltmdc <https://t.co/b0OxIltmdc>
 <https://twitter.com/MirandaKerr/status/737799645229813760> June 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MirandaKerr/status/737799645229813760> 
She is one of the most recognisable faces in Australia, but news website 
Mamamia has reported that Kerr’s appointment caused concern 
<http://www.mamamia.com.au/miranda-kerr-royal-hospital-for-women/> among the 
medical community, with some writing to the hospital board to complain and 
others reportedly withdrawing financial support for the foundation.

The main cause for concern, other than the fact that LA-based Kerr has no 
apparent connection to the hospital, is her reported association with 
anti-science views including, recently, an apparent endorsement of a book on 
“holistic” childcare 
<http://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/entertainment/sydney-confidential/miranda-kerrs-mother-therese-airs-her-vaccination-scepticism-in-detailed-blog-post/news-story/64db3eb4ca83ad55539962ace7111133>
 by chiropractor and anti-vaccine advocate Jennifer Barham-Floreani.

The book is at the centre of an anti-vaccine furore in Australia and is 
reportedly promoted by some chiropractors 
<http://www.smh.com.au/national/health/chiropractors-promoting-antivaccination-views-despite-crackdown-20151223-gltwpl.html>
 as a way to flout rules preventing them from advising parents not to vaccinate 
their children.

Kerr has also been criticised for comments she made in an interview with 
Harper’s Bazaar after the birth of her son in 2011, in which she said children 
born after an epidural looked “a little bit drugged up”.

“I was like ‘well, I don’t want that.’ I wanted to give him the best possible 
start in life I could,” she said.

Professor John Dwyer, president of Friends of Science in Medicine, told 
Mamamia that Kerr’s “scientifically naive” opinions made her an interesting 
choice.

“She supports a whole of pseudo-scientific concepts and she’s the face of a 
foundation raising money for an academic, prestigious, orthodox medical 
hospital,”Dwyer said 
<http://www.mamamia.com.au/miranda-kerr-royal-hospital-for-women/>.

Guardian Australia has contacted the Royal Hospital for Women Foundation for 
comment.
 