
The federal government holds 550 pages of material showing the detailed impact 
of $4.8bn ofplanned cuts to family payments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/20/scott-morrison-to-unveil-family-benefits-offer-softening-2014-budget-cuts>
 but has refused to release them on the basis that it would take bureaucrats 
too long to review the documents.

The Department of Social Services said a lot of the material was contained in 
Excel spreadsheets and the 100 hours needed to process the freedom of 
information request would be a “substantial and unreasonable diversion of 
resources”.

Scott Morrison to unveil family benefits offer, softening 2014 budget cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/20/scott-morrison-to-unveil-family-benefits-offer-softening-2014-budget-cuts>
The Labor frontbencher Jenny Macklin was seeking all of the scenarios the 
department had produced showing the impact of the government’s revamped social 
services bill on particular types of families and grandparent carers. She was 
also asking for all modelling that estimated those impacts.

The department’s FOI decision maker wrote back on Tuesday saying searches had 
identified about 85 documents, consisting of about 550 pages of material, 
falling within the scope of the request. A lot of the material contained 
“information that is the subject of current government deliberation”.

“Furthermore, a significant proportion of the material is contained in Excel 
spreadsheets, meaning that a significant amount of decision making time will be 
required to review the documents, make a decision on each page, and in respect 
of the Excel documents, each worksheet, and modify the documents under section 
22 of the FOI Act so that they do not disclose exempt or irrelevant material,” 
the letter said.

Macklin, the shadow minister for families and payments, accused the government 
of hiding the impact of the cuts. “It’s disgraceful that this government is 
increasing the cost of living for 1.6 million families with these cuts, and not 
even telling them exactly how much worse off they’ll be,” she said.

Family payment proposals rejected by welfare sector as unfair to low paid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/21/family-payment-proposals-rejected-by-welfare-sector-as-unfair-to-low-paid>
“Why is the government blocking this information from being released? It’s 
time the Liberals told the truth to families about their budget cuts and tax 
increases.”

The government emphasised FOI requests were not handled by ministers but by 
departments, and said that in this case a final decision was yet to be made.

In the letter, the department’s decision maker said the intention to refuse 
the request fell undersection 24 of the FOI Act 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/foia1982222/s24aa.html>, 
which refers to practical reasons such as the unreasonable diversion of 
resources.

But the department foreshadowed further talks with Macklin so she could 
consider revising the scope of the request “so that the practical refusal 
reason no longer exists”. For example, she could limit the request to one of 
the two categories of information originally sought, or seek all detail about a 
particular measure or a particular family type, the letter said.

Tony Abbott’s government struggled to secure Senate support for changes to 
family payments outlined in the politically contentious 2014 budget, and 
Malcolm Turnbull’s government announced a revamped package in October aimed at 
securing net savings of $4.8bn over four years.

The new bill 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/legislation/ems/r5557_ems_fafd5f04-8c07-445a-859d-073edb7842fe/upload_pdf/504036.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf>
 would phase out family tax benefit supplements, while removing family tax 
benefit part B for couple families when the youngest child turns 13 - a measure 
the government argued would encourage people to reinter the workforce by the 
time their children were in high school.

Family tax benefit part B rates would be cut from $2,737 to $1,000 per year 
for single parent families with a youngest child aged 13 to 16. The $1,000 rate 
would also apply to grandparent couples caring for a youngest child in this age 
range.

The package would also increase family tax benefit part A fortnightly rates by 
$10 per child aged up to 19 - a measure the government said would benefit about 
1.2 million lower income families. There would be a similar increase for youth 
allowance and disability support pension recipients aged under 18 and living at 
home.

The standard annual rate for family tax benefit part B would increase by 
$1,000 for families with a youngest child aged under one to “provide more 
choice for families when their children are very young”.

The social services minister, Christian Porter, argued the package would 
simplify the payment structure, provide more assistance to families when they 
needed it most, and was fiscally responsible.

Labor says linking auto assistance to family payment cuts is 'blackmail'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/22/labor-says-linking-auto-assistance-to-family-payment-cuts-is-blackmail>
When the government announced the revised package, it attached four brief 
“cameos” to its media release 
<http://sjm.ministers.treasury.gov.au/media-release/007-2015/> showing the 
impact of the family tax benefits changes, excluding the supplement changes, 
when considered alongside the childcare reforms.

They included a single mum who earns $34,000 a year from working two days a 
week, when she sends her three-year-old son to long daycare. She would “be 
around $38 a fortnight better off in 2018–19 when the families package is fully 
implemented”, the government said.

All of the four selected scenarios related to people who would be better off 
overall.

The parliamentary library summarised the impact of the package in its 
independent analysis of the bill 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/legislation/billsdgs/4202612/upload_binary/4202612.pdf;fileType=application/pdf>
: “Overall, the measures will see an increase in FTB-B rates for families whose 
youngest child is aged under one year, accompanied by a reduction in payment 
rates for all FTB-A families, a significant reduction in FTB-B payment rates 
for single parents and grandparent carers with teenagers, and the loss of FTB-B 
for couple families whose youngest child is aged 13 or over, and for single 
parents and grandparent carers whose youngest child is aged 17 or 18.”

Labor said it would support only $500m of the proposed savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/10/labor-knockback-on-family-payment-cuts-forces-coalition-back-to-crossbench>
, forcing the Coalition to return toprotracted negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/oct/08/scott-morrison-willing-to-sacrifice-3bn-in-family-benefit-cuts-if-senators-agree>
 with Senate crossbenchers. The Coalition linked the passage of the savings to 
the separate childcare package that foreshadowed $3.5bn in additional spending.
 