
Can taste, touch, smell and sound change the way we see art? Tate Sensorium 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fu1pXE9HSeA> set out to answer that question. 
The display, which we – creative agencyFlying Object 
<http://www.weareflyingobject.com/>, along with many talented friends – 
developed after winning Tate’s IK Prize, partnered artworks with multi-sensory 
installations designed to get visitors thinking differently about the art. As 
applications to thenext round <http://www.tate.org.uk/about/projects/ik-prize> 
of the prize open, we reflect on what we learned from the 2015 edition.

Digital doesn’t mean screens

Here’s the conundrum: you want to have more digital stuff in your museum, but 
digital stuff means screens, and screens mean people looking at something that 
isn’t your priceless collection. So what to do? Well, audio is a start. Tate 
Sensorium sound designerNick Ryan <http://www.nickryanmusic.com/> used sound 
played through a combination of headphones, quadrophonic and directional 
speakers to encourage people to move around the room, or draw attention to 
different aspects of the artwork. The National Gallery had asimilar idea 
<http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/whats-on/soundscapes> with the Soundscapes 
exhibition, inviting artists to interpret a selection of paintings through 
sound.

The V&A’s David Bowie Is 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/exhibitions/david-bowie-is/> exhibition tailored 
the experience for each visitor by using a location-aware audio guide. 
Meanwhile, we’re excited about the potential of beacon technology to activate 
content on visitors’ own devices.


Different senses trigger different responses

Seeing something and smelling it are very different things. Smell triggers 
memories (“it smells like my school!” said one journalist to a furniture polish 
scent paired with a work). Using scent creates a more personal, visceral 
reaction, which feeds into the act of interpreting the artwork. Visitors told 
us they remembered featured paintings more clearly for this strength of feeling 
and the personal connections they made.

Smell in the museum is nothing new: the Jorvik Viking Centre 
<http://jorvik-viking-centre.co.uk/> has used smell for a long time to help 
create that Viking atmosphere, while Sensorium scent specialistOdette Toilette’s
 <http://www.odettetoilette.com/> Scratch+Sniff Pre-Raphaelites project brought 
the smellies into Tate Britain long before we got in touch.

We hope to see smell used more abstractly in museums of the future. To partner 
a David Bomberg painting we used smells designed around colour and shape, 
helping draw the eye to different areas and, for some visitors at least, making 
those appear more intense.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Ffrancis-bacon-lessons-tate-sensorium-museums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6bf85b9a81e30337c2cc9fd6e22a2be4ed95b13%2F0_23_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20a%20Francis%20Bacon%20smell%20like%20bacon%3F%20Lessons%20from%20the%20Tate%20Sensorium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Ffrancis-bacon-lessons-tate-sensorium-museums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20a%20Francis%20Bacon%20smell%20like%20bacon%3F%20Lessons%20from%20the%20Tate%20Sensorium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Ffrancis-bacon-lessons-tate-sensorium-museums%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6bf85b9a81e30337c2cc9fd6e22a2be4ed95b13%2F0_23_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A woman experiences David Bomberg’s In The Hold at the Tate Sensorium. 
Photograph: Joe Humphrys/Tate Photography 
Exhibitions tell stories, but who do they tell stories about?

“An exhibition is a room with a plot,” said Pentagram 
<http://www.pentagram.com/#/home> partner Abbott Miller, who has designed such 
rooms for clients including the Harley-Davidson and Sigmund Freud museums. But 
who is the character in this plot?

Normally there’s a straightforward answer: it’s the featured artist, or 
artists, surveyed. But what if it was the visitor? With this project we 
designed the experience around introducing visitors to their own senses, 
measuring their biometric responses throughout and presenting those responses 
back, as charts and a personalised tour through Tate Britain’s permanent 
collection. Layering technology on to the space allows stories to be told 
asymmetrically to the main narrative of the exhibition or museum. National 
Museum Scotland’sCapture the Museum <http://www.capturethemuseum.com/> game is 
a great example of this.

Graphs of sweat = shareable asset

Talking of personalisation, if that personal experience can be manifested into 
something photographable, then it will get shared, because if there’s one thing 
people like talking about on social media, it’s themselves. The biometric 
response charts handed out at Tate Sensorium detailed perspiration levels (a 
measure of arousal) over the individual’s visit. Photos of these got shared 
more than anything else. Sweat selfies, if you will.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Ffrancis-bacon-lessons-tate-sensorium-museums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c44c674379131e55543113366665743491160a2%2F0_0_995_995%2F995.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Does%20a%20Francis%20Bacon%20smell%20like%20bacon%3F%20Lessons%20from%20the%20Tate%20Sensorium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Ffrancis-bacon-lessons-tate-sensorium-museums%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Does%20a%20Francis%20Bacon%20smell%20like%20bacon%3F%20Lessons%20from%20the%20Tate%20Sensorium&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Ffrancis-bacon-lessons-tate-sensorium-museums%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c44c674379131e55543113366665743491160a2%2F0_0_995_995%2F995.jpg>
 A Tate Sensorium biometric response chart. 
Open questions, big ideas 

We’re at a point with technology where the tools to create really interesting 
experiences in the museum space are affordable and knowledge of how to use them 
is fast proliferating. That said, the question of how technologyshould be used 
is still very much up for discussion. Keeping that experimental mindset will be 
key over the next few years, so we can learn what works.

There’s a lesson here for organisations thinking about similar prizes, 
contests, hacks or call-outs: consider posing open questions – broad briefs – 
to technologists and creatives and see what they come back with. The IK Prize 
2015 brief was a single sentence: “Connect the world with art.” Also, be 
prepared to prototype and iterate towards the finished product. It’s more fun 
that way.

Tom Pursey is director of Flying Object <http://www.weareflyingobject.com/>

Entries for Tate’s IK Prize 2016 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/about/projects/ik-prize> close on 7 February 2016

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 