
I will survive

From Joe, age 38
Dear Carole, I am a 38-year-old single gay man who is perfectly at ease with 
his sexuality, but I have this nagging feeling that I should be making an 
effort to perpetuate my genes. If I die without leaving any offspring surely I 
will have failed as a biological entity. I don't believe in life after death, 
so it will be as if I never existed.

Should I impregnate a friendly lesbian, or would it be simpler – and more 
efficient in evolutionary terms – to register as a sperm donor?
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies:
Do you have any nephews or nieces? It has been theorised that homosexuality, 
which remains at a stable level in human populations of around 4% for men and 
2% for women, survives from generation to generation due to a phenomenon known 
as kin selection. This is the evolution of behaviours that favour the 
reproductive success of genetic relatives and has been observed in many 
species, us included.

Nephews and nieces share 25% of their genes with their aunts and uncles. The 
quarter of your genes you have in common with your sibling's offspring is 
second only to the half of your genes you would have in common with your own 
children. Thus, gay, lesbian or childless heterosexuals can increase their own 
reproductive fitness by behaving altruistically towards their nieces and 
nephews – in other words by helping to ensure their survival and future 
reproductive success.

There are many examples of kin selection in nature. Our New World primate 
cousin, the endangered golden lion tamarin, is a highly cooperative breeder. 
Pairs of males (sometimes brothers) both mate with the same female. When the 
infant is born neither male knows which is the father, and yet both invest 
equal care in the progeny. The more carers an infant tamarin monkey has the 
better its chances of survival.

Humans are no different in this regard. For example, a child born as the 
result of an alliance between a gay couple and a lesbian couple has two genetic 
parents and two "alloparents". With four adult carers this infant is better 
placed to succeed in the game of life than a child born to a heterosexual 
pairing.

In answer to the second part of your question: yes, as a sperm donor you could 
fulfil your fitness potential, potentially fathering several children (assuming 
women chose your sample – would you declare your sexuality when donating?). And 
so long as any resulting progeny do not try to find you later in life, you 
would have done so without incurring the potentially heavy costs of parenthood. 
Those costs would be met by sperm recipient and her partner.

Tempted?

Zhang, Y, Xiao, Y, Bales, KL (2009) Primate social systems, scent-marking and 
their applications in mobile and static sensor networks. International Journal 
of Sensor Networks; 
<http://www.inderscience.com/search/index.php?action=record&rec_id=27629&prevQuery=&ps=10&m=or>
 5 (4): 210-222.  

Buss, DM (1994) The Evolution of Desire: Strategies of Human Mating. 
<http://www.perseusbooksgroup.com/basic/book_detail.jsp?isbn=046500802X> Basic 
Books.

Wilson, EO (1975) Sociobiology: The New Synthesis; 
<http://www.age-of-the-sage.org/scientist/wilson_sociobiology.html> Abridged 
edition (1980) Harvard University Press.

Crime and punishment

From Nicholas, no age given
Dear Carole, When I am coaching my football team, how can I best motivate 
them? Specifically, if somebody is late for training should I, a) punish that 
player, b) punish everybody, or c) not punish anybody, or d) something else? 
What if a player commits a foul in an actual game, should I punish them for 
that too?
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies:
A successful coach needs to be an alpha male, the team is your troop and to 
survive intact they must cooperate with one another and obey the rules and 
strategies you teach. To punish them all will lead to dissension in the ranks. 
Can you risk this? It would also mean punishing the late player twice over due 
to the resentment of the other players.

You ask whether you should punish a foul. The answer may depend on whether the 
foul leads to a goal, or to a penalty and the other team scoring. Many humans 
are Machiavellian, so their double standards will mean they silently overlook a 
foul that brings benefit, but raise the alarm over the ones that cause damage.

You mention, "d) something else" – one novel approach is called "spite", in 
which you punish yourself and "cut off your nose to spite your face". If you 
were a highly respected coach and had a bad leg, for example, you could make 
the punishment a physical exercise that obviously pains you. Your team would be 
distressed to see you suffer and would resent the tardy player. You might hope 
his guilt would make his timekeeping better (Kevin Costner attempts this 
strategy in The Guardian <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0406816/>). 

But a spiteful strategy frequently backfires. If you are not a highly 
respected and loved coach your team might think you an idiot for making 
yourself suffer. Your status could fall and your team's faith in your 
leadership evaporate. Your captain might challenge your authority, even ousting 
you and assuming the alpha role, at least temporarily, while a new coach is 
found. In fact, a lack of respect for the alpha may have contributed to the 
original tardiness.

Strategy "a)" may be the best option. Status is a great motivator (as are 
money and sex). Pull rank, punish the player for lateness and make his status 
fall.

As you break your dilemma down into game theoretic options I'm guessing you 
already have the answers you seek. But let's be honest, solutions found in 
textbook theories are not always applicable to real-life situations. There are 
always exceptions to rules, because the social realm is invariably complex.

For example, the player in question may be the most gifted in the squad, and a 
club further up the league table would love a chance to poach him. Perhaps he 
was late for training because on his way he took time to help a blind stranger 
across a busy road. With this additional information is option "a" still your 
best course of action?

The systematic punishments found written in dusty, draconian rulebooks are 
frequently unjust. Listening to and empathising with your players will help you 
accommodate all these social intricacies.

Smith, V (2004) Economics as a laboratory science. 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6W5H-4BVS09H-1&_user=10&_rdoc=1&_fmt=&_orig=search&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_searchStrId=1175229286&_rerunOrigin=google&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=0c2ca69c4695c849e1c8c5c98b13fb88>
 Journal of Socio-Economics; 33 (1): 15-28.

Gintis, H (2009) The Bounds of Reason: Game Theory and the Unification of the 
Behavioural Sciences. Princeton University Press 
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/8901.html>.

Carole is UK-based and as such any advice she gives is intended for a UK 
audience only.
 