
In a country with an increasingly ageing population, would it not make sense 
to use the talents and experience of the older generation, rather than put them 
on the scrapheap? Latest statistics show the unemployment rate for the over-50s 
has risen to 4.4%; that's 370,000 people. Now 132,000 more people are out of 
work than at the same time last year. Yet with occupational pensions becoming 
rare (unless you are in the state sector), pension annuities giving low returns 
and hard-earned savings earning hardly any interest, many people need to 
continue working rather than beingforced to retire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/sep/25/mandatory-retirement-age-ruling> 
when they turn 65. We need to and we want to.

How do you stay on the career ladder when you're over 70? You find yourself 
back on the bottom rung and people a third of your age are climbing up fast. I 
know howArlene Phillips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/17/arlene-phillips-strictly-come-dancing>
 must feel about it – and I'm delighted to see her as the newdancing tsar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/aug/14/dancing-health-fitness-happy-britain>
. The BBC are nowactively recruiting older female newsreaders 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/8272453.stm> too. But I have found that age matters 
more than talent or experience when it comes to finding work.After 18 years 
editing a weekly women's magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/may/27/the-lady-magazine-editor-leaves-arline-usden>
, I have recently found myself back on the job market. As many women will know, 
it is hard enough trying to find a new job when you are over 50, never mind 70.

I do not have iron grey curls, wear bedroom slippers or look anything like a 
71-year-old is supposed to, so I'm told. What does take some getting used to is 
approaching people a third of my age for work, when last year I could have been 
interviewing them for a job. Although patience is something we all have to 
practice as we get older, it is a bit rich when the person about to decide your 
working future knows a fraction of what you do and thinksTyrone Power 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000061/> is an energy supplier.

You can be good at your job, have masses of experience and lots of fresh ideas 
and energy, but that is discounted if you're the wrong side of 50. Or even 40. 
Once the publisher of a magazine I was editing took me out to lunch. After a 
seemingly pleasant start he suddenly said, "You know Arline, there is just one 
thing wrong with you." Somewhat curious, I asked him what he meant. "You are 
40," he replied. He was actually older than me, but that doesn't matter when 
you wear the trousers.

No wonder many more men and women in their 60s and 70s are undergoing cosmetic 
surgery. One private hospital reported a303% increase 
<http://www.privatehealth.co.uk/news/april-2009/rise-in-60s-and-70s-surgery-30425/>
 in women and 168% in men in their 60s going under the knife in the last five 
years. Liz Dale, director of the Harley Medical Group, says that "pressure in 
the workplace is a key driver for women of more advanced years, given the 
current high level of competition for jobs".

Ideally, I want to go on working for another 10 years, but I am part of a 
generation who are on top of their game yet considered too old by their bosses. 
As Britain's population gets older, why are capable, useful and dynamic people 
treated so badly? Ultimately it does not matter how you behave, how you look or 
how you dress. All that counts are the numbers on your birth certificate.

You can see why some doctor their birthdates on their CVs. It's a shame it has 
to be this way. I sympathise withAmanda Redman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/aug/11/amanda-redman-age-celebrity>
 for shaving off a couple of years from her age – what woman over 50 hasn't or 
doesn't want to do that? I may be old enough to remember seeing James Dean in
Rebel Without a Cause <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0048545/> at Manchester's 
Premier cinema, but I know my Tinchy Stryder from my Lady Gaga.

We are not the oldie generation – call us the Boldies. And let us stop using 
the word pensioner – indiscriminately tagged on to anyone of 60+ and used as a 
dismissive word linked to being helpless. The word "retired" is also often used 
casually and thoughtlessly by younger people. When you are leaving one role 
behind and moving on to another, you need a thick skin. I was writing for 
teenagers when I was in my 30s. If you are a professional, you are adaptable.

McDonald's is now making more money and customers are happier with their meals 
in restaurants where their staff are over 60. Before we get too excited, this 
is only 1,000 out of 75,000 employees. Yet their oldest employee is a lady of 
83. This gives me hope.

One way out of the employment wilderness is to work for yourself. Prime 
Initiative <http://www.primeinitiative.co.uk/> (the Prince's Initiative for 
Mature Enterprise) is a UK charity founded by Prince Charles that helps people 
over 50 to set up a business. The charity says its activities are needed 
because the over-50s face unemployment and age discrimination. In the UK almost 
one person in three aged between 50 and 65 is without work; under 10% are 
retired on adequate incomes.

Garden designer Liz Friedrich faced retirement at 59. "A quick look at my bank 
balance convinced me I couldn't stop working completely – and anyway I just 
didn't feel old enough," she says. With Prime's help, she enrolled on London 
Metropolitan University's Forward at 50 course, which has led to her starting 
her own business, Plant Box, selling fully-planted containers for patios and 
balconies.

The economy needs its elders. We're not saying we're better than anyone else, 
just that we've got so much to offer. We are not invisible and are as important 
and relevant to society as the next generation. We need more role models on 
prime-time TV. There was the US series Thirtysomething in the 80s; why not have 
Seventysomething for the 00s?

In the feel-good film Fried Green Tomatoes at the Whistle Stop Café 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fried_Green_Tomatoes_(film)>, the wonderful Kathy 
Bates is about to park her car when two much younger women sneak in and steal 
the space from her. "I'm younger and faster than you," says the driver 
triumphantly. "I'm older than you are and have more insurance," is the swift 
reply. Although I'm not the youngest around the block and may not have much 
insurance, I still have plenty of drive.
 