
Everything seemed to go well. Very well in fact. You might have had a sneaking 
suspicion in the exam hall or it might come as a surprise, but this results 
day, a large number of you will have done better than expected in your A-levels 
and may be able to upgrade to a more prestigious university or choose a 
different course.

In the past, students that exceeded their offer may have managed to find a 
place throughClearing <https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing>, or been 
encouraged to take a gap year and reapply the following year. However, since 
2009, when Ucas introduced Adjustment, a formal system for overachievers, 
students now have a five-day period in which to see what other options are 
available while still holding on to their confirmed place.

Last year, 1,160 applicants were accepted on to a university place through 
this system. Although this figure is slightly down on the previous year 
(1,220), the number is expected to be much larger this summer as the student 
numbers cap has been lifted, which potentially means many more spaces for this 
kind of thing.
“I wouldn’t be surprised if we saw much more activity in Adjustment this 
year,” said Lynsey Hopkins, head of admissions at Sheffield University. “The 
home EU intake has always been regulated, but in the last few years we have had 
free recruitment of applicants with AAB and above and in the last two years ABB 
and above. This year has no restrictions at all. If applicants with good grades 
come along there’s a good chance, in most cases, they will be able to be taken. 
We’re gearing up for a busy one.”

Although the number of people using Adjustment is expected to rise this year, 
Fatuma Mahad, director of operations at Ucas, points out that more students 
than ever are now placed through their firm “first” choice (73% of all 
acceptances in 2014) and students should be cautious about opting to change 
last minute. “It’s a significant step to switch at this point. Most students 
remain committed to going to their first choice university, having researched 
the course, attended open days, and forged relationships with current students 
or other applicants,” she said. “I would encourage those who are thinking about 
Adjustment to consider the practical implications and to talk to their school, 
college or careers office to help them decide if a move is the right thing.”

University league tables 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2015/may/25/university-league-tables-2016>
Hopkins agreed. She thinks students considering using Adjustment this summer 
should pay a visit to the university before making any decisions. “If they are 
happy with the place they have, if they’re excited about going and they’ve 
built up a relationship with the university already then in no way should they 
feel obliged to use the service. Their decision shouldn’t be cast into doubt 
just by the availability of Adjustment,” she said.

However, Martha Rumney, who achieved A*AB rather than the BBB she was 
predicted and secured her place at Queen Mary, University of London, through 
Adjustment, feels that it was better to take a risk than to just go with the 
safe option. “I had a bit of a wobble and thought maybe I’d go to my first 
choice, but my best friend encouraged me and said ‘if you’re capable of the 
grades you should go for it’.”

There are, however, some practical concerns and students applying to a 
university late often find themselves at the bottom of the pile for 
accommodation. In an effort to address this, some universities, including the 
University of Sheffield, are now guaranteeing accommodation for any Adjustment 
orClearing <https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> places. “This can 
often be the clincher for somebody if they are keen to change their mind but 
don’t want to lose out on accommodation,” said Hopkins.

Although the range of courses and universities offering places through 
Adjustment is broad, the service is not available to everyone. Vacancies are 
unlikely in subjects such as medicine and dentistry, where numbers are limited 
and there is a complex admissions process. Similarly, not all universities 
accept students this way. As a spokesperson from the University of Oxford 
explained: “We don’t take students through Clearing and Adjustment as all our 
applicants are predicted top grades. The subject tests and interview play an 
important part as well, so we wouldn’t make offers to students who hadn’t been 
through the full application and admissions process.”


Five steps to upgrading your degree offer through Adjustment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/05/five-steps-to-upgrading-your-degree-offer-through-adjustment>
Other universities point out that despite the student cap being lifted, they 
will still only have a small number of spaces open to students this way. The 
University of Manchester say they anticipate having a limited number of 
vacancies available in science and humanities subjects. Meanwhile, a 
spokesperson from the University of Durham said: “We will have a limited number 
of places available for exceptional students in specific programmes. All 
vacancies will be advertised on the Ucas website.”

Despite the drawbacks, Tom Elwell, a geography teacher at Stowe school in 
Buckinghamshire, thinks that teacher’s predictions are not always accurate and 
there will always be students who have had a good day in the exam hall and 
exceeded expectations. “For these students it is only right that they shop 
around, no matter how stressful and last minute the experience may be,” he 
said. “It may seem that doing this at the end of the summer will throw 
everything up in the air, but there’s nothing wrong with being ambitious.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 