
The Lords are today having a debate about the arts in education 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/news/2014/november/lords-debates-arts-education/>
. This follows recent comments by the secretary of state for education,Nicky 
Morgan, about arts subjects being limiting to career prospects 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/nicky-morgan-speaks-at-launch-of-your-life-campaign>
, which are ill-judged and deeply worrying. They are particularly hard to 
understand when you look at the hugely impressive contribution that music and 
the other creative industries make to the UK.

The government’s own figures show that these industries are worth well over 
£71bn 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/creative-industries-worth-8million-an-hour-to-uk-economy>
 a year to the UK economy. Employment seems to be the education secretary’s 
particular area of concern. Yet the latest figures published by her government 
show that there are 1.68m jobs in creative industries, and that jobs in this 
sector grew by nearly 9% in just one year – more than 10 times the figure for 
the UK economy as a whole (0.7%). Music alone is worth £3.8bn to the UK 
economy, and as the culture secretary Sajid Javidhas pointed out 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/sajid-javids-speech-at-british-phonographic-industry-agm>
, one in every eight albums sold anywhere in the world is by a British artist. 
We may be a pretty small country in terms of population, but our musicians 
exert an enormous influence across the globe.

Despite this success, comments like those from the education secretary reflect 
an attitude that puts music and the arts under incredible pressure in our 
nation’s schools. In my work for theDon’t Stop the Music campaign 
<http://www.dontstopthemusic.co.uk/>, I’ve come across schools where there is 
no music budget at all. I’ve learned of schools where music lessons are barely 
a part of life – and where musical instruments for children to learn and 
progress with are almost a novelty.

As schools grapple to meet targets and focus hard on maths, English and 
science, subjects like music can be squeezed way down the priority list. 
Together with an Ofsted inspection regime that simply does not pay enough 
attention to music in schools, a perfect storm has hit music education. While 
some children are reaping the benefits of a fantastic musical education and the 
chance to learn an instrument, far too many are not. A recent report from the 
exam board of the Royal Schools of Music, for instance, revealed that40% of UK 
children 
<http://www.kevinbrennan.co.uk/post/103546308038/dont-stop-the-music-inequalities-in-music>
 from more disadvantaged backgrounds who have never played an instrument said 
they had no opportunity to learn at school.

There are also immense benefits for those children who may be suffering from 
certain behavioural or mental health issues. If you take a child who is not 
particularly academic or athletic, who feels isolated or anxious, and are able 
to offer them a creative outlet, it can often have life-changing effects. Quite 
apart from the proven effects of specialist music therapy, simply having a 
musical instrument for company, being able to practise and focus on making a 
sound, and eventually playing as part of an ensemble can have a huge impact on 
self-confidence and self-belief – two things that provide life-long benefits.

My own experience as a child who experienced severe mental health issues was 
that music was the one thing that never let me down – being able to spend time 
playing and listening to music provided a safe haven for me at a time when I 
needed it the most. It still does. Of course learning the violin isn’t going to 
cure various health issues, mental or otherwise, but it is another invaluable 
tool that can help provide comfort, self-esteem and encourage social skills, 
teamwork and focus.

I am far from alone in my concern about the pressures facing the arts in 
schools. Last weekend I was joined by a raft of senior voices in the music and 
education sectors in signingan open letter 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/letters/11246561/All-children-need-access-to-a-good-music-education.html>
 to government, demanding it take action on music education. From the Royal 
College of Music to the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra and the National 
Association of Head Teachers, highly respected figures called on the government 
to fulfil the promise of theNational Plan for Music 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-importance-of-music-a-national-plan-for-music-education>
, and end the inequalities in music education.

As the Lords debate the arts in education, I can only hope that they take note 
of these voices. Music and the arts in schools are not impediments to 
children’s education and later careers. I urge the government to recognise 
their importance, and ensure these subjects are not marginalised for our 
nation’s children.
 