
So Jeremy Corbyn has quoted Albania’s communist dictator, Enver Hoxha, at a 
Labour Christmas party 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/Jeremy_Corbyn/12040829/Jeremy-Corbyn-courts-controversy-with-Enver-Hoxha-quote-at-Labour-Christmas-party.html>
, provoking yet another tempest in the media teacup. C’mon guys, he was joking, 
right? You know, likeJohn McDonnell with Mao Zedong’s Little Red Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/25/john-mcdonnell-mao-zedong-little-red-book-george-osborne>
?

Corbyn’s – and Labour’s – opponents will seize on anything to paint him as an 
unreconstructed Stalinist itching to send the burghers of Kensington off to 
some marshy gulag.

But really, he should know better. First, because he and his associates keep 
walking into the same trap. To quote one communist dictator may be regarded as 
a misfortune; to quote two, etc etc.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjeremy-corbyn-albania-labour-enver-hoxha%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F051bc3d723edda247a6b409249a50c671dd7ccf3%2F93_53_2645_3947%2F2645.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don%E2%80%99t%20quote%20murdering%20dictators%2C%20Corbyn%3A%20Albanians%20are%20people%20too%20%7C%20Maria%20Margaronis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjeremy-corbyn-albania-labour-enver-hoxha%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%E2%80%99t%20quote%20murdering%20dictators%2C%20Corbyn%3A%20Albanians%20are%20people%20too%20%7C%20Maria%20Margaronis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fdec%2F10%2Fjeremy-corbyn-albania-labour-enver-hoxha%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F051bc3d723edda247a6b409249a50c671dd7ccf3%2F93_53_2645_3947%2F2645.jpg>
 ‘Albania has yet to recover from the 40 terrible years of Hoxha’s 
dictatorship.’ Photograph: Corbis 
Second, because these jokes bespeak a kind of left cosiness, an assumption of 
shared assumptions that bodes ill forLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>. All subcultures have their 
references, which for insiders carry a complex set of feelings: the comfort of 
belonging and shutting out outsiders, mixed with a rueful, ironic 
self-awareness. (Somewhere I have a pink T-shirt emblazoned with Stalinist 
Thug, made for me long ago by a friend and Nation colleague to commemorate our 
alliance on the left side of some battle being fought at the magazine. We 
weren’t Stalinists—we hated Stalinists—but we were defiantly chuffed that the 
other side had opportunistically said we were.)

But I don’t want the Labour party to be a subculture. And on the left, ironic 
or not, such references still carry a whiff oftankyism 
<http://moufawad-paul.blogspot.co.uk/2015/01/tankyism-and-competing-imperialisms.html>
, a sly sentimental nostalgia for the mythic days of Actually Existing 
Socialism: beforeNikita Khrushchev’s speech 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/20th_Congress_of_the_Communist_Party_of_the_Soviet_Union>
 at the 20th party congress, before the invasions of Hungary and 
Czechoslovakia. Years ago they might have been a mark of solidarity, a useful 
whistling in the dark. Now they hark back to lost fantasies and the smug 
satisfaction of feeling beleaguered with right-on people who agree with you in 
a safe north London pub.

And third, and most important, dear internationalist Jezza, because Albanians 
are people too – and though they do a fine line in black humour, when it comes 
to Enver Hoxha many of them are not yet ready for irony. I was in Albania a few 
weeks ago, interviewingformer political prisoners for a radio documentary 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06qm3mh> . To call Hoxha “tough” is more than 
a bit of a weasel word. It’s really an unconscionable understatement.

Albania has yet to recover from the 40 terrible years of Hoxha’s dictatorship 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enver_Hoxha>. Thousands of people were killed or 
imprisoned in impossibly grim labour camps: the copper mines of Spac in the 
freezing northern mountains, whose unheated cell blocks look like a disused 70s 
car park; Ballsh in the south, where the entertainment was a Chinese-run oil 
refinery. Some prisoners took the easy way out, running at the fence to draw a 
quick bullet from the guards. Their families were tortured, too, exiled in 
internment camps and excluded from employment. Large numbers of those who 
weren’t persecuted were forced to collaborate, threatened with the rape of 
their children or their own arrest.

Corbyn’s ‘new politics’ is neither hateful nor pure: it’s complicated | John 
Harris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/08/jeremy-corbyn-new-politics-labour-momentum-militant>
Hoxha broke first with Yugoslavia, then with the Soviet Union, and finally 
with China, walling Albanians up in silent isolation. Bright-eyed European 
leftists visiting the country in the 70s and 80s were startled to have their 
beards shaved and their clothes changed at the airport before they could be 
seen by the Albanian populace. So pervasive and persistent was the regime’s 
reach that a law to open Albania’s secret police files was passed only this 
year, nearly 25 years after the fall of communism. Many people I talked to were 
cynical about its likely application. The most incriminating files, they say, 
were destroyed a long time ago; and members or descendants of the old elite are 
still in positions of power

I don’t want to live in a world without transgressive jokes, or a world where 
humour comes with a trigger warning, like classic literature on some American 
campuses. But I do want the left to get over its old romance with Stalinism and 
stop snickering about murderers. And I do want – we desperately need – a 
grown-up, functioning, effective Labour party.
 