
It's summer and, with silly season almost upon us, nice to have some good news 
to dwell on, in amongst the horror coming out of the Middle East. What could be 
nicer and more benign than a fat-cheeked baby, let alone a fat-cheeked baby who,
as Vanity Fair puts it 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/society/2014/04/prince-george-new-zealand-photos_slideshow_lastslide_26>
, "single-handedly brought moniker-flaunting clothing back intovogue"?

I have no idea what that means, but I do know that Vanity Fair's August cover 
story <http://www.vanityfair.com/online/daily/2014/07/prince-george-cover>, 
featuring the first infant cover-star of that particular magazine since Suri 
Cruise in 2006, is hard to tear oneself away from. It celebrates the heir to 
the British throne's first birthday later this month and shows Prince George 
looking across at his dad while his mum regards both of them from above – in a 
way that is, according to the coverage of the coverage, almost unbearably 
adorable.

The British royal family has had enough bad press over the years for this 
attention to strike it like warm sun after rain, but there is something creepy 
about the fervor directed atPrince George 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/prince-george>. The media is, in this 
instance, behaving like that weirdo who stops you in the street to go on for 
slightly too long about how cute your baby is – or the stalker whose love 
reaches a pitch that is a few notches shy of reaching around the back to meet 
its polar opposite.


Most of the follow-up this week has been as obsessive in quality as the cover 
story itself, over-gushing about the prince in a way that, when you do it into 
the face of an actual live baby, tends to make them cry. Did we need to know 
that Prince George was a colicky and difficult newborn, that he wouldn't settle 
into a routine (despite his nanny's best efforts), that he finally started 
sleeping through the night after being introduced to solids, or that, according 
to anonymous testimony from a royal aide, on tour in Australia, he didn't 
suffer overly from jetlag?
VANITY FAIR (@VanityFair) 
By George! The Cambridges grace Vanity Fair's August 2014 issue. Preview the 
story herehttp://t.co/ktfcNNCUAg <http://t.co/ktfcNNCUAg> 
pic.twitter.com/2OQ2Upf11I <http://t.co/2OQ2Upf11I>
 <https://twitter.com/VanityFair/statuses/486470929518587904> July 8, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/VanityFair/statuses/486470929518587904> 
Look at what happens when a civilian, as Gawker puts it, "pimps" out his baby 
to the media for profit 
<http://domesticity.gawker.com/do-not-pimp-your-child-out-on-social-media-1602376834>
: he is roundly condemned as grotesque. But the intimacies of the daily life of 
Prince George, heaped with praise merely for existing, are unquestioningly 
swallowed whole by the machine.

There are key differences, of course. As far as we know, the couple didn't 
collaborate with the journalist on this story and the cover shot wasn't taken 
by Annie Leibovitz nor any other of the magazine's star photographers. Instead, 
it was a photo snapped during the Royals' recent tour of Australia, attended to 
by an entire phalanx of reporters and photographers. As the usually quite staid 
Washington Postpointed out 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/style-blog/wp/2014/07/08/prince-george-lands-vanity-fair-cover-for-his-first-birthday/>
, "This one in particular is from that amazing day where George wasthrilled to 
meet his namesake bilby 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/prince-george/10776870/Royal-Tour-Prince-George-tries-to-grab-a-bilby.html>
 at a local zoo."

The Royals are figureheads and as such, duty-bound to be visible. An invisible 
royal is a redundant royal – and one feels for their dilemma of being open 
enough to satisfy the public, and private enough to have interior lives.

Because of this, there will always be a freak-show aspect to royal-watching, 
and the creep factor in this case is probably part of the appeal: the fact that 
William and Kate, as part of the PR machine for the royals, will inevitably 
bask in a celebrity media they at other times abhor – after all, the 
adorableness of the baby (as averred by everyone, everywhere from morning TV 
shows to respectable newspapers) is no prophylactic against dire coverage of 
George or his parents down the line. Their only function is to be loved, but 
still: the transaction can at times seem too grim.

As the baby turns one, there is a dragging sense of the unendingness of it all 
and the fact that this as-yet unwitting small boy will be a fixture in our 
lives forever – whether he likes it or not.

I'm aware that I can be too much of a killjoy about all this. When the prince 
was born, I was in Toronto – where people hung Union flags from their windows – 
and Margaret Atwood (who is not exactly someone known for being 
over-sentimental) advised me and other naysayers to knock it off and just enjoy 
the occasion.

Fine: the photo on the cover of Vanity Fair is a nice, happy family 
arrangement – albeit one in which you know that, just out of shot, the world's 
photographers jostle ten deep. So happy birthday, Prince George. Now let's 
leave the kid alone.
 