
Alex Salmond, Scotland’s former first minister, has warned US voters that 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is an 
emotionally stunted “manchild” who presents “a real and present danger to the 
security of the American republic”.

Salmond said his many dealings with Trump over the property tycoon’s 
controversial golf course near Aberdeen and a nearby windfarm had persuaded him 
that Trump was so unstable that the prospect of him becoming US president 
“should give us all the heebie-jeebies”.

Salmond said he was still unclear whether the Republican candidate’s attacks 
on Mexican immigrants and Muslims were political calculation or genuinely held 
racist views.

“It is a matter of debate as to whether it is more comforting to believe that 
a candidate says disgusting things not because he believes them but because he 
thinks they might benefit him in a campaign,” Salmond said inan article for the 
Daily Record 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/politics/alex-salmond-says-dealings-donald-8778906#ICID=ios_DailyRecordNewsApp_AppShare_Click_Twitter>
.

“It is an open question whether a demagogue is preferable to a genuine racist.”

Why did Alex Salmond take so long to turn on Donald Trump? | Anthony Baxter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/20/alex-salmond-donald-trump-scotland>
Salmond then linked Trump’s candidacy to the famous attack ads used by the US 
Democrats in 1964 against the then Republican presidential candidate Barry 
Goldwater, which stated: “In your guts you know he’s nuts.”

As head of the Scottish government and the MSP for Gordon, the constituency 
around Trump’s estate,Salmond played a key role in the developer’s successful 
quest to build “the world’s greatest golf course” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/nov/03/scotland-donaldtrump> in 
Aberdeenshire against heavy opposition from Trump’s neighbours and Scotland’s 
major environment organisations.

Salmond had endorsed Trump’s claims that he was justified in bulldozing a 
legally protected dunes system, designated as a site of special scientific 
interest under the UK’s environment laws, because the resort would create 
thousands of jobs and involve a £750m sports, hotel and housing development of 
national importance.


In fact, eight years after winning approval for the resort, Trump now only 
employs 95 people, many of whom are seasonal or part-time, and has only 
invested about £30m in the course, a single-storey club house, and a small 
boutique hotel.

The two men fell out after Trump furiously attacked a small experimental 
offshore windfarm being planned several miles from his course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/11/donald-trump-loses-windfarm-scottish-golf-resort>
, which was backed by Salmond and many of Trump’s other local allies, including 
the Robert Gordon University and Sir Ian Wood, an influential industrialist.

That dispute made him “a target for bizarre Trump ravings”, Salmond wrote, 
adding: “Trump swings from public support to extreme opposition with no 
intervening period whatsoever.

“Indeed in the course of a single phone call he would veer alarmingly from 
bonhomie, to bullying, to pleading and then back to a jocular mood. Emotionally 
he is a Peter Pan – the boy who never grew up.

“And this disagreement between us was just about wind turbines! Imagine the 
consequences if similar phone calls were taking place from the oval office, not 
Trump tower, and the subject matter was not wind power but hard power – the use 
or deployment of military force and nuclear weaponry.”

Salmond urged the Democrats to repeat their “Daisy” attack advert used against 
Goldwater. “It shows a lovely young girl counting daisy petals from one to 10, 
which then morphs into a countdown to a nuclear strike from 10 to one. Its 
purpose was to highlight the danger of a Goldwater presidency,” he wrote.

“As this presidential campaign now reaches its climax, they should consider 
using such an approach again.

“Because while many disgruntled Americans are still attracted to the Trump 
anti-establishment, anti-Washington, anti-big government rhetoric there are 
only a few who want to risk a manchild in the White House.

“The truth is indeed out there because: ‘In your guts you know he’s nuts’.”

Salmond’s distaste for Trump’s Islamophobic and anti-migrant rhetoric is not 
new. He endorsed the decision by his successor, Nicola Sturgeon, to strip Trump 
of his status as an honorary Scottish trade ambassador last year, and backed a 
petition calling for the UK government to ban Trump from entering the UK.

 