
For years, donors have been saying that for aid to be effective, developing 
countries should be in the driving seat when choosing priorities.

The Busan conference 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2011/dec/01/china-india-aid-partnership>
 in South Korea in 2011 reinforced that principle, established in Paris 2005. 
The Busan partnership document said: "Partnerships for development can only 
succeed if they are led by developing countries, implementing approaches that 
are tailored to countries' specific situations and needs."

In practical terms, country ownership means that donors use a recipient's 
national systems <http://www.oecd.org/dac/effectiveness/countrysystems.htm> for 
handling aid money, particularly its financial management and procurement 
methods. The approach,backed by Rwanda 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/nov/30/busan-rwanda-aid-effectiveness>
, is seen as more efficient than micromanaging from outside, as well as 
strengthening a country's institutions.

But almost two years after Busan there are concerns that donors have done 
little on country ownership, even though it was declared at the time to be the 
default approach.

According to a paper 
<http://www.bond.org.uk/data/files/publications/Country_Ownership.pdf> (pdf) by 
theUK Aid Network <http://www.ukan.org.uk/> (Ukan) and NGO umbrella group Bond 
<http://www.bond.org.uk/>, the international community may even have gone 
backwards, despite the rhetoric from donors. The concerns have been raised in 
the runup to this week's meeting in Addis Ababa of the steering committee of the
Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation 
<http://www.effectivecooperation.org/>.

The partnership, which brings together donors, developing countries, the 
private sector and civil society, grew out of Busan to ensure that the 
conference's principles would be acted on. Justine Greening, the UK's 
international development secretary, co-chairs the steering committee with 
Armida Alisjahbana, the Indonesian minister of state for national development 
planning, andNgozi Okonjo-Iweala 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/theobserver/2012/apr/01/profile-ngozi-okonjo-iweala>
, the Nigerian finance minister.

So far, the rhetoric on developing countries choosing their priorities has 
been strong. Last week,the EU issued its proposals on financing for poverty 
eradication and sustainable development 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2013/jul/17/development-aid-poverty-eu>
 after the millennium development goals expire in 2015, which said: "Partner 
countries should be in the driving seat when choosing resource priorities."

In its annual report, the Department for International Development (DfID) 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/dfid-annual-report-and-accounts-2012-13>
 said: "Helping to build or boost the administrative systems that developing 
country governments use for planning, budgeting, procurement and auditing 
remains central to DfID's efforts to build effective institutions and ensure 
lasting development."
 Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, co-chair of the steering committee of the Global 
Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation. Photograph: Ramin Talaie/EPA
One sign of whether donors are putting their money where their mouths are is 
their willingness to provide budget support – aid that goes directly to 
developing countries to finance their programmes. It can go to the finance 
ministry (general budget support) or be allocated to particular sectors such as 
health or education (sector budget support). Developing country systems can be 
used even when they do not receive budget support – parliamentary scrutiny of 
aid money is a typical example.

Budget support figures are published annually by the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development with a breakdown by provider, and can be used as a 
proxy for commitment to country ownership. But, according to Ukan and Bond, 
global budget support fell steeply, to only $1.3bn last year from $4.4bn in 
2010. Even Denmark, a champion of budget support, has provided less cash. In 
the UK, budget support in DfID's programmes slumped to £502.8m in 2012-13, from 
£576m in 2011-12.

Using country systems has real consequences, according to Richard Horton 
writing in the Lancet 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736%2813%2961533-0/fulltext>
. He described how a senior official from an African health ministry asked the 
World Bank, the Global Fund to Fight Aids, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and the
Gavi Alliance <http://www.gavialliance.org/> to pool their health spending to 
help strengthen her government's health system. She asked them to agree a 
single reporting mechanism to ease the administrative burden.

The World Bank refused as it wanted total control of its money. Negotiations 
broke down after a year, and the ministry now has three channels for health 
system support and three separate monitoring mechanisms for its three partners.

Many donors face domestic pressure to show value for money and sometimes have 
to pull back from budget support for political reasons. In November,the UK 
suspended £21m to Rwanda 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2012/nov/30/uk-withholds-aid-rwanda-congo-drc>
 after allegations that it financed rebels in the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo (DRC). TheUK suspended all direct aid to the Ugandan government 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global-development/2012/nov/16/uk-suspends-aid-uganda-misuse>
 in November amid allegations of fraud. As aid budgets come under pressure, 
donors may feel less inclined to act on commitments made at Busan and Paris.

However, it is not all about aid. Developing countries need to mobilise 
domestic resources through taxation to become self-reliant – there will be 
discussions in Addis on using aid as a catalyst for this. Ghana, Sierra Leone, 
Uganda and Bolivia have reduced their dependence on aid through taxes, 
including tackling national and international tax rules and renegotiating 
royalties on oil, gas and minerals.

ActionAid's Africa advocacy co-ordinator, Henry Malumo, says: "Governments 
have made good progress on increasing tax revenue to end aid dependency but 
Africans must make sure their governments use the money to deliver real 
reductions in poverty. By stopping companies dodging tax, governments can 
deliver the money for public services such as schools and hospitals that their 
people need."
 