
According to his LinkedIn profile, Justin Moodie made his first website for 
money "in 1994 using Notepad and Photoshop 2". In 2011 as publishing director, 
digital at Dorling Kindersley, his role includes overseeing the team making 
apps using considerably more sophisticated technology. Not that there's 
anything wrong with Notepad, still.

DK is part of the Penguin Group, which is in turn owned by Pearson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/pearson>. It has been making apps for about 
a year: a mixture of travel guides, reference works and console game guides. 
However, its digital heritage goes back much further.

"DK has been doing digital products for a long time," he says. "It was 
pioneering in the digital space 20 years ago with CD-ROMs. People think of book 
publishers as set in their ways and a bit fusty, but that's not the way with us 
at all. The difference nowadays is that the devices are so powerful and 
affordable, the possibilities open to us are unlimited, which was never really 
the case in the past."

DK's Eyewitness and Top 10 travel guides have been doing well on the App Store 
according to Moodie, as have its guide-apps for games including L.A. Noire and 
Call of Duty Black Ops. The company's first big adult reference apps came out 
more recently though: DK The Human Body App followed by DK Quick Cook.

The planning process that went into choosing those physical books to get the 
app treatment sounds fun, as DK's marketing, content, editorial, design and 
digital staff sat down in a room to throw ideas at one another.

"It was a very Darwinian approach: All the publishers were asked to bring an 
idea for apps they thought would be a success, and then we killed off the ones 
that weren't appropriate," he says.

"The first criteria was whether we had global rights for a property. Then 
whether we could add value by making it as a digital product - we got rid of 
the ones that wouldn't be great interactive experiences. And then it was the 
question of whether it had sold well in the past."

Released on 12 August with a Â£9.99 price, it has performed well on the App 
Store: at the time of writing, DK The Human Body App is the 37th Top Grossing 
iPad app overall in Apple's UK store, and the second Top Grossing in theiPad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> Education category. In the US, it 
is 15th in the latter.

"We have tried to manage our expectations carefully, and so far we are really 
pleased," he says. "The consumer reception has been really positive."

The Human Body app has also maintained its pricing, following a pattern laid 
down by Faber's The Waste Land and Touch Press' The Elements, among other 
premium book-apps. Moodie admits that there was a "massive debate" within the 
company about setting the price for this particular app.

"Everything we had seen showed a downward trend in app pricing, but that did 
not change the fact that we had spent a lot of time and money making this 
really superb product," he says.

"The initial price we set was quite high, a reflection of the cost and time it 
took to make the product, and based maybe naively on the print book price. We 
quickly realised that wasn't a smart thing to do, but the question is do we go 
really low to compete with massmarket products and potentially not get the 
returns we need, or raise the price and potentially lose some sales?"

Moodie says that what is simultaneously exciting and terrifying about the App 
Store is the fact that hard data on pricing elasticity and other metrics is 
still relatively thin on the ground, unless gathered from your own apps.

"We need to pioneer and experiment," he says. "We are making products in the 
knowledge that some may not succeed. The academic side of my brain is happy as 
can be, because this is a completely open field. But the business side of me is 
terrified!"

Moodie is certainly relishing the creative challenges of turning books into 
excellent apps, making use of the sensors and technologies within mobile and 
tablet devices. The Human Body, for example, includes haptic feedback for 
people to feel the device "beat" when in the heart and lungs sections.

He says there is a strand running through all DK's products, however. "We have 
always been designing things for tablets, you could say, it's just that until 
now the tablets were made of paper!" he says.

"We design books for reluctant readers: anyone should be able to open any DK 
book at any page and be absorbed immediately, and it's the same with a tablet 
app."

DK is hoping that social networks will help these people spread the word about 
its apps, once they've become absorbed. However, it seems the company is 
already thinking about how more detailed social features might be woven into 
its book-apps in the future.

"The next step, and it's difficult to do, is collaboration," says Moodie. 
"People using the same app and having some sort of shared experience. It's 
about playing to the strengths of the device, not just taking the things we 
already do and porting them over."

DK has released apps for Android: a number of its city-guide apps are 
available onAndroid <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> Market, 
but for now DK The Human Body App is iPad-only.

Moodie says the publisher is looking for "a maturity in the marketplace", 
which goes beyond the pure number of devices being sold to how many apps the 
owners of those devices are actually buying. To that end, he says Google's 
efforts to use operator billing on its Android Market are "manna from heaven" 
to make it easier to buy. He remains cautious about tablet apps though.

"I've got an Android phone, and I love it: it's a great platform," he says. 
"But The Human Body is large-format and designed for tablets, and right now the 
tablet market in Android is tiny. There are a handful out there. Until Android 
tablet penetration becomes substantial, it will be difficult for us. But we are 
agnostic: we're not tied to any platform in particular."

How about Amazon's move into Android - initially with its Appstore, but with 
strong rumours that it is preparing to launch a Kindle-branded tablet this side 
of Christmas?

Moodie warmly praises what Amazon has been doing with its Kindle readers and 
e-books store, including its recent adoption of a print replica format. 
However, he also suggests that DK may have some issues with publishing paid 
Android apps on Amazon's Appstore.

"We operate on agency pricing, and they don't," he says. "We're not 
comfortable with the idea that we can't set our own price."

We finish our conversation by coming back to the CD-ROMs from two decades ago. 
Is there a slightly worrying parallel between those products and modern-day 
tablet apps, given that many people in the publishing industry see CD-ROMs as 
having been a flop for digital book products?

"The difference is that there is an established marketplace through which 
customers can buy the products and through which we can receive money for it," 
says Moodie. "That's really important. Making a great product is only half the 
story."
 