
"You really couldn't judge Steve Jobs the day he was thrown out of the office, 
you know?" retailer Dov Charneytold 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/sapna/dov-charney-dreams-big-for-american-apparel-even-as-its-stoc>
 a reporter this past spring.

Charney, the founder, CEO and chairman of American Apparel, was himself thrown 
out of the office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/19/dov-charney-american-apparel> 
late Wednesday night. His firing was "for cause", according to the tersely 
wordedstatement 
<http://investors.americanapparel.net/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=855505> from 
the company's board. The vote was unanimous, and the termination "grew out of 
an ongoing investigation into alleged misconduct".

Charney always thought of himself as different 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/jun/19/dov-charney-american-apparel>
: a "cool" CEO, irreplaceable and implacable, even as his board grew more 
restive – but, as his record and ouster shows, he wasn't an outlaw or an 
outlier. He was sadly typical, as was his behavior and many of his practices.

The Los Angeles Times reported 
<http://www.latimes.com/business/la-fi-dov-charney-out-20140618-story.html> 
that the misconduct the board is investigating "involved his personal conduct 
with women". This could hardly have come as a surprise to anyone familiar with 
the history of Charney himself, American Apparel as a brand, or the industry in 
which they collided.

Charney's business practices gained attention almost from the moment the Tufts 
University drop-out founded his company in 1997. While competitors manufactured 
in Haiti and Bangladesh, where garment workers earn around 30 cents an hour and
preventable industrial accidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/19/rana-plaza-bangladesh-one-year-on>
 still kill many each year, American Apparel produced all its clothes at its 
Los Angeles headquarters. Its garment workers earned higher starting wages than 
its retail employees, plus health insurance and benefits – and Charney ­enjoyed 
the image of fairness this conveyed.

He played up the all-American image in the company's advertising, even as he 
said 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/sapna/dov-charney-dreams-big-for-american-apparel-even-as-its-stoc>
 things like "I don't believe in Made in USA". Among the hipster-skinny models 
andporn stars 
<http://jezebel.com/5135586/american-apparel-now-sponsoring-bloggers--porn-stars-nsfw>
 featured in his company's ads, one could also find the occasional garment 
worker, shot documentary-style in the factory. Not that the image necessarily 
matched up with the reality: American Apparelfought any union that attempted to 
organize its labor force 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20070202040802/http://www.clamormagazine.org/issues/38/aa/straub.php>
, and a worker interviewed by Elizabeth M Cline for her 2012 bookOverdressed 
<http://www.indiebound.org/book/9781591844617> called American Apparel's 
facilities only "less worse" than other factories.

The financial problems at Charney's company, too, date back years. In 2009, 
when American Apparel sales first started to fall, it wasforced by US 
Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2009/09/30/us/30factory.html> to fire 1,800 workers 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Business/story?id=7979899>. (He announced that he was 
complyingin a company letter 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20091004150244/http://americanapparel.net/presscenter/dailyupdate/dailyUp.asp?d=0&t=1859>
.) In 2010,its auditor resigned 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/2010/07/29/americanapparel-audit-idUSN2910316320100729>
, citing weaknesses in the company's financial controls, whichtriggered 
subpoenas from investigators including the Securities and Exchange Commission 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/18/business/18apparel.html>. (The SEC ended its 
investigation 
<http://www.mrketplace.com/25226/sec-ends-american-apparel-investigation/> 
without enforcement.) In2011 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/04/04/american-apparel-bankruptcy_n_844713.html>
 and againthis spring 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-04-08/american-apparel-ceo-finds-new-believer-just-in-time.html>
, Charney's company came within a serger-thread of bankruptcy when an interest 
payment came due that exceeded its cash on hand. The stock has been valued 
above $1 for all of two seconds this year, and as a result the company has 
receivedrepeated 
<http://investors.americanapparel.net/releasedetail.cfm?ReleaseID=840656> 
de-listing warnings from the exchange on which it trades. The company racked up 
losses – over $270m since 2009 – and creditors jacked up their rates. As of 
2011, American Apparel was payinga whopping 18% interest 
<http://www.wwd.com/business-news/financial/burkle-deal-with-american-apparel-stalls-5426606>
 to its primary lender. The companyis now seeking a waiver 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-06-19/american-apparel-to-terminate-founder-charney-as-ceo-for-cause.html>
, but I get a better rate on my AmEx.

There were also lawsuits. By my count in covering his reign at the retailer, 
Charney has faced at least seven sexual-harassment suits from former employees. 
(The New York Timesreported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/20/business/dov-charney-american-apparel-founder-ousted-amid-inquiry.html>
 eight on Friday. Most of themremain in binding arbitration 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/business/2014/06/19/dov-charney-american-apparel-lawsuits/10891519/>
, though at leastone was settled without liability to the company 
<http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1336545/000133654513000009/app12311210k.htm>
 andone appeal is pending 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/business/2014/06/19/dov-charney-american-apparel-lawsuits/10891519/>
.) Women have alleged variously that the former CEO held business meetings at 
his home while dressed only in somethingdescribed as a "cock sock" 
<http://www.onpointnews.com/NEWS/ceo-fakes-arbitration-in-sex-harassment-case.html>
, that he sent them unsolicited sexually explicit photographs, and that he 
coerced one,on her 18th birthday 
<http://jezebel.com/5780629/judge-stops-american-apparel-sex-slave-suit>, into 
giving him a blow job 
<http://nypost.com/2011/03/09/i-was-american-apparel-execs-slave/>. (The latter 
lawsuit in New York wasdismissed 
<http://nypost.com/2012/03/21/260m-sex-slave-suit-against-dov-charney-tossed/> 
after judges in New York and California ruled the case was subject to binding 
arbitration; it wasstill pending 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/business/2014/06/19/dov-charney-american-apparel-lawsuits/10891519/>
 earlier this year.) The Equal Employment Opportunity Commissionfound 
<http://www.cnbc.com/id/101774897> that American Apparel discriminated against 
"women, as a class, on the basis of their female gender, by subjecting them to 
sexual harassment".

But in his own mind, Charney was always the victim. "My personal sexuality, or 
whatever, has been used against me,"he told Flaunt in 2011 
<http://fashionista.com/2011/12/american-apparels-dov-charney-addresses-sexual-harassment-accusations-what-led-the-company-to-near-bankruptcy-and-their-plan-to-get-back-on-track-financially#awesm=~oHGOVx5VhCK3dB>
. "I like to fool around with girls. Get over it."

It seemed that he'd do anything to épater la bourgeoisie. Anyone who objected 
to a boss who walked around the office in his underwear was uncool. Anyone who 
cared about actually being sweatshop-free (such as the socially conscious 
employees heonce referred 
<http://jezebel.com/316322/working-at-american-apparel-is-all-its-coked-up-to-be>
 to as "WTO" and "so ’99" on a conference call) was a hippie, and therefore 
uncool. Even the company's officers and executives could beso uncool. Charney 
once, in the pages of the Wall Street Journal,called 
<http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB120796037535209509> his own CFO a 
"complete loser". In the New York Times, hederided 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/14/fashion/14CHARNEY.html?pagewanted=1&ref=fashion&pagewanted=all>
 his company's only experienced executives as "these clowns" he had been forced 
to hire by his lenders. "Like they know better" Charney scoffed. He was careful 
always to pose as a rebel.

Charney acted as if the corporate vision he was peddling were novel. But the 
employment practices that Charney stood for are unfortunately typical for 
retail, an industry that is only too willing to tolerate the personal "quirks" 
of powerful men – as long as those men continue to create value for 
shareholders.

Charney reportedly 
<http://gawker.com/5559165/american-apparel-has-a-full-body-head-to-toe-hiring-policy>
 pressured store managers to"ease" the employees considered least attractive 
off the schedule 
<http://gawker.com/5323472/we-predict-more-lawsuits-in-dov-charneys-future> 
(which hedenied in an email 
<http://gawker.com/5329709/dov-charney-i-do-employ-uglies>). In retail, hiring 
and firing on the basis of looks is as common as spending your entire shift 
folding sweaters; image is everything, and even mall brands like Abercrombie & 
Fitchrefer 
<http://www.shrm.org/hrdisciplines/diversity/articles/pages/abercrombiefitch.aspx>
 to their $8-an-hour sales associates as "models".

In reality, Charney's formula was as old as retail. He sold – albeit more 
successfully than some, at least at first – the same tired packaging: 
exploitation as sex, and sex as liberation. Hell, with a product as boring as 
an unbranded (but comfortable) classic t-shirt, and with competitors as big as 
Fruit of the Loom, this man had to dosomething to stand out. But what everyone 
seemed to miss is that selling sex didn't make Dov Charney a renegade – it made 
him a cliché.

"Either I'm delusional, or we're going to change America," he told 
<http://www.americanapparel.net/presscenter/articles/20040531labj.html> the Los 
Angeles Business Journal in 2004. With losses of $110m in the last 15 months, 
it seems the former was the case.
 