
Update 25 October 2011: International Resources Group (IRG), a Washington 
based company owned by L-3 Communications, have asked us to make clear that 
they have not funded Pargav and we accept this. On 25 October,our apology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/oct/25/corrections-and-clarifications>
 for this error was published in the Clarifications and Corrections Column.


Downing Street faces growing pressure to definitively identify a company named 
in the report by the cabinet secretary, Gus O'Donnell, into Liam Fox's links 
with his best man,Adam Werritty <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/adam-werritty>.

The former cabinet minister Peter Hain demanded that ministers clarify who is 
behind the company, IRG Ltd.

The report's publication on Tuesday was intended to draw a line under the 
furore around Fox's links with Werritty, which led to Fox resigning as defence 
secretary. But the report, which named the six companies and individuals that 
funded Werritty's Pargav "slush fund", has raised more unanswered questions.

Among the Pargav donors, including the mining tycoon Mick Davis, private 
investigations firm G3 and billionaire property mogul Poju Zabludowicz, is a 
company referred to as simply "IRG Ltd".

More than 30 companies and organisations use the same initials, including an 
Iraq-focused charity, an executive recruitment agency linked to the former Tory 
minister Virginia Bottomley and a pizza restaurant in Basildon.

On Thursday , Hain put down a parliamentary question for the Cabinet Office 
minister, Francis Maude, demanding he "explain the nature and purpose of IRG 
Ltd".

Hain said: "The tentacles of this scandal spread even further and the 
government must come clean on what IRG is. There is no reason for the Cabinet 
Office to say it knows what IRG is, but not to admit it in public."

International Resources Group, a US company owned by L-3 Communications has 
denied it is the same IRG Limited that funded Pargav.

Another IRG Ltd is a UK company which trades as Odgers Berndston, an executive 
recruitment agency and it counts former Conservative health secretary, Virginia 
Bottomley, as a director. It too has denied any connection to Pargav.

A third organisation, the Iraq Research Group, said to be led by Stephen 
Crouch, the former chairman of the Tory Party's Camarthen West and South 
Pembrokeshire constituency, has been identified in media reports as a possible 
candidate.

The Guardian has been unable to contact Crouch. Simon Hart, the MP for 
Camarthen West, said Crouch used to make frequent trips to Iraq and said it was 
understood locally that he had a background in the military or intelligence.

"We always thought he was working for the programme rebuilding Iraq and that 
he was working for an American company," Hart said.

Hart said Crouch once helped arrange a Â£5,000 donation to the local party from 
Tony Buckingham, an oil tycoon with interests in Kurdistan. A search of company 
records shows that almost 30 companies registered in the UK use the initials 
IRG. A Cabinet Office spokesman said: No 10 knows which organisation it is, but 
will not make it public. "We are not going to go into the detail of the people 
or organisations that are in the report." A spokesman at Conservative central 
office said: "The Conservative party has no idea who IRG is."
 