
It cannot continue like this. The number of goals at the Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> is about to take a 
downward turn. There were 70 in the 24 group games at an average of 
fractionally under three per match, a remarkable figure for international 
football.

Samuel Eto'o, Didier Drogba, and the impressive Manchester United newcomer 
Manucho will not find it so easy now that the men who earn their living trying 
to prevent goals in the domestic leagues of Namibia, Sudan, Zambia and South 
Africa have gone home.

Dodgy keepers and inadequate defenders were only partly to blame. The main 
reason for the high scoring was simply that so many teams set out to attack. It 
has made for a wonderful tournament so far and the intensity of the 
quarter-finals, starting with the biggest and oldest rivalry in West Africa, 
Ghana v Nigeria in Accra today, should keep the momentum going.

Arguably the best defence of the tournament so far belongs to the team who 
have shown the least creativity - Nigeria. Joseph Yobo and, alongside him Danny 
Shittu of Watford, have stood firm for all but a few seconds of their 
unforgettable 270 minutes when Salomon Kalou scored a superb individual goal 
for Ivory Coast to consign Nigeria to defeat in their opening game.

Claude Le Roy, the Ghana coach who has been working in Africa since 1985, is a 
big fan of his front pair, Asamoah Gyan and Junior Agogo, but it is hard to see 
them prospering against Yobo and Shittu. Gyan has become a laughing stock among 
the fans: he threatened to quit when he was booed for a poor performance 
against Namibia, then missed several chances in the final group game against 
Morocco. Agogo has never played at such a high level, and Ghana's best hope for 
goals might come from midfield, where Sulley Muntari has excelled and Michael 
Essien has been the player of the tournament so far.

'Take out Essien, Muntari and Stephen [Appiah] and there is no team,' says the 
former Ghana player Nii Lamptey, who won 38 caps for the Black Stars in the 
1990s. 'The bench is a disaster.' One of those three, the injured Appiah, is 
already missing. Ghana will need the crowd to lift them in what should be the 
best atmosphere for any match.

Le Roy rates his own key defender, John Mensah, very highly and it is easy to 
see why. The Rennes man has been outstanding, unlike his full-backs. John 
Paintsil, the West Ham reserve player, has been a liability at right-back and 
if Berti Vogts gets his tactics right - not always a given - the speedy John 
Utaka could exploit his uncertainty. The Super Eagles have been very 
disappointing and are due a big performance. If it comes today, Ghana could be 
in trouble. Vogts desperately needs a result to stop a barrage of criticism. He 
accused the Nigerian media of racism in the build-up to today's game, saying: 
'If white journalists handled a black manager like this, I think you would call 
it racism. Many of these journalists aren't even here. They are watching the 
matches on TV, writing that we have to become world champions.'

The only team here who look capable of being genuine contenders at South 
Africa 2010 are Ivory Coast. Egypt have been impressive, too, playing fluid 
football to trounce Cameroon, but Drogba's Elephants look awesome and they 
should see off Guinea in tonight's second quarter-final.

'Tournaments are good for us, bring us together,' Drogba said. 'We did well in 
2006 [when they reached the final of the last Cup of Nations] and in the World 
Cup we lacked experience of playing in it before.'

He believes Ivory Coast are one of the teams who can prosper over the next 
couple of years, as does the most famous African player of them all, Roger 
Milla. 'Cameroon, Nigeria, Ivory Coast - they could all find themselves in the 
quarter-finals in South Africa, and then who knows?' he said. 'When we reached 
the quarter-finals in 1990 that was it, a fantastic achievement for us, we were 
happy to get that far. Now, an African team must have the right spirit to go 
all the way to the final.'

Ivory Coast have it. They defend well, have quality full-backs, and have good 
men in reserve. Kolo Tour√© should be fit after an injury, and his brother Yaya, 
of Barcelona, will have plenty of the ball in midfield. Drogba has not been at 
his best but he, like the team, appears to have another gear should he, or 
they, need it.

The surprise team have been Angola. They play an attractive passing game, and 
in Flavio and Manucho they have an impressive attacking partnership. Flavio 
plays in Egypt but could move to one of Europe's bigger clubs in the summer; 
Manucho has joined Manchester United and been loaned out to Panathinaikos until 
he gets a work permit. Between them they have scored four goals, and they will 
test Egypt tomorrow. That might go to extra time, along with Tunisia-Cameroon 
and Ghana-Nigeria. But the Elephants should win comfortably by a nose - a very 
long one.
 