
Fittingly, this enthralling competition continues today with semi-finals 
featuring four of the most successful countries in its history. Egypt, 
Cameroon, Ivory Coast and Ghana have won the tournament 14 times between them 
and each is confident of lifting the trophy again.

"We arrived as champions and we intend to go home as champions," said Mohamed 
Shawky, the Middlesbrough midfielder who played every minute of Egypt's 
victorious 2006 campaign and has again been a key player this time round. With 
a neat and inventive five-man midfield, the Pharoahs are perhaps the most fluid 
team left in the tournament but to fulfil their ambition they must beat the 
most feared - Ivory Coast, who boast one of the most potent strikeforces in 
world football.

Though they have hit 13 goals in four games so far and conceded just one, the 
Ivorians have not been truly tested, having been fortunate to face opponents 
who were missing influential players through suspension. Further cause for hope 
is the fact that neither Didier Drogba nor Kolo Tour√© have looked fully fit so 
far and, as Egyptians have been pointing out all week, the Pharoahs beat the 
Elephants twice in 2006, once in the group stages and then again in the final 
after a penalty shoot-out.

"We know them very well and I have devised a suitable plan for beating them," 
said Egypt's manager, Hassan Shehata, who is bidding to become the first 
manager to retain the trophy. "I don't think the match will go to penalties 
again - we will be playing to win in 90 minutes because I think their great 
physical power could be a big factor if it goes to extra time."

In the first semi-final the hosts, Ghana, will have to tame the Indomitable 
Lions of Cameroon if they are to fulfil the promise they made to their 
supporters. Ever since taking charge of the Black Stars, their manager, Claude 
LeRoy, has insisted that anything other than overall victory would be a failure 
and yesterday the players, in a live video link-up with the country's 
president, John Kufuor, who is in Italy at a meeting of the world food 
programme, vowed to triumph. "Your Excellency, we will do the job," boomed 
Michael Essien. "We will make the nation proud."

To keep his promise, Essien may have to excel in an unfamiliar role. The 
expulsion of the captain, John Mensah, in the quarter-final against Nigeria 
means Ghana have a glaring hole in the middle of their defence. Essien 
performed admirably there for 30 minutes against the Super Eagles, but his 
limitations in the role have been exposed in the past, notably at Chelsea. With 
Cameroon's attack being led by the most prolific scorer in African Cup of 
Nations history, Samuel Eto'o, Le Roy said he was exploring other options.

The most obvious choice is to entrust the central defensive role to Shilla 
Illiasu, who, after Mensah, is the only other specialist centre-back in the 
squad. The 25-year-old, who once had trials with Arsenal and Blackburn Rovers 
before signing for FC Saturn in the Russian top flight, is short of match 
practice having been out injured for months.

"Mensah is one of the best five defenders in the world and his loss is a major 
blow," said Le Roy. "But Shilla has made a great recovery and has been training 
for a few days now. I'm confident he could do the job if called upon. But I've 
got a lot of thinking to do before I decide whether to thrust him into such a 
big game."
 