
If you can say one thing about New York public officials in the early 1800s, 
it’s that they knew how to party. The extent of their raucous boozing and 
debauchery is being carefully catalogued inside the newly opened Nan A 
Rothschild Research Center, a repository in midtown Manhattan housing over one 
million archaeological artifacts fromNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> City’s past.

On a recent Thursday morning, Amanda Sutphin, the director of archaeology for 
the New York Landmarks Preservation Commission, sorted through some of her 
favorite City Hall party relics. She picked up a smooth, cylindrical object the 
size of stubby Cuban cigar. “Take a look at this douche,” said Sutphin, who is 
tall, with glasses and a short brown bob. “It’s made of cow bone though, so it 
might have felt a bit rough.”

The park behind City Hall, which was built in 1812, is by far the repository’s 
largest haul – the city has collected over 400 boxes of artifacts from the 
site. A lot of them seem to be liquor bottles. “Whenever someone important 
would come to the city – like, say, Marquis de Lafayette – they would always 
throw a giant party.” Sutphin paused, still holding the douche. “But I’m not 
saying this douche was found at Lafayette’s party!”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fnew-york-city-weird-artifacts-archeology-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85d45261f87eaefe27cfba7dab0b2195de42d383%2F0_0_3000_4000%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drunk%20history%3A%20the%20weirdest%20artifacts%20from%20New%20York's%20wild%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fnew-york-city-weird-artifacts-archeology-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drunk%20history%3A%20the%20weirdest%20artifacts%20from%20New%20York%27s%20wild%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fnew-york-city-weird-artifacts-archeology-manhattan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85d45261f87eaefe27cfba7dab0b2195de42d383%2F0_0_3000_4000%2F3000.jpg>
 The cow bone douche. Photograph: Laura Parker 
The douche was uncovered in 2011, and caused enough of a stir that it was 
featured on a Saturday Night Live skit some years ago. “It was just like, ‘They 
found a douche behind City Hall, ooooo…” A pause. “I never said it was funny.”

Originally, no one could work out what it was – the archaeologist who found it 
thought it was a pepper grinder. “But you can see here,” – Sutphin unscrewed 
the top – “it’s got a little plunger. And on the ends you can see the small 
holes.” It probably belonged to a young woman from the middle class – a more 
well-to-do society lady would have had a glass douche. “For a smoother 
experience,” Sutphin said. Some women even used theirs as contraception, 
although, as Sutphin noted, “Probably wasn’t very effective.”

The repository is a small, climate-controlled room in the basement of a Durst 
Organization building on West 47th Street. There are about 1,5000 cardboard 
boxes – “archival boxes” is the technical term – filled with artifacts from 14 
sites across the five boroughs, stacked neatly on white shelves. There are a 
lot of ceramics from the late 18th and early 19th centuries, remnants of the 
Revolutionary war (bayonets and buttons made by soldiers when it was too cold 
to go outside), and a lot of evidence of what people used to eat: bones – both 
cow and dog – and oysters as large as saucepans. This is because New York 
harbor in the 18th century was home to one of the largest oyster beds in the 
world; the street carts that now sell hotdogs used to sell oysters in all 
varieties: raw, pickled, fried. “Having an oyster back then would have been 
like having a nice steak,” Sutphin said.

Sutphin studied at Barnard College and has been with the Commission for 20 
years. Her job is to review development projects happening throughout the city 
and figure out if there are any potential archaeological treasures to be found. 
“You need to have a good grasp on the city’s history, particularly things like 
knowing where the early settlements were, what was farmland and what wasn’t – 
and most importantly, where people dumped their trash.” The most common 
archaeological sites in the city are 19th century privies – toilets, in other 
words. Before New York City had public water, people used outhouses, with a 
separate cistern to store water. When public water was introduced, people began 
filling their outhouses with household trash. For Sutphin, colonial lavatories 
are about as exciting as it gets. “It’s a time capsule of what that period is 
like. Sometimes you find incredible things: people’s old dishes, their secret 
liquor stash.”

The eyes of the city: 20 years of street photography – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/dec/08/the-eyes-of-the-city-street-photography-richard-sandler-in-pictures>
Sutphin’s job is rare: only a handful of other major US cities have 
archaeology programs, Boston and DC among them. “A lot of people think it’s 
like Indiana Jones,” Sutphin said, somewhat annoyed. “It’s not about finding 
some cool thing from the past that has magic powers – it’s trying to recreate a 
puzzle of what the past was like.”

Next to the City Hall party items, Sutphin had assembled a selection of the 
collection’s quirkier items: burned coffee beans – “Coffee was as important in 
the 19th century as it is now. Everyone drank it because the water was kind of 
shit back then” – a femur from a passenger pigeon, which once ruled the skies 
above New York before being hunted into extinction some 100 years ago – “They 
had bright, pretty feathers so everyone wanted some” – and a tea cup set 
belonging to the Van Cortlands, a wealthy family from the Bronx. 
Coincidentally, some of the items in the repository were until very recently 
stored inside the women’s restroom in Van Cortland park. “I do not know why or 
how the decision was made to store the collections there – but it was made many 
years ago and I think clearly shows the need for the repository both as a 
climate controlled facility and as a place that is managed by people who 
understand the importance of the collections,” Sutphin said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fnew-york-city-weird-artifacts-archeology-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16fba75a1cce12a918e8791969a100a469da6125%2F0_0_750_789%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drunk%20history%3A%20the%20weirdest%20artifacts%20from%20New%20York's%20wild%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fnew-york-city-weird-artifacts-archeology-manhattan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drunk%20history%3A%20the%20weirdest%20artifacts%20from%20New%20York%27s%20wild%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fnew-york-city-weird-artifacts-archeology-manhattan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16fba75a1cce12a918e8791969a100a469da6125%2F0_0_750_789%2F750.jpg>
 The wine jug seal from Benjamin Fletcher. Photograph: New York Landmarks 
Preservation Commission 
The only item in the collection associated with a particular individual is a 
wine jug seal belonging to Benjamin Fletcher, who was governor of New York from 
1692 to 1697. (It was normal for wealthy people to send their own fancy glass 
jugs to taverns to be filled with wine.) Fletcher was a notorious lover of 
pirates, to the point where he allowed them safe passage in New York and as a 
result, was swiftly fired from his post and sent back to London, where he faced 
charges of conspiracy and bribery. “He was a naughty boy,” Sutphin conceded.

Although the repository is only open to researches and scholars, the 
Commission recently launched an online digital archive, where anyone can view 
images of the collection and read up on each artifact’s backstory. Admittedly, 
these descriptions aren’t very imaginative. “Nuremberg single wire spectacles, 
small pieces of copper alloy wire tying the circular loops closed, probably 
Klemmer’s clip, glass lenses missing.” In real life, the spectacles look like 
they’ve seen better days. Sutphin pulled them out of their box to show me. “I 
don’t know how effective these would have been – maybe more effective than the 
douche?”

She started to laugh, but stopped abruptly. “But seriously,” she said, leaning 
in closer. “The more stories we understand about our city the more people are 
represented, the richer we all are. It’s very much an anti-Donald Trump view.”
 