
On the face of it, a “perfume by” credit in a film seems a ludicrous 
affectation; when the credit belongs to an outfit called “Je Suis Gizella”, the 
strongest initial whiff one gets is of self-parody. Yet all sensual properties 
are treated with profound seriousness in Peter Strickland’s lithely kinkyThe 
Duke of Burgundy 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Duke-Burgundy-Sidse-Babett-Knudsen/dp/B00SZ0ANSG/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1429717113&sr=8-1&keywords=The+Duke+of+Burgundy>
 (Artificial Eye, 18), a film that constructs an erotic universe so heady, so 
immersively airtight, that it may as well be giving off olfactory cues.

Just as Strickland’s wonderful Berberian Sound Studio  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/02/berberian-sound-studio-review-french>
paid reflexive homage toItalian giallo horror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2008/may/16/theitalianmastersofshocka>
, this study of the sadomasochistic power play between two female entomologists 
is a highly refined reconstitution of vintage pulp: in this case the softcore 
European art porn of the 1960s. Strickland may expertly ape the genre’s arch 
sexual etiquette and whispery, experimental layering of image and sound, but 
this is pastiche with purpose – where woozy throwback technique highlights 
strikingly forward-thinking politics of gender and relationship. The 
interaction between older, seemingly more self-possessed Cynthia (Sidse Babett 
Knudsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/feb/01/sidse-babett-knudsen-borgens-appeal>
) and her protege, Evelyn (Chiara D’Anna), probes a similar 
strength-in-submission paradox toFifty Shades of Grey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/fifty-shades-of-grey>, though positioning it 
between two women levels the playing field entirely; as the film plunges deep 
into its own fragrant anti-reality, Strickland’s marvellous actresses enact a 
personality-merge worthy of Bergman.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnasLuiP-1E0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnasLuiP-1E0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnasLuiP-1E0&media=>
 ‘Steel-plated perkiness’… watch the trailer for Annie. 
Personality is drastically submerged, on the other hand, in Annie 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Annie-DVD-Will-Gluck/dp/B00M0GMAKK/ref=sr_1_2?ie=UTF8&qid=1429718383&sr=8-2&keywords=annie>
 (Sony, PG), an update of the merry-moppet musical soulless enough to make you 
remember John Huston’s uneven 1982 version more fondly than you should. The ick 
factor here derives not from the essential schmaltziness of the story, in which 
an explosion-haired orphan once more melts the heart of a crusty New York 
billionaire, but the rampant materialism of its makeover: today’s Annie, played 
with steel-plated perkiness byQuvenzhane Wallis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/21/annie-review-quvenzhane-wallis-saves-the-day>
, is lured less by the possibility of a new family than the perks of indoor 
swimming pools and acre-sized flatscreens. “What’s the hustle?” she snaps at 
Jamie Foxx’s media mogul. If anything, her heart’s the one that could use a 
turn in the microwave – as could the once-familiar songs, frostily Auto-Tuned 
by pop mega-producer Greg Kurstin.

If the new Annie’s utter vapidity is hardly a surprise, the degree of rigorous 
religious curiosity that survives multimillion-dollar treatment inExodus: Gods 
and Kings 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Exodus-Gods-Kings-Christian-Bale/dp/B00R62JOPM/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1429719316&sr=8-1&keywords=Exodus%3A+Gods+and+Kings>
 (Fox, 12) is far less expected. As spectacle, Ridley Scott’s retelling of the 
Moses story serves up DeMille-gone-digital pageantry by the bronzed armful; 
it’s imposing and pompous in a comfortingly old-school way. But Scott 
accommodates a more secular audience than the biblical blockbusters of yore – 
or even, arguably, Darren Aronofsky’s recent Noah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/noah>. No figure’s faith or inherent goodness 
is taken entirely for granted, least of all in the case of Moses himself, 
sternly played (how else?) by Christian Bale. And Scott’s dazzling rendering of 
assorted plagues and parting waters doesn’t quite deny the participation of 
nature, however synthetically they’ve been brought to screen.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fthe-duke-of-burgundy-annie-exodus-gods-and-kings-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F23%2F1429792386441%2Fcf40b574-275c-4c12-8bb4-e315d1b3876b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=DVDs%20and%20downloads%3A%20The%20Duke%20of%20Burgundy%3B%20Annie%3B%20Exodus%3A%20Gods%20and%20Kings%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fthe-duke-of-burgundy-annie-exodus-gods-and-kings-dvd-review%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=DVDs%20and%20downloads%3A%20The%20Duke%20of%20Burgundy%3B%20Annie%3B%20Exodus%3A%20Gods%20and%20Kings%20and%20more&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fapr%2F26%2Fthe-duke-of-burgundy-annie-exodus-gods-and-kings-dvd-review%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F23%2F1429792386441%2Fcf40b574-275c-4c12-8bb4-e315d1b3876b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘Old-school spectacle’: Exodus Gods and Kings. Photograph: Allstar/20TH 
CENTURY FOX 
If you miss a standout documentary in cinemas these days, you often have only 
a few weeks to wait until it comes back around on DVD. With any luck, Kim 
Longinotto’s tough-minded but ultimately heart-clutchingDreamcatcher  
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Dreamcatcher-DVD-Brenda-Myers-Powell/dp/B00S879CX8/ref=sr_1_3?s=dvd&ie=UTF8&qid=1429720504&sr=1-3&keywords=Dreamcatcher>
(Dogwoof, E) won’t escape general notice this time. Ignore the new agey title: 
this portrait of radiantly heroic Chicago social worker Brenda Myers-Powell, a 
former sex worker acting as guardian angel to those still on the streets, takes 
a long, hard, ground-level look at social structures in which abuse and 
prejudice have become self-regenerating. Brightened but not lightened by 
Myers-Powell’s irrepressible sass and candour, it’s the long-serving 
Longinotto’s best film. Meanwhile, two decades on from his premature passing, 
there probably won’t be a more comprehensive documentary overview of rock god 
Kurt Cobain than Brett Morgan’s sprawlingCobain: Montage of Heck 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Cobain-Montage-Heck-DVD-Kurt/dp/B00TPM6PP8/ref=sr_1_1?s=dvd&ie=UTF8&qid=1429720631&sr=1-1&keywords=Cobain%3A+Montage+of+Heck>
(Universal, 15), which amasses personal archival material to disconcertingly 
intimate effect – even with little fresh information to hand. It’s a wallow, 
but an absorbing one.

A more hopeful study of musical genius is on offer in the week’s best Netflix 
addition. Oscar-shortlisted but bypassing UK cinemas, Alan Hicks’sKeep On 
Keepin’ On <http://dvd.netflix.com/Movie/Keep-on-Keepin-On/80011709> documents 
the moving mentor-prodigy relationship between the late, great jazz trumpeter
Clark Terry – who passed away in February aged 94 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/feb/22/clark-terry> – and gifted, blind 
young pianist Justin Kauflin. Eschewing formulaic legend portraiture, Hicks 
focuses on the specifics of artistic knowledge and how it may be imparted; the 
intuitive connection between two virtuosos at opposite ends of their careers 
becomes something of a spiritual exchange as Terry’s health declines. 
Invaluable viewing for jazz fans – or anyone who needs their faith in music 
teachers restored after the terrors ofWhiplash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/18/whiplash-review-drummer-miles-teller-mark-kermode>
.
 