
Energy companies should be in a powerful position to help people understand 
the need to save energy and cut carbon emissions. But there's an inevitable 
problem.

Why, customers ask, would an organisation that makes its money from selling 
energy want customers to use less?

E.ON spotted that this problem was frequently getting in the way of the 
industry playing its part in the vital campaign to cut energy use. Customers 
would often stumble over this basic question.

The company had created its changing energy business strategy in 2008, focused 
on creating a low-carbon economy and, with over 55% of its emissions coming 
from customers' homes, it knew it needed their support in putting that strategy 
into practice.

In May 2010 it launched its Energy Fit campaign to inspire behavioural change 
in home energy use and to provide practical advice to individual households.

The campaign fell into two parts. Phase one saw the launch of the free energy 
home monitor, enabling customers to understand how they were using energy and 
where they could make savings.

Launched with the publicity tag: "Why on earth would an energy company want me 
to use less energy?", E.ON calculated that this up-front approach would help 
win customer trust and resonate with its employees. Since its launch 300,000 
customers and some 10,000 employees have signed up to the monitor.

Phase two, launched in October, took a different tack, asking: "When will 
energy companies stop telling me to save energy and start helping me to do it?"

For this, E.ON created energyfit.com <http://energyfit.com/> â€“ an interactive 
website allowing customers to complete an online survey of their energy use and 
get tailored advice on how to make savings.

Traffic to the site has been very encouraging. Before final readings were 
taken in February, the site had already received 313,260 views and some 80% of 
the 102,829 surveys started by customers had been completed.

Simon Beavis is part of the wordworks <http://www.wordworksbysea.com/> network

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Become a GSB member 
<http://reg.guardian.managemyaccount.co.uk/sustainable-business/start.php> to 
get more stories like this direct to your inbox
 