
The England and Wales Cricket <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cricket> 
Board believes it has the consent of county chairmen to push through a new-look 
domestic programme that would see the number of championship fixtures reduced 
by two matches.

The ECB <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb> chief executive, Tom Harrison, 
and chairman, Colin Graves, have been working since the start of the year on a 
restructure of the English game and proposals drawn up by their review 
committee have been presented to the county chief executives and chairmen over 
the past two days. While the previously mooted eight or 10-team city-based 
Twenty20 competition is on hold, an appetite remains to raise the standard of 
white-ball cricket played domestically as England look to create a pool of 
players who can compete for both the 2017 Champions Trophy and the World Cup 
two years later on home soil.

Andrew Strauss means business but ECB must shake off Pietersen shadow | Mike 
Selvey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/may/12/andrew-strauss-kevin-pietersen-ecb-lords-england-lawyers-director-mike-selvey>
The plan, which has the backing of Andrew Strauss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-strauss>, the director of England 
cricket, will see the Twenty20 and 50-over tournaments played in one or two 
mid-summer blocks, allowing players to focus on the skills specific to these 
forms of the game.

To make this work, however, the number of four-day fixtures per team would be 
cut from 16 to 14.

It appears a radical move, with attendances in the NatWest T20 Blast, which is 
currently spread over the season, on the rise and domestic 50-over cricket, the 
hardest ticket to sell, recently polling as the third-ranked competition among 
the players in a recent survey by the Professional Cricketers’ Association.

The PCA’s results also showed the County Championship to be considered the 
premier domestic trophy, while clubs could yet face a backlash by members. 
There is also the question of the competition’s integrity if teams do not play 
everyone home and away. The reigning champions, Yorkshire, last week publicly 
stated their intention to oppose a cut in first-class matches and claimed to 
have wide support from other clubs, while one chief executive, when contacted 
by the Guardian, described the mood in their meeting to be “polite, but 
negative” but the chairmen’s session is understood to have gone better.

Eoin Morgan says ‘new’ England can learn from old masters Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/02/eoin-morgan-england-learn-world-cup-winners-australia>
An ECB spokesperson said: “There was rounded discussion on the domestic and 
international game and we listened to views and valuable insights from across 
all the first-class counties. Today brought a consensus of opinion which allows 
us to further develop strong plans.”

Structural changes to competitions only need approval by the ECB management 
board, which has just four county chairmen among its 14 directors and next 
convenes at the end of this month. To alter the championship without the bulk 
of counties in agreement however would represent a high-risk approach from 
Harrison and Graves.
 