
This year is the 150th anniversary of the conquest of the Alps’ last major 
peaks, including the Grandes Jorasses and the Matterhorn – the culmination of a 
five-year flurry of Alpine first ascents. While these feats are being 
celebrated throughout the winter in a number offascinating exhibitions 
<http://1865.chamonix.fr/en/les-expositions/>, particularly in the Chamonix 
valley, it perhaps sounds odd now to talk of “conquests” in relation to nature. 
We have – sadly – effectively conquered her, and are awaiting the blowback of 
climate change: mountains are crumbling at alarming rates,glaciers are receding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/04/speed-glacier-retreat-worldwide-historically-unprecedented-climate-change>
, whole valleys are being cut off by landslides. But a new, gentle approach to 
the high mountains is in evidence in a range of recent buildings that give both 
expert climbers and the general public the chance to understand these changes 
without leaving a heavy footprint. Some are remote, cutting-edge, autonomous, 
space-age pods accessed only by risky ascents in technical gear; others you can 
go and see in your flip-flops.

Refuge du Gouter, Mont Blanc, France


In the frenzied early period of Alpine exploration (and exploitation) the 
biggest target of all was the mighty Mont Blanc, an inhospitable wilderness in 
the heart of Europe culminating at 4,808 metres, which was conquered in 1786.

The mountain shrugged off early attempts at development. Gustave Eiffel, not 
content with looming over Paris, attempted to dig the foundations for a lodge 
and observatory right at the summit. Scientist Joseph Vallot had more luck 500 
metres lower down and installed – as you do – a lush oriental salon in his 
shelter (you can see it reconstituted in theChamonix Alpine Museum 
<http://www.chamonix.com/musee-alpin,49-187321,en.html>).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa1e7d97e55b3b96919105532af0a458e051911e%2F0_1077_3456_3577%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa1e7d97e55b3b96919105532af0a458e051911e%2F0_1077_3456_3577%2F3456.jpg>
 A resconstruction of Joseph Vallot’s oriental salon in the Chamonix Alpine 
Museum. Photograph: Andrew Todd 
The magnificent new Refuge du Gouter, opened last year, stands in sharp 
contrast to this peak-bagging, colonial attitude: it is space-age 
eco-architecture, a uniquely beautiful and intelligent building, inside and 
out. The former refuge – sealed shut awaiting its fate – is a pock-marked metal 
shed sitting on shifting ice. In use, it was sub-par and often terribly 
overcrowded.
 Photograph: Jean-Pierre Clatot/AFP/Getty Images 
The new refuge is built further along the precipice of the Aiguille du Gouter 
(the crumbling rock face that kills many climbers every year). It is a 
steel-clad wooden egg perched over the void on steel piles drilled six metres 
into the mountain, turning its nose to the prevailing wind and plastered in 
photovoltaic panels. Inside it is warm and minimalist, its chunky wooden frame 
complemented by pine benches, bunks and floors. The climbers’ bunk rooms – with 
wooden screens between the beds – are a vast improvement on the old refuge’s 
haphazard heap of bodies; food is also good and hearty, and the common areas 
are light and panoramic. Its heart is a submarine-like plant room regulating 
meltwater for consumption, storing electricity in huge batteries and compacting 
excrement for helicopter evacuation.

• Half-board stay in dorm bed €93pp, refugedugouter.ffcam.fr 
<http://refugedugouter.ffcam.fr/home.html?_lang=GB&_setlang=1>. Getting to the 
refuge involves an exposed scramble up the Aiguille du Gouter, including the 
notorious Grand Couloir, which is subject to frequent rockfall; aguide 
<http://www.chamonix-guides.eu/> is necessary. The Refuge is open June-late 
September or early October, and can close when the ascent becomes dangerous 
(sometimes for weeks). Check the website before travelling; reservations are 
essential. A spartan emergency bivouac adjacent to the old refuge is open all 
year round

Chässerug, Toggenburg, Switzerland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a8d760de3d2c3beca088aea202516d98b868c0%2F0_0_937_562%2F937.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9a8d760de3d2c3beca088aea202516d98b868c0%2F0_0_937_562%2F937.jpg>
 Photograph: PR 
The challenge of designing responsibly for the mountains has attracted 
superstar Tate Modern architects Herzog and de Meuron to the relatively modest 
job of renovating a cable car station. Inaugurated in June this year and open 
all year round (with some inter-season closure), the Chässerug lift station 
sits on a plateau above the 2,000-metre precipice bordering the north side of 
the Walensee, about an hour from Zurich by car or train and bus. It offers a 
superb panorama over six countries and gives access to extensive summer and 
winter hiking and winter skiing.
 Chässerug station’s new canteen, made from local spruce. Photograph: 
https://www.facebook.com/chaeserrugg/photos_stream 
Replacing a jerry-built canteen formerly on the site, the new building is 
sober, rugged and sensual, made entirely of locally sourced and crafted spruce 
– a far cry from the fake chalets that offer overpriced, mass-produced meals to 
hordes of skiers. The food here is well-executed local fare made with fresh, 
responsibly sourced ingredients (three courses from about £20). Building on 
such a remote site required great ingenuity – here the timbers we brought in 
using the existing cable car instead of by not-so-eco helicopters.

• Adult ticket £33 return, including lunch, chaeserrugg.ch.  
<http://www.chaeserrugg.ch/en/startseite/summer/summit-restaurant/summit-restaurant.html>
Restaurant open all year except weekdays in October-November (weekend opening 
dependent on weather, winter opening according to snowfall, check the website). 
The lower lift station in Unterwasser is open 8.30am-5pm (winter hours).




Hotel Bellevue, les Houches, France

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7d6627a5711e526ece2633bc8c8b0a49493c3a1%2F0_0_640_422%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7d6627a5711e526ece2633bc8c8b0a49493c3a1%2F0_0_640_422%2F640.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
If you don’t want to brave the climate change-accelerated rockfall on the 
Aiguille du Gouter, ponder the projecting egg of the new refuge from the place 
where early climbers would eye up the normal route up Mont Blanc. On the site 
of a stone-built 1868 establishment of the same name, the new Hotel Bellevue is 
another piece of pioneering eco-architecture from the great Austrian architect 
Hermann Kaufmann. Made from robot-milled wood, the building uses 10% of the 
energy of a conventional building thanks to geothermal energy, and high-spec 
insulation. The only hitch is that this exemplary building has been shut for 
the three years since it was finished because of a stand-off between the 
government and the owner, which is now trundling through the courts. It may 
open with some modifications: until them, enjoy looking at it from nearbyHotel 
Le Prarion <http://www.prarion.com/>.

• Projected rate from €210 half-board for two, bellevuemontblanc.com 
<http://www.bellevuemontblanc.com/Accueil.html>. The hotel is accessible from 
the Bellevue ski lift from Les Houches or the nearbyTramway du Mont Blanc 
<http://www.compagniedumontblanc.co.uk/en/site-overview/tramway-du-mont-blanc> 
from Saint Gervais les Bains station. (This is a rack-and -pinion train rather 
than a tram, and runs to the start of the Aiguille du Gouter ascent at the Nid 
d’Aigle viewpoint).

Skyway Monte Bianco and Rifugio Torino, Italy
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64600dc34c626d36d6af860bcdc3103123b24265%2F0_100_3543_2127%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64600dc34c626d36d6af860bcdc3103123b24265%2F0_100_3543_2127%2F3543.jpg>
 Photograph: Enrico Romanzi 
The Italian side of Mont Blanc is more spectacular than the Chamonix one: the 
mountain cascades right down to the valley in a series of forbidding crags and 
needles. The geography means the site is also much less developed, although it 
does see heavy traffic from the tunnel under the mountain. A new, wonderful 
piece of civic infrastructure, Skyway Monte Bianco could open up the mountain’s 
southern side to mass tourism, whisking visitors to Punta Helbronner at 3,452 
metres on the French border in a few minutes. The Skyway, inaugurated in June 
this year by Italian prime minister Matteo Renzi (“We’re not invading France,” 
he declared at the time) replaces the old La Palud cable car. This resembled a 
1950s Paris Metro carriage, and trembled as it climbed, its door secured only 
with a brass latch.

The Skyway’s bulbous panoramic cars are glazed right to the floor, and revolve 
as they ascend. Easy to access directly from the tunnel road, the Skyway is a 
destination in itself for those who don’t want to strap on crampons. A 
mid-station features one of Europe’s highest Alpine gardens, a gift shop 
selling local produce, and a 150-seat conference room, a restaurant and even a 
winery, using grapes from the valley below.

Some local guides grumble that such fripperies have no place in the high 
mountains, and the decor is more shopping mall than eco-lodge: I felt out of 
place here, sweaty and bedraggled after a long schlepp from the Grand Capucin, 
a mythical granite spire the other side of the Glacier du Géant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F919ea9c0fa4341df9b46cf06e924a7d8d300d88a%2F0_0_3543_2362%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F919ea9c0fa4341df9b46cf06e924a7d8d300d88a%2F0_0_3543_2362%2F3543.jpg>
 Skyway’s panoramic platform, with views of Mont Blanc’s Brenva face. 
Photograph: Enrico Romanzi 
The vertiginous summit station is topped with a panoramic platform which gives 
a thrilling proximity to Mont Blanc’s mighty Brenva face, the spiny Dent du 
Géant and the vast bowl of the Vallée Blanche. The top station is bravura 
engineering: a jagged glass -and-steel carapace (with a very decent cafeteria), 
rooted in an 80-metre spine through the rock. The spine contains a lift shaft 
conveying more adventurous visitors to a chilly tunnel leading out on to the 
glacier and to the restored Torino Hut (where, from spring 2016, visitors will 
be able to spend a comfy night and watch a spectacular dawn over the Aosta 
valley).

The Glacier du Géant is perfect for non-vertiginous trekking in a spectacular 
setting (a guide is necessary, as are crampons and ropes); it’s also an easier 
start than the precipitous Aiguille du Midi for the 13km Vallée Blanche ski 
run. Things can be deceptive, though: on 27 August, a40,000-tonne chunk of the 
Tour Ronde collapsed suddenly 
<http://www.planetmountain.com/english/News/shownews1.lasso?l=2&keyid=43000>, 
obliterating the path I had sauntered along a few weeks previously. It’s 
perhaps important that – thanks to the Skyway – tourists in flip-flops can 
directly witness such harbingers of climate change.
• Skyway: return to Punta Hellbronner €43pp, montebianco.com 
<http://www.montebianco.com/>, open all year round 8.30am-4.35pm in winter. 
Torino Hut: €70pp full-board,rifugiotorino.com <http://rifugiotorino.com/>. 
Check website for opening and booking details: hut managers tend to be 
independent-minded.

Monte Rosa Hutte, Switzerland
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc52707cc092a79d134fff990394b63974a9e9c44%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eco-friendly%20architecture%20in%20the%20Alps%20hits%20new%20heights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F21%2Falpine-architecture-new-buildings-eco-friendly%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc52707cc092a79d134fff990394b63974a9e9c44%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
National borders wiggle invisibly over summits and precipices: trudging 
breathlessly up Mont Blanc’s final arête, you won’t care that your right foot 
is in Italy and your left in France. But if you thought such an extreme 
environment would reduce architecture to a survivalist standardisation, you’d 
be wrong: even the remotest places, it seems, reflect national character. In 
Italy, burly, swarthybergamaschi builders romp fearlessly across the snow as 
they work on the Torino Hut, whereas over the hill, French workers are 
diligently, carefully decommissioning the asbestos-infested old Refuge du 
Gouter. There’s even been someAlpine umbrage regarding the generous European 
funding of the Skyway 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/peak-of-discord-mont-blanc-europe-border-france-italy/>
: the French have yet to build their part of the path leading up to the 
spectacular exit at the top station, effectively closing the Schengen border 
betweencaffè ristretto and café allongé.

Trust the Swiss, then, to be the smartypants with the deepest pockets in this 
mountain brinksmanship. The new Monte Rosa Hutte, stranded like a crashed UFO 
on a rock in the middle of the vast Gorner glacier, is an emblem of Helvetic 
pride, having been conceived with the Federal Institute of Technology in 
Zurich, and rather more lavishly funded (for the same capacity) than the Gouter 
hut. Open since 2010, 1,000 metres lower than its cousin on Mont Blanc, it uses 
some of the same approaches to eco-building (wood frame, tight volume, metal 
skin, abundant photovoltaics), with extras including a vast grotto blasted into 
the rock to store meltwater. It is the most complex wooden building ever made 
in Switzerland, and throws some demonstrative Daniel Libeskindian shapes, with 
its jagged stair glazing, where the French hut remains impassively rational in 
its eggy geometry.

The location is different, too: the Monte Rosa Hutte sits at a hub of many 
climbs rather than on a highway with one destination, and can be accessed with 
relatively little danger (albeit with some ladders and a glacier crossing, 
which may require ropes and crampons). Where the Gouter hut keeper has to get 
used to his guests leaving en masse at 3am – with absolutely no desire for a 
return trip – the Monte Rosa Hutte incites a relaxing, contemplative stay in an 
utterly extraordinary setting.
• Dorm bed £64pp half-board, including take-away hikers’ tea, 
section-monte-rosa.ch <http://section-monte-rosa.ch/fr/cabanes/monte-rosa>. 
Reservation essential. Open June-October, depending on weather conditions.

Accommodation was provided by the Office de Tourisme de Chamonix 
<http://www.chamonix.com/chamonix-mont-blanc,0,en.html> and the Club Alpin 
Français <http://www.ffcam.fr/> provided guiding to Refuge du Gouter
 