
Ed Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> has sought to calm a 
“bitter war of words” between Labour and some businessmen, suggesting those who 
have spoken out against his party are a small number of Conservative supporters 
with a Conservative view of the world.

Speaking at a conference on infrastructure, the shadow chancellor said there 
was a spread ofLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and 
Conservative supporters in the world of business but the vast majority simply 
wanted to work with the government in pursuit of a good education system, 
Britain staying in the European Union and a stable policy environment.

Balls struck a conciliatory tone after two days of tension between Labour and 
Boots boss Stefano Pessina, whogave an interview suggesting Ed Miliband as 
prime minister would be a catastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/01/labour-boots-stefano-pessina-chuka-umunna-tax-uk>
 for Britain. Miliband and other senior Labour figures, including Balls, then 
accused Pessina of being a tax-avoider and said there was an “unholy alliance” 
between people like him and the Conservative party.

The personal nature of the attack from Labour then drew further criticism from 
businessmen in right-leaning newspapers. Lord Rose, a former chief executive of 
Marks and Spencer, Conservative party peer and Tory donor, told the Daily Mail 
that Pessina was entitled to his opinion as the head of a company that employs 
70,000 people, and did not deserve a “tide of derision” and “personal jibes”, 
while B&Q chief and member of David Cameron’s business taskforce, Sir Ian 
Cheshire, told the Telegraph that Labour’s personal attacks on Pessina were 
“pretty unattractive”.

Also speaking to the Telegraph, the Heathrow airport chairman, Sir Nigel Rudd, 
said making personal attacks on people stifled debate: “It makes people think 
twice about voicing their opinions. We should listen to all opinions, 
especially people who have created as many jobs and are as astute as Stefano 
Pessina. I would not make personal attacks on union leaders – either if they 
had a view that I agree with or disagree with. We should encourage people to 
enter the debate.”

Asked about the row at a conference attended by leading companies, including 
BT, Legal and General, EDF and Thames Water, Balls said it was understandable 
that some from the business community want to express political views.

“On the bitter war of words, the reality is that there are going to be some 
issues in any society which become very divisive politically,” he said. “The 
level of taxation you levy at any point in time, there will always be different 
views on that. Whether or not we should have a health service which is 
predominantly free or whether people pay. There will always be some people in 
every community, including the business community, who take a political view.

“There will be some identified Labour-supporting business people who take a 
Labour view and there will be some Conservative-supporting business people who 
take a Conservative view. They might even end up becoming Conservatives 
ministers or Conservative peers.

“My sense is the vast majority of business people don’t take a Labour view or 
Conservative view, but the best way forward for our country to support jobs or 
growth and they want to work with the government of the day and they want us to 
try and take a long-term view.”

The Conservatives, including chancellor George Osborne, have seized on 
Pessina’s comments as support for their arguments about Conservative economic 
competence. However, Boris Johnson, the London mayor, took a slightly different 
position on his LBC phone-in, saying it was “disappointing” that Boots is 
domiciled in Switzerland.

He said it was “quite refreshing to see some tycoon saying what he thinks” and 
argued the Labour party had no interest in wealth creation.

But he added: “In business terms, it’s what he’s got to do. I have to say I 
find it a little bit disappointing that he doesn’t cough up for Britain – that 
is my view and I’ve made that view plain in many other cases.”

Boots moved its formal tax residence from Britain to Switzerland after 
Pessina’s private equity-backed buyout in 2007. The Conservative party denied 
it had anything to do with Pessina’s comments, though the party is known to 
have approached businesspeople to speak out against independence in the runup 
to the Scottish referendum.
 