
Eddie Jones has ruled out any prospect of him coaching the British & Irish 
Lions next year, despite having guided England to anunprecedented series win 
over the Wallabies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/18/england-v-australia-second-rugby-union-test-in-melbourne-live>
. The Australian says he wants to focus onturning England into the top side in 
the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/eddie-jones-england-australia-whitewash-3-0-series>
 but expects a sizeable red rose contingent to tour New Zealand in 2017.

Eddie Jones calls for 3-0 whitewash after England clinch series against 
Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/eddie-jones-england-australia-whitewash-3-0-series>
While Wales’s Warren Gatland has long been the favourite to coach the Lions 
next year, having fronted thesuccessful 2013 tour to Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/06/australia-lions-third-test-match-report>
, Jones’s remarkable success since taking the job at Twickenham theoretically 
makes him a candidate. The former Japan coach insists, however, that he is 
“completely unavailable” even if a role were dangled in front of him.

“I signed a four-year contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/20/eddie-jones-appointed-england-coach-rfu>
 to make England the best team in the world and I’m going to spend every minute 
I have doing that,” stressed Jones, whose side have secured an unbeatable 2-0 
lead in the best-of-three series afterdefeating Australia 23-7 in Melbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/australia-england-match-report>. 
“If I took the Lions job I’d have to spend anything from six to 12 months not 
doing that.”

Ian Ritchie, the Rugby Football Union’s chief executive, has already advised 
the Lions’ committee that Jones will be concentrating on his England duties, 
although he has not ruled out releasing one of the assistant coaches for the 
tour. “Eddie does not want to do it and we want him to stay to coach England,” 
Ritchie said. “Both us of feel that, between now and 2019, Eddie’s focus is on 
the World Cup and nothing will change that.”

It is Jones’s firm belief, though, that England will be represented by “at 
least” 15 players when the Lions select their squad next year. “I’d be hopeful 
of missing at least 15,” he suggested. “If we can get 15 in the Lions squad 
we’ll have had a good Six Nations and good November Tests.”

Jones is also keen to ensure England finish their tour of Australia on a high 
note by wrapping up a 3-0 series win in Sydney. He may have to rest some 
battered players in the wake of a brutally physical second Test in Melbourne, 
with James Haskell nursing a sore foot and Jack Nowell undergoing concussion 
protocols.

“There’ll be a few changes,” Jones said. “When I looked at the team on 
Saturday there were some guys there with only 80 minutes in them. They’ve been 
up since June last year and some are starting to show some signs of battle 
weariness.”

It could offer an opening for players such as Jack Clifford, Teimana Harrison, 
Danny Care and Alex Goode but, equally, Jones is wary of complacency as his 
squad recuperate in their new beachside base in Coogee. “If the All Blacks were 
here they’d be able to make five changes and go out and beat the opposition 
3-0. We’ll have to work because everyone is going to get slaps on the back now 
and their agents are going to be on the phone saying: ‘Now we can get you this 
deal.’ We’ve got to make sure we find 23 players who can fix their minds on the 
job. I’ll be cheering for Australia during the Rugby Championship but we want 
to beat them 3-0.”

This certainly has the makings of an enjoyable week for Jones, who grew up in 
Sydney and has been buoyed by England’s spirit in the face of an aggressive 
Wallaby display at the weekend. “They tried to put us off the game and get us 
involved in a scragging contest,” claimed Jones, who used to play alongside the 
Australia head coach, Michael Cheika, at Randwick. “We didn’t allow ourselves 
to get involved in that. As soon as Cheika talked about niggle, we knew that 
was going to be on. They obviously went out to target a few players. Sekope 
Kepu went at Maro Itoje the whole game. He thought he was going to be the Mr 
Hard Man. Our discipline in maintaining a commitment to play the ball rather 
than the man – a lot of it is due to Dylan Hartley’s captaincy.”

England also drew inspiration from a poem, The Guy In The Glass by Dale 
Wimbrow, which the defence coach, Paul Gustard, read to the players in the 
buildup. Gustard told the squad he regretted aspects of his own playing career 
and urged them to give everything to the England cause. “I told them that I had 
lots of opportunities in life, both off and on the field, and I wasted most of 
them,” Gustard said. “I thought I trained and worked hard but I didn’t.”
 