
The Eddie Betts show returned to Adelaide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> as the Crows thumped a rookie West 
Coast outfit by 100 points in the AFL pre-season competition. Betts booted five 
goals and a nine-point supergoal while racking up 18 touches as the Crows 
coasted to a 2.20.10 (148) to 0.7.6 (48) win on Sunday at Adelaide’s Unley Oval.

His best-on-ground performance came against a West Coast side missing 
virtually all its stars, including Nic Naitanui, Matt Priddis, Luke Shuey and 
Josh Kennedy. The Eagles fielded just seven players from their 2015 grand final 
team, opting to spare most of their senior list from travelling interstate to 
play in hot conditions.

Lance Franklin quiet for Sydney in AFL pre-season win over Power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/20/lance-franklin-quiet-for-sydney-in-afl-pre-season-win-over-power>
But if the stakes had been lowered, Betts clearly didn’t get the memo. The 
ever-dangerous goalsneak spearheaded a dominant second quarter in which the 
Crows kept the Eagles scoreless and pushed their lead out from single digits to 
54 points.

“I think Eddie’s just got a great pride in his performance,” Crows coach Don 
Pyke said after the game. “He’s a guy who sets a really strong example for a 
lot of our players. For Eddie, regardless of the stage I think he just wants to 
perform and that’s the quality of a really good player.”

Matt Crouch was another strong performer in a near full-strength Crows side, 
gathering 24 touches, while captain Taylor Walker booted three majors. Small 
forward Wayne Milera, taken by the Crows at No11 in the 2015 draft, impressed 
with his poise on debut while fellow draftee Dean Gore booted two goals.

The Crows expect to have gun midfielder Rory Sloane back for next week’s clash 
against Fremantle at Mount Barker, with Carlton recruit Troy Menzel also a 
chance to debut.

It was a day to forget for West Coast star recruit Lewis Jetta, who was barely 
sighted in his first game in Eagles colours. Key defender Mitch Brown was solid 
in his first game for the Eagles since suffering a season-ending knee injury in 
the 2015 opening round.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Feddie-betts-stars-as-adelaide-thump-west-coast-in-nab-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ac9aef5c8fe4935f98cd1268a5517cecbe4c1c%2F0_173_4149_2489%2F4149.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eddie%20Betts%20stars%20as%20Adelaide%20thump%20West%20Coast%20in%20NAB%20Challenge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Feddie-betts-stars-as-adelaide-thump-west-coast-in-nab-challenge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eddie%20Betts%20stars%20as%20Adelaide%20thump%20West%20Coast%20in%20NAB%20Challenge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F21%2Feddie-betts-stars-as-adelaide-thump-west-coast-in-nab-challenge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88ac9aef5c8fe4935f98cd1268a5517cecbe4c1c%2F0_173_4149_2489%2F4149.jpg>
 Rory Thompson of the Gold Coast Suns attempts to break free during the NAB 
Challenge Cup match against the Brisbane Lions at Moreton Bay Central Sports 
Complex. Photograph: Bradley Kanaris/Getty Images 
The sight of Gary Ablett in full kit on the sidelines was the closest Gold 
Coast got to greatness in their scrappy 25-point NAB Challenge pre-season win 
over fellow battlers Brisbane. Inspirational Suns captain Ablett caused a stir 
in the 3,807-strong crowd in Burpengary, north of Brisbane, on Sunday when he 
appeared before the match in his Gold Coast gear.

Sadly, he was only getting ready to pose for a promotional photo before 
joining fellow star Suns midfielders David Swallow, Dion Prestia and Jaeger 
O’Meara on the sidelines. Ablett is not expected to be sighted until the 11 
March pre-season clash against Adelaide due to a foot complaint. Forward Tom 
Lynch took up the reins in Ablett’s absence and led by example in the 0.9.14 
(68) to 0.6.7 (43) win, kicking three goals.

Gold Coast’s Touk Miller stood out in an undermanned midfield with 16 telling 
disposals, while former West Coast winger Matt Rosa (19 disposals) provided 
plenty of run.


Brisbane were also without the bulk of their big names, fielding a squad 
boasting an average of 24 games a player. Gold Coast averaged 50 games a player 
and as a result, the Suns dominated, leading clearances 42-29, inside 50s 56-32 
and contested possessions 148-115.

Nine players were making their debut for Brisbane, including No2 draft pick 
Josh Schache, former Blue Tom Bell and former Cats Josh Walker and Jarrad 
Jansen. Stand-in skipper Mitch Robinson and Bell impressed, as did busy draftee 
Rhys Mathieson, while Schache showed flashes of brilliance up forward in a 
first-half cameo.

The Lions needed all the goal-scoring firepower they could get – they kicked 
just three majors after the first quarter. Rested stars including skipper Tom 
Rockliff, Pearce Hanley, Dayne Zorko, Daniel Rich and North Melbourne recruit 
Ryan Bastinac are set to appear in their next clash against St Kilda on 6 March 
in Mackay. Gold Coast’s next match is against West Coast in Joondalup on 3 
March.
 