
Eddie Hearn on Friday handed Amir Khan and Kell Brook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kell-brook> the ultimate incentive to bring 
one of British boxing’s most frustrating rivalries to a dramatic conclusion: a 
Wembley date in high summer.

“I’ve booked Wembley for 4 June,” Brook’s promoter said, “which doesn’t mean 
it’s nailed on to happen, but I think it makes perfect sense for both of them.”

Sky Sport’s head of boxing, Adam Smith, said: “They are closer to agreeing 
terms than ever before.” Given he said that three years ago as well, there will 
be a lot of fingers crossed over the next few weeks.

If the fight does happen, it might not rival the Wembley showdown between Carl 
Froch and George Groves in front of 80,000 people in 2014, but it will be big. 
However, both surely realise they cannot drag out the negotiations much longer.

The fight was first mooted in October 2012, when Brook had sidestepped an 
offer from Timothy Bradley and Khan was contemplating a move up to welterweight.

Weight is still an issue: Brook, who holds the IBF welterweight title, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/17/kell-brook-shawn-porter-ibf-title-amir-khan-awaits-boxing>
 is big at the weight and more than likely will have to move up to 
light-middleweight towards the end of 2016. The window for a 10st 7lb fight 
between the two best at the weight in this country will not be open for ever.

Khan fuelled the latest speculation when he revealed on Thursday that his 
preferred opponent, Manny Pacquiao, had declined his offer to share a ring in 
his farewell in April, and instead had opted to fight Bradley. He might have 
known disappointment was in the wind,having earlier signed a letter of agreement
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/nov/03/amir-khan-manny-pacquiao-agreement-las-vegas>
 to negotiate that Bob Arum, Pacquiao’s promoter, had angrily dismissed out of 
hand.

Tyson Fury to remain on BBC Spoty shortlist despite sexist remarks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/04/tyson-fury-stay-on-sports-personality-of-the-year-shortlist-despite-sexist-remarks-bbc>
Arum, it seems, has recognised either the danger that Khan’s speed poses or is 
just doing what he would regard as sensible business by keeping the Pacquiao 
fight in-house.

Nothing is simple in Khan’s career, however. Two factors beyond his control 
might yet scupper a Brook fight: Ramadan and the InternationalBoxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/boxing> Federation.

The Bolton fighter says they have to meet before the Muslim month of fasting 
starts on 6 June – which makes the 4 June deadline a tight one.

The IBF has mandated that Brook must next fight the 31-year-old Canadian Kevin 
Bizier, which would be a bust in the UK, and would probably be held in Quebec 
or, says Hearn, New York.

In the latter part of Khan’s career, big fights have fallen through or 
happened way after their best sell-by date, with Floyd Mayweather his chief 
tormentor, having twice reneged on nod-and-a-wink agreements. Mayweather 
announced his retirement afterbeating Pacquiao in one of the sport’s great 
letdowns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/03/floyd-mayweather-beats-manny-pacquiao-on-points-to-remain-unbeaten>
, and Khan could only rue his decision not to fight Devon Alexander the first 
time he had the chance, which might have cemented a challenge against 
Mayweather, instead of watching Marcos Maidana step in – twice.

If circumstances might now finally direct Khan towards a fight with Brook, 
British fans will be the winners – if Brook gets the moderate Bizier out of the 
way early enough. Brook has been resting a rib injury that interrupted his 
programme this summer after two low-key stoppage defences of his title, against 
Jo Jo Dan and Frankie Gavin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/30/kevin-mitchell-world-title-fight>
. Dan, not one of the best world title challengers to reach these shores, lost 
twice to Bizier.
 