
Actions are supposed to speak louder than words but not when an English rugby 
team are touring Australia. For the second successive day Eddie Jones has felt 
the need to have a dig at a former Wallaby, this time for claiming England are 
cheating in the scrums. He has already received an apology from a former 
international who asked him a tasteless question following Saturday’swin in the 
first Test in Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/11/australia-v-england-first-test-live>
.

England’s Eddie Jones questions extent of injury to Australia’s David Pocock
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/13/eddie-jones-david-pocock-england-australia>
The latest target of Jones’s ire is the one-time Wallaby captain Phil Kearns, 
a summariser for the host broadcaster, Fox Sports, who suggested Dan Cole 
scrummaged illegally throughoutEngland’s 39-28 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/11/australia-england-first-test-match-report>
. Kearns said it was “pretty obvious” Cole “was angling right in the whole 
time” and urged referees to be more vigilant, prompting Jones to advise this 
Saturday’s referee, South Africa’s Craig Joubert, to ignore him.

“I’ve got great confidence in Craig Joubert; he’ll referee the game and he 
won’t let Phil Kearns referee the game,” Jones said. “If Phil Kearns was 
refereeing Australia would win every game. We are lucky we’ve got a fantastic 
referee at the weekend … one of the most respected referees in the world. Every 
side I coach, I coach them to play legally. We want to scrum straight, we want 
to scrum square and we want to take them.”

It remains Jones’s informed belief, having coached Australia, that there is an 
orchestrated campaign to destabilise opposition teams, with England having not 
forgotten the criticism of Joe Marler’s scrummaging by the former Wallaby coach 
Bob Dwyer just beforethe hosts’ pool exit in last year’s Rugby World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/03/england-australia-rugby-world-cup-match-report>
. “Phil is part of an organised campaign and he is playing his role,” Jones 
said.

“Every couple of days someone comes up with something. I have been part of it, 
so let’s not beat around the bush, we know how it works here. Now it’s Dan 
Cole’s turn, next time it’ll be someone else’s turn. Maybe me. I hope they keep 
attacking me because that takes the pressure off the team. We’ll make sure our 
scrum is well prepared for the game and we’ll be ready for any tricks the 
Australians have.”

In almost the same breath, naturally, Jones could be heard musing about the 
effectiveness of Australia’s lineout, proving every side in the world likes to 
sow a few seeds of set-piece doubt. Anything the Wallabies attempt on the 
psychological front Jones is pretty confident he can do better. “In the last 
couple of Tests their lineout has really been under pressure … I’m sure Stephen 
Moore, a seasoned international with 100 Tests, will be worried about that area 
of their game.”

There are signs Jones’s strategy is paying off, with Australians slightly 
unnerved to be confronted by such a seasoned media operator. He has been in 
vintage form, unlike Fox Sports, whose reporter Stephen Hoiles has been forced 
to apologise for suggesting Jones and his fellow Australian assistant coach 
Glen Ella had looked “lubed up” while congratulating each other on England’s 
win.

The same channel also put out a less-than-subtle promotional film, which Jones 
described on Sunday as “disgusting, demeaning and disrespectful to the team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/eddie-jones-australian-pundits-disrespectful-treatment-england-fox-promo-stephen-hoiles>
” but the coach long ago developed a sufficiently thick skin not to be offended 
indefinitely. “They can say whatever they want, we’re just getting on with our 
preparation. We’ve had a good week in Brisbane and we’ll have a good week in 
Melbourne. They’re all entitled to their opinion and they can get on with it. 
We’ll worry about ourselves.”

What is not in dispute is England’s desire to create history by winning the 
three-Test series, something they have never done in the southern hemisphere. 
Even the combined British and Irish Lions have seldom managed it, and Jones has 
been invoking the memory of the 2001 Lions tour when Australia, as now,lost the 
first Test in Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2001/jul/01/rugbyunion.news> before winning 
in bothMelbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2001/jul/08/rugbyunion.lionstour2001> and 
Sydney <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2001/jul/15/rugbyunion.news>.

The message, accordingly, has been to tighten up their defence, guard against 
any complacency and, if possible, complete the job this weekend with a game to 
spare. “History shows that in the professional era the Wallabies have never 
lost the second Test [of a three-Test series],” Jones said. “If you look back 
at the 2001 and 2013 Lions series, the Wallabies have always bounced back. They 
love being underdogs.”

With George Ford and Owen Farrell in line to resume their 10-12 partnership, 
there is certainly no lack of England incentive. “We want to win this series 
and we’ve got an opportunity on Saturday, so we’ll be as desperate as the 
Australians – even more desperate when you consider the history of the English 
game in Australia,” Jones said. “We have to play our best 80 minutes of the 
season; we’ll worry about what it means to the team after that.”
 