
At some festivals it can take several days before you see the show that you 
love so much you'd promote it around town on a sandwich board. This year I 
think I saw it on my first day of previews.James Acaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/31/james-acaster-edinburgh-festival-2014-comedy-normal-people-perve-solo>
, two-time nominee for the Edinburgh comedy award, has set the bar ridiculously 
high with an ingenious tale of loopholes, undercover cops and Pret a Manger 
bananas. While most acts at the fringe are still fluffing the odd line or 
occasionally reaching for their notes, he looked completely in control. The man 
has comic flair down to the perfectly timed comic flare of those nostrils. 
Could it finally be his year for the award?

Adam Riches <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=42u5oizxUm8> stormed his Saturday 
night set with impressions of Sean "Bastard" Bean, a lonely Ryan Gosling and – 
best of all – Ryan Gosling's mum. I think the secret to his show is that even 
while the audience are in stitches, no one in the room is having more fun than 
Riches. His energy and sheer delight in performance are infectious. If you go, 
think twice before sitting in the front row, unless you think of shaving and 
showering as group activities.

Phil Wang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/31/phil-wang-edinburgh-festival-chinese-stereotypes-in-hollywood-films>
 had an amiable first preview with a fantastic bit in which he imagines himself 
quipping and musing his way through an interview with Guardian Weekend in a 
Caffè Nero. He has some nice material about visiting Chinese restaurants (or, 
as his family calls them, restaurants) and Chinese whispers (or, as his family 
calls them … you get the picture). Wang says he's "gentle but exciting" in bed 
and it may not be long before you can say the same for his stage performance.

Sarah Kendall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/02/sarah-kendall-edinburgh-festival-comedy-worst-heckle-sexual-violence>
's set Touchdown is an ode to all the ugliness and beauty of adolescence, 
celebrating the joy of unexpected friendship and the fine art of the hand-drawn 
penis.Holly Walsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/30/holly-walsh-edinburgh-festival-2014-build-comedy-like-lego>
's set takes a similar delight in the inventive shagging to be found in 
medieval art. Both of them are particularly adept at evoking the awkwardness of 
teen romance, and the path of sexual discovery in the pre-internet age: 
Madonna's coffee-table bookSex <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sex_%28book%29> 
and More magazine's position of the fortnight. Walsh says her mum's sexual 
advice consisted of "put down a towel" (there's a nice moment when her brother, 
in the audience, says the same advice came to him from their dad). She also 
follows up the serious observation that explicit online material creates "porn 
star" pressure for girls by questioning if all those feline funnies on the 
internet create a similar pressure for cats.

Kingmaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/03/edinburgh-festival-2014-review-kingmaker-boris-johnson>
, a comic three-hander about a Boris-a-like politician's bid for PM, shows how 
political ruthlessness is first forged in the playground and explores the 
school ties that bind the cabinet's "Eton mess". Go and see Ivo Graham and 
you'll be rewarded with an unassuming, likable and very touching set about his 
own Eton school days – as well as a handwritten thank-you letter for seeing his 
show.

But which acts deserve thank-you letters from the audience? Let us know what 
you've seen so far …

More from the Edinburgh festival

• Review: Unfaithful – love and longing in a taut four-hander 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/05/unfaithful-edinburgh-festival-2014-review>
• Review: The Trial of Jane Fonda – as inventive as a school play 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/05/trial-of-jane-fonda-review-edinburgh-festival-2014>
• Standups on their entrance music: 'I play it loud to drown out the screaming 
in my head' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/05/standups-entrance-music-edinburgh-festival-comedy>
• Jim Davidson: provocative, predictable and oh so popular <>
• Liam Williams: 'I've had nervous breakdowns on stage' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/04/liam-williams-edinburgh-festival-2014>
• All Edinburgh festival coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/edinburgh-festival-2014>
 