
A comedian who eats food from audience members' mouths, another who bellows 
abuse in their faces and another reporting back from the frontline of anti-cuts 
activism: the judging panel has produced an eclectic shortlist forthis year's 
Edinburgh comedy awards <http://www.comedyawards.co.uk/>. This year's list of 
challengers features two comedians that everyone knew would appear,Adam Riches 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/stage/2011/apr/30/this-weeks-new-comedy> and Nick 
Helm, two shortlist veterans in Josie Long and Andrew Maxwell, and two new 
additions, in Chris Ramsay and Aussie absurdistSam Simmons 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2011/aug/11/sam-simmons-review>.

The early favourite is probably Riches, an Edinburgh veteran whose previous 
claim to fame was slipping on a yoghurt and breaking his leg onstage in his2008 
show Rogue Males 
<http://edinburghfestival.list.co.uk/article/19972-adam-riches-rogue-males/>. A 
win for him would celebrate untrammelled silliness, from a man who's more 
ringleader of mayhem than comedian per se. Silliness, of the Harry Hill 
variety, is also Simmons's stock-in-trade;his show Meanwhile is a volley of 
skilful nonsense 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2011/aug/11/sam-simmons-review>, culminating 
in an oddly moving taco-smashing routine. I'd be happy to see the award go to 
either, or to Long, whose show consolidated a surprising 2010 left-turn towards 
political comedy. An hour of controlled dismay about Tory damage to all she 
holds dear, her 2011 set is good – but not as good as she'll be when she stops 
apologising for the politics.

Among a decent but not brilliant crop of comedy shows, there has been no 
exceptional, out-of-nowhere hit, of the type supplied byHans Teeuwen 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2010/aug/23/hans-teeuwen-edinburgh-comedy-review>
,Bo Burnham 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2010/aug/25/burnham-edinburgh-best-comedy-show>
 and Doug Stanhope in years gone by. But that needn't trouble the panel, which 
never rewards those shows anyway. Making up the 2011 shortlist is astrong 
offering from Irish veteran Andrew Maxwell 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2011/aug/21/edinburgh-fringe-comedy-review>, 
who – like Long – directly addresses state-of-the-nation concerns; Helm's 
much-hyped show, which features too much shouting in our faces and not enough 
good jokes; and Ramsey, a young comic familiar to some from his appearances of
Russell Howard's Good News <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00phwkz>, whose 
show I'm seeing tonight.

It's a little surprising to see no sketch comedy on the list. Next year, I 
suspect, the promising range of young sketch companies will likely bag a 
nomination or two. In the meantime, team comedy is represented on an 
eight-strongBest newcomer shortlist 
<http://www.comedyawards.co.uk/2011_shortlist.asp>, in the form of Etonian 
double-actTotally Tom <http://www.totally-tom.com/>, and by Humphrey Ker and 
Thom Tuck, two-thirds of sketch favouritesThe Penny Dreadfuls 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2010/aug/17/penny-dreadfuls-review>. That 
list is completed by Cariad Lloyd, who performs her character-comedy show on 
the Free Fringe; the excellent US standup Hannibal Buress; The Chris and Paul 
Show (Chris O'Neill and Paul Valenti); former CBBC presenter Holly Walsh; and 
tipped-for-the-top Josh Widdicombe. I haven't seen them all; Buress is my 
favourite out of those I have. All will be revealed on Saturday 27 August.
 