
The relationship between aid and the national interest is under close scrutiny 
after the UK published its new aid strategy. Now, more than ever, it is the 
effectiveness of aid spend in reducing poverty, rather than alignment with 
national interest, that will win over the public.

The UK aid strategy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-aid-tackling-global-challenges-in-the-national-interest>
 makes a great play of achieving results and value for money. It promises to 
shut down projects that aren’t working and expand ones that are.


But nowhere in the 28-page document does the UK government, once considered 
the bastion of sound, evidence-driven, effective aid spending, even pay lip 
service to the most important principle of all: thateffective aid is about 
partnerships, relationships and ownership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2011/nov/18/paris-declaration-aid-effectiveness-necessary>
.


Aid and national interest needn't be uneasy bedfellows if the balance is right 
| Jonathan Glennie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/02/uk-aid-strategy-national-interest-uneasy-bedfellows>
Experts are meant to boldly declare what makes aid effective. In reality, 
though, aid has proved very complex. Despite decades of research and practice, 
much less is known than we would like about what makes one project work and 
another fail. Fads are frequent, and this strategy is notable for its rejection 
ofgeneral budget support <http://www.oecd.org/derec/50313762.pdf> (pdf), which 
only a few years ago was a great new hope for aid practitioners.


But research makes one thing clear: if you don’t have support and ideally 
leadership from the supposed beneficiary, aid intervention is likely to fail.


Ownership was the guiding principle of the Paris agenda for aid effectiveness 
<http://www.oecd.org/dac/effectiveness/34428351.pdf> (pdf), which has shaped 
the spending of major donors since it was agreed in 2005. You don’t turn up 
with blueprint approaches; you build answers together, joining donor expertise 
on some technical matters with recipient expertise on the ground.


Achieving results was also a key theme in Paris, and the aid world has come on 
leaps and bounds in this regard. Ittracks <https://devtracker.dfid.gov.uk/> how 
money is spent and whatimpact <http://icai.independent.gov.uk/> it has better 
than ever before, and that is important – this is taxpayers’ money and they 
deserve to know if it is being spent well.


But in the Paris era, this emphasis on results has been underpinned by an even 
stronger focus on relationships. Working with beneficiaries and other donors is 
the only way to achieve results.


In the evidence 
<http://parliamentlive.tv/Event/Index/9c69dc2b-8291-4b4b-a2b6-0f9ebbe11136> I 
presented to the international development committee, I tried to show you don’t 
get results in the short term, whether in stable or fragile contexts. You get 
them by building slowly, establishing close relationships with partners.


Building relationships is also the best way of safeguarding money. You can 
throw all the audits and monitoring and evaluationlogframes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/aug/17/how-to-write-a-logframe-a-beginners-guide>
 you like at a project but, if you don’t know your partners well, those 
spreadsheets might not tell you the reality.

There are two ways to manage large projects. There is the “audit every penny” 
mentality. Of course we need audits and detailed impact assessments, but when 
that is all you are relying on, you are in a really bad position. If you don’t 
know the real needs of the organisation/post-holder/government you are working 
with, even the most detailed audit is a desperately weak accountability 
mechanism. It is not a scientific analysis of impact, as is sometimes claimed; 
it is a last resort.


What you really need is to build five-, 10- or 20-year relationships with 
organisations. You know the people. You know what they are trying to do. You 
trust them. They trust you. And you work closely together both on the project 
in hand and on the financial and impact reporting.


In aid, relationships matter more than anything else.


But reading the UK aid strategy 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/478834/ODA_strategy_final_web_0905.pdf>
 (pdf), in which the hubris of a “we know what’s best” attitude bubbles up over 
the document, you would be forgiven for thinking that the Department for 
International Development (DfID) now has little time for building relationships.

I can’t remember when I last heard a government minister or DfID spokesperson 
emphasise ownership and the importance of humility from donors.


General budget support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2011/oct/13/eu-focus-human-rights-aid>
, the investment of large amounts of money in government systems based more on 
trust than tight tracking systems, was the most extreme expression of a serious 
belief in ownership. It is now being terminated. In fairness to the UK, it was 
not wholly successful and therefore is hard to defend.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Feffective-aid-projects-teamwork-not-templates-jonathan-glennie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70e68a90dca4cbb8244e74553b4ace3433ee9092%2F0_214_3500_2103%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Effective%20aid%20projects%20are%20the%20result%20of%20teamwork%2C%20not%20templates%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Glennie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Feffective-aid-projects-teamwork-not-templates-jonathan-glennie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Effective%20aid%20projects%20are%20the%20result%20of%20teamwork%2C%20not%20templates%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Glennie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F03%2Feffective-aid-projects-teamwork-not-templates-jonathan-glennie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70e68a90dca4cbb8244e74553b4ace3433ee9092%2F0_214_3500_2103%2F3500.jpg>
 DfID will now spend only 70% of UK aid. Photograph: WPA Pool/Getty Images 
But the strategy makes me very worried about the future of other similar and 
much more defensible investments, in sector budget support and trusted civil 
society organisations. This money is the lifeblood of development, and without 
it the creativity and drive of independent ministries and organisations could 
grind to a halt, as they transform into huge implementing bodies of Whitehall 
preferences.


This becomes doubly worrying because DfID will spend only 70% of aid. The rest 
is being spent by other government departments who may know little about how 
ownership and partnerships must underpin successful aid spending.


Luckily, DfID is packed with some of the most thoughtful aid experts in the 
business, whose job it should now be to educate the rest of the civil service 
about how to spend well. They could do worse than finding a copy of the Paris 
agenda, dusting it down, and sending it round Whitehall. It is not perfect but 
it is a very good start.


Perhaps they should quickly reacquaint themselves with it as well.

 