
The situation for journalists in Egypt has become “unacceptable” with dozens 
of reporters and bloggers being held in jail, Reporters Without Borders has 
said in an open letter to the president,Abdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>.

Egypt jails author Ahmed Naji for sexually explicit book
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/20/egypt-author-ahmed-naji-book-sex-drugs>
The Paris-based watchdog urged the government to release 
<http://en.rsf.org/egypt-the-situation-of-journalists-in-22-02-2016,48857.html> 
at least32 reporters said to be being detained 
<http://www.madamasr.com/news/new-journalists-syndicate-campaign-declares-journalism-not-crime>
 or serving prison sentences.

In April last year, Reporters without Borders ranked Egypt 158th out of 180 
countries in itsglobal press freedom index 
<http://www.madamasr.com/news/egypt-fares-poorly-2015-press-freedom-index>. 
Since then, the number of raids on media organisations and reporter arrests has 
continued to rise.

In December, the Committee to Protect Journalists listed Egypt as the second 
biggest jailer of journalists worldwide 
<https://cpj.org/2015/12/china-egypt-are-worst-jailers-of-journalists-world.php>
, trailing shortly behind China. The number of those imprisoned rose 
dramatically in 2015, nearly doubling after Sisi’s administration assumed power.

Prominent cases include the detention of investigative reporter Hossam Bahgat 
<http://www.madamasr.com/tags/hossam-bahgat-case>, who was summoned for 
questioning by military intelligence over an article he wrote for  
<http://www.madamasr.com/sections/politics/coup-busted>the online news site 
Mada Masr in early November.

Bahgat was detained and released two days later after agreeing not to write 
about the army beyond specific legal boundaries set out by the authorities. The 
case against him remains ongoing.

“In 2015, Egypt became one the world’s biggest prisons for journalists. In 
most cases, their only ‘error’ was to have covered demonstrations or protests 
or to have spoken with members of the Muslim Brotherhood [whichEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> has declared to be a ‘terrorist 
organisation’] in the course of their reporting,” Reporters Without Borders 
said.

Working as a journalist in Egypt has become as dangerous as openly 
demonstrating against the regime
Reporters Without Borders  <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fegypt-prison-for-journalists-reporters-without-borders-letter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93ba3ea4d1d206cc3a626338376ce0eeb985e636%2F0_127_4064_2437%2F4064.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt%20is%20one%20of%20the%20'biggest%20prisons'%20for%20journalists%2C%20says%20watchdog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fegypt-prison-for-journalists-reporters-without-borders-letter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%20is%20one%20of%20the%20%27biggest%20prisons%27%20for%20journalists%2C%20says%20watchdog&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fegypt-prison-for-journalists-reporters-without-borders-letter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F93ba3ea4d1d206cc3a626338376ce0eeb985e636%2F0_127_4064_2437%2F4064.jpg>
 The high-profile case against three al-Jazeera journalists shed light on 
Egypt’s harsh treatment of reporters. Photograph: Cui Xinyu/REX 
It argues that several journalists are being “held on trumped-up charges 
unrelated to press offences” – including charges of affiliation with a 
terrorist organisation, partaking in unauthorised protests, disseminating false 
information and disturbing the public order.


In November, authorities arrested the investigative journalist and researcher 
Ismail Alexandrani <http://www.madamasr.com/tags/ismail-alexandrani-case> on 
charges of belonging to the Muslim Brotherhood and disseminating false 
information.

His detention has repeatedly been renewed since his arrest. Several rights 
groups 
<http://www.amnestyusa.org/get-involved/take-action-now/egypt-release-ismail-alexandrani-ua-27515>
 have denounced his treatment, arguing he is being targeted for his criticism 
of the authorities.

Reporters Without Borders said Alexandrani’s case showed that “working as a 
journalist in Egypt has become as dangerous as openly demonstrating against the 
regime”.

The letter also describes how many of the journalists have been “subjected to 
unjust trials that violate Egypt’s 2014 constitution and international human 
rights law, demonstrating the Egyptian justice system’s lack of independence”.

“Respect for the fundamental freedoms of Egyptian citizens and foreign 
residents has unfortunately declined since [Sisi] became Egypt’s president in 
2014,” the letter claims.

Cases

How Egyptian media has become a mouthpiece for the military state
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/25/egyptian-media-journalism-sisi-mubarak>
The watchdog also outlined several of the high-profile cases against 
journalists since the military-led takeover of government in July 2013.

It gives the example of photojournalist Mahmoud Abu Zeid, popularly known as 
Shawkan <http://www.madamasr.com/tags/shawkan>, who spent more than two years 
in jail before standing trial – violating the penal code’s two-year cap on 
pretrial detention.

The letter also pointed to the three journalists killed by security forces 
while covering the dispersal of the pro-Muslim Brotherhood Rabea al-Adaweya 
sit-in on 14 August 2013.


More than two years later, “no investigation 
<http://en.rsf.org/egypte-still-no-investigation-into-deaths-14-08-2014,46806.html>
 had been opened into the deaths of these journalists or the massacre that took 
place that day, and none of those responsible have been arrested,” the letter 
said, adding that no security personnel have been held accountable for the 
murders of journalists since the popular uprising of January 2011.

The statement concluded with a call “to release these unjustly detained 
journalists and to stop persecuting them. Otherwise, Egypt’s prospects for the 
future will be very dim in the long term”.

A version of this article first appeared on Mada Masr 
<http://www.madamasr.com/news/reporters-without-borders-decries-persecution-journalists-under-sisi>
 