
Bestselling Egyptian novelist Alaa al-Aswany was forced this week to shut down 
one of his public seminars. The event – ironically enough titled Conspiracy 
Theory: Between Reality and Illusion – had been scheduled for Thursday at 
Alexandria’s Jesuit Cultural Centre, but on Monday,Aswany announced 
<https://www.facebook.com/148101218572962/posts/941230509260025/> that Egyptian 
state security had informed him the seminar could not be held.

Aswany, also a practising dentist, exploded on to the Arabic literary scene in 
2002 with his second novel, The Yacoubian Building. The book became a 
bestseller in Arabic, was made into a big-budget film, and became a hit in its 
English translation. Aswany has maintained a high-profile output since as a 
newspaper columnist, novelist and public speaker. He has been holding public 
seminars in Cairo and Alexandria for the last several years, stirring debate 
and propounding his views on post-2011Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>.

He was initially supportive [ see footnote] of the current president 
Abdel-Fattah al-Sisi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>, 
even after a mass killing of Muslim Brotherhood supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/29/alaa-al-aswany-egypt-muslim-brotherhood>
 in August 2013, but has also criticised parts of Sisi’s governance. By last 
summer, the novelist was banned from publishing his weekly column in the 
Egyptian daily Al Masry Al Youm and from appearing on state-run media.

“While I publish everywhere in the world,” Aswany said last month in an 
interview with the French newspaper Humanité 
<http://www.humanite.fr/alaa-al-aswany-nous-sommes-tous-ensemble-confrontes-la-barbarie-591102>
, “I cannot do so in my own country”. He said that under Sisi’s government 
“freedom of expression does not exist, the situation is worse than under 
Mubarak”. He told the newspaper that he still supports the “fight against 
terrorism”, but that it doesn’t justify dictatorship.

Kept off the airwaves, Aswany uses social media to communicate with an 
Egyptian audience.On Thursday, he used Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/AlaaAswany/status/674726538856808449> to condemn what he 
said was an attempt by security services to smear social media, which he called 
“the only space left for free expression”.

The cancellation comes as the space for speech that doesn’t fit Sisi’s 
narrative has narrowed. This year, dozens of journalists and activists have 
been jailed, from prominent investigative journalists like Hossam Bahgat to 
young stringers. In a campaign launched earlier this month, the country’s
Journalists’ Syndicate demanded the release of at least 32 reporters 
<http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/1/64/172931/Egypt/Politics-/Egypts-journalists%E2%80%99-syndicate-to-hold-protest-for-.aspx>
 it said are currently in detention.

The hostility to controversial speech has also affected novelists. There is no 
pre-publication censorship in Egypt, but theyoung novelist and journalist Ahmed 
Naji went to trial last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/01/egypt-editor-on-trial-for-publishing-sexually-explicit-guide-using-life>
 because a chapter of his most recent novel, which appeared in a literary 
journal, was found to have “offended public morals”. Although Naji’s novel The 
Use of Life remains on sale, he could face up to two years in prison for the 
excerpted chapter.

In May this year, a book documenting Egypt’s political graffiti, Walls of 
Freedom,was held up at customs 
<http://www.madamasr.com/news/culture/revolutionary-graffiti-book-still-being-held-authorities-publishers-say>
 and subsequently refused entry. In August, Egypt’s National Centre for 
Translation (NCT)pulled its own translation 
<http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/18/0/137010/Books/Book-pulled-from-shelves-due-to-alleged-criticism-.aspx>
 of Egypte de Tahrir: L’anatomie d’une révolution from shelves. This came, 
according to Ahram Online, after a TV presenter accused the NCT of publishing 
books that “attack the army”.

This crackdown applies to other arts as well: The country’s groundbreaking 
Al-Fann Midan (Art is a Public Square) festival washarried out of existence by 
state security last year 
<https://en.qantara.de/content/art-and-revolution-in-the-arab-world-in-2015-struggling-against-the-restoration-of-order>
. The event, which launched in 2011, was a cherished space for music, poetry, 
and theatre events, but it underwent increasing problems with security permits 
in 2014.

The Cairo-based Arabic Network for Human Rights Information 
<http://anhri.net/?p=156338&lang=en> (ANHRI) was swift in condemning the 
cancellation of Aswany’s seminar, saying in it “completes the crackdown on the 
great writer”. In addition to his media ban, ANHRI noted that the author “is 
being subjected to smear campaigns on account of defending his right as well as 
his fans’ right to freedom of expression, and the right to criticise the 
absence of freedoms”.

“The state has dozens of newspapers and satellite channels that speak on its 
behalf and defend its stances,” the ANHRI statement quoted Aswany as saying, 
“so why [does] it waste the citizen’s right to hold a seminar that is attended 
by scores or hundreds?”

This year, two books by Aswany were released in English translation: Democracy 
Is the Answer 
<http://www.frontlineclub.com/in-conversation-with-alaa-al-aswany-democracy-is-the-answer/>
 and his most recent novel,The Automobile Club 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/arts/books/2015/08/14/book-review-the-automobile-club-egypt-alaa-aswany/re2c3A9YV7KGjH2r1tacHJ/story.html>
.

• This footnote was appended on 16 December 2015 to make clear that while Alaa 
Al Aswany supported the Egyptian military intervention against the Muslim 
Brotherhood in July 2013 he did not vote for President Sisi in the presidential 
election in May 2014 and in fact campaigned on behalf of the socialist 
candidate Hamdeen Sabahy.
 