
Two Cairo courts have convicted and sentenced to five years in jail more than 
100 protesters for taking part in peaceful, anti-government demonstrations last 
month, officials said on Sunday.

They said the 101 were convicted of breaking a disputed 2013 law that 
effectively bans street protests. Seventy-nine of them were fined 100,000 
Egyptian pounds (£8,000) each and 54 were convicted and sentenced in absentia. 
The officials spoke on condition of anonymity because they are not authorised 
to speak to the media.

The sentences were passed late on Saturday, hours after another Cairo court 
sentenced 51 protesters to two years in jail for their part inlast month’s 
demonstrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/cairo-protests-egypt-red-sea-islands-saudi-arabia>
, which were called in protest atEgypt’s decision to hand over control of two 
Red Sea islands to Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/egypt-saudi-arabia-tiran-sanafir-red-sea-islands-transfer>
 as part of a demarcation deal.

The deal, negotiated in near total secrecy, has brought mounting criticism of 
President Abdel-Fatah al-Sisi by activists who claim the transfer was a 
sell-off to oil-rich Saudi Arabia, which last month announced a 
multibillion-dollar aid package toEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>.

Sisi maintains that the islands belong to the Saudis and has angrily demanded 
an end to public criticism of the deal.

Egypt police suppress protests against Sisi government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/cairo-protests-egypt-red-sea-islands-saudi-arabia>
A massive police deployment on 25 April stifled the planned demonstrations, 
prompting activists to stage small flash protests in various parts of the 
capital. More than 1,200 arrests were made in the run-up to the event and on 
the day. Most of those arrested have been released, but almost 300 faced formal 
charges and were referred to trial for breaking the protest law.

The arrests and Saturday’s sentences signalled the government’s zero tolerance 
for dissent. Sisi says he has to balance safeguarding rights with his 
government’s fight against a resilient insurgency by Islamic militants in Sinai 
and efforts to revive the economy.

He has repeatedly insisted that Egypt’s human rights record must not be judged 
by western standards.
 