
The Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>, has suggested that 
28-year-old Italian research student Giulio Regeni may have been tortured and 
killed in Cairo by his political enemies seeking to destabilise the country at 
a sensitive time.

The remarks, to Italian daily newspaper La Repubblica, were the first clear 
indication that public and political pressure in Italy and acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> over Regeni’s brutal murder in 
Cairo earlier this year has put the Egyptian leader on the defensive.

Experts have said they believe the murder of the Cambridge PhD student, whose 
body was found in a ditch more than a week after he disappeared in January, 
bore all the hallmarks of Egypt’s notorious secret service and could have been 
motivated by his status as a foreigner or as an academic investigating labour 
unions.

In the La Repubblica interview, Sisi expressed his condolences to Regeni’s 
family – saying he understood their “pain, bitterness and shock” – and said 
specialised investigative working groups had been formed to “uncover the real 
causes behind the incident”.

“I reiterate once more our sincere keenness to intensify cooperation with 
Italian authorities to resolve any ambiguity related to this painful incident 
and bring their perpetrators to justice,” he said, according toa transcript of 
his remarks that were posted on the newspaper’s website in English 
<http://www.repubblica.it/esteri/2016/03/16/news/al_sisi_my_promise_to_regeni_family_as_a_father_we_ll_find_who_killed_giulio_-135572409/?ref=HREA-1>
. “In the upcoming days, the Egyptian team in charge of this case will head to 
Rome to discuss ways to enhance mutual coordination in this regard.”

Why was he killed? Brutal death of Italian student in Egypt confounds experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/24/why-was-he-killed-brutal-death-of-italian-student-in-egypt-confounds-experts>
But the remarks sought to deflect blame from Sisi’s own government and opened 
the door to conjecture that another party could have targeted Regeni in order 
to purposely interfere with Egypt’s relationship withItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy>.

“The timing of this incident is intriguing and raises several questions. Why 
did it happen during the visit of the Italian minister of economic development 
toEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt>, where she headed an Italian 
business delegation?” Sisi said. “Why did it happen when bilateral relations 
gather unprecedented momentum both politically and economically? Are there any 
beneficiaries who seek to impede relations, given the turbulent situation in 
the region?”

He said Italy needed to consider a “fundamental point”: Egypt’s security, 
which, if lost, would “endanger the whole of the Mediterranean and Europe”.

“There are 90 million people living in Egypt, a quarter of the population of 
the Middle East, and 60 million of them are under 40 years old. Imagine if just 
one in a thousand of these young people became radicalised and were recruited 
by terrorists. The result would be a destructive force that would have a 
devastating impact, and not only on this region,” he said.

It was a remark that seemed aimed directly at the European parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/10/european-parliament-condemns-killing-of-giulio-regeni-in-egypt>
, which last week overwhelmingly passed a resolution that condemned the murder 
and said it was a “wake-up call” for the EU. The resolution placed the blame 
for the killing squarely on forces within the government and criticised Egypt’s 
systematic human rights abuses, saying the killing was not just an “isolated 
incident”.

Sisi pointed an accusatory finger at Italy in an unrelated case involving an 
Egyptian citizen and Italian resident named Adel Moad, who is alleged to have 
disappeared in Italy last year.


“I reiterate that such individual acts should not be exploited to undermine 
bilateral relations. At critical moments, real friends show their true colours 
and the depth of relations is verified,” Sisi said.


He emphasised that Regeni’s murder was a “terrifying and unacceptable 
incident” that has never been faced by an Italian in Egypt before.

Raffaele Marchetti, professor of international relations at Luiss University 
in Rome, said the Sisi interview made clear that the Egyptian president was 
feeling pressure to respond to the criticism that has been levelled at him.

“It sends the signal that it is very crucial, very important, and that he 
cares about the relationship with Italy,” Marchetti said. At the same time, it 
showed Sisi would probably continue to pin blame on his political enemies.

“He is saying ‘it is my enemies who want to destroy and damage Egypt, the 
stability of Egypt.’ And why is that? To damage business, tourists, political 
alliance on Libya, a number of issues in which the relationship is important,” 
Marchetti said. “Sisi is saying, if you want to understand Regeni, you have to 
look at who is against me.”
 