
Preamble:
This is probably the most explosive fixture in international football and 
comes, of course, less than three months after the teams' duel for a place in 
the World Cup ignited a bloody and hysterical ruckus involving players, 
officials, journalists, statesmen, diplomats, students, retailers, clerics, air 
stewardesses, farmers, engineers, medics, singers, beggars, bigots, 
delinquents, ruffians and postmen. What is needed now, then, are cool heads, so 
praise be to deft-footed Egyptian striker Mohammad Zidan for previewing today's 
encounter thus: "For both sides this will be a war. This is a matter of life 
and death. For us it's a chance to show the world that we deserve to be at the 
World Cup. If we win this we can watch the World Cup in peace. We're the 
champions and we're a better team than them. Everybody will see who is the 
better team." Who knows what is about to unfold?

The first thing to look out for, of course, is what stance the sides adopt 
during the national anthems. Before last November's play-off in Sudan, which 
was just a few days after the Algerian team had been stoned by febrile Pharoah 
fans ahead of the last group game in Cairo, the Fennecs (or Desert Foxes, or, 
if you want to keep things simple, Algeria) snubbed the Egyptians by turning 
their back on them during the anthem. That, it is said by some, enraged the 
Egyptian players still further â€“ and given thatAlgeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/algeria> went on to win the game, albeit 
with a degree of luck, it might be worth riling them anew.

Also worth examining are the teams' formation. Both have been accustomed to 
playing with a three-man defence, which in Algeria's case provides a platform 
for solidity in the centre and entertaining buccaneering out wide, whereEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> tend to have refined a more fluid 
model that enables them to move meaningfully and mordantly all over. Yes. In 
short, this promises to be an intriguing match and you'd be ill-advised, not to 
mention downright rude, to follow it anywhere but here.

Finally, let us fervently hope that this affair is kinder to the eye than this 
afternoon's oafish kerfuffle between Ghana and Nigeria.

Teams:
Algeria: 16-Fawzi Chaouchi; 2-Madjid Bougherra, 3-Nadir Belhadj, 4-Anthar 
Yahia, 5-Rafik Halliche; 6-Yazid Mansouri, 19-Hassan Yebda, 15-Karim Ziani, 
20-Mourad Meghni; 13-Karim Matmour, 9-Abdelkader Ghezzal.

Egypt: 1-Essam Al Hadari; 2-Mahmoud Fathallah, 3-Ahmed Al Muhammadi, 6-Hani 
Said, 20-Wael Gomaa; 7-Ahmed Fathi, 8-Hosni Abd Rabou, 14-Sayed Moawad, 
17-Ahmed Hassan; 9-Mohamed Zidan, 10-Emad Motaeb.

Referee: Bonaventure Coffi Codjia (Benin)

7:24pm: No national anthem snubbing this time - both parties content 
themselves with singing along lustily with their own while maintaining a 
tolerant silence during their opponents. And that's followed by cordial 
hand-shakes. All very gentlemanly.

7:26pm: Like a flying penguin in a bikini, your emails are currently 
non-existent. Feel free to change that status.

1 min: Amid abundant smoke from assorted flares and what not, Algeria set the 
game in motion, whacking the ball upfield in amiless fashion, thereby allowing 
Egypt to settle into some reassuring passing around the back.

3 mins: Halliche slips but recovers sufficiently to disposses Motaeb in the 
box. The Egyptian bays for a penalty, but the ref ignores him. The television 
controllers do not consider the incident worthy of a replay. Conspiracy 
theories are probably being spawned in Cairo as we speak.

4 mins: Meghni - once dubbed the new Zidane in France (for whom he won a U-17 
World Cup way back when) - curls a freekick over the bar.

5 mins: "I'm an Egyptian currently working in Canada," declares Yaser Abou 
Elenein. " What I want to say very loudly is ... GO EGYPT!" And go they just 
did, Fathallah hurtling down the right before flashing a tempting cross in 
front of goal. No one could get their toe to it, however.

6 mins: That's lovely play from Egypt, who have quickly got into their 
positive passing groove. Halliche had to show tremendous vigilance to divert a 
Zidan shot behind.

8 mins: Egypt are dominating possession, and circulating the ball with great 
pace and fluidity. Algeria seem intent merely on surviving for the moment, with 
virtually the whole team behind the ball. "I'd totally buy an upper-body 
work-out video hosted by Bouazza and Ghezzal," reveals Steven Villereal. "What 
do you reckon their combined chest circumference is?" Do you know, I've never 
given the matter any thought. And am not really about to.

10 mins: Meghni leads an Algerian counter-attack and wins a corner. Belhadj 
curls it in, El Hadari's punch is unconvincing but Egypt eventually scramble it 
away. Algeria regain the ball around half-way, however, and Boughera barges 
forward to bang one just wide from 35 yards.

12 mins: Fathi dinks one over for Motaeb to chase, but Chaouchi gets to it 
first. By the way, I should explain that when I said I hadn't received any 
emails yet, what I meant was that I haven't got any good ones yet. Plenty of 
rubbish or irrelevant ones, but what am I to do with them other than shake an 
impotent first at them, eh?

13 mins: Al Hadari collects another Belhadj cross and then runs into Yahia ... 
and goes down as it attacked by a steriod-fuelled bouncer. The ref merely looks 
and laughs.

15 mins: This game is far superior to this afternoon's one. It's been played 
at break-neck tempo and both sides brim with attacking gusto. Belhadj has just 
raced down the left and curled an inviting freekick towards Ghezzal, who failed 
to connect.

17 mins: Another player goes down as if struck by a bad-tempered gargoyle. 
This time it's Ghezzal, and again he's surely faking - Gomaa barely touched him 
when competing for a header.

19 mins: Algeria have reverted to a back four, Muhammadi having effectively 
pushed Belhadj back to a more defensive role. Egypt's frantic pressing high up 
the pitch when not in possession is helping pin Algeria back.

21 mins: Chauouchi appears to have a long streak of bright blue paint down the 
side of his neck. No idea how he got it, but it's unlikely to catch on.

23 mins: Al Hadari charges off his line to intercept a long ball towards 
Ghezzal.

25 mins: Unlike Eygpt, Algeria are choosing not to pressurise their opponets 
in their own half, preferring to cluster back in their own territory, and 
spring forward rapidly whenever they do manage to get the ball back. It didn't 
look so clever just now, however, when Muhammadi picked out Zidan with a sharp 
slow pass from the back and the striker flicked it brilliantly to Motaeb, who 
curled it towards the top corner from the edge of the box. Terriffic save by 
Chauouchi.

27 mins: Yahia seems to have devised a strategy of sending long high diagonal 
passes towards Ziani, who is a small man and stands no chance of winning the 
ball against the Egyptian defenders. It is a silly strategy, to be sure.

28 mins: Another pointless cross-field hoof from Yahia. Another predictable 
outcome.

29 mins: Meghni is brought down by Said wide on the right. Belhadj floats in 
the freekick. Al Hadari punches it away under pressure from Halliche, who 
receives a totally unmerited booking.

31 mins: Algeria have condensed the midfield and stemmed the forward flow of 
Egypt. It remains a keenly contested, delicately poised match, however. 
Engrossing stuff. "My girlfriend's mother is Egyptian so I was once lucky 
enough to visit that beautiful country and see a national match," exults Peter 
Corway. "The passion amongst the support is incredible. The players are 
constantly cheered and praised by the die-hard support. Compare that to English 
fans who have no problem booing their own players, it's quite something."

34 mins: Belhadj shows commendable composure to pass his way out of defence 
while being harrassed by Hassan.

36 mins: Moawad surges past some flimsy challenges down the left and curls a 
dangerous cross into the six-yard box. Zidan lunges at it but can't get a touch.

37 mins: Fathallah booked for pulling back Matmour as the Algerian threatened 
to run away from him and on to a long pass over the top.

PENALTY TO EGYPT!  It was the correct decision. Halliche was caught out by a 
long ball over the top and lunged at it in a bid to prevent Motaeb latching on 
to it. He made contact only with the striker, who collapsed to the ground. And 
Halliche cops a second yellow card, and trudges off. The unjustified first 
booking has proved costly.

GOAL! Egypt 1-0 Algeria (Hosny, pen, 39') Hosny halts his run in John 
Aldridge-esque fashion to send the keeper the wrong way, then rolls it into the 
net. Chaouchi is outraged and confronts the ref in a highly aggressive manner, 
appearing to thrust his head at the Beninese official. Many would have shown at 
least a yellow for that, but Mr Codjia just waves him away.

41 mins: Egypt carve Algeria open again, Moawad playing a lovely one-two 
before clipping a cross towards the centre. It's cleared. And after that the TV 
controllers showed a replay of Chaouchi's confrontation with the ref ... and 
reveal that he did actually headbutt the official! The contact was minimal, but 
Paul Alcock, for one, would surely have reeled twenty yards backwards. Turns 
out the keeper was shown a yellow. And was incredibly lucky to escape a red. 
"Is that a picture of a desert fox that I see on the shoulder of the Algerian 
jersey?" Yes it is, Chris Thomas. "Do all of the Puma made African jerseys in 
the tournament have images of the respective national team's flamboyant 
nickname?" yes they do, Chris Thomas. "Is there a black antelope on the 
shoulder of the Angolan jersey or an image of a pharaoh on the Egyptian 
jersey?" Yes there is, Chris Thomas. "I would love to see a picture of a Reggae 
Boy on the Jamaican jersey." That's a good idea, Chris Thomas.

43 mins: Al Muhammadi races past Belhadj - who's no slouch, as they say - but 
sends his cross into the sidenetting.

45 mins: Algeria are in disarray and Egypt are piercing them with ease. Rabah 
Saadane must be pleading for half-time.

Half-time: The ref brings the half to a close, and receives a hug from Yebda 
as t hey walk off the pitch. This has been a high-quality, richly entertaining 
game so far and though Egypt are in full flow and a man and goal to the good, 
Algeria will surely come at them in the second period. One of Saadane's main 
tasks during the break will be to inject some sangfroid into his charges, some 
of whom have lost tactical discipline since the goal, not to mention come close 
to copping a red card.

A point of order: "Not only did Chaouchi practically headbutt the ref, his 
team-mate Ghezzal slapped him round the face to calm him down," declares Scott 
W. "Isn't this - technically - a sending off for both players? We should be 
thankful that Codjia turned the other cheek, or this game could be all but 
over."

46 mins: The players are back to where they belong.

47 mins: Al Muhammadi, who is having an oustanding game down the right, 
centres. Algeria scramble it as far as Hosni, whose venomous shot is blocked by 
Mansouri.

48 mins: Hassan sends a 30-yarder miles wide.

49 mins: Motaeb out-sprints two Algerian defenders and then, as Boughera 
attempts to dispossess him, goes down in the box. The ref waves play on. I'd 
like to see a replay of that - first impression was it should have been another 
penalty.

51 mins: Fierce cross by Ghezzal, but his team-mates hadn't anticipated it 
therefore were not on hand to turn it in. Meanwhile, Motaeb is still down at 
the other end following that collission with Boughera in the box.

52 mins: Egypt change: Moteab off, Tottenham legend Hossam Ghaly on. Egypt, 
then, seem set to play with one up front, though given the swiftness and 
fluidity of their movement they can never be accused of rigidity.

54 mins: The game's going through a scrappy spell. Thought you'd like to know.

57 mins: Egypt are sitting back a bit more and Algeria are startign to build a 
bit of momentum. They cobbled together a many-passed move just now, working 
their way from their own box all the way up into the Egyptian one, where Yebda 
sent a soft header wide.

59 mins: After soaking up Algerian pressure for several minutes, Egypt sping 
forward and Moawad slashes a shot narrowly wide from the edge of the box.

60 mins: Egypt change: Fathallah off, Geddo on.

61 mins: Again Egyptian are a bit too obliging as they allow Algeria to pick 
their way forward. Eventually they try to intervene at the edge of their own 
area, but do so illegally and concede a freekick. Yebda tonks it goalwards, and 
El Hadari does well to tip it behind for a corner, which he himself punches 
clear. "Given Hossam Ghaly's love of the overly theatrical when being subbed 
out of a match, how does he ensure that he makes an entrance when being subbed 
on?" wonders Adrian Cooper. "Does he angrily snatch a shirt from the ground and 
aggressively tug it over his head or perhaps arrange to be carried on, atop a 
throne and draped in a flowing blood-red cape, by four topless and oiled 
muscelmen, in the style of Lady Gaga?" It was a little like taht funnily 
enough, except without the aggressive dooning of the shirt, throne, cape and 
partially naked studs.

63 mins: Pandemonium in the Algerian box! Moawad was the main instigator, 
sruging forward and pulling it back to Zidan, who stumbled as he was about to 
shoot from five yards. It rolled to Hosni but his shot was diverted over for a 
corner.

GOAL! Egypt 2-0 Algeria (Zidan 65') That's a sumptuous goal! Zidan received 
the ball about 30 yards out, dribbled forward, feinted one way and then turned 
the other before curling a left-footer into the top corner from the edge of the 
area.

67 mins: Algeria change: Meghni off, Laifaoui on.

68 mins: It's party-time for Egypt, who are flipping and flicking the ball 
around for fun now. Algeria can only watch and wince.

70 mins: Algeria have collapsed. And now they're down to nine men as Belhadj 
deservedly sees red for a crazy late tackle. "That is disgusting, unbelievable 
... and he meat to hurt him," fumes Russell Osman on Eurosport.

71 mins: The short-numbered Algerians are prised apart by a long punt from El 
Hadari, but Boughera sprinted back to prevent Zidan from getting off as a shot.

73 mins: Mansouri shoves Zidan, either because he's annoyed the Egyptian was 
offside or, much more likely, because he's peeved at the course of events. But 
that's unlikely to change it. "Why are you covering this nonsense of a 
tournament?" rages Michael Aston. "Seriously, who cares?" Not you, apparently. 
But plenty of other people do. Is that OK?

77 mins: Algeria's defence is all over the shop and Egypt should have hit a 
third, but Hassan lifted his shot over the keeper and into the sidenetting when 
clean through. "Will Belhadj be banned from the World Cup group games after his 
sending off?" asks Andrew Hush. Well, I belive he'll get a three-game ban, but 
they are likely to play at least three matches before the tournament so he 
should serve his time before the summer.

79 mins: Egypt change: Abdelshafi on, Moawad off.

GOAL! Egypt 3-0 Algeria (Abdelshafi 81') I imagine most Algerian fans have 
turned off their TVs by now, because this is all very humiliating. Egypt are 
toying with them ... casually picking their way past their depleted opponents. 
Zidan eventually slips the ball to Abdelshafi, who slams it into the net from 
an acute angle.

83 mins: All Algeria can muster by way of response at this point are angry 
challenges .... a third red card is certainly not out of the question. All this 
could have been so different, of course, if Halliche had not been sent off 
earlier following two bookings, one of which was grossly unjust. Expect 
sentences like that to proliferate in the Algerian papers tomorrow. You will be 
reading them, right, Michael Aston?

85 mins: El Muhammadi scampers down the right, as he has done so often 
tonight, and then calmly pulled the ball back for Geddo, whose low shot was 
well saved by Chaouchi.

ANOTHER RED CARD FOR ALGERIA! The keeper has been dismissed, a fate he has 
seemed to be seeking for quite a while. He hurtled off his line and aimed a 
wild kick at an Egyptian forward, who had already been whistled offside. 
Ludicrous.

88 mins: Algeria change: Ghezzal is taken off so that another keeper, 
Zemmamouche, can come on.

90 mins: There will be at least four mintues time added on. Plenty of scope, 
then, for Algeria to get enough men sent off for the match to be abandoned. 
"Three red cards, three brilliant goals and a stunning team performance from 
Egypt," observes Peter Corway. "What the hell is Michael Aston talking about?!"

90+1 mins: Several of you have emailed to correctly point out that friendlies 
don't count towards serving suspensions. The reason Algeria may yet have 
Belhadj and Co available for the World Cup is that this week proposed 
organising a tournament for the six African qualifiers ahead of the WC, which 
would have competitive status and help them hone their match readiness ... and 
expunge those suspensions. Whether it goes ahead are not remains to be seen.

GOAL! Egypt 4-0 Algeria (Gedo 90+2) Another sweeping Egypt move culminates 
with Gedo slotting it past the new keeper and into the net from 18 yards.

Full-time: That was splendid entertainment and a highly accomplished 
performance - yet again - from hassan Shehata's serial champions. Even before 
Halliche's unjust expulsion they were the better side, and after that Algeria 
disintegrated. They have a responsibility to pull themselves together before 
the World Cup, not just to themselves but for everyone who is saddened that 
this excellent Egyptian side won't grace the global stage. Getting to South 
Africa isn't enough - once there they must show again they deserve to be there. 
Egypt, meanwhile, have to be overwhelming favourites for the final against 
Ghana. Be sure to tune into that right here. Please. Even you might enjoy it, 
Michael Aston, if you allow yourself to.
 