
Security forces in Egypt have used teargas to disperse small protests against 
the president,Abdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>, witnesses have said, 
deterring what opposition groups had expected to be a day of large 
demonstrations against his rule.

This month, thousands of Egyptians angered by Sisi’s transfer of two Red Sea 
islands to Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/egypt-saudi-arabia-tiran-sanafir-red-sea-islands-transfer>
 called for his government to fall in the largest demonstration since the 
former military general took office in 2014.

On Monday, riot police backed by armoured vehicles were positioned in Cairo’s 
Tahrir Square, the focus of Egypt’s 2011 uprising, and at a suburban square
where at least 600 Muslim Brotherhood supporters were killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/jul/18/cairo-republican-guard-shooting-full-story>
 in August 2013 in anticipation of protests.

Security forces moved swiftly, dispersing a march in the Dokki neighbourhood 
with teargas as it started, a witness said. Videos and pictures posted on 
social media also showed that teargas was used at a small protest in the Imbaba 
district. Jets and helicopters circled over Cairo.

Police have arrested over 90 people across eight governorates in recent days, 
according to the Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights. Groups of youth were 
arrested at coffee shops and others were targeted in their homes, the 
Cairo-based human rights group added.

The ministry of interior was not immediately available for comment. On Sunday, 
the interior minister, Magdi Abdel Ghaffar, said there would be no leniency 
against any “any attempts to destabilise national security and any vital public 
or police facilities”.

Sisi on Sunday urged citizens to defend the state and its institutions from 
the “forces of evil”, an apparent reference to the protests planned for Monday.

The protests, which coincided with a national holiday celebrating the Israeli 
withdrawal from the Sinai peninsula in 1982, came as the Egyptian president 
faced mounting criticism for a government accord accepting that the uninhabited 
Red Sea islands of Tiran and Sanafir are in Saudi waters.
Islands map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/egypt-islands/giv-27167wmiNCp6wp0xz/>
 The deal on Tiran and Sanafir paves the way for theconstruction of a bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/08/saudi-arabia-egypt-bridge-red-sea-king-salman-abdel-fatah-al-sisi>
 linking Saudi Arabia to Sharm el-Sheikh, at the tip of the Sinai peninsula 

Saudi and Egyptian officials say the islands belong to Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> and were only under Egyptian 
control because Riyadh had asked Cairo in 1950 to protect them.

The announcement came during a visit to Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> this month by the Saudi monarch, King 
Salman, as the kingdom announced a multibillion-dollar package of aid and 
investment, fuelling charges that the islands were sold off.

Popular backlash to the decision evolved into broader opposition against Sisi 
and his government earlier this month, when protests carrying the 2011-era 
chant “down with military rule” spilled into the streets of central Cairo.










 