
Egyptian activists are using social media to demand the release of five 
detained members of a satirical street performance group whose video clips 
mocked the president,Abdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>.

The activists posted pictures on Facebook of themselves holding mobile phones 
in front of their faces with the caption: “Does a mobile phone camera rattle 
you?”

Police arrested four members of the group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/egyptian-street-children-detained-by-government-video>
 Awlad el-Shawarea (Street Children) on Monday. A fifth member was arrested 
over the weekend and remains in custody despite a court ordering his release.

The performers face several charges, including inciting terror attacks and 
street protests, attempting to overthrow the government and insulting state 
institutions, according to their lawyer Mahmoud Othman.

Othman told Associated Press on Thursday that the five were being held at a 
police station in the Cairo suburb of Heliopolis.

The Guardian view on Egypt: one murder in Cairo, and one nation’s 
authoritarian spiral | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/11/the-guardian-view-on-egypt-one-in-cairo-and-one-nations-authoritarian-spiral>
“I last saw them [on Wednesday] and they are in good condition,” he said. “The 
prosecution, regrettably, does not see their clips as creative work protected 
by the constitution.”

The five are Ezzedeen Khaled, Muhammad Adel, Muhammad Dessouki, Muhammad Yahya 
and Muhammad Gabr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/egyptian-satirists-arrested-for-mocking-president>
. Othman said their ages ranged between 19 and 25. A sixth member of the group, 
Mohammed Zein, has not been detained, he added.

Awlad el-Shawarea is part of a street-based art, music and graffiti movement 
born out of Egypt’s 2011 uprising and fuelled by liberal youths opposed to both 
the rule of Islamists and the military. Authorities in recent months have 
sought to clamp down on the movement, closing a popular arts centre in downtown 
Cairo and cancelling some street art festivals.

The move against Awlad el-Shawarea underlined the government’s diminishing 
tolerance for dissent and signalled that its next target could be social media 
networks, one of the last remaining platforms for young, pro-democracy 
activists and artists to air their views and work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fegypts-activists-social-media-facebook-satirists-release-awlad-el-shawarea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2f6fd915cf96ce35685c9bf7c6c838439ed5397%2F0_193_4134_2478%2F4134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Egypt's%20activists%20turn%20to%20social%20media%20to%20call%20for%20satirists'%20release&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fegypts-activists-social-media-facebook-satirists-release-awlad-el-shawarea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Egypt%27s%20activists%20turn%20to%20social%20media%20to%20call%20for%20satirists%27%20release&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fegypts-activists-social-media-facebook-satirists-release-awlad-el-shawarea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa2f6fd915cf96ce35685c9bf7c6c838439ed5397%2F0_193_4134_2478%2F4134.jpg>
 Awlad el-Shawarea members were arrested after they mocked the president, Abdel 
Fatah al-Sisi. Photograph: Reuters 
Recent clips by the group were entitled “Al-Sisi, my president, made things 
worse,” and “Leave”, a chant that was popular during the 2011 uprising that 
forced autocrat Hosni Mubarak to step down. Other clips mocked the president’s 
habit of ending speeches with “Long live Egypt!” and his recent reference to 
advice by his late mother “never to covet what belongs to others”.

'Erase and I will draw again': the struggle behind Cairo's revolutionary 
graffiti wall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/23/struggle-cairo-egypt-revolutionary-graffiti>
The famous Egyptian satirist Bassem Youssef took part in an online campaign to 
free the activists on Thursday. Youssef’s show was taken off the air a few 
months after then-military chief Sisi ousted Egypt’s first freely elected 
leader, the Islamist Mohamed Morsi, in July 2013.

“If you truly are not scared of anyone, let them go free,” Youssef said in a 
brief video, addressing Sisi and referring to the five performers and other 
political detainees. He was alluding to the president’s recent assertions that 
no one scares him.

Egyptian actor Amr Waked, who played the rich Arab chieftain in the widely 
acclaimed 2012 movie Salmon Fishing in the Yemen, also took part in the 
campaign, as well as Yousry Nasrallah, one of Egypt’s most respected film 
directors, prominent human rights advocate Ghada Shahbander and novelist and 
rights campaigner Ahdaf Soueif.

Sisi took office in June 2014, nearly a year after Morsi’s ouster. He has 
since overseen the arrest of thousands of Morsi’s supporters as well as scores 
of pro-democracy activists behind the 2011 uprising. The government has 
defended the crackdown and the erosion of freedoms since the 2011 uprising by 
saying it is trying to restore stability, revive the economy and defeat an 
increasingly powerful insurgency based in the Sinai Peninsula.

Sisi’s announcement last month that his government intended to surrender 
control over two strategic Red Sea islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/egypt-saudi-arabia-tiran-sanafir-red-sea-islands-transfer>
 to Saudi Arabia sparkeda series of protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/02/egyptian-journalists-protest-arrests-cairo>
 that were met with one of the biggest rounds of arrests in the last two years.
 