
Search teams have resumed the difficult hunt for the flight recorders of 
EgyptAir flight MS804 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egyptair-flight-ms804> 
as mystery persists over what caused theAirbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> to plunge into the Mediterranean 
sea killing 66 people, minutes aftersmoke was detected in multiple places on 
board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/21/egyptair-flight-ms804-smoke-detected-in-minutes-before-crash>
.


The black box flight data recorders that could hold the clues to the mystery 
have not yet been found as Egyptian military and international sea-search teams 
continue to scour a vast area of the Mediterranean north of Alexandria on the 
Egyptian coast.

The task is particularly complex given that the flight recorders could have 
sunk to more than 2,000 metres below sea level. The black boxes emit a constant 
signal pointing to their location, but these only continue for four to five 
weeks in the water before their power runs out.

A French patrol vessel carrying specialist equipment for sea searches and 
retrieval has left the French port of Toulon and should arrive in the area on 
Sunday or Monday to join the search. Egypt’s president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, 
said a submarine belonging to his country’s oil ministry had left for the site 
of the crash.

Smoke was detected in multiple places on board the missing EgyptAir flight 
MS804 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egyptair-flight-ms804> minutes before 
it crashed, French investigators have confirmed, as the Egyptian military 
released pictures of the plane’s debris.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fegyptair-crash-search-teams-hunt-flight-ms804-black-box-recorder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bdcc8cf0e68047573048e1854b2852220381b0b%2F0_145_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EgyptAir%20crash%3A%20search%20teams%20hunt%20for%20MS804%20black%20box%20recorder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fegyptair-crash-search-teams-hunt-flight-ms804-black-box-recorder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EgyptAir%20crash%3A%20search%20teams%20hunt%20for%20MS804%20black%20box%20recorder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F22%2Fegyptair-crash-search-teams-hunt-flight-ms804-black-box-recorder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bdcc8cf0e68047573048e1854b2852220381b0b%2F0_145_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 A lifejacket found among wreckage from EgyptAir flight 804. Photograph: 
Xinhua/Rex/Shutterstock 
Signs of smoke were picked up in a toilet and in the aircraft’s electronics, 
according to data from the Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting 
System (Acars), which routinely transmits data to airlines about the condition 
of their planes.

Making his first public comments since the Airbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> A320 crashed on Thursday while 
flying from Paris to Cairo, Sisi said it would take time to determine the cause 
of the crash. He thanked the countries that had joined Egyptian navy ships and 
aircraft in the search for the wreckage.

Sisi said the Egyptian search submarine had the capacity to operate at a depth 
of 3,000 metres (about 9,800ft) below the surface.

As the search for the plane’s flight recorders continued, the Egyptian 
military released pictures of some of the debris recovered on Friday. 
Photographs of a lifejacket, parts of the plane’s chairs and other wreckage 
were posted on Facebook.

In France, investigators confirmed the data about smoke warnings first 
reported by the websiteAviation Herald 
<http://avherald.com/h?article=4987fb09&opt=0>, while the French foreign 
minister, Jean-Marc Ayrault, said no theory on the cause of the crash had been 
ruled out.

“At this time … all theories are being examined and none is favoured,” he said 
after meeting relatives of victims.
EgyptAir locator map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/debris-confirmed/giv-12515yhRDxbG9LwgM/>
The warnings came at about 2.26am local time (04.26 GMT) on Thursday, just 
before air traffic controllers lost contact with the plane.

David Learmount <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidlearmount>, a 
consulting editor at Flight Global, said the data presented the beginning of a 
sequence of events that could be “the answer to what happened”, but he could 
not confirm whether the fire was triggered by an act of terrorism or an 
electrical fault.

“There’s a report of smoke in the forward lavatory [and] a minute later 
there’s smoke in the avionics bay, which is very worrying, and then two minutes 
later the flight control computers, one after the other, start to fail,” 
Learmount told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme.

“Now the question we are left with is did this start with an ordinary 
electrical fault, a short circuit which started a fire, or was the fire started 
deliberately with a small explosion or an incendiary device?

“It could still be terrorism but it looks as if the aircraft went out of 
control because the controls were literally burning up. But we don’t know if 
it’s terrorism that started this or an electrical fault.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Missing%20EgyptAir%20flight%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Missing%20EgyptAir%20flight%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer&media=>
Missing EgyptAir flight: what we know so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/19/egyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer>
Shaker Kelada, the former head of Egypt’s plane crash investigations unit, 
cautioned against reading too much into the data. “Alone, it means nothing. 
It’s the last four seconds at the end of the transmission. If it’s an 
indication of anything it could be a follow-up to an explosion. It could also 
happen if someone smokes in the cockpit or the bathroom. But there was no 
warning in the cockpit.

“This could be the first indication of a bomb. Or it can be unrelated. Since 
we don’t have any further information we cannot tell anything.”

Greece’s lead air accident investigator, Athanasios Binis, said on Saturday 
that the search had been narrowed to a 900-square mile area, approximately 180 
miles (290km) north of Alexandria. “That is where we are focusing and the sea 
there is between 7,500-10,000ft [2,300-3,000 metres] deep. Our priority now is 
to find the black boxes and as much wreckage as possible.”

Sole Briton on flight MS804 had just become father for second time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/sole-briton-on-flight-ms804-had-just-become-father-for-second-time>
Investigators were still unclear whether the plane’s sudden drop in altitude 
was controlled or not, he added. “We still don’t know how it dropped from 
37,000ft to 15,000ft or whether the pilot had tried to control it. It seems 
that they had a series of technical malfunctions before they lost control but 
what caused that we have yet to discover.”

The passengers included 30 Egyptians, 15 French citizens, two Iraqis, two 
Canadians, the BritonRichard Osman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/sole-briton-on-flight-ms804-had-just-become-father-for-second-time>
, and citizens from Algeria, Belgium, Chad, Portugal, Saudi Arabia and Sudan. 
They also included a boy and two babies. Seven crew members and three security 
personnel were also on board.

The spokesman for the investigation said it was “far too soon to interpret and 
understand the cause of Thursday’s accident as long as we have not found the 
wreckage or the flight data recorders”.

Despite theories that a bomb may have been smuggled on board, no claim of 
responsibility has so far been made by Islamic State or other terrorist groups.
 