
Egypt has enlisted an oil ministry search–submarine in the hunt for the flight 
recorders ofEgyptAir flight MS804 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egyptair-flight-ms804>, which plunged into 
the Mediterranean killing 66 people.

The so-called black boxes could hold clues to why the Airbus A320 crashed; 
minutes earlier,smoke was detected in multiple places on board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/21/egyptair-flight-ms804-smoke-detected-in-minutes-before-crash>
.

 As Egyptian military and international sea-search teams continued to scour an 
area north of Alexandria on the Egyptian coast, they hope to find the flight 
recorders that could hold the clues to why the aeroplane crashed.

The task is particularly complex given that the flight recorders could have 
sunk more than 2,000 metres. The recorders emit a constant signal pointing to 
their location, but this only continues for four to five weeks in the water 
before their power runs out.


Egypt’s president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, making his first public comments since 
the plane crashed on Thursday while flying from Paris to Cairo, said it would 
take time to determine the cause. “All the theories are possible,” he said in a 
televised address. “There is no particular theory we can affirm right now.”

He said the Egyptian submarine could operate at a depth of 3,000 metres. 

A French patrol vessel carrying specialist equipment for sea searches and 
retrieval has left the French port of Toulon to assist in the search.

Smoke was detected on board the EgyptAir flight MS804 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egyptair-flight-ms804> minutes before it 
crashed, French investigators have confirmed. Signs of smoke were picked up in 
a lavatory and in the aircraft’s electronics, according to data from the 
Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System (Acars), which 
routinely transmits data to airlines about the condition of their planes.

Q&A: key questions about EgyptAir flight MS804
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/qa-key-questions-about-egyptair-ms-804>
Experts have said that until the flight recorders are found, it is too early 
to speculate on the smoke on board or whether it indicated a bomb. It is 
unclear whether the plane’s sudden drop in altitude was controlled or not, or 
whether there had been technical malfunctions and what might have caused them.

Greece’s lead air accident investigator, Athanasios Binis, said that in 
addition to the submarine, ships equipped with scanners were scouring the 
seabed. While searchers were now focused on a 900-sq-mile area, approximately 
180 miles north of Alexandria, they would “enlarge it, if necessary, as the 
operation progressed”. He said a little more wreckage had been found since 
Egyptian military released pictures on Friday of the first debris, including 
lifejackets, parts of the plane’s chairs and other wreckage. But he told the 
Guardian that progress had been “limited”.

He said the cockpit flight recorder and flight data recorder had underwater 
locator beacons that could effectively emit signals in water at a depth of 
6,000 metres and for often longer than 30 days.
map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/05/debris-confirmed/giv-12515yhRDxbG9LwgM/>
“In that sense we are lucky,” Binis said. “We are only in day four of the 
search but in operations like this you need luck. The waters there are deep but 
we know from experience signals will be emitted in deep waters. In 1978, the 
recorders of South Africa airlines flight 295 were found at a depth of 4,900 
metres off the island of Mauritius.”

Strong winds over the Mediterranean could hamper investigations but wreckage 
was not expected to be dispersed beyond the area where the search was now 
focused.

The passengers included 30 Egyptians, 15 French citizens, two Iraqis, two 
Canadians, the BritonRichard Osman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/sole-briton-on-flight-ms804-had-just-become-father-for-second-time>
, and citizens from Algeria, Belgium, Chad, Portugal, Saudi Arabia and Sudan. 
They included a boy and two babies. Seven crew members and three security 
personnel were also on board.

Despite theories that a bomb might have been smuggled on board, no claim of 
responsibility has so far been made by Islamic State or other terrorist groups.

 