
 The EgyptAir flight that crashed last week showed no technical problems 
before taking off from Paris according to an aircraft technical log signed by 
its pilot before takeoff, Egypt’s state-owned newspaper al-Ahram has said.


 Al-Ahram published on Tuesday a scan of the log on its website. The paper 
said EgyptAir flight MS804 transmitted 11 electronic messages starting at 21.09 
GMT on 18 May, about three and a half hoursbefore disappearing from radar 
screens with 66 passengers and crew on board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/19/no-theory-ruled-out-as-hollande-confirms-crash-of-egyptair-flight-ms804>
.

 The first two messages indicated the engines were functional. The third 
message came at 00.26 GMT on 19 May and showed a rise in the temperature of the 
co-pilot’s window. The plane kept transmitting messages for the next three 
minutes before vanishing, al-Ahram said.

 Earlier on Tuesday, the head of Egypt’s forensics authority dismissed as 
premature a suggestion that the small size of the body parts retrieved since 
the Airbus 320 jet crashedindicated there had been an explosion on board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/24/egyptair-crash-official-says-human-remains-suggest-blast-on-plane>
.

 Investigators struggling to work out what happened are looking for clues in 
the human remains and debris recovered from the Mediterranean Sea.

 The plane and its black box recorders, which could explain what brought down 
the flight Paris-to-Cairo flight as it entered Egyptian air space,have not been 
located 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/22/egyptair-crash-search-teams-hunt-flight-ms804-black-box-recorder>
.

 An Egyptian forensics official said 23 bags of body parts had been collected, 
the largest no bigger than the palm of a hand. Speaking on condition of 
anonymity, the official said their size pointed to an explosion, although no 
trace of explosives had been detected.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Missing%20EgyptAir%20flight%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Missing%20EgyptAir%20flight%3A%20what%20we%20know%20so%20far%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F19%2Fegyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer&media=>
Missing EgyptAir flight: what we know so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/19/egyptair-flight-ms804-paris-cairo-missing-video-explainer>
 But Hisham Abdelhamid, head of Egypt’s forensics authority, said this 
assessment was “mere assumption” and that it was too early to draw conclusions.

 At least two other sources with direct knowledge of the investigation said it 
would be premature to say what caused the plane to plunge into the sea.

 “All we know is it disappeared suddenly without making a distress call,” one 
of them said, adding that only by analysing the black boxes or a large amount 
of debris could authorities begin to form a clearer picture.

The investigators do have a few scraps of data in the form of fault messages 
sent by the plane in the last minutes of flight, logging smoke alarms in the 
forward lavatory and an electronics bay just underneath, but they are 
tantalisingly incomplete.


 “The difficulty is to connect these bits of information,” said John Cox, 
executive of Washington-based Safety Operating Systems, who co-authored a 
report on smoke and fire risks by Britain’s Royal Aeronautical Society.

 There are too few messages to fit a typical fire, which would normally 
trigger a cascade of error reports as multiple systems fail, he said, and too 
many of them to tie in neatly with a single significant explosion.

 Investigators will need to understand why, for example, there was no message 
indicating the autopilot had cut off, progressively handing control back to the 
pilots as systems failed and computers became unsure what to do.

The Frenchman, who headed a three-year inquiry into the 2009 loss of an Air 
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> flight in the Atlantic, said 
the published data appeared insufficient for any conclusion.

Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> has deployed a robot submarine 
and France has sent a search ship to help hunt for the black boxes, but it is 
not clear whether either of them can detect signals emitted by the flight 
recorders, lying in waters possibly 10,000ft (3,000 metres) deep. The signal 
emitters have a battery life of 30 days.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fegyptair-crash-plane-showed-no-signs-of-technical-fault-preflight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b5795f25df00ffcf249058774e6bf7665c8b4d%2F0_0_4252_2552%2F4252.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EgyptAir%20crash%3A%20flight%20MS804%20showed%20'no%20signs%20of%20technical%20fault'%20preflight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fegyptair-crash-plane-showed-no-signs-of-technical-fault-preflight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EgyptAir%20crash%3A%20flight%20MS804%20showed%20%27no%20signs%20of%20technical%20fault%27%20preflight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F25%2Fegyptair-crash-plane-showed-no-signs-of-technical-fault-preflight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62b5795f25df00ffcf249058774e6bf7665c8b4d%2F0_0_4252_2552%2F4252.jpg>
 French soldier aboard an aircraft during searches for debris. Photograph: 
Alexandre Groyer/AFP/Getty Images 
 Although government officials have acknowledged the need for international 
assistance, the US Navy said Egypt had not formally requested US support beyond 
a P-3 Orion surveillance aircraft, which was deployed on Thursday.

Eighteen loads of debris have been recovered in a search operation assisted by 
French and Greek aircraft, the Egyptian investigation committee said.


 The plane had just crossed from Greek into Egyptian airspace when it vanished 
off radar screens but, five days after the crash, air traffic controllers from 
thetwo countries were still giving different accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/egyptair-flight-ms804-did-not-swerve-before-crash-cairo-says>
 of its final moments.

In Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, two officials stood by 
earlier statements that Greek radar had picked up sharp swings in its 
trajectory – 90 degrees left, then 360 degrees right – as it plunged from a 
cruising altitude to 15,000ft before vanishing.

 But Ehab Mohieldin Azmi, head of Egypt’s air navigation services, said 
Egyptian officials had seen no sign of the plane making sharp turns and that it 
had been visible at 37,000 feet until it disappeared. “Of course, we tried to 
call it more than once and it did not respond,” he said.

 Relatives of the victims were giving DNA samples at a hotel near Cairo 
airport on Tuesday to help identify the body parts.

 Amjad Haqi, an Iraqi man whose mother Najla was flying back from medical 
treatment in France, said the families were being kept in the dark and had not 
been formally told that any body parts had been recovered.

 “All they are concerned about is to find the black box and the debris of the 
plane,” he said. “That’s their problem, not mine. And then they come and talk 
to us about insurance and compensation. I don’t care about compensation, all I 
care about is to find my mother and bury her.”
 