
The Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi, has said for the first time that 
the Russian plane thatcrashed in Sinai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/russian-plane-crash-investigators-seek-cause-of-a321-crash>
 last year was downed by terrorists seeking to damage Egypt’s tourism industry 
and relations with Moscow.

“Has terrorism ended? No it has not, but it will if we unite. Whoever downed 
the Russian plane, what did he mean? He meant to hit tourism, and to hit 
relations withRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>,” Sisi said on 
Wednesday in a televised speech. The comments were the first official Egyptian 
indication that the plane was deliberately downed.

Moscow stopped all civilian flights to Egypt, a popular destination for 
Russian tourists, after the planecrashed in Sinai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/russian-plane-crashes-in-sinai-egyptian-pm-says>
 on 31 October, killing all 224 people on board.

The official Egyptian confirmation that a bomb brought down the Airbus A321 
could potentially exposeEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> to 
compensation payments for the families of the victims.

Russia said a bomb brought down the flight. Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/05/isis-word-sinai-plane-crash-catastrophic>
 said it smuggled the explosive aboard concealed in a soft drink can. But an 
Egyptian-ledinvestigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/02/sinai-plane-crash-no-direct-evidence-of-terrorism-says-us-intelligence-chief>
 said it had yet to find evidence of foul play.

The Isis online magazine carried a photo of a Schweppes soft drink it said was 
used to make an improvised bomb that blew the airliner out of the sky.

An EgyptAir mechanic whose cousin joined Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> in Syria is suspected of planting a 
bomb on the plane, sources familiar with the matter told Reuters in January.

A senior security official at the airline denied that any of its employees had 
been arrested or were under suspicion, and an Interior Ministry official also 
said there had been no arrests.

The crash has called into question Egypt’s campaign to eradicate Islamist 
militancy and damaged its tourism industry, a cornerstone of the economy.

Islamist militants have stepped up attacks on Egyptian soldiers and police 
sinceSisi, as army chief, toppled freely elected Islamist President Mohamed 
Mursi in 2013 after mass protests against his rule. Hundreds have been killed.
 