
On 28 January a young Egyptian man was urging the novelist Alaa al-Aswany 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alaa_Al_Aswany> to write a book about the 
revolution that was gathering momentum in Cairo's Tahrir Square. Just minutes 
after their brief conversation the protester was shot dead by a government 
sniper from a nearby roof.

Aswany never learned his interlocutor's name, but that and other killings, 
along with the sheer bravery of revolutionaries motivated by"an untameable 
anger and a profound sense of injustice" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jan/27/police-power-egypt-battle-protesters?INTCMP=SRCH>
, are seared into the memory of Egypt's most celebrated living writer as he 
articulates his feelings about the overthrow of Hosni Mubarak and what it means.

"The revolution was a great human achievement," Aswany says in a booming voice 
that amplifies his evident emotion. "It means people are willing to die for 
freedom and justice. When you participate in a real revolution you become a 
much better person. You are ready to defend human values."

Now though, like other Egyptian democrats, he fears a counter-revolution led 
by old regime loyalists fomenting violence and sectarian attacks, precisely in 
line with the finger-wagging warning by Mubarak of the "chaos" that would 
follow if he were forced from the presidency.

Uncertainties abound, Aswany admits, smoking furiously between appointments in 
his dental surgery in Cairo's Garden City district, its leafy streets a haven 
from one of the noisiest urban spaces on the planet, and whose fading charms 
and human vibrancy he captured in his best-selling novelThe Yacoubian Building 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Yacoubian_Building>.

"The revolution succeeded in Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> 
but there is someone else taking the decisions," he muses. "The army is seen 
very positively ... but we have to keep up pressure [on it] to take the 
decisions of the revolution. It needs a lot of effort ... and then, at some 
point, they respond."

The novelist counts Naguib Mahfouz, Gabriel García Márquez and Ernest 
Hemingway among his literary heroes. The BBC's Jeremy Paxman may be another 
inspiration. In March Aswany's combative questioning – a sharp shift from 
Egyptian cultural norms – triggered the resignation of the prime minister 
appointed by the army after Mubarak's departure.

Live on a TV chatshow he politely but insistently asked Ahmed Shafiq 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ahmed_Shafik>, a former air force general, just 
how a loyal servant of the deposed dictator could be a minister in 
post-revolutionary Egypt. Shafiq finally snapped, ranting that Aswany had no 
right to speak to him like that. The next day he was gone, replaced byEssam 
Sharaf <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Essam_Sharaf>, whose first act was to 
visit Tahrir to acquire some popular legitimacy.

Aswany's most recent TV debate was with a Muslim Brotherhood 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_the_Muslim_Brotherhood_in_Egypt> 
leader, many of whose followers strongly disapprove of the liberal sexual mores 
portrayed in The Yacoubian Building and his last novel,Chicago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/oct/04/fiction.alaaalaswany>. "In a 
real democracy you must not exclude anyone," he argues. "They have the right to 
express themselves and form a political party. The influence of the Muslim 
Brotherhood was exaggerated by the old regime to send a message to the west: 
either you accept the dictator Mubarak or prepare to see fanatics in power."

Egypt's changes have echoed widely across the Middle East, he believes, and 
none more than the arrest of Mubarak and his sons. "Egypt has been giving the 
political lead to the Arab world for 100 years. We had the first parliament, 
the first constitution, the first revolution, the first democratically elected 
government in 1924, so things begin here. This could explain why the Gulf 
regimes are so absolutely against the revolution and defended Mubarak.

"It's not surprising they really feel threatened. When you put your president, 
your ex-dictator, in jail and investigate him like any Egyptian citizen you 
change the concept of political power in the whole area. These people still 
believe the ruler is the father, the symbol, the chief of the tribe, so it is 
absolutely unacceptable for them to criticise the father. Now the president is 
just a public servant."

In a recent book of essays, On the State of Egypt: A Novelist's Provocative 
Reflections 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/State-Egypt-Novelists-Provocative-Reflections/dp/977416461X>
, Aswany gave a brilliant though perhaps unintentionally hilarious illustration 
of the lack of freedom and accountability in Egypt when he recalled the then 
prime minister Gordon Brown's encounter with a disgruntled voter who he was 
overheard complaining was a bigot before being forced to make a humiliating 
apology.

"If Gordon Brown ruled Britain by fraud and emergency law, he would not have 
apologised to Gillian Duffy," he wrote. "In fact, he would probably have had 
her arrested and sent to the nearest state security office, where she would 
have been beaten, strung up by her legs, and electrocuted in sensitive parts of 
her body. Maybe Duffy would be tried in a state security emergency court on 
charges of causing trouble, insulting a symbol of state, and endangering social 
peace in Britain."

Democracy, Aswany insists, is the only solution – a deliberate riposte to the 
Muslim Brotherhood slogan "Islam is the solution" – and everything else will 
flow from that. "In medicine we have disease, symptoms and complications. Our 
disease is dictatorship and you have very severe symptoms and complications: 
there is injustice, people become frustrated, or fanatics." Corruption is 
another complication. The alternative to democracy? "Chaos." The trick now, he 
has said is to "institutionalise the values of the revolution".

Between media interviews and dental patients Aswany is close to finishing a 
new novel, The Automobile Club, and it would be surprising if the revolution 
did not put in an appearance beyond a promised dedication to the Tahrir 
activists.

He remains optimistic about the uprisings elsewhere in the Arab world even if 
in Syria, Libya and Yemen their struggles will be longer and bloodier. "When 
you overcome the barrier of fear it is irreversible," he says. But other 
countries must learn lessons too. "To justify the invasion of Iraq the 
Americans said it was the only way to liberate the country from a terrible 
dictator," Aswany recalls. "We proved in our revolution that you could really 
oblige a dictator to step down peacefully."
 