
In a rare display of rebellion against the Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah 
al-Sisi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi>, a Cairo court 
voted to annul his decision to transfer sovereignty of two islands to Saudi 
Arabia.

Judge Yehia el-Dakroury declared that Egypt’s maritime border would not be 
redrawn, meaning that the islands of Tiran and Sanafir would remain under 
Egyptian sovereignty.

Sisi previously awarded the two islands to Saudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia> in a highly controversial deal 
during a visit to Egypt by King Salman, which also coincided with the signing 
of oil deals and development packages from the Gulf kingdom.

The deal was designed to coincide with a bridge joining Saudi Arabia to the 
Egyptian resort town of Sharm el-Sheikh.


Tuesday’s decision was met with cheers inside the courtroom and celebration on 
the steps of the courthouse, even as Egypt’s government declared its intention 
to appeal against the decision within hours of the verdict.


Egypt's president under fire over Red Sea islands transfer to Saudi Arabia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/egypt-saudi-arabia-tiran-sanafir-red-sea-islands-transfer>
“Today’s verdict will be implemented, and the appeal will not stop its 
implementation,” said lawyer Ali Ayoub, who brought the lawsuit against the 
Egyptian government, along with rights lawyer Khaled Ali.

“The verdict nullifies the prime minister’s signature on the agreement – which 
means that Tiran and Sanafir are under Egyptian sovereignty.”


“This verdict proves the widely acknowledged principle of legitimacy,” he 
added, referring to the independence of Egypt’s judiciary. “[This] entails 
general respect for the rule of law and the constitution.”


The decision to declare Tiran and Sanafir as Saudi Arabian quickly proved to 
be a raw nerve for Sisi’s leadership and popularity rating. In a speech in the 
days after the deal, the embattled president pleaded with the Egyptian public 
to stop discussing the issue.

“Egyptians are currently suffering from a state of collective suicide, due to 
fourth generation warfare which targets the loss of Egyptians’ confidence in 
their state institutions,” he said.

The Gulf of Aqaba 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/06/egypt/giv-12515RNLpZ2RzGSvM/>
He added that the deal had taken place entirely in secret, lest “the rise of 
disputes fabricated through the media create a divide between the two 
countries”.


Cairo has controlled the two islands since a transfer of power by Saudi Arabia 
in 1950, amid fears of confrontation with neighbouring Israel. Egypt’s blockade 
of the Strait of Tiran in 1967 is considered one of the main triggers of the 
six-day war.


News of the deal in April sparked the largest street protests in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> since a law effectively banning 
protest came into place in November 2013. More than 250 people were detained in 
protests against the deal on 25 April, with more than 150 of these later given 
prison sentences of between two and five years. While overtly organised to 
protest the islands transfer, the protests also served as a broad base for 
anti-government feeling.









 