
Londoners know that the capital city is one of the world’s greatest cultural 
destinations and that there are endless interesting new places and arts events 
to discover. So how does the arts and culture community show its best face to 
visitors and make sure they’re not just seeing Buckingham Palace and Big Ben? 
This was one of many things discussed at theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Cultural Tourism Workshop at City Hall 
on 30 June.

1. In London, 90% of visitors head for the top 20 attractions

Around four out of five tourists come to London because of the city’s 
incredible culture and heritage, so it seems a shame the vast majority of them 
will spend their time here visiting the top 20 biggest attractions, such as the 
British Museum and the London Eye. These places are of course great, but the 
city can offer so much more than that. Munira Mirza, deputy mayor for culture, 
summed this problem up when she said: “We need to break out of the old 
stereotype of beefeaters and the Tower of London.”

2. Technology is changing everything about the way cultural tourism works


Apps such as YPlan <https://yplanapp.com/>, Instagram <https://instagram.com/> 
and even dating appTinder <https://www.gotinder.com/> are transforming the ways 
in which people go out and experience cities. Not so long ago in London, if you 
wanted to go out you had to buy a copy of Time Out, flick through and hopefully 
settle on something cultural. Fast forward 10 years and this is all but extinct 
and Time Out now has a wildly successfulapp 
<http://www.timeout.com/london/time-out-london-mobile-apps>.


3. Tourists don’t want to be tourists anymore; they want to become locals


Which brings us on to the biggest tourism app of them all, Airbnb 
<https://www.airbnb.co.uk/>. The company’s phenomenal growth shows just how 
much holidays – and visitors themselves – are changing. This is in no small 
part thanks to social media and greater communication between people from 
different countries.


Airbnb hosts not only give visitors somewhere to sleep, but also tips on where 
to eat, what to do and the best places to visit that are more off the beaten 
track. Tourists want to feel more like locals in a city than holidaymakers.


4. Ask for a map of London in a hotel and it will stop at Shoreditch


James McClure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jun/17/airbnb-james-mcclure-arts-london-edinburgh-fringe>
, Airbnb’s UK and Ireland general manager, explained why so much of London’s 
best bits are being left off the agenda: “Next time you’re walking past a big, 
nice hotel, go to reception and ask for a map of London. When I did this, the 
map stopped at Brick Lane. That’s not a map.”


For those of us who live in and love Peckham, Hackney, Walthamstow or one of 
the city’s exciting areas even further afield, this will feel like a pretty low 
blow. Which brings us on to the next point …

5. Hackney Wick has the highest concentration of artists per square mile than 
anywhere else in the world


This astonishing stat was cited by Anna Maloney, director of Hackney WickED 
<http://www.hackneywicked.co.uk/>, an organisation that provides a platform for 
artists in the local area to showcase their work. This concentration of artists 
could get even bigger with the development of theOlympicopolis 
<http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/the-park/attractions/olympicopolis> in 
the nearby Olympic Park. The Stratford Waterfront is set to be turned into a 
cultural area with the V&A, Sadler’s Wells and more due to set up shop there.

6. It’s vital for cultural institutions to engage with the local community


But it’s not just the east that needs to engage; even established institutions 
could do more to get involved with the people living around them.

Those with the UK’s highest cultural engagement live in Kensington and Chelsea 
… those with the least live in Newham
Bernard Donoghue 
Lorna Lee, head of culture and heritage at the Borough of Waltham Forest, led 
the transformation of theWilliam Morris Gallery <http://www.wmgallery.org.uk/> 
from a niche museum to a widely known institution. She explained that it took 
some work to engage with the people of Walthamstow, but in the end something as 
simple as making sure leaflets were delivered to nearby houses, rather than 
being kept at the museum’s reception desk, made a huge amount of difference.

7. But some institutions are losing their local communities

Rising property prices and the selling-off of social housing to private 
landlords is leaving a lot of properties – and, as a result, entire London 
neighbourhoods – empty.

A delegate from the Wallace Collection <http://www.wallacecollection.org/>, 
Simone Stewart, said: “The local community have moved out. The houses have been 
bought by non-residential rich people who don’t contribute much to the local 
community.”

8. The people with the UK’s highest level of cultural engagement live in 
Kensington and Chelsea – those with the least live just 12 miles east, in Newham

Bernard Donoghue, director of the Association of Leading Visitor Attractions 
<http://www.alva.org.uk/>, brought up this eye-opening statistic to make the 
point that institutions shouldn’t just work on attracting tourists – they also 
need to reach out to culturally disengaged people who live here.

“I went to an event in central London, and there were people from the 
Bangladeshi community in Tower Hamlets and Newham who had never been to 
Trafalgar Square before,” he said. “We should be reaching out to those people 
too.”

The London Cultural Tourism Workshop took place on 30 June, for which the 
Culture Professionals Network was media partner

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 