
Elisabeth Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/elisabeth-murdoch> is 
expected to quit the television production company she founded 13 years ago 
after it merges with two others.

Murdoch established Shine in 2001 and oversaw its expansion with hits such as 
MasterChef, and by buying other production companies including Princess 
Productions and Kudos, maker of Spooks andBroadchurch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/broadchurch>.

Shine Group was sold to 21st Century Fox, her father’s media conglomerate, in 
2011 for £415m, giving Murdoch a personal profit of about £130m from the deal.

It was later revealed that Shine had debts of $135m – significantly higher 
than had been thought previously – and 21st Century Fox faced legal action from 
shareholders who did not believe the deal should have been made.

21st Century Fox is in the process of merging Shine with Big Brother maker 
Endemol and Core Media, which producesAmerican Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>. Both companies are 
both controlled by Apollo Global Management, the private equity fund.

The Financial Times reported that Murdoch was expected to stand down as 
chairman of Shine when the merger was completed. Murdoch declined to comment.

The three-way deal is also expected to result in the departure of Alex Mahon, 
chief executive of Shine, and Just Spee, who runs Endemol, after a transition 
period.

It was announced on Monday that Sophie Turner Laing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sophie-turner-laing>, who was BSkyB’s 
managing director of content until she left in May after 11 years, will become 
chief executive of the merged Endemol and Shine global television production 
business.

Although Murdoch had stepped back to a more hands-off role at Shine, she was 
still the highest placed UK-based woman in the most recent MediaGuardian 100.

A well-received MacTaggart lecture at the 2012 Edinburgh TV Festival was 
followed by a lengthy New Yorker profile in December that year, headlined 
Heiress: the rise of Elisabeth Murdoch. It was widely perceived as a further 
move to establish Elisabeth as a significant Murdoch dynasty figure independent 
from her father and siblings in the wake of the phone-hacking scandal.

Murdoch later revealed that her one regret about the speech was not being more 
positive about her brother James, who had run News International but was 
tarnished by the hacking affair and retreated to a New York-based role. Her 
father reportedly did not speak to her for almost two months afterwards.

Selling Shine put Murdoch and her husband Matthew Freud, founder of the 
eponymous PR agency, into the Sunday Times Rich List for the first time last 
year with a combined wealth reported to be £255m, making the couple 12th among 
media types and 315th overall.

Freud and Rupert Murdoch <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rupert-murdoch> 
have a famously poor relationship and he was reported to have banned his 
father-in-law from his 50th birthday party last year.


• This story was amended on 1 October 2014. An earlier version referred 
throughout to 21st Century Fox as News Corp.


• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly “for publication”.

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 