
This article is part of the Guardian’s Euro 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/euro-2016> Experts’ Network, a 
cooperation between some of the best media organisations from the countries who 
have qualified for France. theguardian.com is running previews from three 
countries each day in the run-up to the tournament kicking off on 10 June.

This is a tale of a father, a son and a promise; a tale of how one Albanian 
immigrant’s will helped a talented youngster become the player who carries the 
enthusiasm of a nation into the European Championship.

Euro 2016: the complete guide to every squad and every player in France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
It takes a lot to become a top player in football nowadays. It requires 
talent, will, sacrifice, hard work and a bit of luck as well. But sometimes it 
also takes the unwavering faith of a loving father who made the most of a 
half-hearted promise, ensuring his son’s footballing talent would not go 
unnoticed. This is the story of Elseid Hysaj, the Napoli andAlbania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania> right-back.

An outstanding 2015-2016 season with the Serie A club made the 22 year-old one 
of the most exciting prospects in European football, reportedly attracting 
interest from Bayern Munich, Atlético Madrid, Chelsea, and even Barcelona. None 
of this would have been possible if Hysaj’s father Gzim, an Albanian immigrant 
in Italy, had not put blind trust in the capabilities of Elseid, known as Elsi, 
since he first kicked a football.

Like many Albanians during the 90s, Gzim risked his life by travelling on 
rubber dinghies and speedboats to work in Italy as an illegal worker, doing all 
kinds of odd jobs, in order to ensure his family’s wellbeing. He made that 
dangerous trip across the Adriatic Sea several times so that he could send 
money back to Albania, where little Elsi was raised by his mother. Enlisted in 
one of the small amateur clubs in his hometown, Shkoder, Hysaj started to show 
his footballing talent at an early age. His father noticed the spark and a 
twist of fate helped him ensure that his son’s life would change for the best.

One of the odd jobs the hardworking Albanian immigrant performed regularly 
during his years in Italy was that of a construction worker. In the summer of 
2004, Gzim started work on restoring the house of one Marco Piccioli, an 
Italian Fifa-registered agent, who had managed several well-known players. “My 
son is a football player. Can you find him a team?” Gzim asked the agent, who, 
realising Elseid was only 10 years old at the time, replied jokingly: “He’s 
young, bring him here after four or five years”.

The reply did not dishearten Gzim, who managed to keep in contact with 
Piccioli. Meanwhile, little Hysaj continued playing for one of the amateur 
teams in Shkoder – although he was overlooked by the academy scouts of major 
local side Vllaznia. The right-footed youngster established himself as a good 
defender in the amateur grassroots leagues, showing an ability to play anywhere 
across the defence with ease – a characteristic he has preserved to this day.

When Elseid was 14 years old, Gzim decided it was time to remind the agent of 
the half-joking statement he had made several years previously. He met with 
Piccioli and asked him if he could arrange trials for his son at Italian 
academies. The agent gave a positive reply and, since he already had contact 
with Fiorentina, he arranged a trial for the young Albanian. Hysaj travelled to 
Italy and impressed in his time for the Italian club, who tried to sign him. 
But the paperwork proved difficult, due to bureaucratic procedures regarding 
the children of immigrants and non-EU residents in Italy. So while Fiorentina 
pondered whether it was worth signing the youngster, Empoli showed the will to 
enlist him after putting him through his paces.

Hysaj started playing in Empoli’s academy in 2009, and showed straight away 
that he was a step ahead of team-mates in the same age group. He was playing 
regularly for the youth team at 16 and was subsequently called to represent 
Albania at the Uefa Under-17 Championship in 2010. In November 2011 he made his 
debut for Empoli’s senior team, playing the full 90 minutes in a Coppa Italia 
match against the club that had decided to pass up on him, Fiorentina. A year 
later, he had become a regular for Empoli under manager Maurizio Sarri and 
received his first senior call-up for Albania, becoming the third-youngest 
player to wear the red and black colours when he faced Georgia at the age of 
18. Brilliant seasons with Empoli and Albania ensued, making Hysaj a household 
name both in Italy and his homeland; his form earned him a contract at Napoli 
in the summer of 2015, guaranteeing him a place in Euro 2016 as the pride of a 
nation and one of Europe’s most sought-after talents.

While most football players spend their money on fancy clothes and cars, one 
of the first things Hysaj did was ensure that his father’s sacrifice did not go 
unnoticed. At the beginning of 2014, in Florence’s Via della Casella, Bar Elsi 
opened for clients and Gzim Hysaj now is the general manager of his first 
business. The bar has become a hotspot for Albanians living in Italy, but also 
for football lovers who time and again happen to meet with one of the stars of 
Serie A. “I am making sure his hardworking days are over. He has done and 
sacrificed more than enough for me and now it’s time I start giving something 
back”, the then 20 years-old Hysaj told me a couple of years ago. So it is true 
what they say – the apple does not fall far from the tree.

The secrets behind other squad members
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Felseid-hysaj-albania-euro-2016-father-promise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d9330d0cb8bbc2559516ba9b73b79f790f1dc6e%2F0_378_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Elseid%20Hysaj%3A%20how%20a%20father%E2%80%99s%20promise%20steered%20his%20son%20into%20the%20Albania%20team&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Felseid-hysaj-albania-euro-2016-father-promise%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Elseid%20Hysaj%3A%20how%20a%20father%E2%80%99s%20promise%20steered%20his%20son%20into%20the%20Albania%20team&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Felseid-hysaj-albania-euro-2016-father-promise%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d9330d0cb8bbc2559516ba9b73b79f790f1dc6e%2F0_378_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The Albania national team coach, Gianni De Biasi, is a popular figure in the 
country but is not married to an Albanian, despite articles suggesting 
otherwise. Photograph: Hektor Pustina/AP 
Gianni De Biasi

The Italian is married to an Albanian – or at least this is what shows up in 
many results if you Google Italian football websites. The hilarious (and 
untrue) result is all due to a mistranslation of the manager’s interview, in 
January 2015, for the website of the Albanian fans’ groupTifozat Kuq e Zi. In 
it, he stated that he would like to have Albanian citizenship. “I would be very 
proud. After all, I am married to an Albanian … the red and black national 
team, it’s been three and something years by now”, were his words. Somehow, the 
conversation ended up mistranslated and when De Biasi received his Albanian 
citizenship in March 2015, well-known Italian media outlets reported that he 
fulfilled the criteria because of his marriage to an Albanian woman. This 
prompted De Biasi to make a public statement explaining the misinterpretation 
of his words – and the fact that he was very much in love with his Italian 
wife, Paola. Meanwhile, Albanian fans saw the funny side of this story and gave 
him an Albanian alter ego. His new name is Gani Abazi, and it has featured in 
popular chants during national team games.

Mërgim Mavraj 

Mergim Mavraj 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=M%C3%ABrgim%20Mavraj&team=Albania&isSimple=true>
Mërgim Mavraj has a very curious love-hate relation with the Albanian FA. He 
was a hot prospect for the national team since his teenage years and played for 
Darmstadt in Germany’s lower tiers. The Germany-born defender was quickly 
provided with the Albanian passport in 2006 in order to wear the red and black 
kit, but he was so upset that he did not receive a call-up by the then national 
team coach Otto Baric that he refused an invitation to represent the Under-21s. 
A heated exchange of words between the player, his agent and the Albanian FA 
followed. Mavraj, who had been called up to the German Under-23 squad for two 
friendly matches, threatened to give up his Albanian citizenship – while the 
president of the Albanian FA declared that he would request the President of 
Albania to strip him of the right to hold the country’s passport. Somehow the 
argument ended – but Mavraj was forgotten for many years, considered a lost 
cause by the Albanian FA, who called him up twice more in the subsequent years 
but received a no for an answer. Only when Gianni De Biasi was appointed head 
coach and went to visit him himself, did the defender decide to play for 
Albania and take his Albanian passport off the shelf. He later admitted that he 
had only been keeping it as a souvenir.

Lorik Cana

Not many Albanian sportsmen can boast the influence that Lorik Cana has in 
Albania. The golden boy of Albanian football has had VIP status following him 
since his early days in the national team and he has made the most of it by 
continuously testing what awaits him after he hangs up his boots. Cana has 
shown himself to be an incredible leader for the teams he has represented, on 
and off the field, and many would suggest that a career in management would be 
the appropriate continuation. But Cana looks set to become a businessman. After 
trying his hand at a French wine shop in Tirana, he has now moved into energy 
drinks. His label in Albania is Black Eagle and, naturally, all the commercials 
revolve around Cana and Albania national team’s success in the past couple of 
years. If football or business do not work out for Cana, there is always 
politics. Political leaders in Albania and Kosovo love the influence he has had 
during the last decade and would be ready to offer him an important place in 
Albanian politics. Up until now, Cana has hesitated to join one side or the 
other, while keeping good relations with all. But he is interested in politics 
and people who know him well believe that sooner or later, he will be involved 
in decision-making for Albania. José Anigo, the ex-sporting director at 
Marseille, noticed Cana’s interest in politics since his early 20s. “He was 
interested in everything regarding Albania and Albanians. I am sure that sooner 
or later, he will be involved with a political party in his homeland”, were his 
words several months ago.

Ansi Agolli

Ansi Agolli can boast to have a strong influence not only for the Albanian 
national team but also in the Azerbaijani Premier League. The much-travelled 
defender has played for Qarabag since 2010 and has become a fans’ idol there 
while winning in three league titles, and two domestic cups. His status as 
well-loved player in Azerbaijan was boosted after Albania’s qualification for 
Euro 2016. Agolli will be part of Azerbaijani football’s history books, through 
being the league’s first player to take part in the competition.

Ermir Lenjani
Emir Lenjani 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/04/euros-player-guide/embed/embed.html?player=Ermir%20Lenjani&team=Albania&isSimple=true>
Players are sometimes caught by surprise when they receive a national team 
call-up, especially when they did not think they were being followed by the 
scouting and coaching staff. That was the case for Ermir Lenjani, a winger who 
was raised in Switzerland and played there for many years before moving to 
France. During his spell at Winterthur, in the Swiss Challenge League, he was 
contacted after a training session by the Albania assistant coach, Paolo 
Tramezzani, who was looking for promising Albanian youngsters all over Europe. 
Lenjani was very happy to meet with FA scouts, as it was his dream to play for 
Albania – but he went into his meeting with Tramezzani fully convinced that he 
was being called up for the Under-21s. He would readily have said yes to that, 
but his shock was greater when it was explained that he was under consideration 
for the senior team. He said yes instantly – stating that, nevertheless, he was 
ready to play for the Under-21s if needed. Tramezzani, trying to keep him calm, 
had to explain that he was ineligible for the Under-21s – as he was already 22 
by that time.


Ermal Kuka writes for Panorama Sport <http://www.panorama.com.al/sport/> in 
Albania.

Click here for a tactical analysis of Albania.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jun/02/albania-euro-2016-team-guide> 
 