
Last month, I found myself in San Diego for a wedding party. For those of you 
familiar with the state of California and its discrete, culturally autonomous 
regions, you’ll know that San Diego and its outlying suburbs trend to the right 
of the political spectrum, contrary to the received wisdom that all 
Californians are atheist, barefoot fornicators. As such, at the aforementioned 
wedding party, I was prepared to experience one or more cultural 
misunderstandings. At a point in the evening, a bit of karaoke broke out and 
someone made the unhealthy decision to performGold Digger by Kanye West 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6vwNcNOTVzY>. Gold Digger contains the dreaded 
N-word, and the white woman who was soon to be my adversary for the night 
dropped the variety of N-word that ends with an “a”. I confronted her, as any 
self-respecting biracial liberal would do, explaining the error. “You can’t say 
that word. It’s way too powerful, has too much awful history behind it, and is 
a racial slur when it comes out of the mouth of someone who is not black,” I 
reminded her.

“If you have a problem with it, call Kanye. This is a pop song. I just said 
‘nigga’, anyway.”

At that point, I took my leave – well aware that there was no getting through 
to this person – but the incident did make me reflect on just how far black pop 
culture has come from the dayswhen David Bowie had to complain on air that MTV 
refused to play music videos from black artists 
<http://www.mtv.com/news/2726379/david-bowie-calls-mtv-out-black-artists-diversity/>
. Black music is so popular that white people from San Diego feel totally 
comfortable saying the N-word in front of a black person. If I was stoned or 
brain-damaged, I could pretend like that’s some kind of moral victory for the 
civil rights movement, but it’s not. At the very least, it’s a sign of how 
deeply we’ve penetrated the psyche of the nation.

And now, with the continued massive success of Fox’s Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/10/best-of-tv-2015-no-8-empire>
, that domination has spread to television. The show’s success has bred 
imitators and creative cousins – series that hope to cross over from the black 
households of Baldwin Hills and Buckhead to the living rooms of white folks in 
San Diego and elsewhere.

The arms race to claim the next Empire is motivated by profit, as anything is 
in the entertainment industry. There’s no altruistic aim here. These shows are 
not greenlit for the purposes of extending an olive branch to the 
African-American community. The#OscarsSoWhite controversy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/22/charlotte-rampling-finds-herself-outnumbered-in-oscars-diversity-row>
 and related boycott by stars like Will Smith remind us that Hollywood is still 
not fully attuned to the needs of its minority audiences and co-workers. Still, 
the steady rise in black faces (and Hispanic faces and Asian faces) on TV 
provides some hope. This year’s pilot season offers a smattering of programmes 
that aim to push diversity into mainstream television.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftv-show-empire-donald-glover-atlanta-shots-fired-african-american%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8129c8a3d2e25921b828e03a02098a01c169b538%2F0_72_3048_1827%2F3048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Empire's%20state%20of%20mind%3A%20the%20new%20TV%20shows%20highlighting%20African%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftv-show-empire-donald-glover-atlanta-shots-fired-african-american%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Empire%27s%20state%20of%20mind%3A%20the%20new%20TV%20shows%20highlighting%20African%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftv-show-empire-donald-glover-atlanta-shots-fired-african-american%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8129c8a3d2e25921b828e03a02098a01c169b538%2F0_72_3048_1827%2F3048.jpg>
 Sanaa Lathan: star of Shots Fired. Photograph: Picture Perfect/Rex/Shutterstock
Fox, continuing to bask in the glory of Empire, ordered something called Shots 
Fired straight to series 
<http://www.eonline.com/news/723121/fox-orders-shots-fired-a-racically-charged-shooting-event-series-starring-sanaa-lathan>
. It stars Sanaa Lathan as the investigator of a series of racially motivated 
shootings in the south. The network is alsoconsidering another musical drama 
from Empire co-creator Lee Daniels 
<http://variety.com/2015/tv/news/queen-latifah-lee-daniels-fox-music-pilot-girlband-star-1201656013/>
, this time focusing on three women who join forces to start a band in Atlanta.

Atlanta is also the setting for (and title of) an FX drama series starring 
Donald Glove 
<http://variety.com/2015/tv/news/donald-glover-fx-community-atlanta-series-1201618952/>
r. At the Television Critics Association press tour,Glover described the series 
as “Twin Peaks with rappers”, 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/01/donald-glover-on-doing-twin-peaks-with-rappers.html>
 a provocative pull quote if I’ve ever seen one. Glover plays a Princeton 
dropout who moves home to manage his hip-hop wunderkind cousin. Glover also 
referred to rappers as “the most existential people” – not a common way to 
describe those in that profession.

I wouldn’t call Empire particularly existential either. On that show, Lucious, 
Cookie, Jamal, Hakeem, Andre, and the rest of the main cast stay focused on two 
basic principles: the importance of family and the need to get paid. It’s a 
straightforward, bombastic soap opera with broadly sketched characters in 
flashy clothes.Atlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/atlanta> might 
have better commercial prospects in the wake of Empire, but it doesn’t sound 
very much like it in artistic execution.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftv-show-empire-donald-glover-atlanta-shots-fired-african-american%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cd8ce8d302a32eeacf54184ff20a49778b546a3%2F0_31_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Empire's%20state%20of%20mind%3A%20the%20new%20TV%20shows%20highlighting%20African%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftv-show-empire-donald-glover-atlanta-shots-fired-african-american%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Empire%27s%20state%20of%20mind%3A%20the%20new%20TV%20shows%20highlighting%20African%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftv-show-empire-donald-glover-atlanta-shots-fired-african-american%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cd8ce8d302a32eeacf54184ff20a49778b546a3%2F0_31_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 Donald Glover: his Atlanta is ‘the hip-hop Twin Peaks’. Photograph: Richard 
Shotwell/Invision/AP 
Whether white audiences embrace shows like Atlanta or Shots Fired is hard to 
predict. This last fall season, Fox premieredRosewood 
<http://www.fox.com/rosewood>, a law enforcement procedural starring Morris 
Chestnut that is one of the network’s highest-rated shows, but the lead didn’t 
necessarily have to be black for it to work. What separates a “show starring 
black people” from a “black show” is that the latter contains the intrinsic 
cultural DNA of the black experience. Empire’s characters had to be African 
American, because the show’s story is specifically about the inner-city drug 
trade, the hip-hop industry, and acceptance (or lack thereof) for LGBT people 
in the black community. The star of Rosewood could have been Patrick Dempsey 
and it wouldn’t have been a drastically different program. Rosewood’s creator,
Todd Harthan 
<http://deadline.com/2015/02/morris-chestnut-star-todd-harthan-pilot-rosewood-fox-1201377873/>
, is also white, which might explain its colorblind approach to storytelling.

To find TV shows that reflect the African-American experience, you still have 
to venture into the cable hinterlands more often than not.OWN 
<http://www.oprah.com/app/own-tv.html> (Oprah Winfrey Network) and BET 
<http://www.bet.com/> retain a strong grip on black-centric programming. By my 
count,Tyler Perry <http://www.tylerperry.com/> currently has four series airing 
new episodes on OWN, though I should be forgiven if I missed any while drowning 
in his prodigious output.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftv-show-empire-donald-glover-atlanta-shots-fired-african-american%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa61502bfdce520f6452de45bbdb5e02e770c1f75%2F0_306_3710_2227%2F3710.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Empire's%20state%20of%20mind%3A%20the%20new%20TV%20shows%20highlighting%20African%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftv-show-empire-donald-glover-atlanta-shots-fired-african-american%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Empire%27s%20state%20of%20mind%3A%20the%20new%20TV%20shows%20highlighting%20African%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjan%2F22%2Ftv-show-empire-donald-glover-atlanta-shots-fired-african-american%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa61502bfdce520f6452de45bbdb5e02e770c1f75%2F0_306_3710_2227%2F3710.jpg>
 The cast of Rosewood: not necessarily telling an African-American story. 
Photograph: Justin Stephens/Fox 
Those Perry shows are soon to be joined by Greenleaf 
<http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/owns-megachurch-drama-greenleaf-premiere-oprah-winfrey-1201685216/>
, created by former Six Feet Under writer Craig Wright. Greenleaf focuses on a 
Memphis, Tennessee, megachurch and the family that runs it. Of course, that 
family has secrets, as befits its soap opera genre. Wright, like Harthan, is 
white, but its setting would be one that wouldn’t immediately lend itself to a 
white cast. In that sense, Greenleaf sounds the most Empire-y of them all, 
though churchgoing southern folk might be less marketable to mainstream 
audiences than Terrence Howard pistol-whipping some hapless extra.

That begs the question of whether white audiences have an appetite for black 
stories or just an abiding interest in the myth-making and hubris of hip-hop 
rebellion. When I think back to my nemesis from San Diego and her rationale for 
using a racial slur in the midst of a party, I remember that her reason for 
doing it was simply that she should be able to and I shouldn’t get offended – 
that it’s a harmless pop song. But those songs, like the word she employed so 
carelessly, hold more meaning than, say, Surfin’ Safari by the Beach Boys. Gold 
Digger is imbued with the sexual politics of black America.

As popular as Fetty Wap’s Trap Queen 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i_kF4zLNKio> was last year, that doesn’t strip 
it of its origin as an ode to selling crack and trying to earn a living as an 
oppressed minority in this country. Empire is successful partially because it 
revels in those same themes, which are thrilling up until the point when you’re 
actually living that lifestyle. Empire does a fine job of injecting pathos, 
humor and humanity into those genre tropes, though. That’s partially why it 
succeeded where 50 Cent and Starz’s similarly themed music industry dramaPower 
<http://www.starz.com/originals/power> did not. But it remains to be seen if a 
black show can break out without the benefit of a gun and a beat.
 