
Four of Britain's biggest bus companies could lose more than £200m in profits 
under plans to axe public spending on transport. The government is considering 
scrapping a scheme that allows bus operators to reclaim around 80% of what they 
pay in fuel duties.

But City analysts says that if the government abolishes the Bus Service 
Operators Grant (BSOG) in one go, it could wipe out most of the profits of 
stock market-listed bus companies. These include First Group, Go-Ahead, 
Stagecoach andNational Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationalexpressgroup>.

Analysts at JP Morgan Cazenove say it is more likely that the grant will be 
frozen or phased out, as the consequences of sudden abolition would be 
dramatic, but one broker warned: "Abrupt cuts would be very negative for the 
immediate earnings outlook."

The grant is worth £500m to the bus industry as a whole, and £235m to the big 
four, according to JP Morgan. In June, ministers signalled concern at the 
profit margins of the largest public transport groups, but dozens of 
independent operators would also be affected by changes to BSOG, as wouldArriva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/arrivabusiness>, which is being taken 
over by Deutsche Bahn and is not included in JP Morgan's research.

The broker added: "Uncertainty will weigh on the relative share price until 
there is greater clarity. However, we believe this is reflected in current 
valuations, which we view as cheap."

Bus operators could compensate for the loss of the fuel subsidy by reducing 
services and hiking fares by around 7%.

Simon Posner, chief executive of the Confederation of Passenger Transport 
<http://www.cpt-uk.org/>, warned that outside London the bus is the main form 
of public transport, and is relied upon most by low-income households: "If we 
want to cut carbon, give jobless households the means to access work and ensure 
that our cities keep moving, we need to ensure buses get their share of 
government support."

Earlier this month the government was caught up in a row over free bus passes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/jul/18/free-bus-pass-days> for 
the elderly. Sources in Whitehall denied ministers planned to raise the 
qualifying age from 60 to 65.

However, JP Morgan said: "A change to the qualifying age, the use of smart 
card technology or the requirement to purchase the annual bus pass are all 
possible ways of limiting expenditure."
 