
For many years, women with endometriosis were ignored and stigmatised. It was 
labelled “the career women’s disease”, afflicting those who supposedly were too 
selfish to have their babies young. Imagine the anger and distress this stigma 
caused, among women who would have loved to have children … if the condition 
itself didn’t hinder them. The myth was that endometriosis did not affect women 
until they were in their 30s, which was tough if, like me, you had your first 
symptoms with your first period.

Endometriosis: hidden suffering of millions of women revealed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/28/endometriosis-hidden-suffering-millions-women>
My own battle with the disorder seems to have occupied most of my life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2004/jun/07/health.genderissues>. Period 
pains were normal, I was told, and if I seemed to suffer more than most, it 
must be because I had a “low pain threshold”. At 19, I began activelyseeking a 
diagnosis <https://www.endometriosis-uk.org/>. I was 27 when I received it, and 
by that stage, major surgery was the only answer. Abruptly I lost my fertility 
and, in some ways, lost myself. Though I was told I was cured, the condition 
recurred, and drug treatment led to huge weight gain. Thyroid failure followed 
and the devastating chain of consequences pursues me to this day. Anything I 
have achieved has been in the teeth of the disease.

It need not be like this. My story is extreme and points to the need for early 
diagnosis.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> of any age 
need the courage to come forward and ask for help, and health practitioners, 
teachers and parents need to listen. The condition is not easy to diagnose, 
because its effects are so diverse and so individual, and because the intensity 
of pain does not necessarily relate to the severity of the condition. Each case 
needs to be handled individually, and the patient may have to make some 
difficult choices.

It is important at every stage to ask questions, and to seek second opinions 
if necessary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/29/if-your-doctor-isnt-taking-your-endometriosis-seriously-its-time-to-find-a-new-one>
. If your doctor sees you as a statistic, or a file to be processed, walk away; 
you are too precious for that. Your strengths and resources, as well as your 
pains, are yours alone. Curious, compassionate doctors are out there, in 
increasing numbers. You may need to be persistent, but there are many avenues 
to healing, and often a happy outcome.

A father’s tears for the pain of endometriosis | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/29/a-fathers-tears-for-the-pain-of-endometriosis>
Exhortations to eat up your greens and go to the gym can seem insulting to 
women struggling to keep food inside them or get to work on time, and it is 
hard even for sensitive people, if their own health is sound, to imagine the 
daily botches and compromises that people in pain make to keep themselves 
going. But when it is possible, we should treat our body as a healthy body and 
respect it; and on good days, invest in it, build its resources.

 If you exercise, put some thought into finding an activity you like. And when 
looking for help, be open-minded. Alternative practitioners are often good 
listeners and highly empathetic. From my own experience I know that, if you 
have been stressed by rushed consultations and tick-box methods, simply to 
speak and be heard is beneficial.

Hilary Mantel on a little understood disease: endometriosis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2004/jun/07/health.genderissues> 
Herbal medicine harnesses the knowledge of countless generations gone before 
us. Reflexology, autogenic training – a range of therapies can help with with 
pain control, with the side effects of drug treatment, and with self-image.

Women with endometriosis often lose their confidence, and carry a burden of 
sadness that longs for release. Kind people and safe spaces are what we all 
need. There is no one way of experiencing this condition, and no one way of 
coping with it. Whatever brings comfort is valid. Whatever works is to be 
valued.

I would like to believe cases like mine could not occur nowadays. But I fear 
they will, until there is official awareness of the cost of ignoring this 
condition – the cost to sufferers, their families, the wider economic community.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fendometriosis-fertility-hilary-mantel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F711de418590b93d57ade65ef05319e0c6ecca656%2F0_32_1630_2440%2F1630.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Endometriosis%20took%20my%20fertility%2C%20and%20part%20of%20my%20self&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fendometriosis-fertility-hilary-mantel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Endometriosis%20took%20my%20fertility%2C%20and%20part%20of%20my%20self&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F28%2Fendometriosis-fertility-hilary-mantel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F711de418590b93d57ade65ef05319e0c6ecca656%2F0_32_1630_2440%2F1630.jpg>
Endometriosis <https://www.theguardian.com/society/endometriosis> is not easy 
to talk about. It cannot be explained in a phrase. It doesn’t show on the 
outside. It touches on areas of women’s experience we are sometimes ashamed to 
speak of. But we must find a way to voice our needs, if we are to command 
resources for research, if we are to understand and overcome endometriosis, and 
find a way of coping till we are free from it.

• This is an edited extract from the foreword of Coping with Endometriosis by 
Dr Zara Aziz and Jill Eckersley, to be published by Sheldon Press in November 
and available in Australia and New Zealand from Exisle Publishing

• Endometriosis UK <https://www.endometriosis-uk.org/>

 