
11.19am GMT 

Australia win the series 4-1! And reclaim World No1 status in ODIs!

England should have won that, chasing a smallish total. It's a team game, and 
impossible to pin defeat on any one individual, but if I were in England's 
dressing-room right now I'd be looking at Bopara with my meanest scowl. The 
match was lost in overs 39 and 40, when Bopara hit two runs from 11 deliveries, 
10 of them dot balls. At that stage of the game, scoring two runs off your 
first 20 balls faced is simply not up to snuff. He could still have gone on to 
be England's hero: more replays suggest that he was harshly dismissed, his foot 
probably having returned to earth when the bail was finally and permanently 
dislodged from the stumps, having bounced around a bit in their groove. On Sky 
everyone's a bit miffed, but I'm assured that still photos are conclusive.

And with that, I'm checking out. Thanks for your attention on this Sunday 
morning/evening/whatever, and a merry Australia Day to you all!
mike selvey (@selvecricket) 
Photographs show bail out of the groove.
 <https://twitter.com/selvecricket/statuses/427399528853942272> January 26, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/selvecricket/statuses/427399528853942272> 
Updated at 11.25am GMT

11.09am GMT 

49.4 overs: WICKET! Tredwell c Wade b Watson (England 212 all out). Australia 
win by 5 runs!

Tredwell gets a featherlight edge, and ball is caught and the match is over!

Updated at 11.09am GMT

11.08am GMT 

49.3 overs: England 212-9 (Jordan 4, Tredwell 0)

Jordan doesn't connect well, and runs a single. Tredwell his back on strike, 
and England need six runs from three deliveries.

11.07am GMT 

49.2 overs: England 211-9 (Jordan 3, Tredwell 0)

And he is off strike! Not achieved in a very convincing manner – another miss, 
the ball thumping Tredwell's pads and rolling to nowhere in particular. Jordan 
can make himself a hero now. England need seven runs from four deliveries.

11.05am GMT 

49.1 overs: England 210-9 (Jordan 3, Tredwell 0)

Watson bowls, Tredwell faces. He swings, and he misses. He needs to get off 
strike sharpish.

11.04am GMT 

49th over: England 210-9 (Jordan 3, Tredwell 0)

McKay bowls final over with tension crackling around the ground like cartoon 
electricity. England, needing a run a ball, get precisely that off the first 
three, but then comes Bopara's incredible random dismissal. His foot was 
certainly in the air, but where was the appeal? England need eight runs from 
six balls.

11.01am GMT 

WICKET! Bopara st 25 (England 209-9)

A freak! Bopara misses the ball, which hits Wade's gloves and rebounds onto 
the bails. There is no appeal, and Bopara's well inside his crease, but at the 
precise moment the bails are dislodged his foot is in the air. The delay 
initially bemuses the commentators, but it's because the TV umpire is busy on 
the replays. He watches it from this angle, and that angle, and the other 
angle, and he's out!

10.55am GMT 

48th over: England 206-8 (Bopara 24, Jordan 1)

Faulkner continues, and gets an ovation when Bopara can't muster a run from 
the first ball. There's another ovation after his second delivery, and another 
after his third. Bopara finally gets a single off ball four, and Jordan one off 
the last. An excellent over for Australia, too many balls wasted by England, 
who need to go at a run a ball from here on in.

Updated at 10.55am GMT

10.50am GMT 

47th over: England 204-8 (Bopara 23, Jordan 0)

McKay returns, and his first three deliveries go for singles – Broad 
inside-edging one just past his stumps and down to fine leg. Then Broad guides 
one through the covers for four, and the next ball to square leg for two. Then 
he gets out, but England need a manageable-if-they-don't-all-get-out 14 off 
three overs.

Updated at 10.55am GMT

10.49am GMT 

WICKET! Broad b McKay 7 (England 204-8)

Not a bad over, that, for England – until this happens off the last ball, 
Broad having a swing but missing entirely. 

10.44am GMT 

46th over: England 195-7 (Bopara 21, Broad 0)

Faulkner replaces Watson, and the diet of singles resumes. Three of them off 
the over, plus the one Bresnan couldn't complete. England need 23 off 24 balls.
   

10.43am GMT 

WICKET! Bresnan run out (Maxwell) 13 (England 194-7)

Bresnan pokes the ball towards cover and sets off on one, only to find himself 
a full two yards shy when Maxwell's throw clips the stumps.

10.38am GMT 

45th over: England 192-6 (Bopara 19, Bresnan 12)

Coulter-Nile bowls and Bresnan scoops it over midwicket, and over a bit more 
ground as well, for a vital six! Nine runs off the over, and Bresilad got them 
all. In the tennis, meanwhile, Nadal is still getting his massages and they're 
clearly doing some good – he's pickpocketed the third set! England need 26 from 
five overs.

10.35am GMT 

44th over: England 183-6 (Bopara 19, Bresnan 3)

Watson continues, as do the singles, in a limp trickle rather than a gushing 
stream. It's a diet of crumbs here for England, who need to be going at a run 
(and a bit) a ball. Every dot is a poke in the ribs, and there have been many 
of them recently. Three singles and a wide come off the first five (and a 
bonus) balls, before Bopara hammers the seventh past point to the rope. 

10.29am GMT 

43rd over: England 175-6 (Bopara 14, Bresnan 1)

Bopara drops the ball short and goes for the run; Bailey collects the ball and 
goes for the stumps. The ball flies a whisker wide, with Buttler well short. He 
survives that scare, then, but two balls later he's gone. England needed six 
runs off the over; they got two and lost a wicket.

10.27am GMT 

WICKET! Buttler c McKay b Coulter-Nile 5 (England 174-6)

A shorter ball from Coulter-Nile is too tempting for Buttler, who guides it to 
where the square leg boundary rope would have been, had McKay not been standing 
in front of it with a big grin on his face.

10.24am GMT 

42nd over: England 173-5 (Bopara 13, Buttler 5)

Watson's not much use in the field, so might as well be bowling. And indeed he 
is bowling. And England get three singles, and need to average 5.7 off each of 
the remaining eight.

10.20am GMT 

41st over: England 169-5 (Bopara 11, Buttler 3)

Doherty drops one short, and Bopara hits it hard. It's England's first 
boundary for five overs, and with that, a few singles and a brace that's a full 
nine runs from the over.

10.18am GMT 

40th over: England 160-5 (Bopara 4, Buttler 1)

Buttler grabs a single off Faulkner's first ball, which is all well and good 
but Bopara is mired here in an impenetrable funk. Four more dot balls follow – 
he's taken 20 deliveries to score two runs now, a criminal tally. So the final 
delivery of the over is thunked high and hopeful, and lands just short of 
Watson at midwicket. England gratefully run two.

10.13am GMT 

39th over: England 157-5 (Bopara 2, Buttler 0)

Doherty returns, and it's a maiden over. This power play has so far brought 
nine runs and two wickets from four overs. Australia, at the end of the 39th 
over, were on 158-5. There's nothing in this.

10.11am GMT 

38th over: England 157-5 (Bopara 2, Buttler 0)

England might still win this, but it certainly isn't going to be the 
procession it appeared to be a couple of overs ago. Root gave his wicket away 
there in a rash rush, and these are dangerous times now. 

10.09am GMT 

WICKET! Root c Doherty b Faulkner 55 (England 157-5)

Root, feeling that he has to score fast and free because Bopara isn't, tries a 
paddle shot and paddles the ball straight to the man positioned at fine leg for 
just that kind of thing.

10.05am GMT 

37th over: England 156-4 (Root 55, Bopara 1)

Just two singles – England have managed just 23 runs off Coulter-Nile's eight 
overs, precisely as many runs as they've powered off Watson's four. Meanwhile 
at the tennis, Wawrinka has taken the second set against a miserable and 
woefully under-par Rafael Nadal, who's getting massaged on-court at every 
changeover but is putting up no kind of fight. He may retire before he's beaten.

10.01am GMT 

35th over: England 154-4 (Root 54, Bopara 0)

The batting powerplay is taken, Australia take their time to get the field 
just so, and then Faulkner's first delivery is powered away past point for 
four. It was to be Morgan's last significant contribution to England's total, 
and three balls later he's on his way.

9.59am GMT 

WICKET! Morgan c Watson b Faulkner 39 (England 154-4)

That's a big wicket for Australia! Morgan picks out Watson at mid-off and 
England's fourth batsman to go, like the third, departs with 39 runs to his 
name.

9.53am GMT 

35th over: England 148-3 (Root 54, Morgan 34)

Coulter-Nile, whose first six overs went for a pretty impressive 18 runs, 
returns, and picks up right where he left off: over seven goes for another 
three. The players will now enjoy some drinks, with England needing 70 runs off 
the 15 remaining overs, at 4.7 runs per over.

9.49am GMT 

34th over: England 145-3 (Root 54, Morgan 31)

Faulkner bowls, England grab three more runs. It all seems a tiny bit 
processional but there's some pain here for the batting side, as Root edges the 
final delivery into his own ankle and hopes around a bit. 

9.45am GMT 

33rd over: England 142-3 (Root 52, Morgan 30)

Maxwell's over starts with a slightly ambitious single – if Root isn't run out 
it's only because there was no direct hit from Watson, and he dived with some 
gusto. The same batsman might have gone a couple of balls later, trying to slam 
the ball over midwicket but only just clearing the fielder. He gives the same 
shot another go, with considerably more success, a few moments later, and 
secures his half-century with a six! 

9.41am GMT 

32nd over: England 131-3 (Root 42, Morgan 29)

Morgan hits Watson down the ground again! This one was never going all the way 
for six, but nobody chases it as it trundles away for four. That's the first 
ball of the over, and the last is dispatched similarly over midwicket by Root 
for a one-bounce boundary.

9.36am GMT 

31st over: England 122-3 (Root 38, Morgan 24)

Root tries to paddle the ball over his head, misses it entirely, and Wade 
behind the wicket is so befuddled by the whole thing – his head is protected by 
no more than a baseball cap, which might be literally and figuratively on his 
mind – that he's in no position to stop the ball when it flicks Root's arm. A 
leg bye is run.

9.32am GMT 

30th over: England 119-3 (Root 38, Morgan 22)

A six! The first of the day! Morgan, inevitably, is responsible, thumping 
Watson back over his head, the ball landing two feet over the boundary rope. 
Talking of astonishing hitting, over in the tennis something remarkable is 
happening, with Wawrinka a set and a break up and playing like some kind of 
tennis-god.

9.28am GMT 

29th over: England 111-3 (Root 37, Morgan 15)

McKay is back, and England remain becalmed. Back in Australia's innings, overs 
28 and 29 went for eight and nine; in England's innings overs 28 and 29 have 
gone for two apiece. The difference between the sides is cigarette-paper thin 
now. The Aussies were on 112-4 at his point.

9.23am GMT 

28th over: England 109-3 (Root 36, Morgan 14)

Watson continues to rumble in, and he doesn't give any Englishman anything to 
work with. A couple of singles is the best they can do (though Morgan was 
minded to try a kamikaze third, until Root wisely puts his foot down).

9.19am GMT 

27th over: England 107-3 (Root 35, Morgan 13)

Morgan hits a fine four, bullying the ball through extra cover. Add a couple 
of singles, and that's six off the over again.

9.17am GMT 

26th over: England 101-3 (Root 34, Morgan 8)

Morgan hits the ball perhaps a foot over Marsh's desperate, outstretched hands 
at midwicket, and gets three as a result. Add a few singles, and that's six off 
the over.

9.14am GMT 

25th over: England 95-3 (Root 32, Morgan 4)

Morgan seeks to impose his run-a-ball sensibility on proceedings, at which 
Root panics and darn nearly gets himself run out – a direct hit from Bailey 
would have done for him. "Given the news about Warnie's fresh role in helping 
the Australian side, I expect one of the spinners has developed a 'murder 
ball'," writes John Starbuck of Australia's murderous bowlers (cf over 19).

9.09am GMT 

24th over: England 91-3 (Root 31, Morgan 1)

Cook hits Coulter-Nile around the ground. Around the ground, but on each 
occasion straight to a fielder. Really, it's uncanny the way he does it. Four 
successive balls are fielded, and then he gets annoyed and loses focus and gets 
himself out off No5.

Updated at 9.14am GMT

9.08am GMT 

WICKET! Cook c Bailey b Coulter-Nile 39 (England 90-3)

That's another quite-good score for Cook, a 62-ball 39 that will be his 
swansong from the tour and ends with a one-hand-on-the-bat flomp to short 
cover. Yes, flomp.

9.05am GMT 

23rd over: England 90-2 (Cook 39, Root 31)

Three more singles. Those merry, wild, boundary-an-over days of overs 18 and 
19 are distant memories now.

9.01am GMT 

22nd over: England 87-2 (Cook 37, Root 30)

Coulter-Nile returns. The batsmen continue to be occasionally flummoxed by 
unpredictable bounce – Cook tries to hit the ball through square leg for four, 
but it arrives at his bat several inches below where he expected it, and is 
bottom edged straight into the ground. Just a single off the over.

8.58am GMT 

21st over: England 86-2 (Cook 36, Root 30)

Doherty slams the brakes on England's freewheelin' run-jamboree, just two 
singles coming off the over.

8.56am GMT 

20th over: England 84-2 (Cook 35, Root 29)

Root slips the ball through the covers for two, and then does it again a 
couple of balls later, and scampers a single from the last. After 20 overs 
Australia were marooned on 65-2.

8.53am GMT 

19th over: England 79-2 (Cook 35, Root 24)

And it's contagious! Cook sweeps the ball, which with a delicious pok is sent 
rocketing to the boundary. And those singles just keep on coming – three more 
of them, to be precise. "They've been used to their spinners getting away with 
murder, literally at times," says Botham of the Aussies. What dark secrets are 
these?

8.50am GMT 

18th over: England 72-2 (Cook 30, Root 22)

More spin, as Maxwell is handed the ball. And Root goes run crazy, sweeping 
for two, reverse-sweeping for four and after all that still having the energy 
for a couple of singles. Those young 'uns, eh? That there is a nine-run over, 
the joint second-highest single-over run-haul of the day.

8.45am GMT 

17th over: England 63-2 (Cook 29, Root 14)

Doherty continues, as does England's diet of singles. Four of them again. It's 
all enough to work up a thirst for something – excitement, boundaries, hard 
alcohol – and sure enough it's drinks time.

8.41am GMT 

16th over: England 59-2 (Cook 27, Root 12)

Shane Watson does some bowling, and England wangle a single here and a single 
there, four of them in all. This is the kind of match it's good to actually be 
at, in that it gives you plenty of opportunities to pop to the bar.

8.36am GMT 

15th over: England 55-2 (Cook 25, Root 10)

Doherty bowls, and England snack on a couple of singles.

8.34am GMT 

14th over: England 53-2 (Cook 24, Root 9)

Faulkner's first delivery is fair pummelled past midwicket for four by Cook, a 
pretty tasty shot even if it didn't gothat far from the diving fielder. And 
that brings up England's half-century, an achievement which took them precisely 
10 balls fewer than it did Australia.

8.31am GMT 

13th over: England 46-2 (Cook 17, Root 9)

Doherty brings in some spin, and a couple of singles result. Doherty's 18 
overs in this series have brought 59 runs at 3.27, making him by some margin 
the most parsimonious bowler on either side. 

8.26am GMT 

12th over: England 44-2 (Cook 16, Root 8)

Another four, Root pounding Faulkner's first delivery over midwicket. Add a 
few singles and a wide and England end up with eight runs from the over – only 
two of the 62 overs bowled so far today have gone for more: Australia's 29th 
(nine) and 47th (12).

8.22am GMT 

11th over: England 36-2 (Cook 15, Root 2)

Cook hits the ball off his hip for four, England's first boundary for 
precisely five overs. This is attritional stuff, not the wild run-feast to 
which we have become accustomed, but that was indeed a tasty morsel.

8.19am GMT 

10th over: England 31-2 (Cook 11, Root 1)

Cook gets a single from Faulkner's third delivery, and Clarke welcomes Root 
onto strike by approaching the stumps and spending a couple of minutes 
reorganising the field. "Fantastic captaincy, angles are so important," 
enthuses Nasser. "Absolute rubbish, look-at-me captaincy," says David Lloyd.

8.15am GMT 

9th over: England 29-2 (Cook 10, Root 0)

Two dot balls and a wicket bring Joe Root out. Shaky, flaky, Joe Root. And he 
doesn't hang about, edging his second delivery and counting himself very lucky 
indeed that it bounced a foot short of Wade. So that's a wicket maiden. 
Australia were 27-2 after nine overs, which is looking pretty competitive.

Updated at 8.16am GMT

8.12am GMT 

WICKET! Stokes c Marsh b McKay 0 (England 29-2)

Stokes swings his bat, and toe-ends the ball straight to Marsh at midwicket. 
As he came out he was being talked up as a potential man of the series, which 
looks significantly less likely now.

8.09am GMT 

8th over: England 29-1 (Cook 10, Stokes 0)

Faulkner does some bowling, and Cook slides the first delivery off the face of 
his bat to third man for a couple. On Sky, Nasser Hussain purrs with delight. 
"That's going to be an important shot," he avers, warning: "You've got to watch 
out for dragons." He may have meant drag-ons, of course. He may have actually
said drag-ons, but I'll hear what I want to hear, thankyou very much, and I 
want to hear about dragons.

8.05am GMT 

7th over: England 25-1 (Cook 7, Stokes 0)

Cook leans back, hooks the ball and … it lands a yard in front of Marsh at 
midwicket. Still, it's a run and they all count etc and so forth. McKay's over 
also features another wide, his fourth such donation to England's total.

8.01am GMT 

6th over: England 23-1 (Cook 6, Stokes 0)

The wicket comes off the last ball of the over, and a matter of seconds after, 
with a tasty square drive for four, Bell hinted that he might be on his way to 
something good. And in a way he was, so long as you define "a good drink and a 
long sit-down" as something good.

7.59am GMT 

WICKET! Bell c Finch b Coulter-Nile 14 (England 23-1)

Bell tries to thunder the ball over mid off, and instead farts it straight to 
him.

7.56am GMT 

5th over: England 18-0 (Cook 5, Bell 10)

McKay continues, as does England's slightly slow start. Bell though improvises 
nicely to run the ball off the face of his bat to third man for a couple. 
They're still doing better than Australia were at this point, mind – they were 
on 14-1 (but would score eight off over six).

7.52am GMT 

4th over: England 15-0 (Cook 4, Bell 8)

Cook gets a single, allowing Bell to survive another leading edge, this one 
looping 10 yards or so and again falling safely. Finally, though, Bell times 
one right, slapping a straight ball over midwicket for four.

7.48am GMT 

3rd over: England 10-0 (Cook 3, Bell 4)

Once again McKay's first delivery is a wide. At that stage he had been 
responsible for 60% of England's five runs. Then Cook grabs a single, and Bell 
tries to thump the ball through mid-off and gets a leading edge which sends it 
instead into the air and, after a heart-in-mouth moment, safely away to the 
cover boundary 

7.43am GMT 

2nd over: England 4-0 (Cook 2, Bell 0)

Nathan Coulter-Nile's first delivery heads vaguely towards Bell and then, upon 
contact with the ground, decides against that kind of trajectory and turns 
left. I say "turns" because the word "bounces" would definitely not be 
appropriate – the thing barely rose a foot off the turf on its way through. 
Horrified, Bell makes absolutely no attempt to score runs off any of the five 
remaining deliveries.

7.39am GMT 

1st over: England 4-0 (Cook 2, Bell 0)

McKay has the opening-over honours, and his opening ball is arrowed towards 
first slip and a wide is signalled. A couple of deliveries later he aims one 
wide of leg stump, and that's a wide as well. In between Cook edges one along 
the ground and scampers a couple.

7.35am GMT 

Action!

Alastair Cook is in the middle and sporting an extremely serious expression. 
Let's play cricket. Well, not you and me, but, you know,them.

7.26am GMT 

Good morning/evening/afternoon world!

Such has been the way of things on this tour that if Australia post a weak 
total, one feels there has to be a reason for it other than England's 
excellence. Someone set off the fire alarm in their hotel; a miscreant broke 
into their dressing-room and shaved an inch off the bottom of their bats; James 
Faulkner isn't wearing his lucky underpants; something astrological is 
happening involving Mars and Saturn; it's just that kind of pitch. We'll soon 
find out whether the English just bowled excellently, or if more powerful 
cosmic forces were at work.
In other Australia news, it's Australia Day today! This means, I'm reliably 
informed by someone on the scene, that "there are lots of drunk dudes walking 
around draped in Australia flags". Also the Tour Down Under, the big 
cycling-type stage-race affair, rolled through Adelaide this morning/last 
night/whenever, which combined with the cricket makes this really quite an 
exciting day in Adelaide – perhaps this alone was the reason why it was named 
theninth best city to visit in 2014 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2013-10-29/adelaide-ranked-in-world27s-top-10-cities-to-visit/5051300>
 by Lonely Planet not long ago. Some people even call it Fabelaide. They really 
do.

Anyway, there'll be more action shortly, and I shall describe it to you, as 
best I can. Promise.

 It's Australia Day, and a boy in prime position for the parade in Melbourne 
looks pretty damn excited about it. Photograph: Darrian Traynor/Getty Images 
Updated at 7.34am GMT

7.08am GMT 

In summary...

Before Simon Burnton takes you through the England reply, it's worth sifting 
through the wreckage of that Australian innings briefly. Maybe wreckage is a 
little strong, but it was a frustrating effort from the home side. No batsman 
truly got a way from a truly disciplined England attack and George Bailey (56) 
and Shaun Marsh (36) were the only Aussies to look even vaguely comfortable.

For the tourists Stuart Broad was impeccable with 3-31 from his 10 overs, Ben 
Stokes consistently threatening with 3-43 and Chris Jordan turned in a mature, 
miserly display with 2-37 from his full allotment. It's hard to tell whether 
this is anything approaching an impressive score but it's at least something to 
defend. 

Thanks for your company in this ODI series and stand by for Simon's take on 
that Aussie effort. 

7.01am GMT 

50th over: Australia 217-9 (McKay 1, Doherty 1)

Doherty bravely throws the bat at the hat-trick ball and it produces a single, 
giving McKay the strike for the final delivery of the innings. He can only 
manage a single himself, lifting Australia to 217. 

6.58am GMT 

Wicket! Coulter-Nile lbw Jordan 15 (Australia 215-9)

Jordan strikes again! This time he traps Coulter-Nile in front and will now 
bowl for a hat-trick to Xavier Doherty. You'll never get a better chance than 
that, really. 

6.57am GMT 

WICKET! Faulkner c Morgan b Jordan 27 (Aus 215-8)

Jordan gets Faulkner with a rank full toss, which the Aussies slogs high and 
long to deep mid-wicket but not beyond the hovering Morgan. It was a let-off 
for the bowler but the two preceeding balls built pressure. He mixed a low full 
toss with a bouncer for the sum total of one single. 1-1 from 3 balls is a 
perfect result for England so far.


6.53am GMT 

49th over: Australia 214-7 (Faulkner 27, Coulter-Nile 14)

Bresnan returns to bowl the 49th and immediately has one hammered back at him 
by Coulter-Nile. It was a catching chance only in the most heartless, technical 
sense. He strikes them well, NCN, and also runs energetically for a tailender. 

Bresnan finishes well in only conceding 7 there, but this final over could be 
frenetic. 

6.48am GMT 

48th over: Australia 207-7 (Faulkner 23, Coulter-Nile 11)

Australia bring up the 200 with Faulkner's jammed single to deep mid-wicket 
and Jordan has his hands full with this pair. Coulter-Nile gets one in the slot 
but his slog towards cow is a fresh-air swing, trickling away for a leg bye. 
Stokes restricts Faulkner's deep mid-wicket biff to two and a single off the 
final ball hands the bowler a points victory with 8 coming from the over. 

6.42am GMT 

47th over: Australia 199-7 (Faulkner 17, Coulter-Nile 10)

Bresnan returns and despite his experience, the Aussie pair might fancy 
launching their attack now. Coulter-Nile's first single was a six in his head 
but the intent was there and it's followed by an ugly but effective slog 
through mid-wicket by Faulkner. After a single Coulter-Nile gets what he's 
after, walloping Bresnan over cover with a lofted boundary. Morgan saves 
another from the next delivery bu tat 12 runs, that is Australia's run-scoring 
over of the innings. 

6.38am GMT 

46th over: Australia 187-7 (Faulkner 11, Coulter-Nile 4)

Stokes returns now to bowl his final over and as Fualkner glances square for a 
single I've got to say, all of us who predicted a par score around 300 now look 
like mugs. Or perhaps Australia just look like mugs. They've certainly made 
this look difficult. Again this over features singles but not much else. 

6.34am GMT 

45th over: Australia 183-7 (Faulkner 9, Coulter-Nile 3)

Coulter-Nile chips Broad high towards the mid-wicket boundary and it drops 
just short of a rapidly moving Stokes. Unencumbered by bowling fatigue he might 
have even made the ground there but he's doing his bit otherwise with 3-40 from 
his 9 overs so far. 

Faulkner retains the strike with a single off the final delivery.




6.31am GMT 

44th over: Australia 179-7 (Faulkner 7, Coulter-Nile 1)

Stokes keeps chugging along, conceding a single to Faulkner and then firing a 
wide past Coulter-Nile, who gets off the mark by running a single down to 3rd 
man. Faulkner is unusually watchful to Stokes' last ball, almost as though he's 
been told not to eff this up like the rest of his teammates. He should just 
have a bit of a dash, really.

6.28am GMT 

43rd over: Australia 176-7 (Faulkner 6, Coulter-Nile 0)

Disclaimer:  before that wicket I was about to say that I didn't mind Cook 
bringing on Broad before the final four overs (when most captains would bring 
him on) as long as it brought a wicket. If it didn't I was going to viciously 
slate both bowler and and captain as though it was a doomed strategy all along.


6.26am GMT 

WICKET! Wade b Broad 31 (Australia 176-7)

Broad is brought back and the attacking move from Cook reaps immediate rewards 
with Wade again walking across his crease and this time being bowled. I told 
you that was a flawed move. How brilliant am I? 


Updated at 6.26am GMT

6.21am GMT 

42nd over: Australia 171-6 (Wade 31, Faulkner 1)

220 is now a more realistic goal for the Aussies but that is going to require 
some lusty blows from Faulkner et al. Wade continues to move across his stumps 
to the miserly Jordan and I'm not sure it's the best technique right now, 
because it seems to almost multiply the degree of difficulty in getting it away 
for a boundary. 

Meanwhile, the Aussie women have kept the Ashes alive again thanks to a heroic 
90 from Ellyse Perry.Read all about it here. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/26/ellyse-perry-australia-england-womens-ashes>

6.16am GMT 

41st over: Australia 167-6 (Wade 28, Faulkner 0)

"Thought you could still go for a run even if stumps broken and the ball 
deflects away as long as play has not actually stopped", says Jan Rennie. Yes, 
you can Jan. I was being a little Wade-ist there. I think I've been scarred by 
his rampant over-appealing when he 'keeps.



Wade lays into Ben Stokes first up, unleashing a rasping cut shot to the 
boundary and then mis-hitting a single in the same region. Bailey's dismissal 
is followed by a defensive prod by the new man Faulkner. 

6.15am GMT 

WICKET! Bailey c Broad b Stokes 56 (Aus 167-6)

Right as Bailey looked set to wind up in the last 10 overs he is slapping one 
lazily to Stuart Broad at mid-on off the bowling of Stokes. A terrible shot 
befitting this sub-par Australian effort so far. 

6.11am GMT 

40th over: Australia 160-5 (Bailey 55, Wade 22)

Chris Jordan returns now for his 7th over and the bowler goes up excitedly for 
an LBW shout against Wade. It's of no interest to umpire Fry and replays show 
it pitched down leg. It definitely would have hit the stumps though so was well 
worth the enthusiastic shout it got. Only two come from the over and the rookie 
continues to be pleasingly economical today. 

6.06am GMT 

39th over: Australia 158-5 (Bailey 54, Wade 22)

The Australian pair turn turn three singles . One other thing I should have 
mentioned about my housemate Rob; even when he did come out of his room he 
moved in total silence. Like a Ninja. He'd appear out of nowhere and all of a 
sudden your glass would fly in the air in terror. Maybe he was roaming around 
the house all the time but we just couldn't hear him. 

6.01am GMT 

38th over: Australia 154-5 (Bailey 52, Wade 21)

Wade starts the over by trying to steal a run after Buttler had thrown down 
his stumps. Matthew Wade would cheat at cards against his own grandmother, I 
guarantee it. Australia bring their 150 up here, which is met with the kind of 
cheer normally reserved for the appearance of a corporate sponsor during a 
presentation ceremony. They're heartier in their appreciation of Wade's pulled 
boundary that follows. 

5.58am GMT 

37th over: Australia 148-5 (Bailey 51, Wade 16)

Broad is back into the attack and Wade turns him for a single to start the 
spell. 

Danielle Tolson wants some more Rob stories: "please don't leave us in 
suspense Russell, what ultimately happened to your housemate Rob? (also, if I 
remember correctly, John Birmingham's book had a lot of plot hinging around 
playing Corridor Cricket- the indoor kind, not the Geoff Boycott kind)"



Well, he actually moved out before there were any falafel-based deaths. I 
can't remember why. I think he bought a house. God only knows how given the 
schedule he kept. He was replaced by a girl who had such horrendous foot odour 
that even entering the house made one gag. She was a doozy. Rob was actually 
much nicer to live with, least not for that Danny Boyle story. The smelly one 
had nothing on him. 

Updated at 5.59am GMT

5.53am GMT 

36th over: Australia 143-5 (Bailey 50, Wade 13)

Appropriately enough, Bailey brings up his half-century with a single and it's 
been very hard work to get there. 




Updated at 5.54am GMT

5.50am GMT 

35th over: Australia 139-5 (Bailey 48, Wade 11)

Meanwhile, if you're on foreign soil but wish to feel like you're in 
Australia, you could join in the fun (at least that's what they tell me it is) 
of theTriple J Hottest 100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2014/jan/26/triple-j-hottest-100-live-blog>
. Or you can join my countdown, which only featuresFlyying Colours 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=q9wnpiiMUJs>, World's End Press  
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=61K4PwjqsSQ>and Tame Impala 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LnKUD_OztRE>.


Australia are now entering the powerplay, by the way. They'll need to make it 
count given they're running at a shade under 4 per over right now. 

5.43am GMT 

34th over: Australia 136-5 (Bailey 46, Wade 10)

As Bumble humours Slats and JB with the 8,899,042nd discussion about the 
differences between Yorkshire and Lancashire, Wade and Bailey are milking 
Bresnan until Wade hooks high but safe down to fine leg. Bailey cuts well to 
the point boundary for 3 but it would have been a boundary if not for Broad's 
wholehearted dive. 

And that is drinks.

5.39am GMT 

33rd over: Australia 128-5 (Bailey 42, Wade 6)

Tredwell continues to tie up an end despite looking utterly innocuous to the 
naked eye. It's writ large in Wade's attempts to advance down the wicket and 
get him away for a boundary but three singles is all that he and Bailey can 
manage. 

5.36am GMT 

32nd over: Australia 125-5 (Bailey 41, Wade 4)

Again Bailey is happy to chip it around and hope his partner comes to the 
party with a lusty blow or two and that is probably the smartest strategy from 
here. If he can hang around it will be up to Wade, Faulkner and Coulter-Nile to 
do the biffing. All are more than capable of fulfilling that role. 

Bailey finishes the over with a dose of good fortune, watching his his 
unconvincing chip from a Stokes full-toss sail just wide of deep mid-on for a 
boundary. Bopara was the man who couldn't reel it in.

Updated at 5.39am GMT

5.32am GMT 

31st over: Australia 117-5 (Bailey 34, Wade 3)

Tredwell returns now to replace the comparably expensive Bopara and he's 
immediately conceding two singles. Wade is busy to start his innings, 
gardening, dancing down the pitch and haring through for another single. 

5.28am GMT 

30th over: Australia 113-5 (Bailey 32, Wade 1)

Wade is the new batsman for Australia and he gets off the mark by nudging one 
to short mid-wicket for a single. It's been an excellent over and indeed an 
even better spell from Stokes, who has figures of 2-22 from his 6 overs. 

5.25am GMT 

WICKET! Maxwell c Buttler b Stokes 22 (35) (Australia 112-5)

Having been brilliantly mozzed by yours truly, Maxwell nicks one straight into 
the gloves of Buttler and Australia are plunged further into the mire. 

5.23am GMT 

29th over: Australia 112-4 (Bailey 32, Maxwell 22)

Now it's Maxwell's turn to get in on the boundary-hitting with his one of his 
own, flicked through the leg side.  That's followed by five singles and it 
suffices to say that that makes it the most profitable over of the innings for 
Australia. Hopefully it gets this pair moving. Right now it's hard to see 
Australia mustering anything over 250.

5.21am GMT 

28th over: Australia 103-4 (Bailey 30, Maxwell 15)

Ben Stokes doesn't look like any of my old housemates but he does get belted 
for a wonderful boundary, cut through point to bring up the Australian hundred.

5.17am GMT 

27th over: Australia 95-4 (Bailey 22, Maxwell 14)

I'm not sure if I've mentioned this before, but Ravi Bopara looks alarmingly 
like my old housemate Rob, who used to stay in his room for days on end and 
then suddenly appear like a vampire. A vampire who loved Next Top Model and Air 
Crash Investigations. They were literally the only two programs he watched. 
Sometimes he'd be in his room so long that we thought he was dead. The only 
other remarkable thing about him was that he worked as a projectionist at the 
Australian premiere of Danny Boyle's Sunshine, which descended into farce when 
the film started running backwards. 

The going is much easier for Bopara here and he only concedes a single to 
Maxwell. 

Updated at 5.20am GMT

5.13am GMT 

26th over: Australia 93-4 (Bailey 22, Maxwell 13)

Stokes is again almost metronomic and it's not until his fourth delivery that 
Maxwell can force two to deep cover. Otherwise the game continues to drift away 
from Australia. The fans baking in this Adelaide sun could be forgiven for 
drifting off to sleep.

Updated at 5.19am GMT

5.09am GMT 

25th over: Australia 90-4 (Bailey 22, Maxwell 11)

Ravi Bopara is on now and Bailey must be breathing a quiet sigh of relieve as 
he steers his second delivery down to the third man boundary. Seven come from 
the over but there is also a subtle release in pressure. 


Updated at 5.19am GMT

5.07am GMT 

24th over: Australia 83-4 (Bailey 17, Maxwell 9)

As Stokes chases down a bunt from Bailey and tries to fire a throw back at the 
bowlers end stumps, the Australian pare hare through to steal a single. Even 
with some rare width from Stokes, Bailey can only biff his cover drive for a 
single to the man in the deep and it's a real scrap for he and Maxwell to even 
squeeze out 3 an over right now. England are in total command and dictating 
proceedings. 

Updated at 5.19am GMT

5.02am GMT 

23rd over: Australia 78-4 (Bailey 16, Maxwell 6)

As Australia's run rate still hovers at a dismal 3.37, Chris Jordan is tying 
up his end again, bowling with pace and accuracy. A leg bye and two singles are 
the sum total for the Aussies, who can't be happy with plodding along like 
this, even given the regular fall of wickets. 

Updated at 5.19am GMT

4.58am GMT 

22nd over: Australia 75-4 (Bailey 15, Maxwell 5)

This could be an intriguing innings from Maxwell. He's had his coach publicly 
encourage him to take a more responsible approach to his batting so whether 
that tempers his freewheeling style will be interesting to note. Bailey 
finishes the over with a rare boundary. It's the first in 7 overs in fact and 
trickles away over the rope square of deep mid-wicket. 

Glenn Maxwell isn't the only Big Show in Australia, you know?
David Downer (@ApacheSaint) 
Queensland has a big pineapple, but not sure even they have one of these. 
Echuca unleashes the big..#AustraliaDay 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23AustraliaDay&src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/8IeAElevXn <http://t.co/8IeAElevXn>
 <https://twitter.com/ApacheSaint/statuses/427274903146860544> January 26, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/ApacheSaint/statuses/427274903146860544> 
Updated at 5.19am GMT

4.53am GMT 

21st over: Australia 69-4 (Bailey 10, Maxwell 4)

Chris Jordan is back on now to the new batting pair and being turned for two 
by Maxwell, who benefits from some flat-footed work by Tredwell at fine leg. 

I think I have some idea 
<http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-Yk8UlrWzLVE/UhXO2z8l1MI/AAAAAAAABLM/4EMw9DUS9gc/s320/1991%2BPaul%2BGascoigne%2BGooch%2BSS.jpg>
 of where Jos Buttler has been getting some of his wicket-keeping ideas. 

Updated at 5.18am GMT

4.50am GMT 

20th over: Australia 65-4 (Bailey 9, Maxwell 1)

Don't worry Australia, Glenn Maxwell is here to save the day. He's off the 
mark turning one to deep mid-wicket and he'll have to bat until late in this 
innings for Australia to post something respectable on this day of national 
celebration. It's more like a funeral so far. 

Updated at 5.18am GMT

4.47am GMT 

WICKET! Marsh c Cook b Stokes 36 (Australia 64-4)

Australia lurch towards calamity as Marsh flicks one off his pads from the new 
bowler Stokes and straight into the hands of a diving Cook. 

4.44am GMT 

19th over: Australia 64-3 (Marsh 36, Bailey 9)

Bailey is lapping for two and then playing an ungainly scoop through the 
off-side, but that first one drew some interesting keeping from Buttler. 
Preempting Bailey's stroke, he spread himself down the leg-side like a 
goalkeeper, but couldn't so much as parry it. 

Updated at 5.18am GMT

4.41am GMT 

18th over: Australia 58-3 (Marsh 35, Bailey 4)

Ooh, Umpire Simon Fry has been having a quick look at the ball over the last 
couple of overs. Replays show he's all over whatever England are/aren't doing 
to it. More concerned with their immediate survival, Marsh and then Bailey push 
singles, but the latter is taking some time to get his eye in here. 

4.37am GMT 

17th over: Australia 54-3 (Marsh 33, Bailey 2)

Cook has wisely decided to stack the leg side field to the pull/hook/slap/slog 
happy Bailey, but he improvises a ramp shot through fine leg for a single. It 
really was a lot of effort for one run, to be honest. Australia's run rate has 
sagged to 3.2 now. They'll need to do something about that really.

4.34am GMT 

16th over: Australia 52-3 (Marsh 32, Bailey 1)

Marsh is looking comfortable now and turns Bresnan to deep square leg for a 
single to start Bresnan's over. Having successfully negotiated his way to 32, a 
pass mark for any self-respecting park cricketer, discussion in the Nine box 
turns to how magnificent he looks out there. Bailey fails to latch on to 
Bresnan's final ball of the over but it trickles away off his pad for a leg 
bye. 

4.31am GMT 

15th over: Australia 50-3 (Marsh 31, Bailey 1)

Bailey gets off the mark with a single and replays of Clarke's dismissal 
re-emphasises its ugliness. Marsh moves on immediately, whipping Tredwell 
through mid-on for a boundary and then a single to the man that Cook 
reflexively drops back for the repeat dose. 

4.28am GMT 

14th over: Australia 43-3 (Marsh 25, Bailey 0)

I spoke too soon about the KFC. Nine are now flashing up their classic catches 
competition, from which one "lucky" viewer can win a year's supply of fried 
chicken. The horrible thought of that distracts me from the start of Bresnan's 
over but there is no mistaking the sight of stumps flying. Clarke is gone 
before he even got going and so Marsh and  Bailey must now salvage something 
from this wreckage. 


Updated at 4.29am GMT

4.26am GMT 

WICKET! Clarke b Bresnan 8 (Australia 43-3)

Now Clarke is gone! He tries to flick Bresnan through the on-side but can only 
play onto his stumps and is on his way back to the pavilion. 
Barney Ronay (@barneyronay) 
Set up for Tredwell to rip out the middle order
 <https://twitter.com/barneyronay/statuses/427294948543569920> January 26, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/barneyronay/statuses/427294948543569920> 
4.22am GMT 

13th over: Australia 42-2 (Marsh 24, Clarke 8)

Replacing the svelte, hirsute and athletic Broad at the Cathedral End is 
off-spinner James Tredwell, who is none of those things. I think that's why I 
love him a little bit. At the risk of flooding you with Arrested Development 
references, Tredwell moves a little bit like I imagine Buster would if handed a 
cricket ball. Three singles come from his first over. 

4.18am GMT 

12th over: Australia 39-2 (Marsh 22, Clarke 7)

I am psychic. No sooner do I mention that sight screen than it becomes a 
distraction to Marsh. Once reverted to its ideal state of blackness play 
resumes and the aforementioned batsman scurries through for a single off 
Bresnan. Clarke moves to 6 from 19 deliveries with a two to deep square leg and 
it's as though he's just gently limbering up in these early stages. 

Maybe Watto is a genius after all. 
Dan Liebke (@LiebCricket) 
Although it's fun to mock Twatto, is it possible that his new team role is to 
lure incorrect reviews out of the opposition?#AUSvENG 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23AUSvENG&src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/LiebCricket/statuses/427292471349891072> January 26, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/LiebCricket/statuses/427292471349891072> 
4.13am GMT 

11th over: Australia 34-2 (Marsh 20, Clarke 4)

Broad is still operating with two slips in his sixth over, which is testament 
to how well he has bowled in dry heat and on a fairly lifeless pitch. Here 
Marsh rolls his wrists over a pretty nudge through mid-wicket and picks up two 
and then a single. As he does so a giant smartphone materialises on the sight 
screen facing the bowler. It's an improvement on the piece of fried chicken 
that plagued the Test series but not much better. 

4.09am GMT 

10th over: Australia 30-2 (Marsh 17, Clarke 3)

Bresnan now appears to replace Jordan and after a single to Clarke, Marsh 
takes off for a tight run to Jordan at mid-on and but for the rookies' decision 
to throw overarm instead of flicking it from ground level, the Aussie would 
have been in trouble. More of a lost opportunity than a missed one.

4.06am GMT 

9th over: Australia 27-2 (Marsh 16, Clarke 1)

Again the Australian pair struggle to force a single until Broad's fifth ball, 
which Marsh nudges to the off-side. His skipper does the same from the next 
ball to get off the mark and retain the strike. Australia will be wary of 
lagging behind a respectable run rate here but balancing that against the need 
to consolidate. 

4.01am GMT 

8th over: Australia 25-2 (Marsh 15, Clarke 0)

Marsh starts the over with two from Jordan and then a single just wide of the 
diving point. Jordan now looks like he's forcing his way through deep, slushy 
sand as he approaches the crease for his delivery stride but is mostly bang on 
target at decent pace. Clarke can't get him away so only 3 come from the over.

3.56am GMT 

7th over: Australia 22-2 (Marsh 12, Clarke 0)

Broad follows the Watson wicket (and I need to add some information on that - 
it was a terribly wide ball for a reprieved batsman to be swiping at so 
lustily) by attacking Clarke's stumps, but the Australian captain is up to the 
task and defending confidently. Broad has 2-8 from his opening 3 overs in a 
terrific little spell.

3.53am GMT 

WICKET! Watson c Buttler b Broad 0 (Australia 22-2)

Watson looks to dominate after his reprieve and it goes awry in a big way as 
he lunges forward with an ambitious cover drive and sends a thick edge flying 
behind to Buttler. That wasn't the smartest shot of the summer but Broad really 
is bowling a treat right now. Advantage England.

3.52am GMT 

NOT OUT!

Watson is very lucky there, benefitting from the fickle fate of Hawk-eye. It 
wasn't hitting enough of the leg stump but that was close.

3.50am GMT 

REVIEW!

Broad thinks he has Watson LBW here and to the naked eye, I think he might be 
right. They've referred it.

3.49am GMT 

6th over: Australia 22-1 (Marsh 12, Watson 0)

Jordan is tidy again to start the over and tying Marsh up well until the 
Western Australian punches a boundary through cover. In fairness to the bowler 
it was more the result of another blue from Bresnan, who did all the hard work 
with his chase and dive before taking a fresh-air shot at scooping the ball 
back into play. It unshackles Marsh, who cuts a short one square of point for 
another four next up. 

If you happen to be at the ground today, you could go and have your photo 
taken with the world cup trophy. Or Michael Klinger. Or Callum Ferguson. What 
are you waiting for?
Cricket World Cup (@cricketworldcup) 
If you're at @TheAdelaideOval <https://twitter.com/TheAdelaideOval> today for 
@CricketAus <https://twitter.com/CricketAus> v @ECB_cricket 
<https://twitter.com/ECB_cricket> get a photo with the #cwc15 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23cwc15&src=hash> trophy in the sth gate 
pic.twitter.com/fwTbW5ZuzX <http://t.co/fwTbW5ZuzX>
 <https://twitter.com/cricketworldcup/statuses/427232606371848192> January 26, 
2014 <https://twitter.com/cricketworldcup/statuses/427232606371848192> 
3.45am GMT 

5th over: Australia 14-1 (Marsh 4, Watson 0)

As Broad continues from the Cathedral End (the cathedral that we cannot see 
anymore, mind you), cameras pan around to the entirely empty side of this 
ground, which is in the closing stages of a huge makeover. It's an eerie sight, 
actually. Less eerie is the sight of Shane Watson stepping aggressively onto 
the front foot in defence of his first delivery faced. Marsh's single is the 
only run of the over. 


3.43am GMT 

WICKET! Finch b Broad 7 (Australia 14-1)

Finch's luck runs out and he has his stumps splattered by the now buoyant 
Broad. He was not convincingly forward to cover that and it really made a mess 
of the furniture. Bopara and Cook just breathed a sigh of relief.

3.39am GMT 

4th over: Australia 13-0 (Finch 7, Marsh 3)

Almost as ugly as those two English drops is the giant replay screen that the 
brass at Adelaide Oval have decided to plonk down next to the beautiful old 
scoreboard. A starker and more depressing contrast in architectural features 
would be hard to find. 

Meanwhile, Jordan is tying Marsh up and even launching an ambitious LBW appeal 
to one that pitched down leg. I don't have any issue with the start of Jordan's 
run-up, as unconventional and probably unnecessary as the wind-up is,  but 
side-on vision shows he's barely at walking pace as he approaches the crease. I 
wonder how fast he could bowl if they fixed that up...

A wide and some sloppy fielding from Bresnan at mid-off bring the only runs of 
the over. 







3.34am GMT 

3rd over: Australia 11-0 (Finch 7, Marsh 2)

As Marsh nudges a single down to fine leg, I'm reminded about a truly odd 
dream I had last night. 

From the third delivery of the over, Finch emphasises the potential 
repercussions of that Cook drop with a blazing cover drive for four and then 
sends the next delivery straight into the hands of Bopara at cover. As if to 
add a glorious absurdity to proceedings, Bopara puts it down in another 
fielding howler. This is far from ideal for England.

3.29am GMT 

2nd over: Australia 4-0 (Finch 1, Marsh 1)

Right-arm paceman Chris Jordan is on to partner Broad and starts with a big 
wide down the leg-side to Marsh. His next is a little closer to the mark but 
still trickles away for a leg bye. I must say that Jordan's much-discussed 
action is a fascinating thing to behold and maybe Cook is as spellbound as me 
because he drops a very catchable chance at first slip. The skipper moved very 
late and maybe assumed that it was going to second slip. That could be a costly 
drop but replays show that Ian Bell was moving towards it before pulling out. 
It doesn't look pretty from any angle. 

3.24am GMT 

1st over: Australia 0-0 (Finch 0, Marsh 0)

Stuart Broad takes the first over from the Cathedral End and comes in for the 
opening delivery with 2 slips in place. None of Broad's first four balls force 
a shot from the stocky Victorian, who is keen to get his eye in on this 
beautiful batting strip. Finally he misses an ambitious pull shot from a short 
one outside off stump before leaving again to finish a maiden over. 

3.18am GMT 

Women's Ashes update

As the two teams for today line up for the national anthems, England's women 
enter Blundstone Arena to defending 268. Top scorers were Taylor (64) and 
Knight (57)
England Cricket (@ECB_cricket) 
England Women are out in Hobart. Aus chasing 269 to win #WomensAshes 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23WomensAshes&src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/GQrf7mydB3 <http://t.co/GQrf7mydB3>
 <https://twitter.com/ECB_cricket/statuses/427273296036388864> January 26, 2014
 <https://twitter.com/ECB_cricket/statuses/427273296036388864> 
3.10am GMT 

A disturbing development in the press box

Our correspondent has just put an entire nation off-side.
Vithushan (@Vitu_E) 
Sacrilege on Australia's Day as @barneyronay <https://twitter.com/barneyronay> 
eats a pie using a knife and fork...pic.twitter.com/3xGuVGunhf 
<http://t.co/3xGuVGunhf>
 <https://twitter.com/Vitu_E/statuses/427276361296646144> January 26, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/Vitu_E/statuses/427276361296646144> 
3.07am GMT 

Michael Clarke and his beloved 23

I'm sure British viewers aren't getting this interview with Michael Clarke, 
which is fairly unremarkable, but he's wearing a cap with a big number 23 on it 
and I can't help but laugh a little bit. It's not quiteWarnie's 23 pool 
<http://resources1.news.com.au/images/2013/06/18/1226665/251261-chez-warnie.jpg>
 or evenMichael Jordan's 23 gates 
<http://i2.cdn.turner.com/money/galleries/2012/real_estate/1202/gallery.michael-jordan-home-sale/images/michael-jordan-gate.jpg>
, but it's still fairly amusing. 

2.59am GMT 

For what it's worth

It’s not outlandish to say that an elevation to number four and some success 
there could be Eoin Morgan’s ticket back into the Test team, though I’m an 
Australian and therefore so used to players being picked in Test teams based on 
limited overs form that it is inside me. Like a disease. A disease that leads 
to you considering 35 a “pretty reasonable” Test average.

Anyway, I come to you live from OBO towers, groaning and saw as a result of 
hiking around the national parks in the Dandenongs after my girlfriend decreed 
Saturday a “non-sports” day. I boughtthis cricket book by Duncan Hamilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/nov/27/footsteps-east-coker-david-foot-last-english-summer-duncan-hamilton-review>
 on the way home though. Then we watched the tennis. I really showed her, 
didn’t I?

You can get me on russell.jackson.casual@guardian.com 
<mailto:russell.jackson.casual@guardian.com> with your comments about today’s 
game, details of what you did yesterday, book suggestions, love advice, cases 
for Gary Ballance, or anything else that takes your fancy.

2.57am GMT 

The toss and teams

Australia win the toss and Michael Clarke elects to bat.


Australia: Marsh, FInch, Watson, Clarke (c), Bailey, Maxwell, Wade (wk), 
Faulkner, Coulter-Nile, McKay, Doherty.

England: Cook (c), Bell, Stokes, Root, Morgan, Bopara, Buttler, Bresnan, 
Broad, Jordan, Tredwell

Well, I guess it's hard for Ballance to bat at four when he's not in the team, 
but looks like Morgan will still bat at five. Root comes in for Ballance for 
one last ODI innings on this very humbling debut tour of Australia. 

2.42am GMT 

Afternoon all

Well, England have finally won an international encounter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/24/england-beat-australia-alastair-cook-captain>
 on this shambolic tour so we’re all set for a resumption of normal service and 
another dose of abject horror. Now it is Adelaide’s turn to host the tourists 
and they appear to have turned on a magnificent day of weather for this 
Australia Day clash. Most of the locals would prefer it was an Australia Day 
Test, like the old days, but we don’t always get what we want as cricket fans. 
If we did, I'd have England playing in powder blue and Simon Katich would be 
playing for Australia. Not playing actually, just standing at short leg scaring 
the life out of batsmen with his wild-eyed glare.

But I digress. England fans have a reason to be cheerful right now, as Barney 
Ronay points out here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jan/25/jos-buttler-ben-stokes-england-australia>
 in his analysis of England’s “best day of an unrelentingly traumatic 
Australian summer.” He has kind words to say about both Ben Stokes and Jos 
Buttler, who were excellent in England’s breakthrough win in Perth.

Unless you are really stinging for some T20I’s, we are now entering the final 
countdown of this brilliant/ awful (pick one) summer of cricket.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Nvxv2R01po&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Nvxv2R01po>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Nvxv2R01po&media=>
 Share  Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Nvxv2R01po&picture=>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Nvxv2R01po>
 Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5Nvxv2R01po&media=>
close  Gob's Final Countdown 
4.19pm GMT 

Russell will be here soon. In the meantime, here's an excerpt from Barney 
Ronay on England managing the blame game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/jan/24/england-cricket-blame-game-alastair-cook>
:

As a late arrival to England's Ashes tour, it took a while to get into the 
swing of things. The main problem seemed to be an unexpected breaking-in 
period, a fug of jet-lag, sun-shock and general squint-eyed confusion. 
Basically I couldn't really understand what anyone was going on about. In 
particular I couldn't understand what theEngland cricket team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/england-cricket-team> were going on about. 
There were words and phrases, whole sentences spoken. But none of them ever 
seemed to gel into recognisable human statements, leaving instead a feeling of 
being caught up within some closed circle of ritual meaning, like accidentally 
stumbling into a four-hour Syldavian Orthodox church service and feeling 
obliged to sit there mumbling through the incantations and helplessly mouthing 
along with the hymns.

Andy Flower has always seemed pretty straight and to the point but oddly 
enough he was the worst of the lot, every utterance shot through within 
corporate aversion speak, and providing a convincing embodiment of the old 
Catch 22 line about Major Major only ever being available to answer questions 
in his office when he's not in his office to answer questions. There are 
various options, all of which are viable options. It would not be appropriate – 
but why, why? – to comment on any individual. Plus the line of the tour in 
response to a question about whetherAlastair Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alastair-cook> is a good captain or not: 
"There are different levels of good."

At first it was tempting to wonder if maybe this was a part of England's 
problems on the field. Perhaps Flower had been sitting the players down and 
giving them not so much a rousing team talk as an instructional face-time 
speak-exchange facilitation. Except, it isn't just him. Even Cook, who with his 
record should have the confidence to speak and be damned, has had the look of a 
man being held hostage against his will and forced by hidden snipers to sit in 
front of a board covered in adverts and talk about hitting good areas and 
executing skill-sets and this not being the moment to discuss matters currently 
under wide-ranging review.

This is not a swipe at Cook, but at a wider sense of systemic obfuscation. Say 
what you like about England cricket's managerial class, but the fact is, like 
Floyd Mayweather, you just can't lay a glove on them. Point at any one of 
England's failings in Australia – the selection of Boyd Rankin, for example, 
who was never really fit and who has bowled in a style reminiscent of a nice 
big friendly horse, if a nice big friendly horse were ever to make it through 
the various levels and earn, through sheer weight of wickets, the chance to 
play international cricket. Then try and work out who was responsible. You 
can't. It's impossible. Instead – and with the exception of the nicely upfront 
bowling coach David Saker – there seems to be some kind of invisible protective 
membrane at managerial level, an ingrained slipperiness. At the end of which 
England have been thrashed like never before. And it appears to be no one's 
fault. It is hard not to conclude that the real agent of confusion is more 
basic – and that it has something to do with the exculpatory plc structure that 
underpins England's management at all levels. This is the way of most sports 
now where business people have imported familiar management structures. The ECB 
itself has a chairman, chief executive, deputy chairman, managing director, 
board, cricket committee, remuneration committee, executive committee, 
commercial committee, nominations committee and – of course – audit and risk 
management committee. And this system of executive power has naturally bled 
downwards into the product itself.

Updated at 4.20pm GMT
 