
Eddie Jones insists England are preparing to face David Pocock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-pocock> even though the Australia 
breakdown specialist has been ruled out of the second Test in Melbourne.

Pocock suffered a fractured eye socket in Australia’s 39-28 defeat in Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/australia-england-first-test-eddie-jones>
 and will be sidelined for six weeks,robbing the Wallabies of their most 
influential player for the potentially decisive showdown at AAMI Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/wallabies-star-david-pocock-ruled-out-for-the-rest-of-england-test-series>
.

Jones suspects the World Cup finalists may be playing mind games after casting 
doubt on the severity of the injury.

Wallabies star David Pocock ruled out for the rest of England Test series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/wallabies-star-david-pocock-ruled-out-for-the-rest-of-england-test-series>
“Pocock is certainly a good player and we wish him all the best and a speedy 
recovery. I just hope he doesn’t recover in time for Saturday – you never 
know,” Jones said. “I don’t know if he is going to be in or out. We will 
prepare as though he is going to play. Well you never know.”

Jones has been infuriated by the “demeaning, disrespectful and disgusting” 
treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/eddie-jones-australian-pundits-disrespectful-treatment-england-fox-promo-stephen-hoiles>
 inflicted on England in Australia.

He objected to a vulgar question asked by the former Wallaby back-row Steven 
Hoiles in the post-match press conference at Suncorp Stadium and was incensed 
by a sneering promotional trailer for the series screened by the host 
broadcaster.

And now for the second week in a row the Australia great Phil Kearns has 
criticised England, following up his analysis of Jones as a “fanatical” coach 
whose success is only short-term with the claim that prop Dan Cole scrummaged 
illegally in the first Test.

“Phil is part of an organised campaign and he’s playing his role. And he’s 
playing a very good role,” Jones said. “We are lucky we have got a fantastic 
referee for the second Test. Craig Joubert has refereed at least one World Cup 
final and is one of the most respected referees in the world.

“He has refereed 15s and he has refereed sevens. I’m sure he will be able to 
referee the scrums well, but I’m also sure he will appreciate the advice Phil 
has given him. I’m sure he will.”

The former Wallabies coach added: “Every couple of days someone comes up with 
something. I’ve been part of it, I know how it works. So let’s not beat around 
the bush, we know how it works here and everyone is entitled to their opinion.”

Hoiles has since apologised to Jones for his inappropriate question concerning 
the way England’s coach and skills coach Glen Ella, who are old friends and 
former team-mates, celebrated Saturday’s triumph.

Happy to cause his own mischief, Jones highlighted the frailty of the 
Australia line-out and zeroed in on their captain Stephen Moore. “In the last 
couple of Tests their lineout has really been under pressure,” Jones said. “I’m 
sure Stephen Moore, a seasoned international with 100 Tests, will be worried 
about that area of their game.”

“The second Test of a series is always interesting. One team is confident 
after a win, the other is desperate to win. History shows that in the 
professional era the Wallabies have never lost the second Test.

“If you look back at the 2001 Lions series, 2013 Lions series, the Wallabies 
have always bounced back. The extra pressure is going to come from ourselves. 
We want to win this series and we have got an opportunity on Saturday, so we 
will be as desperate as the Australians, even more desperate.

“When you consider the history of the English team in Australia, there is 
reason for desperation and it is good desperation.”
 