
The English have never much liked referendums even though they appear to be 
back in favour. Andrew Strauss, in his first outing as cricket director, 
outlined one of the problems encountered by Peter Moores. “He very quickly got 
to the stage where every game was a referendum on whether the coach should stay 
or go,” he said, explainingthe decision to sack Moores 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/09/andrew-strauss-confirmed-director-england-cricket-ecb>
. The implication was that this burden would somehow disappear along with the 
departure of the England coach.

Strauss, the ultimate pragmatist, had himself disappeared into a rare flight 
of fancy – just as he must have done when he came up with the brainwave of 
invitingKevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> to 
be a one-day cricket adviser even though he was not trustworthy enough to have 
in the team.

Andrew Strauss insists on new England coach accepting stance on Kevin Pietersen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/16/andrew-strauss-england-coach-kevin-pietersen>
There will still be plenty of referendums this summer, starting with the first 
Test against New Zealand at Lord’s on Thursday, but this time it will be 
Strauss under the spotlight. Lose to the Kiwis, fall behind in the Ashes and 
there will be no respite; the unprecedented polarisation that has beset English 
cricket will not magically disappear. Nor will the peculiar pressure on the 
players to justify the decisions of their employers vanish into thin air just 
because Moores has gone.

Timing is everything in cricket and for 15 months or more the ECB has been 
horrendously out of kilter:in the sacking of Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/09/kevin-pietersen-ecb-england-alastair-cook>
 rather than being so conventional as to just drop him; in participating in 
thoseridiculous confidentiality agreements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/06/kevin-pietersen-dropped-explanation-james-whitaker-england>
;in the sacking of Alastair Cook as one-day captain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/dec/20/alastair-cook-gutted-eoin-morgan-england-world-cup>
 (a sound idea in August, a desperate one in December):in the remarks of Colin 
Graves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/02/colin-graves-kevin-pietersen-england-future>
, who has finally taken over as ECB chairman, that intentionally or not revived 
Pietersen’s hopes of a comeback beforeleaving him “devastated” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/12/kevin-pietersen-andrew-strauss-england>
 and suddenly looking like a victim of the abuse of trust rather than a 
perpetrator; in the sacking of Moores,who learned of his fate via the media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/06/peter-moores-england-coach-andrew-strauss>
; and finally – and I suppose least culpably since batsmen don’t score 355 not 
out that often –in the timing of Strauss’s meeting with Pietersen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/11/kevin-pietersen-surrey-england-big-day-andrew-strauss>
 to inform him that it was all over with England unless he fancied coming on 
board in some sort of advisory capacity, which was as likely as Nigel Farage 
agreeing to lend a hand to Nicola Sturgeon.

“Trust” has been the buzzword of the week. And we soon learned that it had 
broken down between Pietersen and the amorphous body that is theECB 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ecb>. Petrol had been poured into a diesel 
engine and there was no breakdown service in sight. Now, trust is a fine thing 
to have in a cricket team or, indeed, in any walk of life but I found myself 
nodding at a Peter Trego tweet – I never thought it would come to this – which 
read: “Has trust ever won a game of cricket? I thought it was runs and 
wickets.” Trust was not that rewarding throughout the World Cup. It is quite 
handy to have the best players in the team if at all possible.

Outside England, they think we are all mad. Even Kumar Sangakkara, the sagest 
of cricketing sages, thinks we are mad. They cannot understand how it comes to 
pass that those in charge have chosen to ostracise one of their best players 
and that they do not, at least, allow him to be available for selection. Just 
about every Test nation, often with more slender resources than England, finds 
a way, however flaky theesprit de corps might become. This has some relevance 
since at the top of Strauss’s agenda is the pursuit of a new coach, and most of 
the likelier candidates are from overseas.

Four of the first five names at the top of the bookies’ lists are Australian 
(the exception is the stand-in coach, Paul Farbrace, who is there alongside 
Jason Gillespie, Justin Langer, Tom Moody and Trevor Bayliss). Yet there is no 
guarantee that overseas coaches will wish to operate in a system where it has 
already been established that Pietersen is unpickable and where the identity of 
the captains in all forms of the game has been decided for the 2015 season. 
Strauss clearly has the power to make all those decisions, which makes Michael 
Vaughan’s observations that there were too many restrictions in the post of 
cricket director hard to understand (unless the return of Pietersen was a 
sticking point).

This is something for Gillespie, the strong favourite for the job, to consider 
seriously. Moody already has. Moody was sounded out by Paul Downton before 
Moores was appointed 15 months ago and he withdrew his interest partly because 
he was uneasy about being told whom he could or could not pick (he also sensed 
that there was a determination to appoint an Englishman back then). The notion 
that prominent overseas coaches will be falling over themselves to take the 
England job may be mistaken, especially if the candidates study how the ECB has 
been operating over the past year or so. This also means that the post may have 
to be a remarkably lucrative one to entice the best candidates.

For the moment Farbrace has his chance to oversee affairs alongside Strauss 
and Cook, and their first challenge is far from straightforward. The Kiwis are 
arguably stronger than they have ever been. But they will have to be remarkably 
adaptable as well since four of their key men – captain Brendon McCullum, Kane 
Williamson, Tim Southee and Trent Boult – are still in India.

At their best Boult and Southee are dangerous opening bowlers, especially if 
the Duke ball is inclined to swing in St John’s Wood on Thursday. This pair 
will test not only Cook but also Test cap No666, Adam Lyth, who will be making 
his debut. He will hope to survive as Cook’s opening partner longer than Nick 
Compton, Michael Carberry, Sam Robson and Jonathan Trott and he will do well to 
achieve that. It does not look an easy summer to be a Test opener. Leaving 
aside the excellence of the Kiwis, the Mitchells (Starc and Johnson) are around 
the corner with Ryan Harris and Peter Siddle lending a hand.

Kevin Pietersen: is this the end for cricket’s great maverick?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/17/kevin-pietersen-cricket-batsman> 
Beyond the advent of Lyth and the never-ending hullabaloo about Pietersen are 
concerns over Stuart Broad’s position in the team. He has undergone a 
metamorphosis, a rare and unhappy one, over the past 18 months. He was once a 
fast bowler who could bat; years ago there were hopes that he would be a 
genuine all-rounder. Now he is a fast bowler full stop. He is competing – not 
very effectively – with Jimmy Anderson for the No11 slot. Broad has 
acknowledged that his trust in his ability to bat has been utterly eroded and 
the recent figures back that up. In the Caribbean there were three ducks and a 
10.

He is a diminished cricketer and this must be hard to live with. It requires a 
special kind of bravery once the batting equivalent of the yips has taken root 
and it must be incredibly tough for him just to walk out there with his pads on 
as well as being a sight that is disheartening for his team-mates to behold. 
Broad knows that he will be constantly peppered by every fast bowler he 
encounters and that he no longer has any sort of response.

In the Caribbean his bowling held up reasonably well, though it is an 
increasing strain for him to bowl quickly. And now he has to be judged purely 
as a bowler. However, the expectation is that he will play at Lord’s, provided 
he has recovered from what we were told was an untimely illness, leading him to 
miss a scheduled press conference in London last week. In another era Broad 
would be the main talking point before England’s Test summer, but other 
diversions remain and unless the team performs very well they will not go away 
in what promises to be another divisive time for English cricket.
 