
The Northampton flanker Teimana Harrison will start for England in Saturday’s 
third Test against Australia in Sydney, replacing the injured James Haskell.

Harrison comes into an otherwise unchanged side as England attempt to complete 
a clean sweep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/18/eddie-jones-england-australia-whitewash-3-0-series>
 in the three-match series.

The New Zealand-born back-row has enjoyed a breakthrough season at Northampton 
and is preferred ahead of Jack Clifford in Sydney.

The head coach Eddie Jones said: “You have to work extremely hard to earn an 
England cap so there was no temptation to make changes for the sake of change. 
To play for England you have to be in the best 23 and that’s what this 
selection represents.

Wallabies call in Matt Toomua and Will Skelton for final Test against England
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/23/wallabies-call-in-matt-toomua-and-will-skelton-for-final-test-against-england>
“Teimana comes into the side at seven for James Haskell whose foot hasn’t 
quite recovered from Saturday. Teimana has trained well throughout the tour and 
deserves his spot. He’s an excellent defender and his robustness will be 
important to us at the start of the game. Jack Clifford is unlucky to miss out, 
but will finish the game for us.”

Harrison made his debut against Wales at Twickenham last month and performed 
well in a team that was missing players from Aviva Premiership finalists 
Saracens and Exeter.

The 23-year-old is a strong carrier and tackler, despite his modest size for a 
modern back-row, and is very strong over the ball, but in Haskell he is 
replacing arguably the player of the series.

Jack Nowell has completed the return-to-play protocols for concussion so 
retains his place on the left wing as part of an unchanged backline.

“We’ve treated this week like a dress rehearsal for the World Cup because that 
what we’re always building towards,” Jones said. “To win a World Cup you have 
to win three big games in a row – we’ve won two so this third game is the most 
important game we’ll play all year. It will be a good indication of where we 
are as a team.

“The players have enjoyed being in Coogee this week and the attitude to 
training has been absolutely first class. They have been inspired by the 
challenge of playing better for the last game. We’re looking forward to playing 
in front of a full house at Allianz Stadium on Saturday and we are confident we 
can finish the job off with a win.”

England team v Australia, 25 June, 11am BST

15 Mike Brown (Harlequins, 51 caps), 14 Anthony Watson (Bath, 23 caps), 13 
Jonathan Joseph (Bath, 24 caps),12 Owen Farrell (Saracens, 42 caps), 11 Jack 
Nowell (Exeter, 16 caps),10 George Ford (Bath, 24 caps), 9 Ben Youngs 
(Leicester, 60 caps);1 Mako Vunipola (Saracens, 34 caps), 2 Dylan Hartley 
(captain, Northampton, 74 caps),3 Dan Cole (Leicester, 64 caps), 4 Maro Itoje 
(Saracens, 6 caps),5 George Kruis (Saracens, 17 caps), 6 Chris Robshaw 
(Harlequins, 50 caps),7 Teimana Harrison (Northampton, 1 cap), 8 Billy Vunipola 
(Saracens, 28 caps)

Replacements: 16 Jamie George (Saracens, 7 caps), 17 Matt Mullan (Wasps 12 
caps),18 Paul Hill (Northampton, 4 caps), 19 Joe Launchbury (Wasps, 34 caps), 20
 Courtney Lawes (Northampton, 48 caps),21 Jack Clifford (Harlequins, 7 caps), 22
 Danny Care (Harlequins, 61 caps),23 Elliot Daly (Wasps, 4 caps)
 