
Sadly there appears to be no truth in the rumour that Roy Hodgson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/roy-hodgson> is unveiling his England 
squad at the headquarters of Vauxhall on Monday because he wishes to draw 
attention to the fact that his own production line is spluttering to a halt.

Greg Dyke has been busy performing that task since being appointed FA chairman 
and his latest wheeze seems even sillier thanhis original notion that England 
should target the 2022 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/04/greg-dyke-england-world-cup-qatar-2022>
. Proposals tointroduce an extra division and encourage leading clubs to set up 
B teams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/08/premier-league-division-b-teams-fan-commission-greg-dyke-league-three-non-eu-players>
to begin in it should be resisted, mainly on the grounds that such a scheme 
merely spreads the Premier League disease to the otherwise reasonably healthy 
lower slopes of the country's football pyramid.

It is debatable whether the plan would work anyway without much greater 
investment in coaching and grassroots development but Dyke says there is no 
time to wait for the Elite Player Performance Plan to come to fruition and 
would rather hurry things along before the England manager runs out of players 
to pick. His solution appears more drastic than the actual problem though, 
despiteDanny Mills's apparent fondness for watching Manchester United B  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/07/danny-mills-b-league-fa-commission-report>
(how could anyone tell the difference?), inviting Premier League clubs to 
inflict even more damage on the overall league structure is unlikely to prove a 
vote-winner.

At least Hodgson can be forgiven for thinking in the short term, as the next 
couple of months are what he has spent the past two years working towards. He 
has probably had his squad in mind for a while and is just waiting on injury 
clearance for Jack Wilshere, Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain, Kyle Walker and possibly 
Phil Jones, although Ashley Cole's impressive return as a Chelsea left-back has 
left him a slightly more difficult decision in that area than it first 
appeared. Back in March, with Cole hardly playing, it seemed reasonable to 
suggest that Leighton Baines and Luke Shaw should make the trip, yet now Cole 
is playing again, and playing well, he has an edge in experience over both. 
That is now a tough call for Hodgson, though none of the three would let him 
down and Baines and Shaw have more time ahead of them.

If Walker passes a fitness test he should go as right-back along with Glen 
Johnson. If he fails, Hodgson could do worse than call up Nathaniel Clyne as 
Johnson's understudy.When Jones hurt his shoulder  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/07/manchester-united-phil-jones-world-cup-injury>
playing for Manchester United against Hull, the usual hubbub started about what 
a loss he would be to Hodgson due to his versatility. He can play right-back or 
midfield, you see, though not terribly well.

This is the World Cup and, while Jones might fill in for his club in various 
of positions, he should be selected for England on his credentials as a 
centre-half alone. That makes him marginally more likely to make the squad than 
his team-mate Chris Smalling or Everton's rapidly rising John Stones. 
Full-back, we keep hearing, is now a specialist position, no longer just for 
dogged defenders and takers of throw-ins but a key attacking role in the game. 
Actually it has been that way for some time. Franz Beckenbauer, in David 
Miller's newly republishedEngland's Last Glory, describes how difficult it was 
for West Germany to cope with Alf Ramsey's formation in 1966. "Playing without 
wingers made space for the full-backs, Cohen and Wilson, to run forward and 
create a lot of problems," he said. "Our team found it hard to do anything 
against this unique way of playing and I think it was this system that won the 
World Cup forEngland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/england>."

Many more systems have been trialled and rejected since but, when you have a 
decent supply of specialist attacking full-backs, they ought to be trusted. It 
sounds almost regressive to ponder Jones performing the role; and finding a 
berth for him in midfield should not be contemplated unless fever or 
food-poisoning has wiped out all of England's more sensible choices. These 
still include Michael Carrick by the way. Just because England can name some 
exhilarating attacking midfielders does not mean they should neglect defensive 
cover and keeping hold of the ball.
 