
Local government <https://www.theguardian.com/society/localgovernment> reform 
in the Balkans has some pertinent lessons for English devolution, as we 
discovered on a Local Government Information Unit (LGiU) tour across Macedonia, 
Kosovo and Albania in partnership with the Kosovo Local Government Institute.

In the UK we think of local government’s role as delivering vital services, 
developing local economies, giving communities a voice and helping them shape 
the places they live in.

In the western Balkans, although local government aspires to all those things 
too, the settlements that emerged after conflicts in the 1990s were primarily 
designed to create political and ethnic stability. That was obviously the right 
choice at the time but it led to a large number of small municipalities.Kosovo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kosovo> has 38 for a population of 1.8 
million, each with relatively weak powers. The governance geography it has 
ended up with, while effective at managing community tensions and representing 
local identities, is much less effective at running public services or 
developing local economies.

Without clarity and local scrutiny we risk the prize of devolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/apr/20/clarity-local-scrutiny-devolution-regions-accountability>
Throughout the region there is now an emphasis on moving from a political 
settlement to a functional one. This process is most advanced in Albania, where 
373 municipalities were rationalised into 61 last year. Similar thinking is 
underway inMacedonia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/macedonia> and the LGiU 
is working with the Kosovo Local Government Institute to develop a policy paper 
on this for Kosovo.

Engaging with this process I was struck by three reflections that could be 
applied to the devolution agenda in England.

Democracy is crucial

It’s clear in the Balkan context that the transition to more functional local 
governance is a non-starter unless you maintain a sense that people are 
represented, their identities respected and their voices heard within the new, 
larger units of governance.

Democracy has been the ghost at the feast of English devolution. An agenda 
focused on growth has neglected to think about who people feel they are and how 
they will be able to influence. This has been a large part of thestumbling 
block in non-metropolitan areas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/16/governments-devolution-model-rural-areas-cities>
.

Systems need to be dynamic

There’s a recognition in the Balkans that what was right a decade ago is no 
longer fit for purpose and needs to evolve. But in the UK we often treat 
devolution as though we were designing a system to last a thousand years, 
rather than one that needs to adapt and grow dynamically.

Mayors matter

The experiences of local government in the Balkans illustrate both the 
benefits and advantages of mayors. You can end up with powers vested in the 
individual rather than the system. In Kosovo, the mayor of Pristina told us, 
“local government is weak, but mayors are strong”. Mayors also provide a strong 
point ofaccountability and visibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/apr/20/clarity-local-scrutiny-devolution-regions-accountability>
. The mayor of Tirana told us that he found large parts of England practically 
invisible because there was no clear point of contact, which leads to an 
overemphasis on London in international engagement between cities.

The British government’s insistence on elected mayors as the price of serious 
devolution has been a point of contention for counties. The places in England 
that are against mayors need to think carefully about the level of profile they 
may lose and how it can be replicated in other ways.

These are all issues that have not been sufficiently considered in the rush to 
structure in English devolution, especially outside the cities. Although we do 
not have the legacy of conflict that makes these questions so urgent in the 
Balkans, they should be no less important for us to consider.

Jonathan Carr-West is chief executive of the Local Government Information Unit 
<http://www.lgiu.org.uk/>

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 