
The head of a usually quiet environmental group in Australia has hit back 
against News Corp and coal lobby attacks after hacked emails revealed it was 
partly funded from overseas.


Two emails forwarded to Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman, John Podesta – 
and published by WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/clinton-campaign-wikileaks-hack-russia-donald-trump>
 – show that one of the funders of the Sunrise Project is a large US-based 
charitable trust, the Sandler Foundation.

The Sunrise Project, headed by the former Greenpeace activist John Hepburn, 
works with other environmental non-governmental organisations, local 
communities and Indigenous groups, supporting and helping to coordinate their 
actions.

We should be putting the brake on the Carmichael coalmine, not hitting the 
accelerator | Graham Readfearn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2016/oct/14/we-should-be-putting-the-brake-on-the-carmichael-coalmine-not-hitting-the-accelerator>
It has campaigned to stop Adani’s huge Carmichael coalmine in Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>.

After revealing the emails, a report in the Australian newspaper said 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/green-lobby-plays-hardball-against-adani-but-economics-still-king/news-story/b5a63009ac17c69fdd72ae896cf044bf>
: “Australia is a key target in a global, no-holds-barred war against coal 
which has set a priority of shutting Adani out of Queensland.”

The paper said in an editorial 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/editorials/green-activists-must-not-usurp-national-sovereignty/news-story/9b699cb973d1903e8da000b95c21c3fd>
: “We should decide what mining projects are opened up in this country and the 
circumstances in which they open.

“Such authority rests with Australia’s democratically elected representatives 
and established government processes. It does not belong with overseas 
governments (including prospective US presidents or their staff), 
self-appointed meddling international activists or local vigilante ‘lawfare’ 
litigants funded by activists.”

The paper also published an opinion piece 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/restrictions-needed-on-overseas-charities-funding-legal-battles/news-story/3296bd3131eb2c59876885fc0eb542b4>
 by Brendan Pearson, the chief executive of the main coal lobby group, the 
Minerals Council of Australia. “This episode should prompt a rethink of the 
oversight of environmental groups that operate as charities and that have 
tax-deductible recipient status,” Pearson said.

Hepburn told Guardian Australia he was surprised the emails were considered 
newsworthy and said the Australian and the Minerals Council of Australia were 
acting hypocritically.

“They’re saying that we need to guard our sovereignty from environmental 
organisations, when the mining in Australia is 80% foreign-owned,” he said. 
“They put tens, if not hundreds, of millions of dollars into a massive public 
relations machine that is sustained and ongoing over time. They have incredible 
influence and revolving doors between the highest levels of politics and their 
lobby groups.

“And international foreign-owned mining companies dropped $20m into a campaign 
to prevent a new tax on their industry and, in doing so, destabilised a prime 
minister. And that is the big issue in terms of national sovereignty.”

Hepburn said it should be no surprise that people around the world were 
interested in Adani’s proposed mine.

He said: “It is no surprise that the ongoing expansion of coalmining in 
Australia is on the radar of Clinton’s most senior adviser. While the world is 
ratifying the Paris climate agreement in record time, Australia is becoming a 
global embarrassment for being the first developed country to go backwards on 
climate policy and fast-tracking the approval of new coalmines.”

In May 2015 Hepburn sent an email to a director of the Sandler Foundation 
outlining attacks the then Abbott government was launching against the 
charitable status of environmental groups.

The email was then forwarded 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/18938> by the founder of the 
Sandler Foundation, Herbert Sandler, to Podesta. Forwarding the message, 
Sandler said: “Astonishing and frightening actions by Australian government.”

He then said: “Full disclosure. We are a funder of the Sunrise project as part 
of our work on climate change.”

The only other published email 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/13538> relating to the Sunrise 
Project was one in which Hepburn was celebrating afederal court decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/06/future-of-carmichael-mine-hinges-not-on-skinks-or-snakes-but-its-business-case>
 that overturned federal environmental approval for the Carmichael mine.

The contents of the emails show the Sunrise Project was keen not to disclose 
who its funders were, or who it supported financially.

Hepburn wrote: “We are seeking advice on steps we might take to avoid 
disclosure, challenge and limit disclosure, or to ensure that any disclosure is 
limited to the committee members and is not made public.

“I have no concerns whatsoever about our compliance with our charitable 
obligations but I do have concerns about the potential PR impact of disclosure 
of both our funding and grantees – should that eventuate.”

Victoria's Hazelwood power station to close, French media reports say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/24/victorias-hazelwood-power-station-to-close-french-media-reports-say>
Hepburn told Guardian Australia the disclosure would make its donors targets 
of the mining industry.

“The mining industry will use any possible excuse to attack the environmental 
movement,” he said. “We’ve seen the same thing play out in Canada and other 
countries too – mining industries will attack the charitable status, they will 
try and identify donors and publicly attack the donors, whether they are local 
or international philanthropists.”

He said donors to any charity expect to be able to do so privately. “If you 
give a donation to the RSPCA or some other charity, you don’t expect them to 
disclose that to the media. That’s the same with us – we’re no different to any 
other charity. We need to protect the privacy of our members and supporters.”
 