
This was the most nail-biting contest of the summer between these teams and it 
ended with an English victory, rapturously cheered by a capacity crowd at a 
boisterous, sun-kissed Headingley. For only the fourth time ever England chased 
down a target of 300 with their captain,Eoin Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/eoin-morgan>, leading the way while 
confirming the value of a damn good rest to employers everywhere in the process.

Morgan hit a sizzling 92 from 92 balls before being brilliantly caught by 
Glenn Maxwell at backward point. It was enough to take England within striking 
distance of their target. In the end they won by three wickets with 10 balls to 
spare.

This means that both teams head across the Pennines in the knowledge that the 
series is squared at 2-2 with one match to be played at Old Trafford on Sunday. 
A delicious finale awaits on a day when it appears that Manchester might be one 
of the drier spots in the country.

Morgan says his young team is full of confidence before the decisive match. 
“The attitude of this group of players is outstanding; I’ve never really had 
that feeling before. Their let’s-take-it-on attitude is brilliant.”

The feelgood factor is enhanced by Morgan’s own form. “As captain there are 
only so many words you can use,” he said. “The best way to lead is from the 
front by scoring runs”– something which he has managed in both ODI series this 
summer.

Even with Morgan close to his best the victory was never straightforward. 
England’s captain could not find a permanent ally, though there were sparky 
contributions from Ben Stokes and Jonny Bairstow. If Matthew Wade had hung on 
to an outside edge from Moeen Ali with 31 runs required there would have been 
further jitters. Moreover, Maxwell produced the most stunning of boundary 
catches to dismiss Liam Plunkett, flicking the ball in the air while his feet 
were over the boundary before returning to the field of play to complete the 
operation. But Moeen, who had been England’s best bowler, was still there when 
David Willey clunked the match-winning six.

England v Australia: fourth ODI – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/sep/11/england-v-australia-fourth-odi-live>
The early part of the run chase, the first successful one of the series, had a 
familiar feel to it. Once again Alex Hales was beaten by a fast full-length 
delivery from Pat Cummins and was patently lbw. In this series Hales has had 
the opportunity not only to nail down an opener’s slot for ODI cricket but also 
to suggest possibilities as a Test partner for Alastair Cook. But that chance 
is slipping fast from his grasp.

Meanwhile Jason Roy has beguiled. He bats like a man who might own a 
Harley-Davidson. His progress is always stylish, rapid and eye-catching; yet 
his may not always be the most efficient way to get from A to B. His regret in 
this series so far must be that he has looked in superb form without being able 
to deliver the major innings. On Friday he purred to 33 from 35 balls whereupon 
he was caught at mid-off off Cummins. He demands future selection but he will 
often exasperate.

James Taylor is another in excellent form. At Manchester he mustered five 
fours in 117 balls; here he had five after facing 14, all from the middle of 
his bat, usually against Cummins. But he was caught down the leg side against 
an ordinary delivery from Mitchell Marsh. Thus it was left to Morgan to deliver 
the major innings, which included two sixes, one of which very nearly cleared 
the rugby stand before ending up in the gutter.

Despite two substantial hiccups it always seemed inevitable that the target 
set by Australia would be around 300. It always is in this series.

Willey caused some early mayhem. Joe Burns was bowled off the inside edge; 
then came a most prized wicket; a perfect in-swinger, full in length, thudded 
into Steve Smith’s right pad. Next Aaron Finch groped at a non-swinging 
delivery and was caught behind.

Australia were rocking on 30 for three but England could not drive home their 
advantage. Maxwell, on six, was dropped at second slip by Roy off Mark Wood. It 
was not quite a Herschelle Gibbs moment (he famously dropped Steve Waugh here 
in the World Cup of 1999 with dire consequences for South Africa) and in any 
case “Jason, you’ve just dropped the Royal London One-Day Series trophy” is a 
bit of a mouthful.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-cricket-pitch-ashes-edinburgh-special-guardian-live-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441987844885%2FKP_473928_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Cricket%20Pitch%20Ashes%20Edinburgh%20special%20-%20Guardian%20Live%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-cricket-pitch-ashes-edinburgh-special-guardian-live-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Cricket%20Pitch%20Ashes%20Edinburgh%20special%20-%20Guardian%20Live%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fthe-cricket-pitch-ashes-edinburgh-special-guardian-live-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F9%2F11%2F1441987844885%2FKP_473928_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The Cricket Pitch, the Guardian’s live cricket and comedy chat show, at the 
Edinburgh Festival 
When Maxwell was on 35 another tough chance to long-leg escaped the grasp of 
Adil Rashid. Thereafter he put on quite a big a show with a succession of 
effortless drives and an array of trademark reverse hits. So there was huge 
relief when Moeen bowled him as he tried another reverse sweep.

George Bailey, in a more restrained manner, kept the innings on track until 
another flurry of wickets took Australia from 210 for four to 215 for seven. 
Thereafter the redoubtable John Hastings and Wade accelerated with a flourish, 
cracking 65 in the final five overs, during which Wood’s inexperience of 
bowling end-of-innings overs was exposed, albeit on a tricky day for bowlers.
 