
See a world premiere at the Adelaide Festival

In March Adelaide comes alive as its international arts festival, running for 
over 50 years, takes over the city. 2013 marks the first time it is an annual 
rather than biannual event, and it is new creative director David Sefton's 
debut programme. His stellarlineup of premieres and collaborations 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/program_download> includes 
performances from Sylvie Guillem, Laurie Anderson, Nick Cave, Kronos Quartet 
and The National. The festival has obvious similarities to Edinburgh - but 
given that it's in the southern hemisphere tends to have slightly better 
weather.
• 1-17 March, various venues, adelaidefestival.com.au 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au> 

Visit the Central Market for fresh produce and a slice of life

The vast covered market opened in 1870 and is still a big draw for residents 
and tourists alike. Selling everything you could possibly want to consume – 
honey, coffee, sushi, cheese, bread, fruit, vegetables, cured meats, etc – and 
with a focus on locally sourced produce, it is impossible to resist sampling 
something. There is a food court, which backs on to the city's Chinatown, and 
more established restaurants, such as Lucia's (lucias.com.au 
<http://www.lucias.com.au/geninfo/pizza/pizzabar.php>), for neighbourhood-style 
Italian food, or Big Table (dbites.com 
<http://dbites.com/2012/12/14/big-table-adelaide-central-market/>), the place 
to go for breakfast. If you are keen to find out more about themarket's history 
<http://www.adelaidecentralmarket.com.au/about-the-markets/history>, there are 
tours at 8.30am and 9.30am <http://www.centralmarkettour.com.au/CMTTours.html> 
every day, except Sunday and Monday when the whole market is shut.
• adelaidecentralmarket.com.au <http://www.adelaidecentralmarket.com.au>, 
centralmarkettour.com.au <http://www.centralmarkettour.com.au>

Get back to nature at the Adelaide Botanic Gardens
 The Victorian palm house at Adelaide's Botanic Gardens. Photograph: 
GoGarden/Alamy 
Sydney's Royal Botanic Gardens may overlook the historic harbour, but 
Adelaide's own botanic park <http://uk.southaustralia.com/info.aspx?id=9002564> 
is pretty special in its own right. Spread over 125 acres hovering above the 
eastern end of North Terrace, the park is a peaceful haven from the buzz of the 
city, with an impressive selection of native and foreign flora and fauna. The
Victorian Palm House <http://georama.com.au/palmhouse/files/palmhouse.html> and 
Amazon Waterlily Pavilion 
<http://www.aurecongroup.com/en/projects/property/amazon-waterlily-pavilion.aspx>
 are not to be missed. Or just find a shady spot under a gum and while away the 
afternoon.
• environment.sa.gov.au 
<http://www.environment.sa.gov.au/botanicgardens/Visit/Adelaide_Botanic_Garden>
, 8.30am-6.30pm Mon-Fri, 9am-6.30pm weekends in March (closing times vary 
month-by-month), free

Go mad for March

It isn't known as Mad March 
<http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/entertainment/festivals/a-field-guide-to-the-tribes-of-mad-march/story-e6fredyu-1226584042093>
 by locals for nothing. Also happening during festival season is the Adelaide 
Fringe (until 17 March,adelaidefringe.com.au <http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au>
), featuring comedy, circus and cabaret in venues across the city, while the 
Garden of Unearthly Delights (until 17 March,gardenofunearthlydelights.com.au 
<http://www.gardenofunearthlydelights.com.au>) transforms Rundle Park into yet 
another entertainment space. There are countless pop-up events in temporary 
spaces across town, fromThe Birdcage's block party 
<http://www.facebook.com/pages/The-Birdcage-Adelaide-2013/480070042011501> to 
al fresco late-night drinking venueLittle Miss Mexico 
<http://www.facebook.com/LittleMissMexico>, which has an on-site winery. 
Meanwhile WOMADelaide (8-11 March, 2013 headliners Hugh Masekela and Jimmy 
Cliff,womadelaide.com.au <http://www.womadelaide.com.au>) will be in full swing 
in Botanic Park (see above), along with literary festival Writers' Week (1-7 
March,adelaidefestival.com.au 
<http://www.adelaidefestival.com.au/2013/writers_week/adelaide_writers_week>), 
the Adelaide 500 motor race (28 Feb - 3 March,clipsal500.com.au 
<http://www.clipsal500.com.au>) and much more.

Stroll down the river
 The Torrens river and Adelaide Festival Centre in Elder Park. Photograph: 
Hemis/Alamy 
To the north of the city, the River Torrens meanders through parkland, 
connecting up with the Gulf St Vincent to the west. Starting at the edge of the 
easterly Botanic Park, walk along the water's edge, skirting the zoo, with the
city's much-loved pandas 
<http://www.giantpanda.org.au/index.php/giant-pandas/australias-giant-pandas.html>
. Next, pass through the university district, which is also home to some of the 
big cultural institutions of the state, such as Art Gallery of South Australia (
artgallery.sa.gov.au <http://www.artgallery.sa.gov.au/agsa/home>) and the South 
Australian Museum (samuseum.sa.gov.au <http://www.samuseum.sa.gov.au/>). Coming 
up on the left bank is top restaurant Jolleys Boathouse (jolleysboathouse.com 
<http://jolleysboathouse.com/>) and also the landing for Popeye boat tours (
thepopeye.com.au <http://www.thepopeye.com.au/index1.html>). The Oval is next 
up to the right, followed by St Peter's Cathedral (stpeters-cathedral.org.au 
<http://www.stpeters-cathedral.org.au/>), then finally Elder Park and the heart 
of festival activity.

Sample some local fare

Aside from Central Market, Adelaide has many other edible highlights. FruChocs 
 <https://www.facebook.com/menzfruchocs> – apricots and peaches dipped in 
chocolate – are a local delicacy, as are Haigh's chocolates, which runs a 
factory tour (haighschocolates.com.au 
<http://www.haighschocolates.com.au/tours/>). Pie Floaters 
<http://getmetoadelaide.wordpress.com/tag/pie-floater/>, a meat pie in pea soup 
(just what you fancy on a hot day), are available throughout town, including at 
legendary 24-hour Bakery on O'Connell Street (bakeryonoconnell.com.au 
<http://www.bakeryonoconnell.com.au/>). Keep an eye out for Fork on the Road 
<https://www.facebook.com/ForkontheRoadAdelaide> events to sample the city's 
burgeoning street food scene. And wash it all down with a Boost juice (
boostjuice.com.au <http://www.boostjuice.com.au/>) or Farmer's Union iced 
coffee (facebook.com/farmersunion <https://www.facebook.com/farmersunion>), 
both of which started life here. Finally you really haven't been to Adelaide 
without going to one of the many pudding-only venues, such as the swankyOnyx 
Dessert Lounge <https://www.facebook.com/OnyxDessertLounge>.

Have a culture fix

As the state capital, Adelaide is home to some of South Australia's greatest 
cultural treasures. The South Australian Museum (samuseum.sa.gov.au 
<http://www.samuseum.sa.gov.au/>) contains the largest Aboriginal collection in 
the world, with all kinds of artefacts and documents narrating indigenous 
histories. Also worth a look are the national meteorite collection, the 
majority of which you can touch as the museum promotes interactivity rather 
than dusty glass cabinets, and some of the oldest fossils in the world from 
nearbyFlinders Ranges 
<http://uk.southaustralia.com/regions/flinders-ranges-outback.aspx>. Next door 
at the State Art Gallery (artgallery.sa.gov.au 
<http://www.artgallery.sa.gov.au/agsa/home>), there are Australian, Aboriginal 
and international artworks. The current visiting exhibition is aTurner from the 
Tate show 
<http://www.artgallery.sa.gov.au/agsa/home/Exhibitions/Turner_from_the_Tate.html>
 (until 19 May), and be sure to observe the gallery's latest acquisition, a 
hanging horse torso byBelgian artist Berlinde De Bruyckere 
<http://www.adelaidenow.com.au/entertainment/belgian-artist-berlinde-de-bruyckere/story-e6fredpu-1226550689894>
.

Rundle Street is the place to be
 Catch a summer evening market in Rundle Street 
<http://www.rundlestreet.com.au> 
Rundle Mall in the city centre has the usual shopping suspects, from David 
Jones to Woolworths. If you continue east along the mall it becomes Rundle 
Street, where the stores are hipper and the bars livelier. Wander off the main 
street and smaller lanes like Ebenezer Place hold hidden treasures such asDas 
Boutique <http://www.das-revolution.com.au/> for a flat white with your hipster 
hair-do orTreadly <http://treadlybikeshop.com.au/> for cycling accessories, 
plus there are late-night openings andsummer evening markets 
<http://www.weekendnotes.com.au/summer-fridays-east-end/>. Grab a coffee early 
on in the day at theHowling Owl <http://www.thehowlingowl.com.au/> at 13 Frome 
Street, or head there in the evening when it is magically transformed into a 
gin den.
• rundlestreet.com.au <http://rundlestreet.com.au/>

Get on your bike
 Mount Lofty botanical gardens. Photograph: David Moore/Alamy 
Everyone's at it, from the baristas to the fashionistas, partly for 
environmental reasons but also because masses of parks and good weather makes 
you more inclined to cycle. Hire afree city bike 
<http://www.bikesa.asn.au/AdelaideCityBikes> and head up to Mount Lofty botanic 
park <http://www.adelaidehills.org.au/attractions/mt-lofty-botanic-gardens> in 
the Adelaide Hills, or make the most of the flat-as-a-pancake city streets. 
Cycling fever peaks in January when theTour Down Under 
<http://www.tourdownunder.com.au/> comes to South Australia and finishes in 
Adelaide.

Drink local

One of the best things about Adelaide is the local grog. Coopers beer 
<http://www.coopers.com.au/> is brewed in the Regency Park suburb where you can 
take a brewery tour (coopers.com.au) <http://tours.coopers.com.au/)>, or just 
grab it at one of the numerous pubs (confusingly called hotels), such as the 
Exeter (theexeter.com.au <http://www.theexeter.com.au/>) or Austral (
theaustral.com.au <http://www.theaustral.com.au/>), in huge, sociable jugs. But 
given that the vineyards are mere miles away, it's a wine drinkers' paradise. 
Try Riesling from the Clare Valley, Shiraz from the McLaren Vale or Cabernet 
from the Barossa, with a decent list at even the diviest of venues, giving you 
the most authentic of South Australian experiences.

• The Adelaide festival runs from 1-17 March. The Guardian's daily coverage 
starts on 1 March at guardian.co.uk/music/adelaide-festival-2013, supported by 
Emirates. For more information visit:southaustralia.com 
<http://www.southaustralia.com>
 