
Andy Burnham’s contribution (Let’s take back control of the immigration debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/take-back-control-immigration-debate-labour>
, 17 December) is sane and helpful but incomplete. The EU principle of freedom 
of movement is not incompatible with Britain’s interest in managing 
immigration. The issue is not mobility itself, but whether mobility involves 
entitlement to full citizenship rights – social security, residence, 
healthcare, employment, etc. Citizenship is a political, economic and social 
status,as the sociologist TH Marshall argued long ago 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T.H._Marshall's_Social_Citizenship>, involving 
more than possessing a document, or even paying taxes. Citizenship involves a 
range of obligations, and rights. This broader conception of citizenship is 
widely shared throughout Europe, and provides a starting point for a more 
realistic discussion of migration than simple numbers.

Several EU member states share an interest in managing migration. In addition 
to the concern in other west European countries, it is not in Poland’s interest 
for Polish graduates to be washing cars in Britain, or in Romania’s interest 
for its graduates to be working in Italy, Spain or the UK. EU discussions of 
freedom of movement in 2003-04 were based on little serious research. It was 
expected that migration flows within Europe would even out over time, with much 
short-term migration and long-term migration in the low thousands. The Blair 
government was so confident that migration would not pose any problem for 
Britain that it rejected the transition period adopted elsewhere (except for 
Ireland and Sweden).

It was also expected that per capita GDP growth in eastern Europe would reduce 
the incentive for migration. However, despite structural adjustment funds from 
the EU and western capital investment, GDP per capita remains lower in several 
east European countries than in western Europe, supporting migration push.

Migration <https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration> flows are a matter of 
concern for all EU member states, and capable of negotiation, within the 
framework of freedom of movement. Brexit will be deeply damaging to the UK, 
economically, politically and even culturally, and to Europe. It is a tragic 
example of solving a manageable problem at the expense of creating a much 
bigger one.
Roderick Martin
(Formerly professor at Central European University Business School, Budapest) 
Winchester

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 