
European migration <https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration> policies have 
led to the alleged torture, abuse and illegal deportation of asylum seekers 
arriving by boat to Italy, according to dozens of migrant testimonies published 
for the first time.

Forty Sudanese migrants were also illegally deported to Sudan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> without recourse to proper asylum 
procedures, and at least one of them – a refugee fromDarfur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/darfur> – was beaten by officials on his 
return, interviewees said.

The alleged abuse is the natural outcome of the EU’s new migration strategy, 
according toAmnesty International, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> which conducted the 
research.

The implementation of the EU ‘hotspot’ system, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/21/chaos-greek-islands-three-tier-refugee-registration-system-syria-lesbos>
 which forces all migrants to be fingerprinted on arrival in Italy, and the 
failure of the EU’srelocation scheme, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/23/refugees-in-the-uk-questions-and-answers-on-the-relocation-scheme>
 which has meant more refugees are housed in Italy and Greece than most EU 
members, has stretched Italian resources and created a dynamic that encourages 
abuse, Amnesty said.

One Sudanese victim told the Guardian: “I saw someone tortured with 
electricity – I saw it with my own eyes.”

The 23-year-old, who also provided testimony to Amnesty, added: “He refused to 
give [the police his] fingerprints, and that’s why they did it. They used 
Tasers.”

The Italian interior ministry did not respond to the Guardian’s request for 
comment. Italian officials and politicians have previously warned that the 
country lacks the resources to care properly for so many asylum seekers, and 
needs more support from its European neighbours.

Since 2015, European leaders have forced Italy to register all arrivals from 
Libya, <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> effectively making Italy 
responsible for their care, without welcoming any themselves. Just 1,200 
refugees have been formally relocated from Italy to other European countries 
out of the 40,000 whom EU members initially promised to absorb.

Matteo Renzi: Italy cannot take in 155,000 migrants again next year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/italy-matteo-renzi-migrants-refugees-european-union>
The Italian prime minister, Matteo Renzi, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/matteo-renzi> threatened last week to veto 
the disbursement of EU funds to countries that failed to welcome refugees from 
Italy. “Italy cannot take another year like the one we’ve just had,”Renzi said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/25/italy-matteo-renzi-migrants-refugees-european-union>
.

Amnesty’s lead researcher on the project, Matteo De Bellis, said: “The hotspot 
approach, designed in Brussels and executed in Italy, has increased, not 
decreased, the pressure on frontline states. It is resulting inappalling 
violations of the rights of desperately vulnerable people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/may/06/gambian-migrants-who-risk-death-find-life-less-than-sweet-in-italy>
 for which the Italian authorities bear a direct responsibility and Europe’s 
leaders a political one.”

The vast majority of incoming migrants appear to have been treated in a humane 
manner by Italian police. The Italian navy and coastguard also playan 
instrumental role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/five-refugees-drown-overcrowded-boat-overturns-libyan-coast>
 in the rescue of hundreds of thousands of stricken asylum seekers in the 
southern Mediterranean.

But the testimonies released on Thursday reveal that several officials, under 
pressure to fingerprint uncooperative asylum seekers, and to stem migration 
numbers, have abused people and returned them to dangerous situations without 
allowing them to apply for asylum.

One 27-year-old victim alleged that policemen in Sicily beat and Tasered him 
before using a pair of three-pronged pliers on his naked testicles. “I was on a 
chair made of aluminium, with an opening on the seat,” he told Amnesty, in 
testimony also confirmed by a second victim. “They held [my] shoulders and 
legs, took my testicles with the pliers, and pulled twice. I can’t say how 
painful it was.”

A 16-year-old from Darfur told Amnesty that he was electrocuted after he tried 
to resist being fingerprinted. “They gave me electricity with a stick, many 
times on the left leg, then on right leg, chest and belly,” he was quoted as 
saying. “I was too weak, I couldn’t resist and at that point they took both my 
hands and put them on the machine.”

A Darfurian man deported to Sudan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sudan> in 
August told the Guardian he was expelled despite telling policemen that he 
wished to apply for asylum. “I told them I wanted political asylum in Italy,” 
he said by telephone. “But I’m not sure the translator translated this.”

The dangers of his illegal deportation became apparent on his arrival in 
Sudan. At least one returnee was beaten by Sudanese security officials during 
his interrogation, the man said. “He was dragged on the floor, and hit with a 
chair. We were in the same room, and he was next to me. I don’t [know] why they 
did it.”

The Sudanese president, Omar al-Bashir, has been charged by the international 
criminal court withthree counts of genocide in Darfur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/12/bashir-charged-with-darfur-genocide>
. The Guardian has asked the Sudanese government for comment.

Additional reporting: Eiad Abdullatif
 