
The Apprentice frontman Lord Sugar, the physicist Stephen Hawking and the 
human rights campaigner Shami Chakrabarti are among a chorus of experts warning 
about the risks of leaving the European Union in atelevision advert 
<https://youtu.be/69sNgfbU9Gs> being launched on Wednesday.
Brexit explained: Can I still register to vote? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=website_crash>
With just over a fortnight to go before the 23 June referendum, polls suggest 
the result is too close to call. Senior figures in the Stronger In campaign are 
concerned that relentless warnings from politicians, led by David Cameron, that 
a British exit from the EU would “put a bomb under the economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/06/david-cameron-brexit-would-detonate-bomb-under-uk-economy>
” have failed to sway voters.

The opening sequence of the Britain Stronger in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> advert, which will be aired on 
Wednesday evening, appears to undermine the remain campaign’s strategy of 
bombarding the public with facts and figures.

“Politicians arguing. Claim and counterclaims. Statistic after statistic after 
statistic. Enough. Let’s hear what the experts think about Europe,” it begins.

Sugar, the first of a lineup of celebrities, says: “Let me tell you as a 
businessman for 50 years, businesses do not want uncertainty. Now granted, the 
EU is not the perfect place – far from it – but you don’t sort something out by 
running away from it. You stick at it and you make it better, and you take 
advantage of what it offers.”

Stronger In has wheeled out global politicians including the US president, 
Barack Obama, and the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, to make their case.
Brexit explained: referendum debates 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=referendum_debates>
Many advocates of a vote to remain in have also shared a stage with their 
political opponents to demonstrate the importance of the issue for Britain’s 
future – with Cameron appearing alongside Labour’s Harriet Harman in a branch 
of Asda to talk about the impact on food prices.

But with many voters sceptical about whether they can trust politicians and 
keen to hear impartial voices, Stronger In, which is being closely coordinated 
by Downing Street, is now turning to a battery of “experts”.

In the new broadcast, Hawking says: “Scientists know that progress comes from 
cooperation. By working together in Europe we make our economy stronger, and we 
give ourselves more influence in the world, and we provide future opportunities 
for young people.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D69sNgfbU9Gs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D69sNgfbU9Gs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D69sNgfbU9Gs&media=>
Stephanie Flanders, the former economics editor of the BBC who is now at City 
bank JP Morgan, echoes the chancellor’s arguments about the economic benefits 
of the EU single market, saying: “What we get as being a member of theEuropean 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> is full access to the biggest 
market of consumers in the world, over 500 million people and our ability to 
trade very freely with all of those economies.

Opposition leaders call for EU deadline extension after website crashes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/08/jeremy-corbyn-calls-eu-referendum-voter-deadline-extension>
“For ordinary households, then, that means a wider range of employment 
opportunities, hopefully higher wage jobs than they might otherwise get, and 
potentially lower prices than in a scenario if we left the European Union.”

Other advocates for remain appearing in the film include Chakrabarti, the 
former chair of Liberty, who says the EU has helped bring peace to the 
continent of Europe, and the former TUC general secretary Brendan Barber, who 
says jobs and workers’ rights would be at risk if Britain left.

George Osborne, the chancellor, will make his case for remaining in the EU on 
Wednesday night, when he is interviewed on the BBC by Andrew Neil.
 