
Dundalk capped an historic night with a last-gasp headed equaliser against 
their lofty Dutch opponentsAZ Alkmaar on their Europa League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa-europa-league> debut.

Struggling after having their captain, Stephen O’Donnell, sent off and 
trailing to Stijn Wuytens’ goal, the semi-professional Irish side rallied in 
the dying minutes and scored through Ciaran Kilduff, securing a 1-1 draw as 
Irish tricolours were waved in the Netherlands.

Southampton’s Charlie Austin makes quick work of Sparta Prague
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/southampton-sparta-prague-europa-league-match-report>
AZ had taken the lead when Wuytens headed home from a long ball during the 
second half of the Group D clash and the signs looked ominous when O’Donnell 
was dismissed. But from early in the matchDundalk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundalk> had matched the Dutch top-four 
club for speed and creativity with a skilful performance from the marauding 
midfielder Daryl Horgan and with 10 men they defended valiantly as Andy Boyle 
cleared off the line.

A pinpoint cross from the left was then headed home by Kilduff, delighting the 
travelling support and earning the visitors a valuable point.

Tonny Vilhena edges Feyenoord past much-changed Manchester United
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/feyenoord-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
Also in Group D, Zenit St Petersburg staged a dramatic comeback at Maccabi 
Tel-Aviv, scoring four goals in the final 14 minutes to win 4-3. The Russian 
club were trailing after goals from Haris Medunjanin (two) and Vidar Orn 
Kjartansson but Aleksandr Kokorin’s scrambled finish gave them hope and the 
sending-off of Eli Dasa nine minutes from time offered a lifeline.

Dasa’s second yellow card led to Mauricio scoring via an indirect free-kick, 
Giuliano then equalised before Luka Djordjevic headed home in the second minute 
of added time.

The three-times European champions Internazionale were humbled at home by 
Hapoel Be’er Sheva, who gave Celtic a scare in their Champions League play-off 
before the Scots scraped through 5-4 on aggregate last month.

The Israelis, making their Europa League group stage debut this season, were 
2-0 winners as Miguel Virot and Maor Bar Buzaglo scored in the San Siro in 
Group K, whileSouthampton comfortably beat Sparta Prague 3-0 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/southampton-sparta-prague-europa-league-match-report>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Feuropa-league-roundup-dundalk-alkmaar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85d2681ac6dd1e1a8c0adeefc04a85de85e4849c%2F0_29_3147_1888%2F3147.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europa%20League%20roundup%3A%2010-man%20Dundalk%20snatch%20late%20draw%20at%20Alkmaar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Feuropa-league-roundup-dundalk-alkmaar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europa%20League%20roundup%3A%2010-man%20Dundalk%20snatch%20late%20draw%20at%20Alkmaar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Feuropa-league-roundup-dundalk-alkmaar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85d2681ac6dd1e1a8c0adeefc04a85de85e4849c%2F0_29_3147_1888%2F3147.jpg>
 Internazionale were embarrassed by Israel’s Hapoel Be’er Sheva at the San 
Siro. Photograph: Giorgio Perottino/Reuters 
Ajax fared better in Greece where they came from behind to beat Panathinaikos 
2-1 in Group G in a match which finished nine men playing 10.

Marcus Berg gave the hosts a fifth-minute lead but on-loan Chelsea forward 
Betrand Traoré equalised before half-time and after Jairo Riedeweld scored the 
winner in the 67th minute things went downhill for the Greek side.

Ivan Ivanov was sent off for a second bookable offence – a fate which later 
befell Ajax’s Hakim Ziyech – before Mubarak Wakaso was shown a red card for 
violent conduct in added time.

Sassuolo marked their debut in the Europa League with a 3-0 win over seasoned 
campaignersAthletic Bilbao in Group F. The Serie A side left all their scoring 
until the final half hour with goals from Pol Lirola, Gregoire Defrel and 
Matteo Politano.

Rapid Vienna also secured maximum points in that group with a 3-2 win over 
Racing Genk.

In Group A Feyenoord’s Tonny Vilhena scored the only goal to beat Manchester 
United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/15/feyenoord-manchester-united-europa-league-match-report>
while the Ukrainian debutantsZorya were only denied a landmark first win by the 
Fenerbahce defender Simon Kjaer’s goal in the fifth minute of added time.

Group B’s early pace-setters are Apoel and Olympiakos after wins at home to 
Astana (2-1) and away to Young Boys (1-0) respectively.

Anderlecht gained an early advantage in Group C as they beat FK Qabala 3-1 at 
home whileMainz and St-Étienne could only draw 1-1 in Germany, with Robert 
Beric snatching an 88th-minute equaliser for the French club.

Diego Perotti scored an early penalty for Roma in the Czech Republic but they 
were pegged back by Marek Bakos’ goal forViktoria Pilzen in Group E, which is 
topped byAustria Vienna, who held on for 3-2 win at Romania’s Astra Girgiu 
after Lukas Rotpuller’s red card with 11 minutes to go.

Goals from Alexandre Pato and Jonathan dos Santos saw Villarreal come from 
behind to beatFC Zürich 2-1 in Group L, while in Group J Fiorentina were held 
to a goalless draw byPaok Salonika.
 