
GROUP A

FRANCE The hosts can call on their most talented group of players for a 
decade, with an exciting young generation featuring Raphaël Varane, Paul Pogba, 
Antoine Griezmann and Anthony Martial. However, Didier Deschamps’ main concern 
will be squad harmony – the sex tape blackmail story involving Mathieu Valbuena 
and Karim Benzema is hardly a positive sign. If the latter is absent, Olivier 
Giroud will lead the line, with Martial providing pace from the left flank.

ROMANIA Probably the most defensive side. In 10 qualification games they 
conceded only two goals - but scored just 11, despite being in a weak group. A 
run of three consecutive goalless draws againstNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/northernireland>, Hungary and Greece 
summarises Anghel Iordanescu’s approach. The star players are the former Spurs 
centre-back Vlad Chiriches and the Fiorentina goalkeeper Ciprian Tatarusanu. 
Don’t expect much going forward.

ALBANIA In their first appearance at a major tournament, a single victory 
would be an achievement. Having beatenPortugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/portugal> and Serbia in qualifying, 
Albania are capable of causing an upset. Their Italian coach Gianni De Biasi 
uses a defensive-minded system and cares little for possession. The former 
Sunderland player Lorik Cana captains the side from defence, while Taulant 
Xhaka is their most talented midfielder, but expect goalsoring to be a problem 
area.

SWITZERLAND Vladimir Petkovic replaced Ottmar Hitzfeld after the World Cup and 
has madeSwitzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/switzerland> a more 
open, attack-minded side, using 4-3-3, 4-2-3-1 and a 4-3-1-2 in an attempt to 
get the best from his forwards. Thanks to the attacking full-backs Stephan 
Lichtsteiner and Ricardo Rodríguez, the wingers Xherdan Shaqiri and Admir 
Mehmedi have freedom to cut inside and shoot. Yet none of Haris Seferovic, Eren 
Derdiyok or Josip Drmic have nailed down the centre-forward role.

MICHAEL COX PREDICTION: France, Switzerland, Albania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/albania>, Romania

Lens game at Euro 2016 dominates but England and Wales content | Daniel Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/12/lens-england-wales-euro-2016>
GROUP B
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Feuro-2016-group-by-group-guide-england-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75bc2605acfe8b4c5c71e1a9b6d199ccc58fa09c%2F149_7_2962_1777%2F2962.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20Michael%20Cox%E2%80%99s%20group%20by%20group%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Feuro-2016-group-by-group-guide-england-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20Michael%20Cox%E2%80%99s%20group%20by%20group%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Feuro-2016-group-by-group-guide-england-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F75bc2605acfe8b4c5c71e1a9b6d199ccc58fa09c%2F149_7_2962_1777%2F2962.jpg>
 Wayne Rooney, left, congratulates Harry Kane on scoring against Switzerland at 
Wembley in September Photograph: Adrian Dennis/AFP/Getty Images 
ENGLAND Roy Hodgson’s side achieved a 100% record in qualification, using a 
variety of systems and an unusually exciting style of football featuring 
youngsters such as Ross Barkley, Raheem Sterling and Harry Kane. However, 
weaknesses will be exposed against better opposition. The lack of a holding 
midfielder is a worry, with the indisciplined Jack Wilshere being favoured for 
that role. Wayne Rooney is seemingly undroppable despite being in the worst 
form of his career.

WALES Chris Coleman often uses a 3-5-2 system featuring two natural wingers up 
front, attempting to compensate for the lack of striking quality. Gareth Bale 
is given a roaming role just off the hard-working Hal Robson-Kanu, and Wales’ 
system is all about trying to supply Bale in dangerous positions. Aaron Ramsey 
is a top-quality central midfielder, Joe Allen offers good distribution and the 
three-man defence have functioned well, thanks to the captain Ashley Williams.

SLOVAKIA Jan Kozak’s side will be classic plucky underdogs, likely to sit deep 
and counterattack down the flanks through Robert Mak and the former Manchester 
City and Rangers winger Vladimir Weiss. There is a decent spine to the side, 
with the goalkeeper Matus Kozacik, the centre-back Martin Skrtel and the 
midfielder Marek Hamsik all fine players. No top-class striker though: Adam 
Nemc top-scored in qualifying with three, so the veteran Robert Vittek has been 
recalled.

RUSSIA The departure of Fabio Capello paved the way for the CSKA Moscow 
manager Leonid Slutsky to take charge on a part-time basis, while remaining in 
charge of his club. Four straight victories secured qualification. Capello used 
mobile forwards, but Slutsky prefers Zenit’s Artyom Dzyuba, a 6ft 5in striker 
who scores plenty with his head. The problem is at the back where Slutsky is 
relying on the CSKA combination of Aleksei Berezutsky, aged 33 and Sergei 
Ignashevich, 36.

MC PREDICTION: England, Slovakia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/slovakia>, Wales, Russia

GROUP C
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Feuro-2016-group-by-group-guide-england-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcedfc25cfa48b995b00dde09552826d985eefb6a%2F0_0_3424_2053%2F3424.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20Michael%20Cox%E2%80%99s%20group%20by%20group%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Feuro-2016-group-by-group-guide-england-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20Michael%20Cox%E2%80%99s%20group%20by%20group%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Feuro-2016-group-by-group-guide-england-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcedfc25cfa48b995b00dde09552826d985eefb6a%2F0_0_3424_2053%2F3424.jpg>
 Kyle Lafferty scores Northern Ireland’s dramatic equaliser against Hungary in 
September. Photograph: Jason Cairnduff/Reuters 
N IRELAND An organised side with fine centre-backs in Jonny Evans and Gareth 
McAuley, plus an underrated central midfielder, Southampton’s Steven Davis. 
Northern Ireland are more technically talented than other minnows at the 
championship. There is a lack of creativity, though, and while Norwich City’s 
Kyle Lafferty scored seven goals in qualifying, it is difficult to imagine the 
journeyman forward will prosper against top defences.

GERMANY Philipp Lahm’s absence highlights a lack of full-backs, but Jérôme 
Boateng and Mats Hummels have formed an impressive defensive partnership. 
Joachim Löw can also count on Marco Reus and Ilkay Gündogan, who both missed 
the World Cup through injury. Thomas Müller was prolific in qualifying, with
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/football/germany> performing better with 
him on the right and Mario Götze as a false nine. Reus and Mesut Özil should 
complete a formidable attacking quartet.

POLAND No one scored more goals in qualifying than Robert Lewandowski’s 13. 
Arguably the best centre-forward in the competition, the Bayern Munich striker 
can also come deep to orchestrate play. The focus on Lewandowski could help the 
Ajax youngster Arkadiusz Milik. A mobile and powerful left-footed forward, he 
registered six goals and six assists, justifying Adam Nawalka’s use of two 
strikers.Poland <https://www.theguardian.com/football/poland> are strong down 
the flanks, but somewhat slow at the back.

UKRAINE Mykhaylo Fomenko’s side were slightly unfortunate not to qualify 
automatically, and two narrow 1-0 defeats to Spain suggest they are capable of 
frustrating superior opponents. Ukraine are heavily reliant on their two 
inverted wingers. Sevilla’s Yevhen Konoplyanka, the only regular based outside
Ukraine <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ukraine>, starts from the left 
and cuts inside dangerously, while the left-footed Andriy Yarmolenko does the 
same from the right.

MC PREDICTION: Germany, Poland, Ukraine, Northern Ireland

Euro 2016 interactive wallchart: groups, fixtures, venues and more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2015/dec/12/euro-2016-interactive-wallchart-groups-fixtures-venues-and-more>
GROUP D
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Feuro-2016-group-by-group-guide-england-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb84e91c6dcdc24c1f5a7385991db1718634b5889%2F146_438_4469_2681%2F4469.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Euro%202016%3A%20Michael%20Cox%E2%80%99s%20group%20by%20group%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Feuro-2016-group-by-group-guide-england-wales%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Euro%202016%3A%20Michael%20Cox%E2%80%99s%20group%20by%20group%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Feuro-2016-group-by-group-guide-england-wales%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb84e91c6dcdc24c1f5a7385991db1718634b5889%2F146_438_4469_2681%2F4469.jpg>
 Spain celebrate after beating Italy 4-0 in the Euro 2012 final in Kiev. 
Photograph: Pierre-Philippe Marcou/AFP/Getty Images 
SPAIN Now without Xavi Hernández and Xabi Alonso, the holders move the ball 
forward more quickly. Sergio Busquets stays deep and the use of Andrés Iniesta 
alongside Koke, Cesc Fàbregas, Thiago Alcântara or Santi Cazorla is bold. 
Vicente del Bosque has not decided whether to use Iker Casillas or David De 
Gea, but eight clean sheets shows Spain’s defensive discipline. The 22-year-old 
Paco Alcácer was the top scorer in qualification with five goals.

TURKEY Fatih Terim, now in his third spell as Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/turkey> manager, can call on an 
extraordinarily technically gifted midfield, with the holding midfielder Selcuk 
Inan allowing Barcelona’s Arda Turan and the Leverkusen free-kick specialist 
Hakan Calhanoglu to attack. Burak Yilmaz is, on his day, a clinical forward, 
but the defence are inconsistent while Terim is often guilty of not knowing his 
best system. Still, a dangerous side with the ability to spring a surprise.

CZECH REP One of the most underrated sides, but the former Viktoria Plzen 
coach Pavel Vrba has created a well-organised and attack-minded side capable of 
storming forward dangerously on the break. Although Vrba cannot count on many 
star names, he has got the best from energetic attacking midfielders Borek 
Dockal and Ladislav Krejci, although there is a lack of reliable strikers – 
David Lafata started seven of the 10 qualifiers, but scored only once.

CROATIA An alarming wobble in qualification meant Niko Kovac was replaced by 
the 62-year-old Ante Cacic in September. Three wins from three suggests the 
managerial switch was justified.Croatia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/croatia> will have one of the most 
creative central midfield trios in the tournament, with Barcelona’s Ivan 
Rakitic joined by Real Madrid’s Luka Modric and Mateo Kovacic. Mario Mandzukic 
is a great focal point up front, but an immobile backline could prove 
problematic.

MC PREDICTION: Spain, Croatia, Turkey, Czech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/czechrepublic>

GROUP E

REP IRELAND Almost a stereotypically plucky team hiding major weaknesses, 
particularly in goal, but a victory over Germany and a two-leg win against 
Bosnia shows Martin O’Neill’s side are capable of shocking better sides. 
O’Neill must decide whether to use one or two strikers. James McCarthy and Wes 
Hoolahan offer technical quality in midfield, the left-sided Robbie Brady is an 
underrated, versatile player and Jonathan Walters is an unfussy forward with a 
habit of scoring big goals.

BELGIUM Belgium have improved, but remain weaker than the sum of their parts. 
Eden Hazard and Kevin De Bruyne have been impressive, but Marc Wilmots’ team do 
not fit together well. The absence of any full-backs means four natural 
centre-backs together, with Toby Alderweireld and Jan Vertonghen used on the 
flanks. Up front, the 10 qualification games saw Christian Benteke start four 
times, and Divock Origi and Romelu Lukaku three times each. Who will get the 
nod?

ITALY Antonio Conte has continued his Juventus blueprint of switching between 
a three- and a four-man defence. It makes sense, with the Juve stalwarts 
Giorgio Chiellini, Andrea Barzagli and Leonardo Bonucci protecting 154-cap 
Gianluigi Buffon. Went unbeaten in qualifying, but struggled for goals, so are 
Simone Zaza, Graziano Pellè and Eder up to the job? Conte has expressed 
concerns about Andrea Pirlo’s MLS move and wants the playmaker to return to 
Serie A.

SWEDEN Still based heavily around Zlatan Ibrahimovic, who scored 11 times in 
qualifying (including three in the two-leg play-off against Denmark) despite 
sometimes being fielded in a slightly deeper role behind another striker. Erik 
Hamren experimented with a 4-3-3 but has since fallen back on a more 
Scandinavian 4-4-2 system. There have been flashes of magic from Erkan Zengin 
and Jimmy Durmaz, butSweden <https://www.theguardian.com/football/sweden> are 
workmanlike rather than spectacular.

MC PREDICTION: Belgium <https://www.theguardian.com/football/belgium>, Italy, 
Ireland, Sweden

Roy Hodgson and Chris Coleman ready for friendly rivalry at Euro 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/12/roy-hodgson-chris-coleman-euro-2016-england-wales>
GROUP F

PORTUGAL Portugal started their campaign with Paulo Bento in charge, but a 
shock home defeat to Albania saw him replaced with Fernando Santos, renowned 
for his ability to drill players defensively. He promptly led Portugal to seven 
straight wins – four of them 1-0. His selections have been interesting, with 
the longstanding lack of a striker meaning either the captain and record 
goalscorer Cristiano Ronaldo, or the silky playmaker Danny, featuring up front.

ICELAND A major tournament debut is a huge achievement for a country with a 
population of 330,000. More all-weather pitches have helped, as has a 
disproportionate number of registered coaches. This is a talented squad, with 
the playmaker Gylfi Sigurdsson and the forward Kolbeinn Sigthorsson the most 
exciting players. However, with the joint coaches, Lars Lagerback and Heimir 
Hallgrimsson, playing a basic 4-4-2,Iceland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/iceland> could be overrun.

HUNGARY Hungary have qualified for their first European Championship since 
1972, but it was a topsy-turvy campaign featuring three managers. Pal Dardai 
had stabilised the side while still acting as the Hertha Berlin coach, but was 
replaced by Bernd Storck. He got them through the play-offs against Norway, 
bravely handing the talented but ill-disciplined midfielder Laszlo Kleinheisler 
his debut in Oslo. The winger Balazs Dzsudzsak is the side’s only star.

AUSTRIA Marcel Koller’s Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/football/austria> 
were one of the most impressive performers in qualification – they opened with 
a 1-1 draw against Sweden, then recorded nine consecutive victories. The star 
man is Bayern Munich’s David Alaba. A left-back at club level, he is used as a 
midfield playmaker who dominates games. The 6ft 5in striker Marc Janko bangs in 
the goals, often supplied by the all-Stuttgart right-sided combination of 
Florian Klein and Martin Harnik.

MC PREDICTION: Portugal, Austria, Iceland, Hungary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hungary>
 