
Chris Coleman said he is more than happy for all the attention to be on Gareth 
Bale at the European Championship finals in France this month if it enables 
Aaron Ramsey to thrive in the shadows of theworld’s most expensive footballer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2013/sep/01/gareth-bale-real-madrid-tottenham>
. Bale scored seven and set up two of Wales’s 11 goals during qualifying and is
very much the star attraction, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/31/chris-coleman-wales-gareth-bale-european-championship-joe-ledley>
 but Coleman claimed that Ramsey is “as big for us as anyone”.

Euro 2016: the complete guide to every squad and every player in France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/jun/01/euro-2016-the-complete-guide-to-every-squad-and-every-player-in-france>
“All I expect from Aaron [in France] is just to be Aaron Ramsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/aaron-ramsey> on the pitch for us, 
because there’s no one like him,” the Wales manager said.

“He can do things in the position he plays in that other players can’t do. He 
can start play on the edge of our box and he can finish it off on the edge of 
the opposition box.

“Some of the performances I’ve seen him put in are total dominance in a 
football game – the best performances I’ve seen from any Welsh midfielder, and 
that’s how good he can be.”

Coleman seems likely to deploy Ramsey and Bale alongside one another as two 
No10s in a system that gives the Arsenal midfielder more attacking freedom than 
he has in a club shirt and allows the most talented players in theWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wales> squad to operate in tandem. “Balo 
will tell you how good Aaron Ramsey is,” Coleman said. “Whatever happens at 
Arsenal or anywhere else, I can only speak about when he comes with us.

“When you’ve got the imagination he has, and you’ve got the confidence he has, 
when you try something it’s not always going to come off. But when it comes 
off, he can open doors that nobody else can. He’s as big for us as anyone.”

Asked whether Ramsey can benefit from the spotlight being on Bale, Coleman 
replied: “Yeah, I think it’s good for him, to be honest with you. Balo doesn’t 
care, he’s got that personality where he just gets on with it. And it’s good 
for Aaron; if he’s under the radar he won’t have a problem with that.”

Ramsey is guaranteed to stand out in France come what may after he decided to 
dye his hair blond. The 25-year-old said he had been “contemplating it for a 
while” but maintained that his boots will be doing the talking once the 
tournament gets under way.

“I want to make an impression on the field – that is my main target, to help 
Wales get out of the group stage and then see where we go from there.”
 