
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> may not be leading the 
way when it comes to technology companies, having never produced a giant to 
rival the likes of Google or Facebook. But the continent punches at or above 
its weight in some key areas, boasting companies as big and as well-respected 
as any in the world.

In aerospace and defence, Airbus is second only to the US’s Boeing, and owes 
its formation to Europe’s capacity for warand peace. The firm behind the 
world’s largest passenger jet,the A380 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/feb/08/theairlineindustry.travel>, 
has its roots in a collaboration between France, Germany and the UK, conceived 
totake on Boeing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/29/boeing-787-dreamliner-airbus-a380-battle-for-skies>
. The three countries developed vast aerospace expertise through successive 
wars in which air power was crucial. Britain’s Rolls-Royce and BAE Systems, 
Italy’s Finmeccanica and French groups Dassault and Safran are also in the top 
20 global aerospace firms by revenue.

The state-owned oil and gas producers of Opec nations such as Saudi Arabia and 
Iran are major players, but strip them out and you are left with big, private 
multinationals. America’sExxonMobil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jul/22/private-empire-exxon-mobil-review>
 may be the largest, but Europe is home to a host of rivals. The UK has the 
continent’s two biggest, BP and Shell, which is half Dutch. France’s Total is 
not far behind and Italy’s Eni is far from a minnow. European oil powerhouses 
owe much of their strength to the continent’s history of colonialism, which 
allowed them to a foothold in oil-producing parts of Africa and the Middle East.

When it comes to the automotive sector, the US and Europe play second fiddle 
to Japan, withToyota very much the car in front 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/26/volkswagen-top-spot-toyota-vw-emissions-scandal>
. But German companies fill the upper echelons: Volkswagen is the world’s 
next-biggest carmaker, although thediesel emissions scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/sep/23/volkswagen-emissions-scandal-explained-diesel-cars>
 could change that. Mercedes owner Daimler and BMW occupy the next two 
positions – ahead of Detroit-based General Motors and Ford. Most major European 
countries in Europe have a globally recognisable auto champion: France’s 
Renault, Sweden’s Volvo or the UK’s Jaguar Land Rover (ultimately owned by 
Indian conglomerate Tata). Italian firm Fiat may have merged with US rival 
Chrysler, but it remains very much an Italian company and the home of Ferrari.

The US dominates the pharmaceuticals industry: Johnson & Johnson and Pfizer 
are the world’s two largest drug and biotech firms. But Europe is no slouch. 
The UK has AstraZeneca and GlaxoSmithKline, while tax-light Switzerland boasts 
Roche and Novartis. Pfizer is trying to seal a$155bn takeover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/23/pfizer-allergan-agree-160-billion-dollars-deal-tax>
 of Irish-based Allergan that would allow it to move its headquarters to Dublin 
and take advantage of lower corporation tax. Pfizer would still be a US 
company, but its brass plate would be European.

When the world’s rich want upmarket brands, they turn to Europe, with its long 
history of trade and craftsmanship. The champion is Paris-headquartered LVMH, 
the firm behind Louis Vuitton and Moët Hennessy, as well as subsidiaries 
including Dior, Krug champagne, Glenmorangie single malt and watchmaker Bulgari.

Then there are classic British brands such as Burberry, Aston Martin, Fortnum 
& Mason and Mulberry, and fashion houses like Italy’s Armani and Versace and 
Germany’s Hugo Boss. The demand for European quality from the burgeoning middle 
classes of developing nations such asChina, India and Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/29/global-luxury-goods-market-exceeds-1tn-euro>
 has cemented the continent’s position as the go-to place for high-end designer 
goods.
 