
In association with

Omidyar Network <http://www.omidyar.com> is a philanthropic investment firm 
dedicated to harnessing the power of markets to create opportunity for people 
to improve their lives.

Established in 2004 by eBay founder Pierre Omidyar and his wife Pam, the 
organisation invests in and helps scale innovative organisations to catalyse 
economic and social change. To date, Omidyar Network has committed more than 
$400 million to for-profit companies and non-profit organisations that foster 
economic advancement and encourage individual participation across multiple 
investment areas, including microfinance, entrepreneurship, property rights, 
government transparency and consumer Internet and mobile.

To learn more about Omidyar Network, please visit omidyar.com 
<http://www.omidyar.com>.

Partner

Taylor Wessing <http://www.taylorwessing.com/> is a leading International law 
firm with a single-minded approach: to help our clients succeed.

What makes us different is our forward thinking approach to serving clients. 
We think creatively about business issues and are constantly looking for new 
and better ways to add value with truly innovative solutions that help to grow 
our clients' businesses.

With a leading international team of specialist lawyers across the entire 
spectrum of the media and technology sectors, we are able to provide unrivalled 
support for commercial organisations doing business in Europe across a full 
range of legal practice areas. We are also strong in the Middle East, India, 
China and North America.

We are driven by where the industries of tomorrow are growing the fastest.

Hack Partners

Nokia <http://www.nokia.co.uk/> is committed to connecting people to what 
matters to them by combining advanced mobile technology with personalized 
services. More than 1.3 billion people connect to one another with a Nokia, 
from our most affordable voice-optimized mobile phones to advanced 
Internet-connected smartphones sold in virtually every market in the world. 
Through our services, people also enjoy access to maps and navigation on 
mobile, a rapidly expanding applications store, a growing catalog of digital 
music, free email and more. Nokia's NAVTEQ is a leader in comprehensive digital 
mapping and navigation services, and Nokia Siemens Networks is one of the 
leading providers of telecommunications infrastructure hardware, software and 
professional services globally.

BlueVia <http://www.bluevia.com> is the new global developer platform from 
Telefonica that helps developers take apps, web services, and ideas to market. 
BlueVia is built on four founding principles: Scale, Tools, Business Models, 
and Path to Market. BlueVia offers ground breaking, zero risk, business models 
for developers, along with 'mix & match' models to create multiple revenue 
streams. For more information, documentation and video tutorials, go to
www.bluevia.com <http://www.bluevia.com>

Sponsorship enquiries

Stefanie Schmidt
Media sponsorship
Guardian News and Media
stefanie.schmidt@guardian.co.uk <mailto:stefanie.schmidt@guardian.co.uk>
+44 (0) 203 353 4889
 