
Evgeny Lebedev <https://www.theguardian.com/media/evgeny-lebedev>, owner of 
the Independent titles, has launched a campaign aimed at providing a platform 
for journalists who are facing harassment and intimidation in their own 
countries.

In an article in today's Independent, 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/voices-in-danger-journalism-in-the-line-of-fire-8591566.html>
 he says a new section of the paper's website, called "Voices in Danger", will 
feature case studies and interviews (where it is safe to do so). It will also 
reproduce some of their work.

Lebedev explains that it was the murder of Anna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/anna-politkovskaya> in 2006 that "brought 
home to me the importance of journalistic freedom." She was working for his 
family's Russian newspaper, Novaya Gazeta, when she was killed.

Three men were charged with her murder and acquitted. But there has been 
widespread criticism of the investigation. It has been "hopeless", writes 
Lebedev. It is also known that she was being watched by state security agents 
at the time. Four other Novaya Gazeta were subsequently killed.

Lebedev writes about the links between the paper's investigative work and the 
problems being faced by his father, Alexander:

"Only last year, the head of Russia's version of the FBI, Alexander Bastrykin, 
drove the paper's deputy editor to the middle of a forest outside Moscow and 
threatened to have him killed after our expos√©s of corruption in his 
organisation.

Bastrykin is now spearheading a campaign in the Russian courts against my 
father Alexander, who has refused demands to muzzle the newspaper. Our family's 
sources tell us there is a contract out on his head if he is jailed.

So I, and my family, know only too well what risks members of the media take 
in the course of their work."

Lebedev believes there is a need to know about the pressures from "despotic 
regimes" on journalists trying to exercise freedom of speech.

The "Voices in Danger" initiative is being launched in collaboration with the 
Paris-based press freedom watchdog, Reporters Without Borders, and other NGOs.

It comes ahead of the 2013 World Press Freedom day 
<http://www.unesco.org/new/?id=46282>, on 3 May. See also The Independent's 
editorial. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/editorials/editorial-voices-in-danger-must-be-heard-8591462.html>

Source: Independent 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/voices-in-danger-journalism-in-the-line-of-fire-8591566.html>
 