
Former Atlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta> police officer 
James Burns was indicted by a grand jury Wednesday for the murder of Deravis 
Caine Rogers.

Rogers, 22, was sitting in his car when Burns shot him in the head and killed 
him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/18/atlanta-police-officer-fatal-shooting-deravis-caine-rogers>
, and dashcam video showed “no provocation” for the shooting, according to the 
police investigation.

Despite the overwhelming evidence in his case, the indictment marks a shift in 
prosecutions of police killings, both nationally and inGeorgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/state-of-georgia>.

A 2014 Wall Street Journal analysis found that over a seven-year period ending 
in 2011, just41 people 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/police-rarely-criminally-charged-for-on-duty-shootings-1416874955>
 were charged nationwide. For Georgia, Burns is now the second law enforcement 
officer in over five years to be indicted for killing a civilian while on duty. 
The previous indictment took place earlier this year, when former Dekalb County 
police officer Robert Olsenwas charged with the murder of Anthony Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/22/anthony-hill-shooting-atlanta-georgia-police-felony-murder-charge-robert-olsen>
, also young, unarmed and black.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fformer-atlanta-officer-james-burns-indicted-caine-rogers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89142d793d6161fcd203e645bbc17af8a7ec65e9%2F0_0_703_1025%2F703.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ex-Atlanta%20officer%20James%20Burns%20indicted%20for%20murder%20of%20Deravis%20Caine%20Rogers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fformer-atlanta-officer-james-burns-indicted-caine-rogers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ex-Atlanta%20officer%20James%20Burns%20indicted%20for%20murder%20of%20Deravis%20Caine%20Rogers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fsep%2F01%2Fformer-atlanta-officer-james-burns-indicted-caine-rogers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89142d793d6161fcd203e645bbc17af8a7ec65e9%2F0_0_703_1025%2F703.jpg>
 Former Atlanta police officer James Burns at his booking at Fulton County 
jail. Photograph: AP 
“Though nothing can bring our son back, we know this is a powerful first 
step,” Rogers’ parents said in a statement after the indictment.

Georgia’s grand jury investigations in officer-involved shootings like have 
been the subject of significant backlash: until a new law passed this year, 
officers in Georgia were allowed to sit in on the entire hearing, including the 
prosecution’s evidence against them, and had the opportunity to make a 
statement at the end without being challenged or questioned – privileges 
granted to officers only in Georgia.

 The law was cited as one symptom of a justice system that did not hold one 
officer responsible for police shootings over a more than five-year period. Of 
184 Georgians shot and killed by police officers since 2010 – nearly half of 
whom were unarmed or shot in the back – none of the officers involved were 
indicted, according toan Atlanta Journal-Constitution investigation last year 
<http://investigations.myajc.com/overtheline/ga-police-shootings/>.

The new law curtailing these privileges took effect on 1 July this year, but 
because Rogers was killed prior to that it did not affect this hearing.

In the hours before the indictment was announced, roughly 200 people gathered 
for a vigil that lasted 24 hours before and during James Burns’ hearing. 
Supporters stayed outside the Fulton County courthouse overnight, and held 
signs listing the names of people killed at the hands of cops. The list 
included Jamarion Robinson, a 26-year-old shot and killed by US marshals last 
month while being served arrest warrants.

“We know that we’ve got to continue fighting to make sure that he is sent to 
jail,” said Dre Norman, who stayed outside the courthouse overnight, referring 
to Burns.

Burns was charged with two violations of oath of office, aggravated assault, 
felony murder, and making a false statement.

Shean Williams, a partner at the Cochran Law Firm, placed blame on the police 
department for failing “to provide adequate training and discipline to officer 
Burns” such that it is “ultimately responsible for the death of Caine Rogers 
through the actions of officer Burns”.

After Rogers’ death, Xochitl Bervera, director of the Racial Justice Action 
Center, called on Atlanta police chief George Turner to take responsibility for 
his department’s role in the incident.

“Chief Turner needs to acknowledge that killings happen when officers are 
trained to see community members as enemies and neighborhoods as combat zones 
to occupy,” she said. “Until we get rid of broken window policing and policing 
for profit, we will continue to see officers violating the rights of – and 
sometimes ending the lives of – our friends, neighbors and fellow residents.”

When asked about changes to training protocol since Rogers death, Atlanta 
police spokesperson Sgt Warren Pickard answered:

“The actions that Burns took in this incident were the result of his 
decision-making, not as a result of training.”
 