
Authorities in West Virginia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/west-virginia> declared the water of 
300,000 residents affected by last month's chemical spill safe to drink on 14 
January, just five days after the incident. Since then, a few things have 
happened. Stop me if you've heard them before (but I doubt you have).

1. On 15 January, the Centers for Disease Control and the state issued a 
statement <http://www.dhsem.wv.gov/Documents/Advisory%20-%201-15-2014.pdf> 
advising pregnant women to ignore the state's OK.

2. On 17 January, Freedom Industries, the owner of the plant involved, filed 
forbankruptcy <http://www.wvgazette.com/News/201401170030>, a move calculated 
to protect them from the financial consequences of the spill.

3. On 21 January, Freedom Industries admitted 
<http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2014-01-23/a-second-toxic-chemical-spilled-in-west-virginia-and-freedom-industries-said-nothing-until-now>
 the presence of a second toxic chemical in the spill, a proprietary mixture of 
polyglycol ethers known as PPH.

4. On 29 January, a member of the state's water quality board told a panel 
that he could "guarantee 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2014/01/29/3222571/west-virginia-formaldehyde/>
" residents are still breathing fumes from that formaldehyde.

5. On 30 January, Governor Earl Ray Tomblin, a Democrat, asked 
<http://www.wowktv.com/story/24593495/gov-earl-ray-tomblin-asks-for-more-bottled-water-distribution>
 the company in charge of that region's water supply for another 20 truckloads 
of bottled water – on top of the 13 truckloads they already donated.

This may prove prescient. On 31 January, Freedom Industries reported a second 
spill. But not to worry, theyassured 
<http://www.wvgazette.com/News/201401310042> the West Virginia Department of 
Environmental Protection (DEP), "None of the stuff got into the river." DEP 
itself was less-than-clear on what happened, one official telling the 
Charleston Gazette:

It's kind of like a lot of the piping up there … It's got some groundwater in 
it. We don't know where it is coming from.

On a related note: 1 February brought the news 
<http://www.wvgazette.com/News/watercrisis/201402010083> that the DEP never 
reviewed Freedom Industries' pollution prevention plans in the first place.

This seems like juicy stuff to me. Yet the story, as the national media sees 
it, is over. On Friday, MSNBCkilled 
<https://twitter.com/ErinBrockovich/status/429371599121166336> a segment with 
activist Erin Brockovich on the topic in order to devote more airtime toChris 
Christie's traffic problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/feb/02/chris-christie-bridgegate-versus-hillary-clinton-benghazi>
.

bumped by @msnbc <https://twitter.com/msnbc> as they cover Christie, 300k 
without water in WV & all these officials do is play political games
http://t.co/rDkxoj8wWa <http://t.co/rDkxoj8wWa>

— erin brockovich (@ErinBrockovich) January 31, 2014 
<https://twitter.com/ErinBrockovich/statuses/429371599121166336>

To anyone that follows environmental news, this arc is familiar: A 
human-interest story with an environmental pollution angle breaks through the 
media chatter. Cable news outlets roll clips of distraught residents. Footage 
the damage unspools (with or without stomach-turning images of dead or injured 
wildlife). There is a news conference of dubious utility. Investigative 
reporters find evidence of previous infractions of safety and environmental 
regulations. Politicians declare the need for hearings and more strict 
enforcement. Volunteers show up to help. Sometimes there's a concert.

Then we move on. We move on despite the fact that the chemical leak was, in 
some ways, an improvement on the status quo for West Virginians: at least the 
residentsknew there were questions about the water piped into their homes. Most 
of the time, most West Virginians simply live in the toxic aftermath of the 
daily release of not-quite-as-verifiably deadly chemicals. The mix of air, 
water, and soil pollution that is a matter of course in coal mining counties
means 
<http://content.usatoday.com/communities/sciencefair/post/2011/06/study-mountaintop-mining-raises-birth-defect-risks/1>
 that children born in those areas have a 26% higher risk of developing birth 
defects than those born in non-coal-mining counties. That's not from drinking 
water that's been declared contaminated, that's from drinking water, breathing 
air, and playing on ground they've been told is safe.

The underlying crisis behind most environmental tragedies is the part of the 
story that we rarely hear about. Our attention is shifting away from chemical 
spill, as it has from mine collapses and explosions, from oil spills, and, 
often, from natural disasters as well. Ironically, it's natural disasters – the 
ones with the least tangible connection to the actions of specific individuals 
– that manage to sustain the most interest among the national media. I am 
pretty sure this is because no one lobbies on Hurricane Sandy's behalf. 
Tornados are not considered to be good Sunday talk show guests.

That the coal industry has spent upward of $14m a year for the past four years 
onlobbying <http://www.opensecrets.org/lobby/induscode.php?id=E1210> efforts – 
not including the $14m they spent just last year on directcontributions 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/industries/indus.php?ind=E1210> to campaigns – 
partially explains why our attention is so fleeting. It also explains why the 
disasters are so bad.

The latter consequence stems from a distressingly simple pattern of cause and 
effect: for 200 years, and most particularly during the last two decades, the 
coal industry (and the energy lobby in general) has been as much, if not more, 
effective and industrious in its influence on politicians than it has been in 
generating electricity.

Our country has grown a vast and complex regulatory and financial support 
system for cheap, dirty energy: tax breaks, loopholes and the like. Researchers 
estimate that if Americans has to pay the real cost for each kilowatt-hour, 
factoring in hidden costs to communities' health, economy, ecology, we would 
pay three times as much than we do today. The energy lobby's approach to 
influence peddling, on the other hand, has systematic elegance of a see-saw: 
They put money into politicians' pockets, and they get legislative favors back. 
Indeed, it has been 38 years since Congress passed any law that had a 
substantive impact on the use of toxic chemicals. To put that in context: in 
1975, we were still using asbestos in our walls, you could smoke on airplanes 
and food packagers did not have to report or monitor pesticide residue levels 
on fresh produce.

I have a more tenuous explanation for the transient and vague concern of 
political reporters over environmental matters. I believe it probably has 
something to do with how terrified most of us are of science, which is full of 
numbers and big words.

I should emphasize that many reporters do fantastic work in this field. And by 
"many" I mean about a dozen. Remember how this time last year the New York 
Times announced that it wasdismantling 
<http://insideclimatenews.org/news/20130114/new-york-times-dismantles-environmental-desk-climate-change-global-warming-journalism-newspapers-hurricane-sandy>
 its environmental reporting desk? As far as I can tell, that left 
approximately 15 dedicated environmental reporters among the nation's top five 
papers (the Guardian US hasSuzanne Goldenberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/suzannegoldenberg>). Some context: across 
the industry and worldwide, the Society for Environmental Journalists has 1,400
members <http://www.sej.org/reaching-sej-members>. Last year, almost twice 
<http://www.cpac.org/CoSponsor> that many reporters attended the Conservative 
Political Action Conference alone – I was one of them.

CPAC attracts journalists primarily because it's considered an early indicator 
presidential horserace odds; I wish we pundits would bring to science the same 
intrepid attitude we have toward reporting on those fuzzy facts. Indeed, the 
same certainty with which pundits cite poll numbers could be applied to 
scientific findings with even more confidence – journal studies are 
peer-reviewed and designed to have reproducible results. That polls can be 
wrong, or the mood of the electorate shift rapidly, is simply acknowledged with 
a wink: "The only poll the matters is the one on Election Day." In the world of 
scientific investigation, and for environmental studies in particular, every 
day is Election Day: you can see the proof of their conclusions all around you.

When it comes to the West Virginia chemical leak, one might suppose that the 
Washington Beltway has insulated the chattering class from the stink: not just 
the because of the bubble of self-absorption the Beltway represents, but 
because of the sheer distance between West Virginia and Washington DC. It's 
about a five-hour drive. New Jersey is just an hour closer, but the shared 
obsession with process politics (and Bruce Springsteen) makes it seem like next 
door.

Still, West Virginia is closer than DC reporters might think, and its toxic 
water may yet wind up in the ice that clinks during Washington cocktail 
parties. Many of the chemicals that coal production sloughs off into the air, 
water, and land are heavy metals. They don't decompose with time and instead 
migrate and accumulate; what was in West Virginia's soil can eventually 
contaminate suburban Arlington's rain.

Last month, the supreme court heard arguments about an Environmental 
Protection Agency regulation designed to address just that: the "Cross-State 
Air Pollution Rule", which is exactly what it sounds like. At issue is the way 
the EPA apportions clean-up and directs policy changes; in the federally 
designated "Ozone Transport Region", a select group of states whose 
power-plants causes other states' to fail federal air-quality standards would 
have to submit to the EPA's authority in fixing the problem.

The rule was successfully challenged by "upwind" states at the appellate level 
and the Supreme Court's predilection is unusually inscrutable: With Justice 
Alito having recused himself, it's possible that the decision will end in a tie 
between its traditionally left and right wings. In the case of a tie, the 
appellate decision will stand.

At the time, Governor Tomblin celebrated 
<http://wvrecord.com/news/246238-tomblin-rockefeller-praise-rejection-of-epa-rule>
 the appellate court's ruling: "It's time for Washington to stop trying to tell 
us how to run our coal mines," he said. He meant "the White House," not 
Washington, of course. Because in Washington, they still don't care.
 