
The public is fed up with politicians, and not just because of the expenses row
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/datablog/2015/aug/07/politicians-entitlements-and-expenses-help-investigate-four-years-of-data>
.

Once upon a time, Australia was regarded as a leader in democratic innovation, 
the “social laboratory” of the world. We were at the forefront of the fight for 
women’s suffrage in the late 19th century, we developed new forms of public 
institutions at arm’s length from executive government, and gave the world the “
Australian ballot 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2008/10/13/rock-paper-scissors>”.

Mass surveillance makes us subjects of the state. That's chilling | Richard 
Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/26/mass-surveillance-makes-us-subjects-of-the-state-thats-chilling>
We still do many things well. In 2014, Australia remained in the top 10 of the 
the Economist’s “Democracy Index 
<http://www.sudestada.com.uy/Content/Articles/421a313a-d58f-462e-9b24-2504a37f6b56/Democracy-index-2014.pdf>
”, despite dropping three places. And while the Australian Electoral Commission 
may have misplaced Senate ballot slips during the last federal election, we’re 
still lucky to have it – the existence of an independent nation-wide body to 
manage elections and enrolment is still something of a rarity internationally.

But like a fish that has to keep swimming to stay alive, democracy must be 
constantly defended and extended to survive. Instead, Australia has been 
starving it of oxygen. Our elected representatives seem willing to do almost 
anything to escape the safeguards designed to keep them in check.

Dodgy expense claims are probably the least of our worries. Which should 
concern us more – the questionable use of taxpayers’ money to fund personal 
flights, or the questionable use of national security issues to undermine civil 
liberties?

The new metadata retention laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/26/mass-surveillance-makes-us-subjects-of-the-state-thats-chilling>
 show a cavalier disregard for the right to privacy, or in the words of 
whistleblowerEdward Snowden 
<http://www.abc.net.au/lateline/content/2015/s4232631.htm>, “a radical 
departure from the traditional operations of liberal society”.

In the early days of the Abbott government, a proposal to curtail consumer 
boycotts was abandoned in the face of fierce criticism, but thecurrent attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/mar/31/tax-deductible-status-of-green-groups-including-greenpeace-under-spotlight>
 on the charity status of outspoken environmental organisations is a similar 
threat to basic civic freedoms.

Meanwhile, there is support from the Liberal party for voter ID legislation, 
which could effectively disenfranchise large numbers of Australians without 
passports or driver’s licences (in NSW only two out of every five Indigenous 
Australians have a driver’s licence, for example).

Is it a coincidence that this policy would be most likely to affect people who 
tend to vote Labor? If not, it represents a sad decline from the days of South 
Australian Liberal premier Raymond Steele Hall: after winning the 1968 state 
election he went on to commit political suicide on a point of principle, by 
reforming a skewed electoral formula that had kept his party in power.

The influence of business in New South Wales has been in the spotlight thanks 
to the Independent Commission Against Corruption (Icac), yet we still lack a 
federal corruption watchdog. And since the Gillard government’s watered-down 
donation reform bill was blocked in 2013, we remain in the dark on political 
donations: over $13,000 can be donated in secret, and still more if donors 
split their donations between multiple state branches of a party.

Because of the royal commission into trade union governance and corruption, we 
now know about Bill Shorten’s failure to disclose an in-kind donation to his 
2007 election campaign. Such convenient memory leaks arecommon 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2015/07/09/shortens-late-declaration-typical-of-a-rotten-disclosure-system/>
, and not restricted to one party.

The same goes for the laundering of political careers into lucrative 
private-sector appointments. We’ve learned that the Adani mining company has 
former Liberal and Labor figures on board 
<http://www.smh.com.au/business/mining-and-resources/indian-miner-adani-hires-labor-and-liberal-staffers-to-make-its-case-20150703-gi3yg8.html>
 lobbying in support of its plans, which include dredging in Great Barrier Reef 
waters.

This tactic is widespread. There are now 30 full-time independent lobbyists 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/national/public-service/lobbyists-should-reveal-private-talks-with-ministers-20150225-13mjgw.html>
 for every cabinet minister, leaving plenty of spots for politicians and their 
staff to slip into once they pass through Canberra’s revolving door.

Australia, along with many other western countries, has allowed our strong 
reforming tradition to decline because at some point we mistook democracy for 
an endpoint rather than an ongoing process. The cultivation of democracy is a 
journey without end, and when we stop moving we find ourselves going backwards 
– often quite rapidly.

In the US, fans of the House of Cards series may wonder whether they are 
watching a documentary. Political scientists Gilens and Page 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/john-cassidy/is-america-an-oligarchy> studied 
two decades of data on the influence of ordinary voters, wealthy voters, and 
interest groups on US policy. Their forensic analysis provides evidence that 
the US is, essentially, an oligarchy run in the interests of wealthy citizens 
and business groups. Their findings may not be so strong if applied to 
Australian data, but no one witnessing the toxic politics of policy change in 
this country would assume we are immune.

Asylum seeker 'mega department' risks our democracy | Bruce Haigh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/09/australias-asylum-seeker-obsession-puts-democracy-at-risk>
The health of our democracy should not be a partisan issue. People who 
disagree on almost everything else can agree that all citizens should have an 
equal opportunity to influence the decisions that affect their lives.

Economic liberals can see that successful rent-seeking undermines competitive 
markets, conservatives can see the threat to the institution of democracy 
itself, and egalitarians can see the unfairness of a society in which some 
voters are more equal than others.

The constituency for stopping the rot should be strong. It’s time for a 
broad-based social movement in defence of democracy. Occupy the state, anyone?

A version of this article was first published in DemocracyRenewal 
<http://democracyrenewal.edu.au/>. Miriam Lyons will appear at the Sydney 
Festival of Dangerous Ideas on 5 September 
<http://fodi.sydneyoperahouse.com/program/after-luck/>.
 