
Formula One has been urged to “improve its image” by speaking out on the human 
rights situation in Azerbaijan,which will stage its inaugural grand prix on 19 
June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/mar/05/bernie-ecclestone-deal-f1-grand-prix-azerbaijan>
.

Sport For Rights – an organisation established to draw attention to 
Azerbaijan’s human rights record – has urgedBernie Ecclestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bernie-ecclestone> to take a stand.

“We have called on Formula One <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/formulaone> 
[chief executive] Bernie Ecclestone to publicly speak out on human rights 
issues in Azerbaijan and to call for the release of political prisoners,” the 
Sports for Rights campaign co-ordinator, Rebecca Vincent, said. “We wrote him 
an open letter and there has not been a public response yet.

Declining reputation of F1 in danger of reaching critical mass | Richard 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/apr/01/f1-critical-mass-bernie-ecclestone-formula-one-baku-grand-prix>
“Mr Ecclestone is in a position where he could really do good. This is an 
opportunity to improve Formula One’s image and to help people inAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan>, rather than just profiting and 
helping some very corrupt people.”

However Vincent, who was backed up by Phil Bloomer, executive director of the 
Business and Human Rights Resource Centre, made it clear that she did not want 
the race airbrushed from the busy Formula One schedule.

She said: “We’re not asking them to cancel the race, we’re not calling on 
people not to go. We are asking Mr Ecclestone to use it to make a stand instead 
of enabling repression. He said last year that there was no big problem with 
human rights in Azerbaijan, and people seemed happy. It takes just five minutes 
on Google to see what is really going on.”

Vincent revealed that the campaign group had been to the London offices of 
Formula One Management on Monday and spoken with two high-ranking F1 officials, 
with further talks planned later in the year.

Sport for Rights has also approached representatives of the pop stars Pharrell 
Williams, Enrique Iglesias and Chris Brown, asking them to cancel their 
performances over the grand prix weekend, but are still awaiting a response.

Bloomer found room to praise Formula One when he said: “F1 should be commended 
for developing their human rights policy. It is a decent, modest policy on 
human rights which follows quite religiously the United Nations’ guiding 
principles of business and human rights.

“But we all know too many cases where human rights policies have been 
developed and not owned by the leadership, and I think Bernie Ecclestone’s 
comments demonstrate that.”

The London conference was launched with a Sport for Rights booklet, entitled A 
Full-Throttle Attack on Human Rights: What Reporters covering the F1 Baku Grand 
Prix should know. The booklet highlighted what the campaign groups say is the 
plight of political prisoners, human rights defenders, journalists, bloggers 
and activists.

Bloomer added: “Azerbaijan has got form. We had the European Games there last 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/26/silence-european-games-azerbaijan-grim-future>
, which was a highly expensive vanity project. These mega sporting events act 
as a sanitiser and also promotes the image of a modern economy. Formula One 
also has form in this area. In Bahrain the government used the grand prix to 
project a very different image to what was happening in the streets, where 
demonstrators were being bludgeoned, where protesters were being imprisoned.”

Bloomer also warned that there was a growing impatience among sponsors. He 
said: “There is rising evidence that major sponsors are running out of patience 
with major sports who are constantly putting their events in highly oppressive 
states. They’ve said they can’t abide to be associated with the ugly, polluted, 
poisonous, toxic brand of Fifa. And when sponsors start to speak the governing 
bodies somehow have to reform.”

Ecclestone did not respond to attempts to contact him on Tuesday. However, an 
Azerbaijan embassy spokesman said: “We welcome constructive dialogue, but the 
call for artists not to perform is not helpful. Should we hold all sporting 
events in flawless western democracies?”
 