
A viral photograph of a newborn baby next to his placenta, the umbilical cord 
spelling out “love”, has prompted discussion about birth rituals – and a couple 
of snarky tweets.

Brisbane <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane> photographer 
Emma Jean Nolan posted the black-and-white photograph of Harper Hoani Spies 
next to his placenta on her professional Facebook page on Sunday, just 90 
minutes after he was born. Since then the post has received more than 3,000 
likes and 750 shares.

Harper’s mother Jolene Spies, descended from the Ngai Tahu iwi or tribe of the 
southern region ofNew Zealand <https://www.theguardian.com/world/newzealand>, 
commissioned Nolan as a birth photographer.

I ate my wife's placenta raw in a smoothie and cooked in a taco
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/30/i-ate-wifes-placenta-smoothie-taco-afterbirth>
In the post, Nolan quotes the website Mothers Matter 
<http://www.mothersmatter.co.nz/Culture/Maori.asp> to explain the sacred link 
between the organ and the land in Maori culture, expressed in Te Reo, the Maori 
language, with the same word.

“As a Maori baby, [Harper’s] placenta will now be returned to the land,” she 
writes. “Whenua (placenta) is returned to the whenua (land) with the pito 
(umbilical cord) the link between the newborn and papatuanuku (mother earth). 
With this affinity established, each individual fulfils the role of curator for 
papatuanuku, which remains lifelong.”

The post has generated conversation about birth rituals.

Facebook user Jackie Kainuku said the practice 
<https://www.facebook.com/emmajeanphotographictales/photos/a.877796332327511.1073741831.877041535736324/901895843250893/?type=3&comment_id=904139039693240&comment_tracking=%7B%22tn%22%3A%22R9%22%7D>
 of burying the placenta was “very common” in New Zealand.

She kept her three sons’ placentas in a freezer for six years, “waiting for 
the right place to bury them”. Before she moved to Australia in 2011, she 
buried them with her partner’s late sister. “It was a very meaningful and 
beautiful way to give back to the Earth for our boys,” she said.

Another commenter Crystal Gell said she put 
<https://www.facebook.com/emmajeanphotographictales/photos/a.877796332327511.1073741831.877041535736324/901895843250893/?type=3&comment_id=904213503019127&comment_tracking=%7B%22tn%22%3A%22R9%22%7D>
 her daughter’s placenta in a pot in soil and planted a lime tree in it: “We 
are waiting to build our house so we can transfer it to the ground,” she said.

Nolan, who is also a trained midwife, told Guardian Australia the practice of 
returning the placenta to the earth is not common in western cultures.

“Even many people who live in Australia but who are from cultures that follow 
this practice often don’t do it,” she said. “However it is clear from the 
response to this post that there are a lot of people still doing it – many will 
go to the lengths of travelling home from overseas to bury it on their home 
land.”

The comments on Nolan’s photo on Facebook are overwhelmingly positive, but 
elsewhere the internet has made other suggestions – some definitely 
tongue-in-cheek – for purposes that placenta could be applied to.

The Cut writer Jessica Roy proposed other phrases 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/01/words-to-spell-with-your-babys-umbilical-cord.html>
 that could be spelled with “navel string”, including “FIRST!!!1” and “LET’S GO 
METS”.
bobby finger (@bobbyfinger) 
@jessicakroy <https://twitter.com/JessicaKRoy> pic.twitter.com/cZBBQ1pWpx 
<https://t.co/cZBBQ1pWpx>
 <https://twitter.com/bobbyfinger/status/685191441396711424> January 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bobbyfinger/status/685191441396711424> bobby finger 
(@bobbyfinger) 
@lindseyweber <https://twitter.com/lindseyweber> @jessicakroy 
<https://twitter.com/JessicaKRoy> pic.twitter.com/wKOV4cKZqM 
<https://t.co/wKOV4cKZqM>
 <https://twitter.com/bobbyfinger/status/685192673284730880> January 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bobbyfinger/status/685192673284730880> 
A five-year-old online tutorial 
<http://www.dse.nl/~jipje/drawing/placenta_art/> for “placenta art” – which 
includes such helpful suggestions as “be well prepared”, “you don’t need to use 
paint to make the prints. There is enough blood in the placenta”, and “use 
heavy watercolour paper so the paper won’t curl when it gets wet” – also 
resurfaced with Nolan’s photo.

Eating your placenta, once perceived as solely the eccentricity of celebrities 
such as Kim Kardashian and January Jones, is apparentlynow more widespread 
<http://jezebel.com/5898245/so-you-want-to-eat-your-placenta>, with cooked or 
encapsulated in an easy-to-swallow pill among the options.
 