
Arqiva <https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> has appointed Fallon, the 
advertising agency behind commercials such as the Cadbury "Gorilla" and Sony 
"Balls", to the £5m-plus annual account to make its online TV service SeeSaw a 
household name.

The transmission company has asked Fallon to create the launch campaign aimed 
at making SeeSaw - the service built from the assets acquired following the
closure of ITV, Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide's defunct service Kangaroo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/24/arqiva-project-kangaroo> - as 
well-known as the BBC iPlayer.

Arqiva plans to launch SeeSaw "in the coming months" but has not revealed a 
date, although registration for a beta test of the service is expected to begin 
soon.

"Pioneering technology aligned with great content will underpin the SeeSaw 
proposition, offering an exciting new way for consumers to enjoy their 
favourite programming," said Maya Bhose, the head of brand marketing at SeeSaw. 
"The marketing campaign will form a key element in driving awareness of the 
service and engaging customers with SeeSaw."

Fallon will create a multimedia campaign for SeeSaw to drive awareness of the 
service among consumers. SeeSaw appointed Fallon following a review of several 
agencies.

Bhose said that she hoped Fallon would bring the "creative inspiration" to the 
SeeSaw brand that has helped clients such as Cadbury and Sony.

SeeSaw is aiming to offer the "best of British content supported by high 
quality international and US programming".

The company has not announced any programming deals but it has been reported 
that agreements have been reached with Channel 4 and BBC Worldwide.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 