
More than 80% of single parents believe they will run out of food or struggle 
to pay for school books, uniforms or utility bills if theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> succeeds in passing the 
cuts to family benefits it says are necessary to pay for its new childcare 
plan, according to a survey.


The government has been unable to get the family tax benefit cuts through the 
Senate, but they remain before the parliament, and in budget calculations, as 
part of the so-called“zombie savings” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/11/so-much-about-this-australian-election-is-unknown-timing-is-the-least-of-our-worries>
. The Coalition insists the $4.8bn saved by the cuts is the only way to pay for 
its $3.5bn childcare revamp.

But included in those family tax benefit cuts is the proposal to reduce family 
tax benefit B by $1,700 a year for families with a child between 13 and 16 and 
then cease the payment, which is now made until the child turns 18. These 
families would also lose end-of-year supplements worth more than $1,000 a year.

Lenore Taylor and Katharine Murphy discuss polling - Australian Politics Live 
podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/audio/2016/jun/04/lenore-taylor-and-katharine-murphy-discuss-polling-australian-politics-live-podcast>
But the single parents surveyed said they relied on the payments to make ends 
meet. 98% of the survey respondents were women.

According to the online survey of 737 single parents by the National Council 
of Single Mothers and their Children <http://www.ncsmc.org.au/>, 65% were 
already running out of food before they could buy more but almost 82% believed 
this would happen if their family tax benefits were cut.

Around half said they were already unable to pay for school camps or other 
one-off school costs, but 78% said this would happen under the cuts. Two-thirds 
(67%) said they already struggled to pay for books and uniforms but 78% said 
they thought this would happen and another 72% said they thought they would no 
longer be able to maintain a roadworthy car.

Asked what they had used family payments for in the past year, one said: 
“Everything, it pays for everything including some of the rent. I manage 
everything for two teenagers on just over $400 a fortnight.”

Asked what they had forgone, another replied: “Forgo dental treatment. 
Inability to feed pets. No car insurance. No health insurance. No home.”

Asked what would happen in payments were cut further a single mother said: “I 
pay rent and bills first, then anything my children need. I neglect myself so I 
can give my children everything they need. I’m wearing ripped clothes so my son 
can have a school uniform.”

Another said “If we lose any more, we will be destroyed.”

Terese Edwards, the chief executive of the council, said the survey told the 
same story she heard every day.

“These families are struggling with the very basics, they are in no position 
to afford further cuts … people are cashing in their super, they are selling 
things, they are absolutely broke,” she said.

“And some of these families are the same women and children who are fleeing 
domestic violence and trying to re-establish a life.”

The government says low and middle income families will be better off under 
its childcare package, but Edwards says that does not help struggling single 
parents with school-aged children.

The government also argues the supplement was introduced because many families 
were finding themselves with a liability after being accidentally overpaid when 
they underestimated what their family earnings would be. Now that technology 
has overcome that problem, the payments have outlived their purpose. Edwards 
says the money is now an essential part of family budgets.

The family tax benefits cuts hit the headlines again this week when the 
Coalition attackedLabor’s $3bn childcare policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/05/labor-3bn-childcare-election-2016-families-less-than-150000>
, saying it was not funded by specific savings. The Coalition’s childcare plans 
have been delayed until 2018 because the family tax benefit cuts it says are 
needed to pay for the extra childcare have not passed the Senate.

Modelling by the Australian National University’s research school of social 
sciences of the overall impact of the 2016 budget, including the family tax 
benefit cuts, found that single parent families in the bottom 20% of the income 
distribution were among the worst hit, and were expected to be, on average, 
worse off by $1209 in 2018-19.
 