
Amy Schumer was faced with booing and walkouts in Florida over the weekend 
after she made jokes aboutDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

Saturday Night Live: Baldwin is back as Trump for 'worst ever presidential 
debate'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/16/saturday-night-live-baldwin-is-back-as-trump-for-worst-ever-presidential-debate>
Around 200 people left her show at the Amalie Arena in Tampa after the 
controversial comic called the Republican candidate an “orange, 
sexual-assaulting, fake-college-starting monster”.

According to the Tampa Bay Times 
<http://www.tampabay.com/blogs/the-buzz-florida-politics/trump-fans-boo-walk-out-on-amy-schumer-in-tampa/2298412>
, Schumer covered issues ranging from the election to gun control, an issue 
she’sspoken out about before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/aug/03/amy-schumer-to-push-for-us-gun-control-after-trainwreck-shootings>
 following the shooting that took place at a screening of her film Trainwreck 
in 2015.

At one point in the show, Schumer asked a Trump supporter, “preferably one 
with sleeves”, to come onstage and explain why they were picking him. A local 
man got up and explained the decision was about not liking Clinton.

“Do you get worried at all with how impulsive he is?” she reportedly said to 
him. “Do you worry he’ll be impulsive and get us in a lot of fucking trouble we 
can’t get out of?”

As audience members booed, Schumer responded: “Of course, we’re in Florida, 
you’re going to boo. I know you’re here to laugh, but you choose how you’re 
going to live your life, and it’s just too important. Just so you know, from 
now on, if you yell out, you’re gonna get thrown out.”

The comic has been a vocal supporter of Hillary Clinton since March and also 
spent time at the weekend helping people in Florida ensure they were registered 
to vote.

The response to Schumer may also be linked to her recent book The Girl with 
the Lower Back Tattoo, in which she called Tampa “horrendous” and joked that 
“no one who lives there has ever read a book”.

Schumer has responded to the incident, telling Entertainment Weekly 
<http://www.ew.com/article/2016/10/17/amy-schumer-responds-tampa-crowd-walk-out>
: “I loved the crowd and my show in Tampa last night! I want to thank the 8,400 
people who stayed. We had a great time! We have always depended on comedians to 
make us laugh and tell the truth. I am proud to continue that tradition.”

 