
Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> and the 
SNP leadership have put the brakes on moves towards a second independence 
referendum saying that the Scottish government will hold fire until “strong and 
consistent evidence” emerges of a change in public opinion.


In marked contrast to her predecessor Alex Salmond, who regularly describes 
independence as inevitable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/26/second-scottish-referendum-inevitable-alex-salmond>
, the first minister said that the fate of asecond referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/14/nicola-sturgeon-independence-snp-conference-scotland>
 lay in the hands of the Scottish people.

Speaking on the opening day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/15/nicola-sturgeon-mocks-unreliable-unelectable-labour-at-snp-conference>
 of the SNP conference in Aberdeen, the first minister said: “I believe with 
all my heart thatScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> should be 
an independent country.

“And I, of course, respect the decision that our country made last year. So 
let me be clear: to propose another referendum in the next parliament, without 
strong evidence that a significant number of those who voted no have changed 
their minds, would be wrong and we won’t do that. It would not be respecting 
the decision that people have made.”


The intervention by Sturgeon, whose remarks were echoed by the deputy first 
minister and finance secretary John Swinney, marked a deliberate tactic by the 
SNP leadership to dispense with the referendum issue in the opening minutes of 
the conference. This was designed to allow the party to focus on bread and 
butter issues as the SNP moves to frame the debate in the run-up to theHolyrood 
elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/07/who-are-snp-election-candidates-profiles>
next May.


The party’s eight cabinet secretaries will each make an appearance on the 
conference platform on Friday to outline their plans on areas such as education 
and health as the SNP seeks to win its third successive Holyrood win .

The leadership hopes that an emphatic win improving on the 50% of the vote the 
SNP secured in the UKgeneral election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/08/general-election-2015-the-winners-and-losers>
 this year, would help the party win the confidence of No voters in last year’s 
referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2014/sep/18/-sp-scottish-independence-referendum-results-in-full>
 as it embarks on a slow march towards a second referendum.


Sturgeon outlined this thinking when she told the conference: “For those who 
want Scotland to be independent, there is only one vote next year that makes 
sense – and that is a vote for the SNP. But I don’t want to just win the votes 
of independence supporters. I want to inspire people who voted No to vote SNP 
too. I want them to vote SNP because we are the best party, with the best ideas 
and the best people to leadScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> 
forward.”


The first minister received a rapturous reception at the largest SNP 
conference yet, held in the Aberdeen Exhibition and Conference Centre, which 
usually hosts events associated with the North Sea oil industry. Sturgeon told 
the conference, which is being attended by 3,500 delegates plus 1,000 
observers, exhibitors and journalists, that the SNP’smembership has grown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/22/snp-poised-become-largest-political-parties>
 from 25,000 last year to 114,121 – the “real verdict” on the party’s time in 
government.


Sturgeon’s remarks showed that the SNP believes that its credibility as a 
long-standing government offers the party its best chance of winning sceptical 
voters round to the idea of independence. But Swinney showed that the party 
knows it has to address one area where it is criticised for a lack of 
credibility when he admitted that the SNP had been wrong about the price of oil.


Salmond claimed during the referendum campaign that an independent Scotland 
would have sustainable public finances in part becauseof oil revenues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/mar/12/scotland-deficit-12bn-alex-salmond-damages-case-independence-economy-oil-revenues-fall>
. He made his calculations on the basis that a barrel of oil was worth $113. The
price is now around $47 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/11/goldman-sachs-says-oil-could-fall-to-20-dollars-a-barrel>
.


Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Swinney admitted that he had failed 
to foresee thecollapse in world oil prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/21/falling-oil-prices-fracking-us-iran-saudi-arabia-opec>
 though he insisted that the UK government was making similar predictions about 
the price of oil. “The figure that we used had not transpired, but the figure 
we used was based within a range of different estimates that were put in place.”


Swinney also admitted that a steep slump in the North Sea oil industry centred 
on Aberdeen and crucial to Scotland’s economic output was largely to blame for 
theloss of 18,000 jobs between June and August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/30/aberdeen-oil-prices-faded-granite-glamour>
, against the UK-wide trend. And he indicated that the unemployment figures 
could still get worse as the effects of the slump in oil prices worked their 
way through the industry – particularly in the north-east region around 
Aberdeen.


The leadership did stress that it was not abandoning its ambitions of a 
referendum as Sturgeon cited four areas – aUK exit from the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/02/nicola-sturgeon-scottish-backlash-if-uk-exits-europe>
, deeper spending cuts, renewing Trident and failing to implement in full the
referendum “vow” of more powers to Holyrood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/18/scotland-bill-fails-honour-devolution-vow-sturgeon-cameron-law>
 – that would lead to a rise in support for independence. She made clear that a 
UK exit from the EU was the most significant area.


“If you try to take Scotland out of the EU against our democratic wishes you 
will be breaching the terms of last year’s vote,” Sturgeon said in a direct 
message to Cameron. “In those circumstances you may well find that demand for a 
second independence referendum is unstoppable.”

Tommy Sheppard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/15/tommy-sheppard-snp-top-10-most-ridiculous-things-about-westminster>
, the SNP MP for Edinburgh East, adopted a different tone to the leadership on 
the referendum when he said that every time David Cameron rejects reasonable 
demands from the people of Scotland, their support for independence increases.


Sheppard won the loudest cheers, after those for Sturgeon, when he told the 
conference that the SNP would continue to seek to amend the Scotland bill to 
restore the pledges delivered by the main UK leaders inthe “Vow” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/scotland-blog/2015/mar/26/the-vow-was-not-a-decisive-factor-in-scots-voting-no-to-indepedence>
 in the final days of the referendum. The SNP would also seek to reverse 
welfare cuts.

He added: “We may fail but I say this to David Cameron: that if we get the 
situation, as we have had over these long months, where we win the arguments 
and they can’t beat us in the chamber and then they drag them out of the bars 
and clubs to come and vote from their shires and the home counties against the 
people of Scotland: they will rue the day they do that.

“Every time they say no to a reasonable proposal then they are fuelling the 
support for the Yes position the next time that is put to the Scottish people. 
Every time they say no to something they are increasing our ambition to have 
everything.”
 