
John Cleese: ‘He left me weak with laughter’

The first time I set eyes on Andy Sachs was at the Lyric Theatre, London, in 
the autumn of 1973. Andy was appearing with Alec Guinness in Alan Bennett’s 
Habeas Corpus, an exquisitely crafted sex-farce about a respectable family in 
Brighton in the 1960s. Andy was playing a piano tuner, but the magnificent 
Margaret Courtenay mistook him for the man who was coming to measure her for a 
custom-made bra. When Andy started on the standard pianist’s hand-and-finger 
stretching routine, she began to register anticipation of nameless carnal 
delights, producing one of the funniest farcical moments I have ever seen. Weak 
with laughter, I managed to open my programme and underline his name.

'I know nothing!' Manuel's most farcical moments in Fawlty Towers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/02/andrew-sachs-manuels-five-most-farcial-moments-in-fawlty-towers>
A few weeks later, I was casting a short film called Romance with a Double 
Bass, and I asked Andy to join us for a few days’ shooting. It turned out to be 
a very happy collaboration, and I observed what a wonderfully inventive comic 
actor I was working with. Luckily, Connie Booth and I were already writing the 
pilot episode of Fawlty Towers, so I had the inspired idea of casting Andy as 
Manuel.

Inspired? Let me explain something. If you met Andy socially it would never 
have occurred to you for one moment that he was an actor. You would have 
guessed a senior civil servant, or a physician, or an academic, or perhaps a 
research scientist. He was quiet, thoughtful, beautifully mannered, well 
informed, observant and extremely kind. But once you put that moustache on him …
Ole! Manuel appeared, as if from nowhere.

I salute you, Andy. You created one of the great comic characters.

Connie Booth: ‘Andrew had wit that could sting’

It’s been 50 years since the cast of Fawlty Towers met at the BBC to begin 
work.Andrew Sachs <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-sachs> was 
unknown to me, but not to John. He had watched him play one of the funniest 
pieces of farce business he’d ever seen in Alan Bennett’s Habeas Corpus.

 Looking back, the choice of Andrew was a stroke of enormous good luck. Like 
Abbott and Costello or Laurel and Hardy, he and John at first glance were a 
droll study in comic contrast. Basil was tall and dogmatic, Manuel small and 
confused. People say that nobody but John could have played Basil; it’s just as 
true that nobody but Andrew could have played Manuel, even though there was a 
time when Andrew, who was German by birth, wanted to play the character in 
German. The character became iconic.

Andrew Sachs obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/dec/02/andrew-sachs-obituary> 
In person, Andrew had none of the manic bravado associated with comedians. He 
wasn’t showy or noisy; he was a good listener; he had wit that could sting. 
There was a certain detachment about him, magnified in the last years by the 
onset of Alzheimer’s.

That same detachment was apparent on stage when some of the great comic 
set-pieces backfired. For instance, during a fire drill at the hotel, Basil 
assembles everyone in the lobby, but Manuel is in the kitchen with a frying pan 
and his sleeve catches fire. Manuel runs out yelling: “Fire! Fire!” But Basil, 
insisting that there is no fire, pushes him back in, which sets the whole 
kitchen ablaze.

In the playing, although Andrew had on a protective jacket, he was badly 
burned. In that moment of panic and pain, Andrew remained calm. (He later sued 
the BBC). And again, in another scene when John whacked him on the head with a 
frying pan, he ended up slightly concussed but showed no pain.

 It reminds me of my first question to Andrew about what makes something 
funny. He used the example of slipping on a banana peel. If an actual person 
slips on a banana peel, he said, we’re concerned for him. To be comic, the 
audience must instinctively know he’s hasn’t been hurt, that he’s OK. Off-stage 
or on, I never saw pain in Andrew.

• John Cleese’s words are from his foreword to I Know Nothing!, Andrew Sachs’s 
autobiography.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffawlty-towers-star-andrew-sachs-dies-aged-86-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fawlty%20Towers%20star%20Andrew%20Sachs%20dies%20aged%2086%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffawlty-towers-star-andrew-sachs-dies-aged-86-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fawlty%20Towers%20star%20Andrew%20Sachs%20dies%20aged%2086%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Ffawlty-towers-star-andrew-sachs-dies-aged-86-video-report&media=>
Fawlty Towers star Andrew Sachs dies aged 86 – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/dec/02/fawlty-towers-star-andrew-sachs-dies-aged-86-video-report> 