
The FBI told a federal court it needed a search warrant to look at thousands 
of Hillary Clinton’s emails on the laptop of former US congressmanAnthony Weiner
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner> because they had the 
potential to cause “grave damage to national security” if disclosed, according 
to court documents made public on Tuesday.

The 50 best US films of 2016: No 10 – Weiner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/05/the-50-best-us-films-of-2016-no-10-weiner>
The wording was contained in a redacted search warrant and other court papers 
that were previously under seal in the investigation of an online relationship 
between Weiner, the estranged husband of top Clinton aideHuma Abedin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/huma-abedin>, and a teenage girl in North 
Carolina. The papers offered no new revelations about Clinton’s emails or the 
scope of a case that factored into the presidential election.

A sworn statement dated 30 October from an FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> agent whose name was blacked out 
cited a previous inquiry into Clinton’s personal computer server that found 22 
emails classified “top secret”. The classification “is significant because it 
means that the unauthorized disclosure of those emails could result in 
exceptionally grave damage to national security”, the agent wrote.

In the Weiner investigation, the FBI discovered header information on emails 
pointing to correspondence to and from Clinton, the papers say. Given the 
findings of the earlier investigation, “there is also probable cause to believe 
that the correspondence … contains classified information which was produced by 
and is owned by the US government,” they say.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhillary-clinton-emails-anthony-weiner-fbi-search-warrant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdc668b4a4db58ab9372259ee837450f9e342bc7%2F0_42_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FBI%20search%20warrant%20for%20Clinton%20emails%20on%20Anthony%20Weiner's%20laptop%20made%20public&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhillary-clinton-emails-anthony-weiner-fbi-search-warrant%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FBI%20search%20warrant%20for%20Clinton%20emails%20on%20Anthony%20Weiner%27s%20laptop%20made%20public&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fhillary-clinton-emails-anthony-weiner-fbi-search-warrant%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdc668b4a4db58ab9372259ee837450f9e342bc7%2F0_42_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 Disgraced former congressman Anthony Weiner. Photograph: Jin Lee/AP 
US district judge P Kevin Castel ruled on Monday that the public had a right 
to see the search warrant application and supporting court paperwork, but he 
said portions would be blacked out to protect the identity of the investigating 
agents. The judge also ordered the redaction of sections of the paperwork 
related to the ongoing investigation into Weiner’s online correspondence.

'The FBI is Trumpland': anti-Clinton atmosphere spurred leaking, sources say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/fbi-leaks-hillary-clinton-james-comey-donald-trump>
The discovery of the emails on the disgraced New York congressman’s laptop 
prompted the FBI director, James Comey, to briefly reopen an investigation that 
he had closed over the summer into Clinton’s use of the private server to 
handle emails she sent and received as secretary of state.

After getting court consent to delve into the newly discovered emails on 30 
October, agents spent several days analyzing them before Comey announced that 
they contained no new evidence of any wrongdoing by Clinton.

In statement, E Randol Schoenberg, a Los Angeles lawyer who had sued to obtain 
the court papers, said on Tuesday that he saw “nothing at all in the search 
warrant application that would give rise to probable cause, nothing that would 
make anyone suspect that there was anything on the laptop beyond what the FBI 
had already searched and determined not to be evidence of a crime, nothing to 
suggest that there would be anything other than routine correspondence between 
secretary Clinton and her longtime aide Huma Abedin”.
 