
When Benfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> make the 
3,800-mile journey to Kazakhstan as part of the group stage of this season’s 
Champions League they will be taking on the remotest and smallest team in the 
competition – and also one of the richest.

FC Astana 
<http://www.uefa.com/teamsandplayers/teams/club=2600605/profile/index.html> 
became the first central Asian team to get to this round of the competition 
after a dramatic late goal gave them a victory over Cypriot club Apoel Nicosia 
last month.

The reward, along with facing former champions Benfica, are matches again the 
Spanish giantsAtlético Madrid  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid>and Turkish club 
Galatasaray <https://www.theguardian.com/football/galatasaray>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fastana-benfica-champions-league-kazakhstan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77d6a4ac540460bbad6516f4675d391dcb13eebc%2F0_146_3538_2122%2F3538.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FC%20Astana%20%E2%80%93%20the%20little%20club%20with%20deep%20pockets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fastana-benfica-champions-league-kazakhstan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FC%20Astana%20%E2%80%93%20the%20little%20club%20with%20deep%20pockets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fastana-benfica-champions-league-kazakhstan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77d6a4ac540460bbad6516f4675d391dcb13eebc%2F0_146_3538_2122%2F3538.jpg>
 Ex-Barcelona defender Eric Abidal pulls out FC Astana in the UEFA Champions 
League draw. Photograph: Marcio Machado/ZUMA Press/Corbis 
FC Astana’s success also means a windfall for the club, as each of the 32 teams
 <http://www.uefa.com/uefachampionsleague/news/newsid=1858497.html> in the 
group stage is awarded an estimated €12m for participating, plus €1.5m for 
every win and €500,000 for every draw.

Most football teams in Europe would consider the millions of euros in earnings 
to be the biggest benefit of playing in theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague>, but that’s not the case 
for FC Astana.

Like many things in Kazakhstan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/kazakhstan> the club was created and is 
owned by the state, and is part of a campaign to promote the country’s newly 
minted, remote, and rather unknown capital city: Astana.

The official owner of the club, which was only formed six years ago, is the 
country’s super-rich sovereign wealth fund, known asSamuryq-Qazyna 
<http://sk.kz/>.

Among the fund’s assets are Kazakhstan’s postal system and the state oil and 
gas companyKazMunayGas <http://www.kmg.kz/en/>, as well as banks, mines, 
airlines, airports and the country’s railways.

Samuryq-Qazyna’s extensive holdings, estimated to be worth about €66.5bn, 
technically make FC Astana one of the richest teams in the Champions League. 
Although a direct comparison is difficult,Forbes 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/kurtbadenhausen/2015/07/15/the-worlds-50-most-valuable-sports-teams-2015/>
 places Real Madrid’s net worth at €30bn and Barcelona’s at €2.8bn. The fund’s 
deep pockets have already paid for a 30,000-seater stadium, the Astana Arena, 
costing €164m to construct and a squadvalued at 
<http://www.transfermarkt.de/fc-astana/startseite/verein/22220/saison_id/2014> 
€14.5m.

Samuryq-Qazyna’s head is Omirzaq Shukeev, a former deputy prime minister and 
economics adviser to presidentNursultan Nazarbayev 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/kazakhstan-election-nazarbaev/26978826.html>. The 
club is also a member of Nazarbayev’sAstana Presidential Sports Club 
<http://sk.kz/event/view/165?lang=en>, created in 2012 to provide financial 
support for several sports teams that compete on the international stage.

All seven of the club’s members have Astana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/astana> in their name, and several feature 
the powder blue and yellow colours of the Kazakh flag.

Best-known among them is the Astana cycling team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/apr/24/teams-demand-transparency-uci-astan-licence>
, home to some of the world’s best racing talent including Alberto Contador, 
Vincenzo Nibali, Fabio Aru and, for a short period before thedoping allegations 
caught up with him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/jun/11/lance-armstrong-interviews-deconstructed>
, Lance Armstrong.

Though still haunted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/feb/27/uci-astana-licence-cycling-vincenzo-nibali-tour-de-france>
 by doping suspicions, the Astana team is an established part of international 
cycling, and their presence at elite events has brought incalculable amounts of 
– mostly positive – publicity to the Astana brand, the real goal of the club’s 
financial backers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fastana-benfica-champions-league-kazakhstan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441879212920%2F58667e7a-b317-47e4-ab82-3bf61533bd41-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FC%20Astana%20%E2%80%93%20the%20little%20club%20with%20deep%20pockets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fastana-benfica-champions-league-kazakhstan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FC%20Astana%20%E2%80%93%20the%20little%20club%20with%20deep%20pockets&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fastana-benfica-champions-league-kazakhstan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F10%2F1441879212920%2F58667e7a-b317-47e4-ab82-3bf61533bd41-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Italian cyclist Fabio Aru of Astana at the 2015 Vuelta a España cycling race. 
Photograph: Javier Lizon/EPA 
Kazakh officials are no doubt hoping that FC Astana will reap similar PR 
benefits when they play against some of the sports top teams in the Champions 
League, one of the most-watched sports competitions in the world.

Nazarbayev congratulated the team after the Apoel match, and noted that 
“Astana will now have soccer battles with the world brands”.

Darhan Kaletaev, FC Astana’s chairman, was quick to thank the godfather of the 
Astana sporting enterprise. “This victory was achieved thanks to the hard work 
of the coaching staff, the football-loving people of Astana, and the support of 
the president ofKazakhstan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/kazakhstan>,” he 
said.

The team’s success may help Kazakh officials forget the sting of narrowly 
missing out to Beijing to host the2022 Winter Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/31/beijing-wins-right-host-winter-olympics-2022>
.

The Olympics would have brought significant positive publicity to Kazakhstan, 
where Nazarbayev – in power since before the 1991 Soviet Union break up – 
exercises tight control over society, politics and the economy.

International human rights groups had protested the possibility of awarding 
the games to Kazakhstan because of its dismal rights record.

At present, FC Astana 
<http://futbolgrad.com/fc-astana-reaching-for-the-stars-in-kazakhstan/> is the 
lowest ranked of the 32 teams in the Champions League and, although it avoided 
being grouped with current footballing superpowers such as defending champions 
Barcelona, Real Madrid or Bayern Munich, their group still holds some 
significant talent, withAtlético Madrid  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/atleticomadrid>reaching the Champions 
League final in 2014.

But even if the club doesn’t advance past the first stage, the exposure the 
Kazakh team and its namesake, Astana, will get from worldwide audience seems 
sure to make its owners in the capital very happy.

Benfica host FC Astana at the Estádio da Luz on 15 September at 7.45pm GMT. FC 
Astana will hostBenfica <https://www.theguardian.com/football/benfica> on the 
25 November

A version of this article first appeared on RFE/RL 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/fc-astana-champions-league-kazakhstan/27212696.html>
 