
As the US deals with an escalating opioid epidemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/09/opioid-addiction-appalachia-tennessee>
, clinicians are anxiously waiting for news on whether a new treatment will 
find its way into addicts’ hands.

The Food and Drug Administration is due to announce by Friday whether it will 
approve the treatment Probuphine, which is implanted in a recovering addicts’ 
arm.

Each day, 80 Americans die from an opioid overdose. And yet there are only 
three opioid abuse treatment drugs: methadone, buprenorphine and naloxone, and 
access to these medications is extremely limited. More than half of people who 
need treatment cannot access it because of a lack of providers or because they 
can’t afford it,according to the US Department of Health and Human Services 
<http://www.hhs.gov/blog/2016/03/31/improving-access-treatment-expanding-reach-buprenorphine.html>
.

Amid opioid epidemic, NFL player risks career to push for medical marijuana
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/17/nfl-medical-marijuana-eugene-monroe-baltimore-ravens>
Clinicians are scrambling for more options to meet fast-escalating demand. The 
proposed implant is intended to minimize the risk of the treatment being resold 
on the black market and abused – as can happen with a pill version of opioid 
treatment drugs – or ingested accidentally by children who find it in their 
homes. But opponents are raising doubts about the scientific support for the 
implant, and say that addiction would be better addressed by improving access 
to the already-approved drug treatments.

“Anything that has the potential to help, has the potential to help,” said 
Jonathan Craig Allen, a psychiatrist and and addiction treatment specialist at 
Hartford HealthCare. “I think this is a good medication, there are a lot of 
positive benefits.”

The proposed treatment awaiting approval by the FDA would dispense a small, 
steady dose of buprenorphine over six months while implanted in the patient’s 
arm. Buprenorphine treatments provide relief from the withdrawal symptoms that 
can come from dropping the use of an opioid outright. They are often combined 
with naloxone but can also be used as a solo medication..

But the rise in buprenorphine use has been met with a rise in abuse of the 
drug, according to state law enforcement agenciesacross 
<http://www.chattanoogan.com/2016/2/10/317775/Heroin-Buprenorphine-Drug-Busts-On.aspx>
the <http://www.kentucky.com/living/health-and-medicine/article44606076.html> 
country 
<http://www.courier-journal.com/story/news/local/2014/07/03/addiction-medicine-suboxone-now-abused/12153725/>
. And from 2005 to 2010, emergency room visits involving buprenorphine jumped 
from 3,161 to 30,135 visits,according to government estimates 
<http://archive.samhsa.gov/data/2k13/DAWN106/sr106-buprenorphine.htm>.

An FDA advisory committee voted 12-5 in favor of approving Braeburn 
Pharmaceuticals’ Probuphine in January.

But Judith Kramer, the FDA advisory committee’s acting chairwoman, was one of 
five members of the committee to vote against the treatment’s approval out of 
concerns about Braeburn’s analysis of its product.

“I just thought, what are we doing? Are we really helping?” Kramer said. “It 
would be better to increase the number of patients with the existing product.”

To prescribe buprenorphine, doctors must obtain a certification, and even 
then, can only prescribe it to 100 patients. The Obama administration, however, 
hasproposed that the cap be doubled to 200 patients 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/29/obama-administration-opioid-heroin-funds>
. Most supporters of medication-assisted treatment think the ceiling should be 
even higher.

Obama’s plan also includes $11m for states to distribute naloxone, a drug that 
reverses overdoses and is typically administered in emergencies by either a 
family member, paramedic or police officer. But supplies of the drug are 
dwindling as clinicians respond to the epidemic.

Those that settle on methadone as their best treatment option must go to a 
clinic daily, though the other treatments can be injected monthly or obtained 
as a prescription that can be kept at home.

And people in rural areas are much less likely to have easy access to 
treatment clinics or doctors who have the certifications to prescribe 
buprenorphine.

Dr Carl R Sullivan, a professor and director of addiction services at the West 
Virginia University Medical Center, said his clinic, the longest-running 
medication-assisted treatment center in West Virginia, currently serves about 
450 people – but 538 more are on a waiting list.
“For me, the tragedy is that even for people who want treatment, it’s nearly 
impossible to get it,” he said.

Kramer emphasized the need to improve access to existing treatment options, 
while listing her considerable concerns about how Braeburn did its clinical 
trials, which she said were “not very rigorous”.

The trial only showed that the treatment is not worse than the pill form of 
buprenorphine, she said. And the implant has only been tested for six months of 
use – it is unclear how it will affect patients after that period has passed 
and multiple advisory board members expressed concerns about the definition of 
what patient the drug is intended for.

Because Kramer, who has spent the last 30 years working in clinical trials, 
has no confidence in the pharmaceutical company’s scientific method, she could 
not resolve other issues she had with the product and voted no.

“We don’t have to do something if it’s no better than we have got,” said 
Kramer. “We need more treatment with the existing treatments.”

Kramer’s criticism was echoed by Tracy Rupp, director of public health policy 
initiatives at the National Center for Health Research, a Washington DC-based 
thinktank. Rupptold USA Today 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/2016/01/12/implant-aims-help-addicts-stop-using-heroin-prescription-painkillers/78677618/>
 that the results could be skewed because some missing urine tests were counted 
as negative, even though people addicted to opiates often avoid urine tests.

“Is Probuphine effective? We still don’t know because the study was poorly 
designed and missing data,” Rupp said.

But Behshad Sheldon, executive director and CEO of Braeburn Pharmaceuticals, 
said the company’s analysis fulfilled the FDA’s desire to see that the implant 
delivered the correct amount of medicine and that the procedure is safe. “It 
[buprenorphine] has already been in millions of people, there’s no doubt really 
about its efficacy or safety if used appropriately,” Sheldon said.

She said more than 4,000 doctors have signed up on Braeburn’s website to be 
trained in administering the drug and if it is approved, the company plans to 
hold 253 training sessions in 52 cities across the US for doctors hoping to 
prescribe the drug. “We’re trying to be very mindful that not everyone lives in 
LA and New York and that people who live in rural areas have even more needs 
for a product like this,” Sheldon said.

Meanwhile, FDA advisory committee members, and addiction specialists who work 
to treat opioid addiction, emphasized that the scale of the problem needs more 
treatment options, even ones like Probuphine, which are only meant for already 
stable patients.

“Certainly, I think that there’s more benefit than risk at this point for this 
approval, and that’s what really swayed me,” Adam Gordon, a professor of 
medicine at the University of Pittsburgh and member of the advisory panel who 
voted in favor of the drug, told the meeting.

Carol Falkowski, a former director of the Minnesota health department’s 
alcohol and drug abuse division who now works for a private drug abuse 
prevention group, said in an email that while there is no “magic pill” to treat 
addiction, every effort should be made to expand medication assisted treatment. 
“The more people who have access to them the better,” Falkowski said.

Though local and federal governments have proposed donating millions to combat 
the crisis, Hartford HealthCare’s Allen said he expects opioid-related death 
rates to increase this year and he is not confident that the opioid addiction 
epidemic has reached its peak.

“People are dying every day in this state from opioid-related deaths,” said 
Allen. “We are not out of the woods.”
 