
The federal budget includes savings and revenue measures worth about $100bn 
over the next decade that have yet to clear the Senate, according to new 
analysis by the independent Parliamentary Budget Office (PBO).


The opposition seized on the analysis, published on Friday, claiming it showed 
Joe Hockey’s forecast return to surplus was “a $100bn house of cards loaded 
with unfairness, a lot of which will never pass the parliament”.

But the treasurer’s office maintained the government had made progress on 
reducing the deficit and would continue to work with the parliament to make 
“sensible savings”. The prime minister, Tony Abbott, has repeatedly criticised 
Labor for blocking budget cuts and demanded it spell out alternatives.


The renewed political dispute was triggered by PBO figures showing the value 
of unlegislated measures 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/~/media/05%20About%20Parliament/54%20Parliamentary%20Depts/548%20Parliamentary%20Budget%20Office/Reports/Unlegislated%20measures%20carried%20forward%20from%20the%202014-15%20Budget%20-%20pdf%20doc.pdf?la=en>
 that were carried forward from last year’s budget and are included in current 
budget estimates.

The outstanding measures include limiting family tax benefit part B to 
families with children under six years of age, increasing Pharmaceutical 
Benefits Scheme co-payments, reintroducing indexation of the fuel excise, along 
with the higher education changes that have been blocked by the Senate twice.

The document also includes several measures from the former Gillard 
government’s final budget in 2013, such as the university efficiency dividend, 
which remain on the books asCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> government policy and 
which Labor now refuses to support in the Senate.


Hockey’s budget <http://budget.gov.au/2015-16/content/bp1/html/bp1_bs9.htm>, 
delivered just over two weeks ago, predicted a fiscal deficit of $33bn in the 
2015-16 financial year. The PBO analysis indicates the fiscal balance includes 
yet-to-be-legislated previous measures worth $3.2bn.

The analysis also includes figures for the following 10 years. The impact of 
the unlegislated measures on the fiscal balance increases from $4.9bn in 
2016-17 to $14.1bn in 2025-26. The total impact over 11 years is just over 
$102bn.

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, said the figures showed the 
government’s attempts to return to surplus were built on a house of cards.

Bowen also pointed to a separate PBO document, released on Thursday 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/~/media/05%20About%20Parliament/54%20Parliamentary%20Depts/548%20Parliamentary%20Budget%20Office/Reports/2015-16%20Budget%20and%20forward%20estimates%20-%20charts/2015-16%20Budget%20and%20forward%20estimates%20-%20charts%20PDF.pdf?la=en>
, which showed policy decisions had increased the deficit (underlying cash 
balance) by $9bn over the five years compared with the previous budget update.

“The treasurer has clearly failed to fully offset new spending in breach of 
their ‘budget repair’ strategy,” Bowen said.


“So much for the prime minister’s feigned indignation over Labor’s modest 
proposals to reduce super tax concessions for high-income earners, as the data 
shows that Tony Abbott will slug Australian motorists an additional $23bn over 
the next 10 years as part of his petrol tax hike.”

The fuel excise decision took effect last year but must be endorsed by 
parliament this year or the government will have to refund the money to big 
fuel companies.

The new leader of the Greens, Richard Di Natale, has signalled that his party 
is prepared to negotiate with the government and consider supporting the 
measure in return for a commitment for public transport funding.

A spokeswoman for Hockey responded to the PBO report by saying the government 
would “work with the parliament to ensure we live within our means”.

“That is the responsible thing to do. Our focus remains on the passage of our 
responsible, measured and fair budget through the parliament,” she said.

“We inherited $123bn of deficits when we came to office. We have now brought 
that down to $82bn over the next four years.”

The $123bn figure was a reference to the total deficits over four years that 
were outlined inthe first mid-year budget update 
<http://budget.gov.au/2013-14/content/myefo/download/03_part_3.pdf> presented 
by the Coalition government.

The pre-election fiscal outlook 
<http://www.treasury.gov.au/~/media/Treasury/Publications%20and%20Media/Publications/2013/Pre-Election%20Economic%20and%20Fiscal%20Outlook%202013/Downloads/PDF/Overview.ashx>
, approved independently by the secretaries of Treasury and Finance, had 
predicted $55bn in deficits over the same period.

The deterioration in the months after the Coalition was elected was a 
combination of parameter variations and government spending decisions such as a 
one-off $8.8bn grant to the Reserve Bank.
 