
Journalism is a glamorous trade in Guy de Maupassant's Bel Ami 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/classics/9780199553938/bel-ami>, as 
Declan Donnellan and Nick Ormerod's film adaptation (released in the US next 
week and in the UK a week later) underlines by casting Robert Pattinson as 
Georges Duroy and Uma Thurman, Kristin Scott Thomas, Christina Ricci and Holly 
Grainger as women drawn to the rising Parisian reporter. As well as introducing 
him to them and assisting his progress as a social climber, working for La Vie 
Française gives him the power to manipulate or bring down ministers.

What he epitomises too, though, is a press that's sordid and shallow, 
advancing the personal ends of journalists and owners with no underlying 
ethical code. Writing talent and a lengthy building up of specialist knowledge 
aren't essential: Duroy owes both his scoops and the bite of his prose to 
Madeleine (Thurman), his passport to political circles and initially the real 
author of what appears under his byline.

Bel Ami belongs to a group of works written between 1880 and 1910 in which 
novelists take aim at journalists, who are portrayed as either vilely willing 
to stain reputations (Zola's Nana 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/classics/9780199538690/nana>, Henry 
James'sThe Reverberator 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/unclassified/9781407643960/the-reverberator>
) or moral vacuums drawn into loathsome schemes (The Wings of the Dove). That 
this reflects antagonism between connected tribes is clearest in Balzac's 
earlierLost Illusions, where the hero, Lucien Chardon, after arriving in Paris 
shuttles between the two worlds of book and newspaper publishing, writing for 
eternity and tomorrow.

One day he is a starving, celibate, unpublished poet, the next, as a venal 
paper's theatre critic, he has a guaranteed income and a mistress and is 
admitted to a dashing gang who party every night. What perhaps particularly 
irked the novelists, beyond their moral revulsion, is that these secret sharers 
who prostitute their writing have so much fun and exercise so much influence. 
"You're now about to become one of the hundred privileged persons who foist 
their opinions on the French public," Lucien is told. "You can make a man curse 
the day he was born. You can draw a regular income – in sensual pleasure – from 
all the actresses … Publishers will queue up outside your flat."

No such sense of glamour and unearned, misused power is present in most 
20th-century fictional portrayals of the press, where hacks typically toil 
pointlessly and joylessly (from Nathanael West'sMiss Lonelyhearts to Michael 
Frayn'sTowards the End of the Morning). But reporters still tend to be 
satirised or viewed coldly, whether they're fools like Boot inEvelyn Waugh's 
Scoop 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/classics/9780141184029/scoop-a-novel-about-journalists>
 or ethically compromised like Fowler in Graham Greene'sThe Quiet American.

From about 1970, however, they seem to join other victimised minorities in 
receiving deeper and more positive representation. Jerry Westerby, John le 
Carré's boozy reporter with a spying sideline, is a comic turn in Tinker Tailor 
Soldier Spy  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/thrillers/9780340513088/tinker-tailor-soldier-spy>
but is fully fleshed out when he returns as the protagonist ofThe Honourable 
Schoolboy. Annie Proulx's The Shipping News and Richard Ford's The Sportswriter 
are complex studies of men in crisis who happen to be hacks, with no hint of 
authorial scorn or mockery.

Sacharaissa Cripslock in Terry Pratchett's The Truth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/fantasy/9780552147682/the-truth> – 
an invertedAll The President's Men in which investigative digging serves to 
preserve a leader in power – does admirable work. And inStieg Larsson's 
Millennium 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/books/data/book/crime/9781849162883/the-girl-with-the-dragon-tattoo>
 trilogy, magazine editor Mikael Blomkvist has as much success at breaking 
stories and hearts as Georges Duroy, but instead of a self-seeking opportunist 
manages to be a feminist (one of his big exposés is about sex-trafficking), a 
popular team leader and righter of wrongs.
 