
The cost of studying for an MBA varies widely and does not always depend on 
the school's position in the various ranking systems.

The London Business School is at the top of many UK-rankings and it charges 
£57,500 for a 21-month course. Manchester Business School has fees of £38,000 
for the 18-month degree.

Lancaster costs £26,000 for the year's full-time MBA and says living costs on 
campus are about £9,000. The new universities tend to charge less: Portsmouth 
charges £17,000; Angela Ruskin £12,900; and the newest entrant to the market, 
Trinity Saint David in Lampeter Wales, has set a fee of £4,188.

Fees for the part-time executive MBAs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mbas> are usually around the same – 
Edinburgh charges £25,800 for its full-time course and £27,400 for its new 
executive MBA while Cranfield charges £35,000 for full-time and £33,000 for 
executive.

They sound daunting amounts, especially taking into account lost earnings on 
the full-time courses, but there are some interesting developments to help 
support students led by the schools themselves.

The unwillingness of banks to lend to prospective MBA students, especially 
those who will be out of the workplace for a year or more, led to the setting 
up in 2006 of Prodigy Finance, a business that works with about five UK and 
overseas business schools. It invites business school alumni to invest in bonds 
with a guaranteed 5% return and charges student borrowers about 7% for fee 
loans repayable over seven years.

Tuck School of Business in Dartford has launched its own small-scale loan 
scheme for students and plans to expand it.

A range of scholarships and bursaries are also available – the London Business 
School says about a quarter of its MBA student receive some kind of 
scholarship. Scholarships are awarded on merit, largely on the basis of high 
Graduate Management Admission Test (GMAT) scores or the college's own admission 
tests. Warwick shortlists anyone with a GMAT score of more than 680 for a 
possible scholarship.

Most schools use bursaries based on the student's earnings or financial 
position to help maintain a diversity of intake. Some grants are targeted at 
certain sectors – Cranfield is offering an Agrifarm scholarship of £35,000 to a 
British farmer wanting to study for its MBA.

Find out more: find-mba.com/funding-your-mba 
<http://http://www.find-mba.com/funding-your-mba>; 
targetcourses.co.uk/funding/funding-mba 
<http://www.http://targetcourses.co.uk/funding/funding-mba>
 