
Sir Alan Parker <https://www.theguardian.com/film/alan-parker> has dismissed 
3D films as a marketing gimmick and said he is unlikely to direct any more 
movies – but would consider working in TV, where "the very best work is being 
done".

Parker said that big budget films were made in 3D because the Hollywood 
studios thought that was necessary to make it appealing to a mainstream 
audience.

"Everything has to be 3D if it is over a certain amount of money from a 
marketing point of view," he said, during an interview with journalist and 
presenter Kirsty Wark at theCannes Lions International Festival of Creativity 
<http://www.canneslions.com/> on Wednesday. "From a creative point of view it 
is rubbish. Absolute nonsense."

He added: "For instance Gatsby, why on earth was that 3D? Well the reason was 
because it cost over $120m and the only way they are going to get back [their 
money on] a $120m movie, in a marketing sense, is if they can market it as 3D 
because that is what that main audience wants."

Parker, 69, started out in advertising in the 1960s before switching to film 
directing in a career spanning 30 years, with credits includingBugsy Malone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bugsy-malone>, The Commitments and The Life 
of David Gale. Wark pointed out that he has not directed a feature film for a 
number of years and asked if he would make more.

"The whole world of film has changed so drastically with regards to what films 
are being made. It's so hard, when you get to a certain age, begging in order 
to do something," he replied. "Even Steven Spielberg has a hard time."

With the rise of quality TV series funded by cable channels – such as Band of 
Brothers, The Sopranos, The Walking Dead and Game of Thrones – Wark asked if he 
might consider the small screen.

"In fact the very best work is being done on TV, there is no doubt on that," 
Parker said. "It's not a world that I've traditionally made films for. But the 
most intelligent work is being made on TV, without a doubt. I would consider it 
– but I quite like going to the pub, actually."

 To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email media@theguardian.com or phone 
020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 