
Blue Is the Warmest Colour  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155325/blue-is-the-warmest-colour>

Epic, erotic, intimate and politically engaged, this movie – based on the 
graphic novel by Julie Maroh andwinner of the 2013 Palme d'Or at Cannes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2013/may/27/cannes-2013-blue-warmest-colour-palme-dor-video>
 – is a must-see. Relating the story of a passionate love affair between two 
young women, it is directed with intelligence and calm by the Franco-Tunisian 
film-maker Abdellatif Kechiche, and features lead performances of outstanding 
honesty and power. Adèle Exarchopoulos and newcomer Léa Seydoux play a teenager 
and an art student who have an intense relationship, discovering that their 
love has to exist both in and out of the closet. It triggers a personal and 
political revolution for both.The film is controversial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/30/blue-warmest-colour-porn-julie-maroh>
; Maroh has called it a heterosexual fantasy of gay experience, but the 
performances have won audiences' hearts everywhere it has been shown.Released 
in the UK on 15 November.

Diana <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155590/diana>

Dianamania and 80s stylings could be due for a brief upswing. Naomi Watts 
stars as the troubled princess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/07/diana-trailer-princess-of-wales-royal>
 and Naveen Andrews is Dr Hasnat Khan, the heart surgeon with whom she had a 
love affair in the final two years of her life(and who has questioned the 
film's factual accuracy) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/aug/26/princess-diana-film-gossip-former-lover>
. The director is Oliver Hirschbiegel, who gave us Downfall, that gripping 
study of Hitler's last days.

Released in the UK on 20 September.

Blue Jasmine <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155586/blue-jasmine>

2011's Midnight in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/oct/06/midnight-in-paris-film-review> 
was a reminder of Woody Allen's great days, followed byTo Rome With Love 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/sep/13/to-rome-with-love-review> and an 
all-too-familiar dip. Now the great man has returned to the US with a comedy 
that is being hailed as something with the real Allen flavour. Cate Blanchett 
is a shallow socialite who has come to San Francisco on a mission to 
re-establish her relationship with her sister.

Released in the UK on 27 September.

The Pervert's Guide to Ideology <http://www.thepervertsguide.com/ideology/>

Slavoj Zizek's Pervert's Guide to Cinema (2006) was a brilliant cine-essay 
whose witty, playful insights shimmered in the mind. Now the great Slovenian 
showman of psychoanalysis — the self-styled "Elvis of cultural theory" — 
returns to deconstruct cinema, fiction, dreams and our own unconscious minds. 
What is the relationship of film to the dreaming state? Is it time to take 
responsibility for our dreams?

Released in the UK 4 October.

The Selfish Giant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/155239/selfish-giant>

Oscar Wilde's classic children's story is reimagined by British film-maker 
Clio Barnard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/may/17/the-selfish-giant-cannes-2013-review>
 in classic, social-realist style. Two lads figure they can make some cash by 
bunking off school to find scrap metal and sell it to a dealer who rules 
aggressively over his scrapyard – a walled domain which the boys believe is the 
secret garden of success.

Released in the UK 25 October.

Benedict Cumberbatch – the star you won't be able to miss

As the days grow shorter, the clocks go back and cut-price Halloween goods 
gather round the Tesco checkout, cinemagoers will learn to appreciate a new 
sign of the approaching autumn and winter: the ubiquity ofBenedict Cumberbatch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/benedict-cumberbatch>. The coming months 
promise to be a veritable Benedictapalooza. This uniquely talented, richly 
voiced actor is going to be all over the screen.

Quite aside from his small screen reappearance as Sherlock Holmes, in October 
he will appear as the WikiLeaks campaigner Julian Assange in The Fifth Estate. 
The knotty, prickly complexity of Assange's character will certainly test 
Cumberbatch's skills. In December, he will return as the fierce and loathsome 
gold-crazed dragon Smaug in The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug. His appearance 
in the last Star Trek movie gave his career some franchise firepower, and this 
will put a nuclear warhead on it. As bonfire night passes, we may see 
Cumberbatch giving interviews for his film coming out at Christmas: the family 
drama August: Osage County, in which he plays "Little" Charles Aiken, a 
character seething at his humiliating, diminutive nickname and forever trying 
to get everyone to call him Charles. Some opportunity for intensity there, as 
well as an American accent. Then there is Steve McQueen's 12 Years a Slave in 
2014; Cumberbatch is William Ford, a preacher and slave owner. What a pile-up 
of Cumberbatch vehicles. He is just so eminently castable – classically 
trained, poised, yet with a hint of offbeat funkiness and with the most 
luxurious voice since Richard Burton. Even the name signals something upmarket 
and exotic. You can cast him as the good guy or the bad guy. He can be brainy, 
or nasty, or vulnerable; British or American. He is perhaps not a conventional 
romantic lead – but he could do that too, at a push. He has a sheen of class 
and seductive theatricality. The Cumberbatch craze could burn out – but my 
guess is a flurry of Best Supporting Actor silverware in 2014 will boost him 
into the A-list.
 