
The demise of the jumbo jet has come a little closer after the US manufacturer 
Boeing <https://www.theguardian.com/business/boeing> announced it would scale 
back production of its famous 747 to just one plane every two months, with 
orders having all but disappeared.

The distinctive four-engine plane has fallen from favour since more efficient 
twin-engined models were developed that could operate on long-haul routes – 
particularly lucrative transatlantic flights – on a fraction of the fuel.

Boeing had prolonged the life of the 45-year-old design with its latest, more 
fuel-efficient iteration, the 747-8, whose freight version looked to have 
particular potential with early sales. But the manufacturer said a stalling air 
cargo market was killing off demand for the plane.

Ray Conner, chief executive of Boeing Commercial Airplanes, said: “The air 
cargo market recovery that began in late 2013 has stalled in recent months and 
slowed demand for the 747-8 freighter.”

He added that Boeing remained confident that an “upcoming replacement cycle” 
for older 747 freighters meant there would still be a need to build more. But 
for now, he added: “We’re taking the prudent step to further align production 
with current market requirements.”

Air freight traffic has shrunk slightly, with volumes down 1.2% from a year 
ago, according to figures from the International Air Transport Association. But 
soaring passenger numbers – up another 6% in the last year – have not come to 
the 747’s aid.

Competing visions of the future of aviation saw Boeing’s great rival, Airbus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus>, launch an even bigger plane, the 
A380 superjumbo, a fully double-decker design. While the A380 has also 
struggled to sell in the last two years, it has won most of the recent trade in 
the 747’s patch, the market for giant passenger planes – once seen as essential 
for major international hubs like Heathrow, where landing slots are at a 
premium.

Boeing has found more success of late in its midsize long-haul planes, such as 
the 787 Dreamliner, where it is planning to ramp up production.

The cost of producing the 747 has for some time exceeded the revenue it has 
brought in, and the manufacturer said it would report an accounting charge of 
$569m in its forthcoming quarterly results to reflect the new reality. It had 
already warned that production would slow from 1.3 planes per month to a single 
unit from March, but now will be halving that rate again from September.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fboeings-747-production-scaled-back-airbus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b1d3f3c678513332b8cea62e5b916a9f91d31cf%2F0_239_4919_2951%2F4919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Final%20boarding%20call%20nears%20for%20Boeing's%20ageing%20747s%20as%20orders%20dwindle%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fboeings-747-production-scaled-back-airbus%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Final%20boarding%20call%20nears%20for%20Boeing%27s%20ageing%20747s%20as%20orders%20dwindle%20away&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fjan%2F23%2Fboeings-747-production-scaled-back-airbus%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b1d3f3c678513332b8cea62e5b916a9f91d31cf%2F0_239_4919_2951%2F4919.jpg>
 A planned upgrade of US Air Force One presidential fleet could be among the 
last 747s built. Photograph: NJ Advance Media /Landov / Barcr 
One significant customer remains in the offing: the 747-8 has been designated 
the preferred choice for the forthcoming upgrade of the US Air Force One 
presidential fleet. But that is likely to be two or three planes, and although 
Boeing executives have hinted at other imminent sales opportunities, only 
around 20 are on order.

More than 1,500 747s have been sold over four and a half decades and the plane 
was once known as the queen of the skies by pilots and spotters. But its 
popularity among airline accountants has plunged in the last 10 years as higher 
fuel costs and narrower profit margins made it economically unviable on many 
routes.

Older 747s have become unwelcome at major airports such as Heathrow, where 
they are now subject to higher landing charges to compensate for the amount of 
noise and pollution they create compared with more modern aircraft.

One glimmer of hope for the 747 had come from Moscow, with the Russian airline 
Transaero having placed an order for four jumbos. However, Boeing’s order book 
was further thinned when Transaero filed for bankruptcy in November.

Even that most prestigious of buyers, the president of the United States, may 
yet have to think twice if battles in Congress about the potential cost resume. 
With the second presidential plane now slated for 2020, his or her new 747s 
could be the last Boeing will build.
 