
The Treasury has sent a final warning to the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> and Labor before the 
election, saying if the parties want to return the budget to surplus they must 
make genuine efforts to reduce spending growth, or be prepared to raise taxes 
to historic highs.

And it seems some voters will not be getting the $315-a-year tax cut on 1 July 
– as suggested by the prime minister,Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> – because the 
measure will have to pass parliament first.

The Treasury published its final budget update on Friday – the so-called 
Pre-election Economic and Fiscal Outlook (PEFO) 
<http://www.treasury.gov.au/PEFO> – to lock in its budget forecasts before the 
election.

It has made no big changes to its economic forecasts since the budget two 
weeks ago – despite the iron ore price falling $5 in the past fortnight and the 
Reserve Bank cutting rates to a record low of 1.75%.

The PEFO is the last word before the election from two of the country’s most 
senior economic bureaucrats, the Treasury secretary, John Fraser, and the 
finance department secretary, Jane Halton.

They warn that without considerable effort to reduce spending growth, the next 
federal government – Liberal or Labor – will find it impossible to generate a 
surplus, of about 1% of GDP, without lifting tax revenue above 23.9% of GDP.

Beware tax cuts for 'Middle Australia'. Above-average earners benefit most
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/may/07/beware-tax-cuts-for-middle-australia-above-average-earners-benefit-most>
They then set out how tough that task will actually be.

The pair say that even if government spending is cut from 25.8% of GDP to the 
long-term average of 24.9%, within 10 years, tax receipts will still have to 
rise from 23.9% of GDP to 24.2% to reach a surplus of 1% of GDP.

That 24.2% of GDP figure is well above the average of the past 30 years, they 
say.

They also warn that the commonwealth debt levels are projected to reach recent 
historical highs, both on a gross and net basis.

They say these debt levels are not an “immediate concern”, given historically 
low interest rates and a growing economy, “but should Australia experience a 
significant negative economic shock” the debt burden will impose a significant 
cost on the fiscal and economic outlook.

“It is crucial for Australia to maintain its top credit rating to ensure the 
commonwealth’s borrowing costs, and those across the economy more generally, 
are kept as low as possible,” they warn.

Company tax-cut plan will cost $48.2bn over 10 years, Treasury reveals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/06/company-tax-cut-plan-will-cost-482bn-over-10-years-treasury-reveals>
It also appears that middle-income voters will not get a $315-a-year tax cut 
on 1 July, as suggested by Turnbull in the days after the budget.

Turnbull, in a radio interview with the ABC’s Fran Kelly on May 4 
<http://www.malcolmturnbull.com.au/media/interview-on-rn-breakfast-with-fran-kelly>
, said the plan to lift the tax threshold for people earning $80,000 (to 
$87,000) would be covered administratively from 1 July, suggesting the tax cut 
would be delivered immediately after the election without the need for 
legislative change.

But the PEFO reveals that the tax commissioner, Chris Jordan, has said the tax 
cut would require legislative change – meaning the measure will have to pass 
parliament first.

The shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chris-bowen>, said Labor had already agreed 
to support the tax cut, but the confusion showed the government “clearly had 
not done its homework”.

“Now we know the government had not done the due diligence, not done the key 
work, to ensure that a personal income tax could be delivered on 1 July as 
promised, just three weeks after the budget has been delivered,” he said.


The government said the $315-a-year tax cut would definitely be handed to 
taxpayers in full this year.


The finance minister, Mathias Cormann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mathias-cormann>, said: “Obviously, 
a re-elected Turnbull government will legislate those tax cuts as soon as 
possible and every person across Australia in the relevant income-tax brackets 
will receive a tax cut as promised in the budget.

“This is a tax cut which takes effect from 1 July 2016,” he said.
 