
Leading shares have lost more than 5% of their value and slumped to a six year 
closing low, dragged down by yet more unwelcome news from the financial sector.

Investors reacted badly to a deeply discounted £12.5bn cash call from banking 
group HSBC, as well as insurer AIG's announcement of the biggest quarterly loss 
in US corporate history. HSBC dropped 92.25p to 399p compared to the rights 
price of 254p a share. Other banks were also battered, with Asia-focused bank
Standard Chartered 77p lower at 587p after HSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> reported poor figures from 
its Hong Kong operations.Lloyds Banking Group lost 8.9p to 49.4p, awaiting news 
of the terms of its possible bailout by the UK government, whileRoyal Bank of 
Scotlanddipped 0.6p to 22.6p.

Insurers were also unwanted, on worries about their capital positions and 
their exposure to banks' corporate bonds. Legal & General lost 3.9p to 36.3p, 
Aviva fell 21.5p to 267.5p while Prudential - tipped as one possible buyer for 
AIG's Asian businesses - dropped 16p to 264.5p.

With the Dow Jones Industrial Average falling nearly 3% by the time London 
closed - and below 7000 for the first time since October 1997 - theFTSE 100 
ended 204.26 points lower at 3625.83. This is the lowest level since the eve of 
the Iraq war in March 2003, when the index closed at 3287. There is some way to 
go yet to reach that milestone, but investors are increasingly concerned the 
market could come close to testing that low point again.

Miners were undermined by weaker metals prices on fears of a prolonged global 
downturn.Anglo American, which is cutting 650 jobs in Australia, lost 87p to 
914p, whileXstrata ended down 94p at 601.5p even though shareholders approved 
its £4.1bn rights issue.

With time and institutional money likely to start running out at some point 
soon, dealers were looking for the next raft of cash call candidates. Property 
groupSegro lost 25.75p to 81.5p as it said it was considering a possible equity 
capital raising, while Mr Kipling and Hovis makerPremier Foods, down 2p to 28p, 
was also tipped to be on the verge of asking for £300m-£400m.

Broadcaster ITV dropped 1.75p to 23p on talk it may announce one - or possibly 
all - of a cash call, job cuts, a reduction in its dividend and the disposal of 
Friends Reunited alongside its results on Wednesday.

In the retail sector, Marks & Spencer lost 12p to 249p after analyst Tony 
Shiret at Credit Suisse issued a note with a 160p target and an underperform 
rating. Shiret said M&S had not really made much financial progress under the 
stewardship of Sir Stuart Rose, and it was still too reliant on older 
customers. He suggested it should revamp its smaller stores to appeal to a new 
and younger audience.

Pharmaceuticals group AstraZeneca edged down 3p to £22.40 after it received US 
approval for its Symbicort treatment for patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD), including bronchitis. In a buy note Panmure Gordon 
said:

"The use of Symbicort in the treatment of COPD, otherwise known as smoker's 
lung, has been long expected to provide a boost to sales in the US because the 
COPD market is the only growth segment of the particular respiratory market the 
product targets."

Directories group Yell fell another 1.25p to 19.5p despite analysts at UBS 
raising their rating from sell to neutral. UBS said:

"Yell shares have fallen 50% over the past week. Although the equity is likely 
to remain highly volatile given that it accounts for only 5% of the enterprise 
value, we believe share price weakness has been caused by concerns over 
refinancing around £3.5bn of debt by April 2011 and the ongoing revenue 
pressures amid a weakening economy. Rather than refinance, we believe Yell's 
intention is to rollover its existing debt under new terms. This is potentially 
a risky strategy for equity holders and assumes banks will be reluctant to take 
equity in the company and write down on their debt. Although we see scenarios 
where the equity could be worth nothing, it now effectively trades as an option 
so will retain some value over the next two years."

Among the few bright spots, Lloyds of London insurer Amlin added 7.75p to 
350.75p following in-line full year results and an upbeat outlook statement. 
The company's broker,Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, said:

"It is not the cheapest stock in the sector, but that reflects its superior 
track record. We see no reason why it will not continue to deliver above 
average returns and see any share price weakness as a strong buying 
opportunity."

Lower down the market Blue Oar Securities jumped 4.5p to 6.5p after rival WH 
Ireland made a £16.2m, 9.66p a share, offer for the broker. Investment Evolve 
Capital has agreed to back the deal by selling its 65% stake in Blue Oar to WH 
Ireland.

Immunodiagnostic Systems closed 3p to 142.5p after launching its new fully 
automated analyser, the IDS iSYS, while stem cell specialistEpistem added 30p 
to 270p after it signed a two year research and development deal with Novartis. 
Under the terms of the agreement, Novartis will pay Epistem an upfront cash 
payment of $4m and will provide research funding for two years. Analysts at 
Daniel Stewart said the deal made Epistem financially self-sufficient and 
profitable, and raised their price target from 350p to 450p.
 