
Is Finnegans Wake the most difficult novel ever written? With 60 different 
languages featured in it, a plot with multiple layers, impossibly varied 
interpretations and a complex“multifractal structure” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/27/scientists-reveal-multifractal-structure-of-finnegans-wake-james-joyce>
 recently discovered by mathematicians, James Joyce’s classic novel is at best 
challenging – even more so thanUlysses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/jan/13/is-james-joyce-ulysses-the-hardest-novel-to-finish>
. Coinciding with the Irish author’s 134th birthday, a group of academics is 
launchingWaywords and Meansigns <http://www.waywordsandmeansigns.com/>, a 
project that sets the entire book to music, unabridged, with musicians and 
readers collaborating.

It’s all so simple. If anyone doesn’t understand a passage, all he need do is 
read it aloud
James Joyce 
The project was started by a group of Joyce fans who, mindful of the 
complexity of his work, are experimenting with ways to make it accessible to 
more readers. Waywords and Meansigns is a freely available, 35-hour-long 
audiobook of sorts. Each of the book’s 17 chapters was assigned to musicians – 
from amateurs to established artists like Grammy-winning producer David Kahne 
or American bassist Mike Watt; and from people who newcomers to Joyce fanatics. 
“The book is all about multiplicity, there are so many ways to interpret it – 
so we wanted to try different musicians from different backgrounds,” said Derek 
Pyle, the project’s director. The requirements were for the chapter’s words to 
“be audible, unabridged, and more or less in their original order”.

“Ulysses was experimental enough that it blew people’s minds and accessible 
enough that they were able to read it,” said Pyle. Right after finishing his 
masterpiece, Joyce spent 17 years writing this “almanac of world history”, “far 
more experimental and bizarre” than Ulysses. It is a book about which 
science-fiction author Philip K Dick said (through one of his characters): “I’m 
going to prove that Finnegans Wake is an information pool, based on computer 
memory systems that didn’t exist until centuries after James Joyce’s era; that 
Joyce was plugged into a cosmic consciousness from which he derived the 
inspiration for his entire corpus of work.” Writer Joseph Campbell said that if 
the world burned down, the history of human consciousness could be 
reconstructed from it.


Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
Daunting, perhaps – but Pyle argues that listening to this book out loud makes 
it much easier. “It’s all so simple. If anyone doesn’t understand a passage, 
all he need do is read it aloud,” said Joyce himself to Claude Sykes, asrecalled
 
<http://peterchrisp.blogspot.co.uk/2015/03/james-joyce-describes-finnegans-wake.html>
 in a 1954 interview with Joyce’s biographer, Richard Ellmann. “Hearing it out 
loud sheds different light on it,” he says.

A big motivation for the project was to make the book more accessible, “but 
simultaneously, we want to appeal to people who really know and love his text – 
and that is why we did it unabridged”. He should know: the origin of the 
project was a party that Pyle and friends organised where they listened to an 
entire 25-hour Finnegans Wake audiobook –read by Patrick Healy 
<http://ubu.com/sound/joyce_fw.html> – in one sitting. That session sparked the 
first musical edition <http://www.waywordsandmeansigns.com/first-edition.html> 
of Waywords and Meansigns, in which Pyle works with with Sara Jewell – and he’s 
now ready for a third.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Ffinnegans-wake-music-james-joyce-birthday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a9bc139cbab03f177f4ab977f218fe43eb2727c%2F0_117_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Finnegans%20Wake%3A%20a%20musical%20reading%20sounds%20out%20a%20cryptic%20text&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Ffinnegans-wake-music-james-joyce-birthday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Finnegans%20Wake%3A%20a%20musical%20reading%20sounds%20out%20a%20cryptic%20text&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fbooksblog%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F02%2Ffinnegans-wake-music-james-joyce-birthday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a9bc139cbab03f177f4ab977f218fe43eb2727c%2F0_117_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 What a 24-hour Finnegans Wake party looks like ... Image from Pyle and 
friends’ first all-night party, in 2012, at Hampshire College in Amherst, 
Massachusetts. Photograph: Laura Robinson 
This time around, they’ll try to listen to the entire book collectively again, 
but it’s “hard to find a place that wants to have you over for 35 hours”.

Finn Fordham, English professor at Royal Holloway, University of London and a 
leading Finnegans Wake scholar, said: “The results – all available online, now 
that we are in the Utopia of the public realm – are rich and various, 
surprising, amusing, weird. Different musicians frame different readings, and 
their different styles offer a series of unexpected transformations of this 
endlessly transformative text. Lift it Hosty! Encore!”

Here is a taster playlist – to listen to the entire book, click here 
<http://www.waywordsandmeansigns.com/second-edition.html> . Let us know how you 
get on!Would you like to make your Wake music and add it to the project? Email 
your tracks towaywordsandmeansigns@gmail.com 
<mailto:waywordsandmeansigns@gmail.com> and marta.bausells@theguardian.com 
<mailto:marta.bausells@theguardian.com>
 