
The second series of First Contact, which aired over three days this week, 
took six notable Australians – including Natalie Imbruglia, Tom Ballard and 
David Oldfield – out of their comfort zones and into contact with Indigenous 
Australia.


At the conclusion of the series on Thursday evening, this much was for sure: 
this is not a show for Aboriginal audiences.

The series has already been widely canned by Indigenous writers and 
commentators on social media andbeyond 
<http://junkee.com/throws-black-people-bus-black-reactions-first-contact/90775>
, and the nub of the critique is this: First Contact exploits the suffering and 
disadvantage of vulnerable First Nations people to manufacture white Australia 
“feels”. It’s that straightforward.

My experience on First Contact challenged everything I knew about Indigenous 
Australia | Tom Ballard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/29/my-experience-on-first-contact-challenged-everything-i-knew-about-indigenous-australia>
From an Indigenous perspective, perhaps the most conflicting aspect of the 
series is that it was made by some of our own: Aboriginal-led company 
Blackfella Films.
Amy McQuire (@amymcquire) 
Poverty porn using trauma of our people as entertainment for white people 
#FirstContact <https://twitter.com/hashtag/FirstContact?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/amymcquire/status/803540763652997120> November 29, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/amymcquire/status/803540763652997120> Celeste Liddle 
(@Utopiana) 
So nice that so many people care about white people learning things. I wish 
they cared as much about black people's trauma#FirstContact 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FirstContact?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/Utopiana/status/803549833592115204> November 29, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Utopiana/status/803549833592115204> 
It was extremely difficult to watch five celebrity types and a squinty former 
political adviser perpetuate Aboriginal stereotypes and cultural falsehoods on 
a magical mystery tour of black Australia.

There were, of course, the expected mild epiphanies: Tom Ballard at the West 
Kimberley regional prison; Nicki Wendt at Cootamundra’s former girl’s home; Ian 
“Dicko” Dickson in the far north township of Coen.

But there were also significant moments when highly questionable statements 
went unchecked – such as when the former One Nation party strategist refused to 
acknowledge that the commonwealth constitution contained any racism.

The ensuing dialogue between the peculiar Oldfield and the lefty comedian 
Ballard didn’t come close to clarifying that when the founding document was 
enacted in 1901, section 127 specifically provided: “In reckoning the numbers 
of the people of the Commonwealth, or of a State or other part of the 
Commonwealth, aboriginal natives shall not be counted.”

Only after 66 years – a period greater than an average Aboriginal person’s 
lifetime 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/0/b066d450abaaa4c7ca256dea000539dc> – 
was that racist provision amended. At the 1967 national referendum, Australian 
citizens voted overwhelmingly in favour of scrapping the article.

Of course, merely broadcasting Oldfield’s brand of post-truth wilful ignorance 
could have a dangerous normalising effect – but the most objectionable part of 
First Contact’s second series is the absence of analytical rigour that follows 
it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffirst-contact-when-indigenous-australia-becomes-entertainment-everyone-loses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71382ca016551538aa37b7012d67a24d18890969%2F0_0_4500_2485%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20Contact%3A%20When%20Indigenous%20Australia%20becomes%20entertainment%2C%20everyone%20loses%20%7C%20Jack%20Latimore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffirst-contact-when-indigenous-australia-becomes-entertainment-everyone-loses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20Contact%3A%20When%20Indigenous%20Australia%20becomes%20entertainment%2C%20everyone%20loses%20%7C%20Jack%20Latimore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Ffirst-contact-when-indigenous-australia-becomes-entertainment-everyone-loses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71382ca016551538aa37b7012d67a24d18890969%2F0_0_4500_2485%2F4500.jpg>
 Former One Nation party strategist David Oldfield in First Contact. 
Photograph: SBS 
We see it again when the group visits Kalan Enterprises’ Dion Creek in the 
Cape of York town of Coen. Creek, a local community leader, champions the 
success of the town’s Families Responsibilities Commission and its 
implementation of the Basics Card welfare control system.

In the ensuing exchanges, no counterpoint is considered by the group or the 
show’s editorial directors – yet authoritative Indigenous organisations 
including the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Legal Service have
rejected the program 
<http://www.natsils.org.au/portals/natsils/NATSILS%20Income%20Management%20Position%20Statement%2017-10-12.pdf>
.A 2014 report 
<http://www.tangentyere.org.au/publications/research_reports/Evaluating%20New%20Income%20Management%20in%20NT%20Summary.pdf>
 found the initiative did little to improve spending habits or living 
conditions within Indigenous communities when applied in prescribed contexts.

It’s a similar story when they head to Coen’s local primary school – one under 
the umbrella of the influential Indigenous lawyer Noel Pearson’s Cape York 
Academy – to hear of the virtues of the “direct instruction” teaching method. 
It is here that First Contact is at its most perilous: a reality show at risk 
of tilting into policy propaganda.

The value of both Cape York Academy and “direct instruction” are still hotly 
contested within Indigenous public spheres. Since 2010, Pearson, a member of 
the prime minister’s Indigenous Advisory Council, hasreceived $37m in federal 
and state funding 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-10/good-to-great-schools-linked-to-%27high-risk%27-business-practices/8000858>
 for his Good to Great Schools Australia organisation.

Aurukun: Noel Pearson's syllabus partly to blame for school crisis, says 
former principal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/aurukun-imported-syllabus-partly-to-blame-for-school-closure-says-former-principal>
A former executive principal who oversaw the Coen, Aurukun and Hopevale schools
described the teaching program as “inappropriate” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/27/aurukun-imported-syllabus-partly-to-blame-for-school-closure-says-former-principal>
. Chris Sarra, an Indigenous educator and founder of the Stronger Smarter 
Institute, called it an“ineffective” and “substandard” approach 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-05-29/pearson-program-part-of-problems-in-aurukun-chris-sarra-says/7456902>
.

Instead of delving into the complexity of these issues, the show returns – 
seemingly perpetually – to dotty Oldfield.

Indigenous commentators Nayukka and Paul Gorrie have pointed out 
<http://junkee.com/throws-black-people-bus-black-reactions-first-contact/90775> 
that Oldfield provides a diversion for arguably equally racist remarks 
delivered by others on the show – such as Renae Ayris, for instance, who at one 
point says: “I’m scared of Aboriginal people.” Side by side with Oldfield, the 
misinformed racial profiling of other cast members becomes more palatable to a 
passive audience.

Like a rodeo barrel-clown, Oldfield also distracts the critical attention of 
viewers, drawing audience contempt his way instead of towards the actual 
disadvantage that impacts upon Aboriginal families like “SW’s” in the Northern 
Territory town of Elliot, and towardsthe institutional structures contributing 
to the perpetuation of those conditions 
<https://newmatilda.com/2016/11/30/first-contact-poverty-porn-trauma-tv-bonus-celebrities/.>
, as the journalist Amy McQuire points out.

If viewers genuinely wanted to better understand Indigenous Australia, they 
would have been better served by turning off the TV on Tuesday to watch a far 
more effective and ethically sound campaign that was unfolding on social media 
that same day.

The #DefineAboriginal hashtag launched as a response to odious comments 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-29/pauline-hanson's-comment-sparks-defineaboriginal-racism-stories/8075468>
 delivered by Oldfield’s former boss, the far-right senator Pauline Hanson, who 
claimed “there’s no definition to an Aboriginal”.


Like #IndigenousDads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/07/indigenousdads-and-their-children-take-to-twitter-over-bill-leak-cartoon>
 before it, #DefineAboriginal provided a more participatory – and therefore 
more accurate – expression of what being Aboriginal in this so-called 
commonwealth involves.
Ryan Griffen (@RyanJGriffen) 
Can we all start a tag #DefineAboriginal 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/DefineAboriginal?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/RyanJGriffen/status/803391899356696576> November 29, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/RyanJGriffen/status/803391899356696576> Ryan Griffen 
(@RyanJGriffen) 
Being told "Yeah but you're one of the good ones" #DefineAboriginal 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/DefineAboriginal?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/RyanJGriffen/status/803393174957764610> November 29, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/RyanJGriffen/status/803393174957764610> The Funkoars 
(@funkoars) 
drinking water from a 'special' cup reserved for me at my friends house by his 
parents so i wouldn't touch the normal ones#DefineAboriginal 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/DefineAboriginal?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/funkoars/status/803408526978609152> November 29, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/funkoars/status/803408526978609152> Meri Kilisimasi 
(@theauslibrary) 
Knowing you're going to die 12 years earlier than non-Indigenous friends 
#DefineAboriginal <https://twitter.com/hashtag/DefineAboriginal?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/theauslibrary/status/803422660860313600> November 29, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/theauslibrary/status/803422660860313600> 
The Indigenous media academic Bronwyn Carlson told me “the stress of 
constantly battling racism can be emotionally and physically traumatic”. 
#DefineAboriginal provided a means forIndigenous Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> to deal 
with racial battle fatigue, she said, in a manner that maintained an integrity 
of agency.


First Contact failed to do that, preferring to sate the voyeurism of 
non-Indigenous viewers instead.

• First Contact is available to watch on SBS On Demand  
<http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/352505923803/first-contact>
 