
The primary divide is now between supporters and opponents of the nuclear 
agreement

Last July’s agreement with world powers brought a realignment in Iranian 
politics. The central divide in the election was between supporters and 
opponents of the deal.


The ‘principle-ist’ Ali Larijani as parliamentary speaker was an effective 
ally of President Hassan Rouhani. Larijani headed off critics of the deal in a 
level of co-operation between parliament and government not seen during the 
presidency of Ahmadinejad and the latter years of Khatami. During the election,
public support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/25/profiles-iran-parliamentary-candidates-tehranbureau>
offered to Larijani as candidate in Qom by General Qassem Soleimani, chief of 
the Revolutionary Guards overseas Qods brigade, reflected broad backing in the 
political elite behind the nuclear agreement.

This agreement was not consigned to history when signed. Implementation is to 
last over the next nine years – both in limiting Iran’s nuclear programme and 
in removingUnited Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations>, 
European Union and most United States sanctions. This suggests the agreement 
will continue to shape Iranian politics, even if less strongly over time.

Iranian politics cannot be reduced to ‘reformists’ versus ‘hardliners’

Iran is a large country – bigger than Iraq, Turkey and Syria combined – and 
every Iranian election throws up a complex mix ofregional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/feb/26/iran-urban-divide-elections-kurdistan-tehran>
,tribal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/26/iran-kurdistan-rouhani-tehranbureau>
 and local factors. Voters have many reasons for voting as they do. The single 
biggest issue in most elections in most countries is the economy - but this is 
a catch-all that can lump together jobs, prices, housing and urgent
environmental issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/23/iran-election-environment-green-tehranbureau>
 like water management.


The generalisations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/25/iran-elections-struggle-theocracy-democracy-tehranbureau>
 of ‘left’ versus ‘right’ of the 1980s, and ‘reformists’ versus ‘conservatives’ 
of the 1990s – however well they applied at the time – no longer work. 
Observers who portrayed the elections as between ‘reformists’ and ‘hardliners’ 
have tied themselves in knots – as shown in reports that ‘reformists’ and 
‘moderates’ hadall been disqualified 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/jan/19/iran-guardian-council-blocks-reformists-february-parliamentary-poll>
 followed by reports they had won the election.

The succession to Ayatollah Khamenei as leader looks remarkably open

With the defeat of Ayatollah Mohammad Yazdi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2015/mar/13/iran-supreme-mohammad-yazdi-leader-in-waiting>
 in the Experts Assembly election, the assembly will need a new chairman. The 
assembly will remain anopaque body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/feb/22/iran-secret-leadership-no-overseers-assembly-experts-tehranbureau>
, but whoever fills the post (as well as the conduct of his election) will be 
the next clue as to how the succession to Khamenei will proceed.


The defeat in Tehran not just of Yazdi but also of Ayatollah Mohammad Taqi 
Mesbah-Yazdi represents a serious blow to thesenior clerics most alarmed by 
Rouhani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/feb/24/iran-elections-view-from-qom-clerical-establishment-tehranbureau>
 and the prospect of better relations with the west. But the views of less 
vocal Assembly members elected round the country may be less clear-cut than 
those trumpeted on the noisy hustings in Tehran. Further surprises lie ahead.


Hassan Rouhani is a capable politician, if no reformist

Iran’s president has proved himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2013/apr/24/former-nuclear-negotiator-iran-cold>
 an astute, hard-headed operator. He not only carried the bulk of the political 
class behind the nuclear agreement, he has again won electoral endorsement for 
his pragmatic conservatism. His politics are based on efforts to improve 
relations with other countries, including the United States; reform of the 
economy to boost the private sector and attract foreign investment; and some 
easing of press controls and morality policing.


Rouhani’s instincts and temperament do not favour exciting opinion leaders – 
especially the urban middle-classes and students – behind a programme of 
change. He is well aware that the Khatami era and the street protests after the 
disputed 2009 election opened up bitter divisions within the political class: 
his approach is based rather on incremental change and building agreement.

Change comes dripping slowly ...

Economic reform to encourage sustainable growth – increasing employment and 
improving living standards – will challenge vested interests, including those 
that have benefited from the closed economy encouraged by sanctions and an 
ideology of ‘resistance’. Rouhani will prefer reassurance to confrontation and 
will pick battles carefully.


Internationally, the region looks dangerous, and these are troubled times with 
unprecedented tensions between Sunnis and Shia. This creates a tricky balance 
of keeping Iran ‘strong’ while also improving relations with both the US – even 
as a presidential election draws nearer – and an increasingly assertiveSaudi 
Arabia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>.

Politically, Rouhani will need to maintain public support with an eye to being 
re-elected as president next year. Anecdotal reports of a lower turn-out in 
poorer parts of Tehran may reflect most strongly a wider sense among Iranians 
they are not benefiting from the easing of sanctions. In terms of the political 
class, Rouhani will need to reassure conservatives that cautious change 
continues to be in the interests of the Islamic Republic, while also offering 
reformists some concessions over political prisoners and censorship.

Gareth Smyth has reported from the Middle East since 1992, including four 
years as Tehran bureau chief for the Financial Times.The Tehran Bureau is an 
independent media organisation, hosted by the Guardian. Contact us@tehranbureau 
<https://twitter.com/TehranBureau>


The article has been updated to reflect that upon final count Ahmad Jannati 
was not defeated in the Assembly race.
 