
What are the prospects for older people in 2015? The general election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/general-election-2015> in May is a good 
opportunity to look back and forward. How have older people fared under the 
coalition government since 2010 and what will the parties offer older people 
and our ageing society if they form the next government?

I would give the coalition government a C – in relation to its actions for 
older people, together with this comment: “Some promising policies for older 
people but major and growing issues need to be tackled, and we are woefully 
under-prepared for our ageing society.”

The last five years have seen major reforms that will directly impact older 
people. It is too early to assess the impact of some reforms such as those on 
pensions and care, although both have potential. Working lives are being 
extended, and slowly but surely the concept of retirement is being redefined.

As the biggest users of health and care services, many older people are 
experiencing the inevitable outcome of growing demand and cuts in funding. Care 
for older people is facing the perfect storm of an ageing population with 
increasing needs but fewer people are getting help, as local authorities cut 
care funding and thepressure on hospital beds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/07/-sp-bedblockers-worsening-nhs-hospitals-crisis>
 intensifies. Older people also have few housing options.

There are still great inequalities in later life, both financially and quality 
of life.Poorer older people die younger 
<http://www.wsws.org/en/articles/2014/09/02/heal-s02.html> and many experience 
poor health from a relatively early age. While we are adding years to life 
across the population, we need to do much more to ensure a better life for all 
in those added years. Relying on “nudge” politics to change behaviours will 
only get us so far.

Some good developments include the greater focus on tackling loneliness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/14/age-of-loneliness-killing-us>
 and the role of older people in family life. But many grandparents and 
great-grandparents find themselves caring at both ends of the age spectrum as 
childcare and eldercare are squeezed.

So it has been a mixed bag. Some commentators think older people have never 
had it so good, particularly compared with younger generations, and argue for 
an end to universal benefits. Pitting generations against each other ignores 
the much bigger concerns that different age groups share and the growing 
inequalities within British society.

Britain is one of the wealthiest countries in the world but that wealth needs 
to be better shared across all ages through fair and effective taxation on 
wealth and assets as well as income. There is an alternative to more and bigger 
spending cuts for all age groups.

Older people are much more likely to vote 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/87c8088a-34ee-11e4-ba5d-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3OiVwSJmu>
 in the coming election than their younger counterparts. But there is no real 
evidence to suggest that their votes will be purely cast in self-interest. They 
are concerned about the future for their children, grandchildren and 
increasingly great-grandchildren. Whether this will be reflected in the 
forthcoming manifestos remains to be seen.

So what should the next government pledge to do? My top five would be to:

• Develop a comprehensive strategy and action plan to create a Britain that is 
fit for our ageing society, together with a cabinet minister leading its 
implementation.

• Join up health and care, and properly fund a single health and care system 
that supports older people as far as possible in their own homes and local 
communities.

• Improve older people’s homes and heating and create more housing options in 
later life.

• Enable older people to get out and about with better transport, engage in 
meaningful activities and reduce social isolation.

• Provide practical opportunities for people of all ages to interact and 
integrate and support the voluntary sector in all its many guises to promote 
older people’s contributions.

In tackling this agenda, the next government must see older people as more 
than voters. As active citizens with views and voices, older people are 
demanding a better deal for themselves and for generations to come. And older 
people must be enabled to shape that future themselves.

There is more data than ever about the impact of ageing and what could be done 
better, so ignorance is not an excuse. We need long-term action to make our 
society fit for ageing. Any attempt to control public spending is bound to fail 
without effective action to promote better ageing and limit the spiralling 
costs of our ageing population.

I am guest-editing a special pre-election edition of Quality in Ageing and 
Older Adults 
<http://www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/products/journals/journals.htm?id=qaoa> 
(to be published in March 2015) which will address many of these issues in much 
more depth.
 