
The digital advertising industry is already undergoing something of a 
transformation. While facing an existential threat from the ascendant ad 
blocker, advertisers are leading the charge to create ever more tailored 
advertising experiences.

The proliferation of connected devices under the internet of things (IoT) 
promises to disrupt the industry further by increasing the number of 
opportunities for advertisers to learn about and sell to consumers.

Interactive billboards promote personalisation
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGtJx_pZjvzc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGtJx_pZjvzc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DGtJx_pZjvzc&media=>
This is a developing tactic that will no doubt grow in its complexity and 
ability to interact and harvest consumer data. British Airway’ssmart billboard 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GtJx_pZjvzc> ad in Piccadilly Circus, London 
wowed passersby in 2012 as a small boy reacted to overhead planes in real time, 
promoting the flights and their current destinations. The billboard has been a 
rich source of ideas since. Jung von Matt/Limmat AG’slive billboard 
<https://youtu.be/l8Y5MDVhZDQ> to capture the attention of busy Zurich 
commuters for Graubünden tourism is fun and clever but using interactivity and 
connectivity to engage consumers has to develop further, to capture data and 
enable advertisers to hone messages and methodologies.

For example, Lexus Australia caused a stir down under with its campaign 
<http://mcsaatchi.com.au/news/mc-saatchi-takes-smart-billboards-to-new-level-for-lexus/>
 to attract car drivers with personalised messages on an overhead billboard and 
US retailer Forever 21 used an ingeniousthread screen 
<https://youtu.be/dvDHNDkO-Qo> to turn customer selfies into threaded pictures 
in store. Good examples of interaction but still lacking in connectivity.

Nike+ drives loyalty through community engagement

Is artificial intelligence the next step in advertising?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2015/jul/27/artificial-intelligence-future-advertising-saatchi-clearchannel>
Perhaps one of the best examples of consumer connectivity and community 
creation isNike+ <http://www.nikeplus.com.br/>, a collection (or ecosystem as 
Nike refers to it) of fitness training and tracking devices and apps. The 
community now boasts over 38 million members (although it’s not certain if 
these are all active). The key here though is continued interaction. Consumers 
are happy to share huge amounts of live data because the relationship is 
two-way; there is a benefit for doing so. This is what drives the success of 
Nike+ and why marketing to the community and potential new users is easier than 
say advertising just a pair of running shoes through a poster ad.

In car radio messages directed at driver mobiles

Connected cars are of course developing quickly. KPMG believes 
<http://www.smmt.co.uk/2015/03/connected-and-autonomous-vehicles-the-uk-economic-opportunity/>
 it’s a huge economic opportunity for the UK butresearchers 
<http://blog.ioactive.com/2015/07/hacking-wireless-ghosts-vulnerable-for.html> 
put the dampers on the hype last week when theyhacked a moving car, bringing it 
to a halt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/21/jeep-owners-urged-update-car-software-hackers-remote-control>
. Nevertheless the connected car, err, bandwagon continues to roll. For 
advertisers that makes it a legitimate target.

But it’s not always about pushing brand messages. Toyota’s radio interaction 
<https://youtu.be/r9Ulrt0oCgA> with Apple’s Siri, a campaign run in Sweden was 
designed to stop drivers using their phones while driving. The driver’s phone 
interacts with the radio to ensure it is turned to airplane mode. Not really an 
internet of things thing but an example of how interaction and can develop 
within a car and how advertisers can get messages across intelligently.

Smart products to track and interact with at home

Smart product platform firm EVRYTHNG is leading the charge in IoT-related 
marketing by connecting the physical world with the online world.

“You can now have printed electronics on goods with sensory capabilities,” 
says Andy Hobsbawm, co-founder and CMO at the company. “It adds value and 
provides services to people. It creates a digital relationship with the 
customer.”

The company has worked with Diageo on its Johnnie Walker Blue Label smart 
bottle <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7myP2_KLumc>, which communicates with a 
consumer’s NFC-enabled smartphone but also doubles up as a product tracker. The 
connectivity enables consumers to record personalised messages for gifts but 
also enables Diageo to collect data and personalise marketing.

Smart TV comes of age

While smart packaging is one way of improving interaction within the home, TV 
is perhaps the most obvious medium after the smartphone. The rise of smart TVs 
is opening new doors to advertisers. Addressable TV advertising is not new as a 
concept but advertisers are beginning to reach levels of engagement and data 
tracking on previously seen on digital platforms.

According to US advertising bible Ad Age, Kraft’s Kool-Aid 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mi1HDKUZK8A> brand ran an addressable campaign 
last year targeting households with children between 7 and 12 and an income of 
more than $70,000. Kraft saw a 38% lift in household penetration.

Increased connectivity and smart devices in the home will enable advertisers 
to develop ideas further, making ads more relevant than ever and appearing in 
places not previously thought possible. Hobsbawm says it should move beyond 
advertising.

“The aim is to use connectivity to make products through which consumers 
willingly enter a direct relationship with you.”

That he says is the value of the internet of things to advertisers, but we are 
not there yet.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Brought to you by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 