
There’s been a gear change at Manchester Camerata 
<http://www.manchestercamerata.co.uk/> over the past two years. Our ambition to 
“redefine what an orchestra can do” has seen us achieve extraordinary things, 
not least a 51% increase in new audiences for 2014-15. What have we learned 
that may help your organisation entice new people through the door? Here are 
five things we’ve done.

Engage the whole organisation

Audience development isn’t solely the job of the marketing and comms 
professionals in your organisation (if you have them); it’s an 
organisation-wide endeavour, from programming through to community engagement, 
which starts with knowing your brand inside out.

In 2013, we in the Camerata management team swapped the city hustle and bustle 
for two days of Whitby sea air to refine our 2015-18 strategy. We spent the 
time revising our vision and purpose – the crux of why the orchestra exists and 
where we’re headed. It may sound like a lot of time to achieve just that, but 
it was time well spent. We left with a shared understanding of our brand and a 
clear vision that now informs decision making across the company: to redefine 
what an orchestra can do. Our programming and marketing are closely aligned, 
which means we think about audience development before even considering print 
deadlines.

Know your audience

There are myriad segmentation tools out there, so it’s quite easy to find out 
the profile of your audience to inform your plans. Analysis of our box office 
data – using, in this case, the Audience Agency’sAudience Spectrum 
<http://www.theaudienceagency.org/audience-spectrum> segmentation tool – 
confirmed hunches we’d had about our audience profile. It also identified 
growth markets, for exampleexperience seekers 
<http://www.theaudienceagency.org/products/audience-spectrum/experience-seekers>
: a younger, culturally diverse group of arts attendees who are looking for an 
all-round experience.

Introducing more social elements to our events, such as pop-up gin bars, 
quirky venues and inviting the audience to sit on stage with the orchestra, has 
attracted a much higher proportion of this group (30% in the case of ourUpClose 
<http://www.manchestercamerata.co.uk/whats-on/up-close> series audience). 
Beyond data (other recommended analysis tools includeAcorn 
<http://acorn.caci.co.uk/what-is-acorn> and Mosaic 
<http://www.mosaicdatascience.com/>) we take time to speak and listen to our 
audience members – and, importantly, our artists – to help inform what we do.

Digital

In the hunt for new audiences we’ve had great success with digital marketing, 
although we have learned lessons along the way.

Online advertising through sites such as Travelzoo 
<http://www.travelzoo.com/uk/> and Amazon Local 
<https://local.amazon.co.uk/National-UK> has really worked for us. But local 
deals sites such as these tend to generate better returns for programmes with 
wider appeal, where more traditional programmes have struggled. Our 2015-16 
season opener, for example, featured an eclectic mix of music from Beethoven to 
the Beatles. We sold more than 400 tickets through these channels, with 20% new 
attendees on the night.

Paid ads <https://www.facebook.com/business/products/ads> through Facebook 
have also generally been more effective for quirky events. For example, the ad 
for our sell-out blindfold gig generated more than 1,000 clicks to the website.

Data is king, so share it

Data is crucial to audience development, yet it still baffles me to find 
marketers who are reluctant to share (consumer permissions granted of course). 
You lose out if you’re territorial about your audience. If you’ve done your 
research, you’ll be approaching organisations with audiences relevant to your 
offer.

With the Arts Council’s Audience Finder <http://www.audiencefinder.org/> – a 
national audience development tool that enables cultural organisations to 
compare and share audience insight – it’s easier than ever to know which 
organisations are a good match for you. Reciprocal marketing could be so much 
more effective if more people were open to sharing. With audience development, 
you can either dip your toe, or go full throttle. We’ve found you get more 
return from the full-throttle approach.

Collaborate

We’re also cultivating new audiences by doing what we do best: collaboration. 
Partnering with a range of organisations means we can reach a much wider 
audience who wouldn’t necessarily know about us. That said, we choose our 
partners carefully; there has to be a brand fit.

We recently joined forces 
<http://www.manchestercamerata.co.uk/news/caff-nero-partnership-announced> with 
Caffè Nero. With a shared ambition to enrich the customer experience, we soon 
realised that we could help each other diversify our customer bases. This 
month, we’ve profiled our new season across Caffè Nero stores in Manchester, 
offering concert discounts to its customers. Another good example is our 
artistic collaboration with the DJs behind the Haçienda, for which both dates 
sold out within minutes – the result of creating something genuinely together.

 There’s confidence in collaboration. You don’t need a massive marketing 
budget, just a creative mind and a lot of gumption.

Paul Davies is head of marketing and comms at Manchester Camerata 
<http://www.manchestercamerata.co.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 