
Doctor Sleep by Stephen King 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/books/booknews/9943326/Stephen-Kings-new-novel-Doctor-Sleep-first-look.html>

Since Stephen King published The Shining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jun/22/rereading-stephen-king-the-shining>
 in 1977, his literary reputation has risen from peddler of schlock-horror to 
master of smalltown America's fears and dreams, both real and supernatural. 
Anticipation is high, therefore, for this sequel to the horror classic, in 
which Danny, the young boy whose telepathic gift stirred up the ghosts of the 
Overlook hotel, has grown up to be a troubled drifter using what is left of his 
"shining" power to bring comfort to the dying in a New Hampshire nursing home. 
When he meets a young girl with powers even stronger than his own, he is drawn 
into one of those epic battles between good and evil. "The Shining is one of 
those novels people always mention when they talk about which of my books 
really scared the bejeezus out of them," says King. The monsters in Doctor 
Sleep are promisingly creepy: polyester-clad senior citizens who turn out to be 
child-torturing paranormals with fangs beneath their dentures.Hodder & 
Stoughton, 24 September.

Bleeding Edge by Thomas Pynchon  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/26/thomas-pynchon-new-novel-911>

The author of 70s cult classic Gravity's Rainbow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomaspynchon> continues his late flowering 
with a typically riotous comedy set in 2001 New York, between the bursting of 
the dotcom bubble and the shock of 9/11. As his latest cast of misfits and 
mavericks observe: "Paranoia's the garlic in life's kitchen, right, you can 
never have too much."Jonathan Cape, 17 September.

David and Goliath: Underdogs, Misfits, and the Art of Battling Giants by 
Malcolm Gladwell 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846145810>

Can a traumatic childhood work in your favour? Should your child go to the 
best school they can get into? Looking at historical examples such as the 
Northern Ireland conflict and the civil rights struggle,Gladwell's latest 
attempt to expose the hidden dynamics of life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/malcolm-gladwell> explores the surprising 
success of the underdog.Allen Lane, 3 October.

Bridget Jones: Mad About the Boy by Helen Fielding  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780224098090>

In this third instalment of the diaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2013/jun/02/profile-bridget-jones-helen-fielding>
, our hapless hapless heroine continues to agonise over the tribulations of 
modern life large and small, from single parenthood and dating in the age of 
social media to the perils of the skinny jean.Jonathan Cape, 10 October.

The Goldfinch by Donna Tartt 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781408704943>

The Secret History author may not be prolific 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/feb/13/donna-tartt-first-novel-11-years>
, but she's regular. This decade's offering is an elegant exploration of love, 
loss, art and obsession, in which a young boy who loses his mother in a 
shocking accident clings to a painting that reminds him of her, but leads him 
into danger.Little, Brown, 22 October.
 