
One in five people in the UK have a disability 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/325491/family-resources-survey-statistics-2012-2013.pdf>
. Government studies also show that disabled people make up 15% of live music 
audiences and that recent engagement in the arts by those with a disability is “
significantly lower 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/438442/Taking_Part_2014_15_Quarter_4_Report.pdf>
” than those without. As a sector, we are still excluding audiences and missing 
the potential to reach people.


We at Just So Festival <http://www.justsofestival.org.uk/> for families have 
worked for some time with the music charityAttitude is Everything 
<http://www.attitudeiseverything.org.uk/> to develop our accessibility 
information and provision. As well as joining the charity’scharter of best 
practice <http://www.attitudeiseverything.org.uk/the-charter-of-best-practice>, 
we were also one of the first festivals to sign up to itsAccess Starts Online 
<http://www.attitudeiseverything.org.uk/about-us/campaigns/access-starts-online/>
 digital campaign, which provides festivals with a guide to creating clear 
access information on their event website. Here are five recommended steps from 
it and how we have implemented them to battle inequality and remove barriers to 
the arts.

Provide a named access contact person

Having a named contact person as part of your online access information goes a 
long way to encourage questions and contact from customers. It provides 
assurance that the organisation is open to discuss and is committed to what’s 
being described and offered. A named contact is the first step to building 
active relationships with audience members who have access requirements. It 
also fosters feedback and, as communication continues, leads to our ideas and 
approach being directed by our audience.

I am the contact online and onsite, which is made clear 
<http://www.justsofestival.org.uk/accessibility> on the website. I commit to 
being contactable throughout the festival, to respond to access queries that 
may arise and much more. Accessibility is in my job title, but this could 
alternatively be a named member of a production or front-of-house team.

Comprehensive online site descriptions

We’re more than happy to describe the atmosphere, qualities and magical spaces 
that families encounter at the festival. For people with a range of mobility 
and access requirements, it’s a description of the physical nature of our site 
that’s just as important.Text description 
<http://www.justsofestival.org.uk/accessibility>, photos 
<http://www.nozstock.com/about/disabled-visitors/terrain-gradient-information/>
, videos, area profiles, specific “access concern spots” and illustrations are 
all useful in different ways.

What you provide should be part of your organisation’s narrative, not an 
add-on. This year, after a conversation with a family attending the festival, I 
produced a keyring with pictorials of each main festival area. This better 
enabled a young child with autism to navigate the site with their family, with 
the picture and text of each area acting as a prompt.

Whatever your approach, when you give information to your audience about what 
your site is like, they’re able to make decisions for themselves. It’s not for 
us to tell audience members what’s possible, but to provide relevant and 
accurate information so they can tell us.

Provide bookable access facilities

Bookable facilities are usually associated with large infrastructure on site, 
such as accessible parking, accessible camping, viewing areas or platforms, 
personal assistant tickets and secure medication storage. At Just So, we extend 
bookable facilities to other elements of the festival programme.

One example is the Lantern Parade, where the audience light up the site, in 
procession, with lanterns they’ve made. For this year’s festival, in our online 
and onsite information, we encouraged anyone who wanted to take part, but who 
may be put off by potential difficulties of moving through the large site, to 
get in touch and we made a bespoke provision. This approach is taken to many 
programming elements, including early access to performance areas and time with 
props, characters or sets. It’s very personal and absolutely free.

This will not appeal to everyone; many people rightly manage their experience 
entirely independently. It’s about demonstrating that there are options and 
committing to being led by the audience on how they want to experience your 
event.

Introduce an online travel guide

Being mindful of the audience’s complete experience, from door to festival and 
back again, is very important. Not doing this assumes that barriers to 
accessing an event can only begin as people come through the gates. The truth 
is that barriers to access can be in place much earlier than this, even at home.

At Just So we recommend taxi companies, outline public transport options and 
describe the arrival process for all festival-goers. Recommended taxi companies 
are briefed and checked to ensure they have a good number of accessible 
vehicles on each shift.

We train security and stewards in inclusion, as well as use a common language 
when it comes to entrances, areas and gates. Importantly, we outline all of 
this as part of the Just So accessibility information page. We are open about 
what’s in place, allowing customers to manage their arrival with confidence in 
the information provided.

Provide online detail on access to performances

Access to performance can be facilitated through a vast range of approaches, 
technologies and provision. Captioning, BSL interpretation, hearing loops,
Makaton <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Makaton> and relaxed performances 
demonstrate the capacity to remove major barriers to engaging with performances.

Music without barriers: providing easy access for deaf and disabled fans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/mar/24/music-easy-access-deaf-disabled-fans>
At Just So we were looking for a way to enable our audience to make more 
informed choices about the programme elements they attended. We compiled “
programme guidelines <http://www.justsofestival.org.uk/key-to-the-programme/>” 
in eight categories, into which we asked all performers to put themselves. One 
category was “Sit Back and Relax – no effort of participation required” and its 
opposite was “Participate – if you want to get stuck in and take part”. Having 
these guidelines throughout the main programme tells audience members what 
being part of it might feel and look like. It enables informed decisions for 
families across the festival.

Putting these approaches in place has seen real results in removing barriers 
to attend, with a 189% increase of families with access requirements able to 
attend Just So Festival this year and much great feedback. We will be applying 
and extending what we have learned in our other productions this year, 
including the forthcoming immersive outdoor theatre eventThe Lost Carnival 
<http://www.thelostcarnival.org.uk/>.

Callum Hogg is safeguarding and accessibility manager at Wild Rumpus 
<http://www.wildrumpus.org.uk/about-us/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 