
If you are planning a trip to the the Andalucian town of Fuengirola for its 
annual festival in honour of the Lady of the Rosary, you will need to know how 
to dance flamenco, because the town hall has banned almost every other type of 
music.

The mayor of Fuengirola, Esperanza Oña, of the rightwing People's party, 
stated his week: "We don't want to turn our festival into a discotheque."

She was citing an order issued by the town hall expressly prohibiting "funk, 
rap, reggaeton, electronica, metal, alternative music, hip hop, reggae, heavy 
metal, country, punk, goth, and latin rhythms in general".

The order dictates that all booths taking part in the week-long festival, 
which ends on Saturday, must present "a traditional image … as much in their 
decoration as the music they play".

The order has led to accusations of censorship on the part of the town hall, 
with critics mocking Oña for failing to see how muchSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> had changed in recent times, accusing 
her of being out of touch and alienating non-Spaniards. According to the last 
census, the town's population stands at 75,953, and of this tally 27,643 are 
foreign nationals.

The controversy has led many to wonder exactly what music is or isn't allowed. 
InEl País newspaper 
<http://ccaa.elpais.com/ccaa/2013/10/07/andalucia/1381167304_311101.html>, a 
writer pointed out that a "Sevillana or a rumba would pass the filter without 
any problem". But the music of David Bisbal, a local star, "could be more 
problematic because of the abundance of latin rhythms – and according to the 
order would be completely unauthorised".

Fuengirola's festival is one of many celebrated in the south, with thousands 
turning out to enjoy street performances, flamenco dancing,bullfighting 
<http://www.fuengirola.es/portal_localweb/RecursosWeb/DOCUMENTOS/1/1_8777_1.pdf>
 and other traditional Andalucian events.

A spokesman for the town hall denied the intention was to censor the 
community: "It's a traditional Andalucian festival, more than 150 years old, 
and a symbol for the region for the way it respects the local customs and 
folklore. You can hear whatever type of music you like the rest of the time, 
but for one week a year we want things to be typically Andalucian."

Oña issued a statement saying she was just following the restrictions insisted 
on by the municipal order signed in 2008 at the behest of festival organisers. 
It was they "who asked that we make sure the festival didn't turn into a 
discotheque … but that we instead preserve the festival's traditional ambience".

She added: "They asked the town hall not to look the other way, as so many 
other town halls have done, and that we sort out the problem."

The mayor's spokesman made the point: "Oña's favourite musician is Michael 
Jackson, and you won't be hearing Billie Jean played at the festival."
 