
Surveying his family's dusty patch of land near Kumasi, in the Ashanti 
province of Ghana, Modesto glances around nervously. "Do not talk of this to my 
father" he asks me, casting off his listless despondency as he contemplates his 
escape "but I am applying to become a policeman." Modesto's dreams and 
ambitions have grown far from the cocoa farm which has sustained him and his 
four younger sisters. "I do not want to work here for nothing, everyday it's a 
struggle. If you want work you must seek it in the city," he explains.

Modesto's father Ernest is 53, a tired man yet two years younger than the 
average farmer in Ghana where the life expectancy stands at 60. Farming in 
Ghana has soldiered through decades of neglect, still employing 67% of the 
country's population, but it will not survive being deserted by the young 
generation.

Nevertheless, Modesto's lack of interest in his father's farm is typical of 
youth not only within Ghana; throughout the developing world agriculture is 
seen by younger generations as an occupation of last resort. Backbreaking toil 
earning neither money, status nor security â€“ in Ghana it is clear that you are 
born a farmer, you don't become one.

Attempting to overcome these negative connotations, Ghana's Youth in 
Agriculture Programme "seeks to change the negative perception the youth have 
of participation in agriculture, farmers as uneducated, unskilled, physical 
labourers with extremely low economic return." Modern agriculture is more than 
tilling the soil and animals. The sector today offers career opportunities in 
research, environment, financial management [and] engineering."

Motivating youth to stay in rural areas, encouraging them to accept farming as 
a viable business venture, cannot be done solely by propaganda. Kanayo F 
Nwanze, president of the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) 
argues "In order to make a real difference to the lives of these young women 
and men, governments and development agencies must invest in agriculture [...]. 
They must also invest specifically in young people themselves."

Certainly access to financial and technical support could make young people 
reconsider farming as a viable occupation. The Cocoa Abrabopa Association (Twi 
for "Cocoa for a better life") is a microfinancial institution which allows 
youth with limited assets to start up a farming enterprise. At the start of 
every farming season, they loan fertiliser, insecticide, and fungicide to 
farmers, who can pay for these once their crop has been harvested. Over a 
period of three years, these loans, combined with training in agricultural and 
business skills, have helped 14,000 farmers increase yields from 3.3 to 15 bags 
per acre.

If Modesto does manage to build a life in the city, the farm will most likely 
be left to his younger sisters, whose options are even more limited. According 
to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) small scale women 
farmers to grow up to 90% of Africa food. Most of these women have had no 
choice as to their occupation, but their lives can be significantly improved 
through targeted policies such as land reform and credit programmes that 
benefit them directly. The FAO estimates that in Ghana, if women and men had 
equal land rights, women's use of fertiliser and profits per hectare would 
nearly double.

Ernest's farm, like over 70% of farms in Ghana, is just under 3 hectares. 
Joining co-operatives remains an essential way for such farmers to increase 
their bargaining power. Kuapa Kokoo, the largest such co-operative in Ghana 
with 45,000 members, is a hugely successful example of how smallholders can 
empower themselves. At their fourth annual general meeting in 1997 Kuapa Kokoo 
farmers decided to set up Divine Chocolate as a means of guaranteeing 
themselves fair-trade prices. By supporting such products consumers in the West 
can help push the balance in favour of Ghanaian farmers. Young people must also 
be encouraged to adapt the smallholder model they inherit if it is to survive 
the 21st century. Perhaps co-operatives can be taken further, for example 
creating more rural centres for production and processing, or investing in 
agricultural research and training.

Support groups such as the Global Youth Innovation Network (GYIN), set up in 
2011 with funding from IFAD, can build confidence and encourage young people's 
potential for innovation. A youth-led organization, the GYIN motivates and 
supports members' initiatives. At their second conference in Benin, Patrick 
Kamdem, a young member from Cameroon, set out their vision "to create an 
enabling space so that young women and men can channel their creativities, 
potentialities and vibrancies in transforming their communities." Lectures, 
discussion groups and business forums were held for young entrepreneurs to 
exchange ideas and experiences.

Agriculture desperately needs young people who can experiment and innovate 
precisely at a time where the youth are turning away from farming. Yields must 
be increased in a sustainable manner for small farms to remain profitable and 
keep up with population growth, all the while adapting to the threat of climate 
change. As Nwanze stresses, "young people living in poverty in rural areas can 
make the change from being some of the most vulnerable people in today's world, 
to being active, productive and influential members of society. Today, they 
need our support. Tomorrow, we will need their contribution, their creativity, 
their commitment and their leadership."

Modesto's hope for a better life in the city is optimistic; youth unemployment 
in Africa is 21% and all too often rural youth are simply met with urban 
destitution. It is imperative that agriculture keeps hold of its greatest 
asset. Young people can act as a catalyst for change, but unless they are 
offered opportunities to use their talents on the land, they will turn 
elsewhere. This is a dangerous trend, as Mahatma Gandhi warned: "To forget how 
to dig the earth and tend the soil is to forget ourselves".
 