
David Graveney has insisted that England did not make a mistake in appointing 
Andrew Flintoff <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-flintoff> as captain 
for the Ashes series. Flintoff's leadership was criticised as the tourists 
slumped to their first 5-0 whitewash against Australia since 1921, but the 
England and Wales Cricket Board's chairman of selectors dismissed any talk of 
misjudgment as Michael Vaughan returned to the captaincy yesterday.

"It wasn't a mistake," said Graveney. "It was a close decision but nothing 
that has happened in the last six weeks makes me personally change my mind."

Flintoff became captain during the tour of India in February 2006 after 
Vaughan broke down with a knee injury. Flintoff then missed much of the home 
season with an ankle problem but returned in the autumn for the Champions 
Trophy in India and the Ashes tour.

In his absence the opener Andrew Strauss led England to a 3-0 Test series 
victory over Pakistan. But yesterday Graveney was adamant that the Lancashire 
all-rounder was the right choice for the Test series in Australia, despite the 
emphatic nature of the defeat.

"I take my hat off to him [Flintoff] because it was a very difficult job to do 
and he has done it as well as he possibly could. We've made a lot of errors, 
but the appointment of the captain is not one of them," said the chairman of 
selectors.

Graveney travelled to Australia to inform Flintoff that Vaughan would resume 
as captain for tomorrow's Twenty20 international and the forthcoming triangular 
one-day series against Australia and New Zealand.

"He was fine because he understood that," Graveney said. "Freddie was doing a 
job in Michael's absence and he understood it. It was not a question of being 
sacked. He will be the same as everybody else, he will be supporting the team 
and he is hurting the same way everyone else is but now we're looking forward 
to a fresh start."
 