
Advertising is by nature a perky business but every four years our glass 
becomes three quarters full rather than the usual half. These are the years, 
like this one, when the Olympics and European Football championship collide and 
send clients into spending mode. According to ZenithOptimediaUK ad spend is 
projected to increase by near to 10% in 2016 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/article/zenithoptimedia-forecasts-uk-stellar-ad-growth-almost-10-2016/1375883>
.

But it’s not just about the money, for the general atmosphere of optimism and 
celebration spills over into the advertising activity for their brands. In 
short they start making work that people find fun, watchable, interesting and 
sharable rather than rather simply waxing lyrical about than the number of 
blades in their razor or the APR on their credit card. These are good days in 
the ad business.

And so, a few days out from the first national anthems at the Stade de France 
and work is emerging from advertisers seeking to capitalise on the Euros, 
whether official sponsors or not.

Mars has delivered an epic cross channel invasion as part of their believe 
campaign <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eC5bfQgSY9Y>. Carlsberg have thrown 
the kitchen sink and Marcel Desailly into aFrench Revolution themed romp 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3XlD8lqFH98>. And over in the home of 
England’s eternal sporting adversaries, Lufthansa has created a spot that plays 
withEnglish perceptions of Germany complete with Lederhosen and Sauerkraut 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FD9UTBWo51w>. And this is just the start, the 
opening salvo of football themed advertising we will have to endure right up to 
the moment when the last of the home nations are dumped out of the tournament.

However, for all the exuberance of an ad industry in full cry, it’s hard not 
to despair at the bottom of the barrel national stereotypes and cliches on 
show. It’s hard not to wonder why, on these occasions, the combined genius of 
the ad business can’t muster anything more original than a parade of crass 
in-jokes at the expense of our European neighbours. This isn’t creativity at 
its best in the service of our clients’ brands and businesses; this is Carry On
Advertising <https://www.theguardian.com/media/advertising>.

And yet, for all the cracker joke originality of the work, there is something 
rather constructive and even powerful about the benign nationalism on our 
screens. On the eve of a referendum that will tear this country apart if we 
vote to remain and tear Europe apart if we vote to leave, the xenophobia of 
Euro 2016 advertising may well be a force for good.

For all that the cliches and stereotypes may grate, the sentiment is 
resolutely good natured and warm hearted. The fact that the jokes are tired and 
familiar renders them affectionate rather than sharply barbed. This is not an 
appeal to the deeper recesses of nationalism lurking in the British psyche but 
a reminder that we actually respect, admire and yes, on occasions, even love 
our European neighbours.

Far happier, 60 years after the Treaty of Rome, to meet them on the football 
pitch rather than on the battlefield. And the truth is that this work is far 
more powerful at making the emotional case for staying closely bonded to our 
European neighbours than anything so far created by the remain campaign. 
Precisely because it represents our relationship with Europe as one of friendly 
rivalry and affection with a big dollop of self-deprecation that serves to 
remind us that if our European partners aren’t perfect, neither are we.

For anyone that cares about Britain’s future in Europe the Euros and 
advertising’s exuberant and rather crass promotion of partisanship and 
patriotism may just have come at the right time.

Richard Huntington is the chief strategy officer at Saatchi & Saatchi London

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 