
Won’t somebody think of poor Yaya Touré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/20/yaya-toure-manchester-city-dispute>
? The overgrown toddler has been spent so much time crying over the past 24 
hours because he wasn’t given a Bugatti for his birthday that his room is 
starting to resemble the Dead Sea and while that was a novelty for a while, 
it’s starting to become a bit of a nuisance and with Manchester City refusing 
to pay for someone to come round and wash the water away, it’s no surprise 
Touré wants to return to Barcelona.

This is a grave, shocking humanitarian crisis on a grand scale and perhaps the 
only way for us to put a smile back on Touré’s face is if we all clump together 
and get him that Bugatti. As such, the Mill would be delighted to man the phone 
lines all day and take your donations. Please, give generously –you can change 
one little boy’s life with one small act of kindness.

But first, more rumours, such as Liverpool wanting to improve their defence by 
givingAshley Cole, a free agent now, a two-year contract. That would be a 
pretty good way of improving their defence. Unfortunately Brendan Rodgers faces 
competition from Arsenal, Milan, Manchester City, Monaco, Paris-Saint Germain 
and, er, Tottenham.

Liverpool sniffing around the Dnipro Dnipropetrovsk winger Yevhen Konoplyanka 
again,having remembered how fun it was when they tried to sign him in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/01/liverpool-ukraine-yevhen-konoplyanka-dnipro-16m>
. However, Manchester United are also interested, with Louis van Gaal making 
his presence felt at Old Trafford already; he’s also lining up a deal forBayern 
Munich’s Toni Kroos, while Southampton’s Luke Shaw has been spotted 
house-hunting in Cheshire. The natural order is being restored.

Tom Ince wants to play for Internazionale, just like his dad. Presumably he 
would also like to finish his career at Wolves.

Newcastle still want Darren Bent, but Aston Villa are ready to welcome the 
striker, 47, back into the fold after his sterling work on loan at Fulham.

Jack Colback. Free transfer. Swansea City. What more do you need to know?

Sam Allardyce has been told to play with more style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/may/20/sam-allardyce-keeps-job-west-ham-manager>
. West Ham are closing in on the signing of Phil Bardsley.
 