
I recently read an article entitled Who Killed Long Copy 
<http://www.campaignlive.co.uk/news/1309220/>. It was an excerpt from Read me: 
Ten Lessons on Creating Great Copy 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Read-Me-Lessons-Writing-Great/dp/1780673485>. There 
was a sentence that really made me think: “It’s ironic that the one place where 
long copy really has fallen out of favour is advertising, the industry that 
invented copywriting in the first place.”

I work at OgilvyOne. David Ogilvy was the daddy of long copy; his Man in the 
Hathaway shirt <http://waxwanedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2012/09/mhs.jpeg> and 
theMan from Schweppes is here 
<http://media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/originals/bf/44/3d/bf443de07a4844b21dfe0280183d84fe.jpg>
 are two of the most iconic long copy ads ever written.

So are we continuing his legacy today? Yes, is the short copy answer. The 
advertising industry has evolved, as consumer habits and media consumption 
have. The good agencies and the good copywriters are still writing beautiful 
and engaging long copy. But it’s in the form of letters, emails and 
well-crafted online content, telling a bigger, on-going story that lives and 
grows over time, through multiple touch points, across a customer’s entire 
relationship with a brand.  

But just because long copy is still used doesn’t mean this once integral tool 
of the marketing arsenal is thriving.

From my perspective, as someone who runs an agency, it is definitely getting 
harder to find people who can come up with engaging ideas and then craft the 
copy that fills those ideas. 

The main cause of this has to be in our education system. Add in a societal 
shift from the days when the media set a good example (now it seems good 
grammar is a bad thing) and a lack of time for anything other than “snackable” 
content, and this has contributed to the view that long copy ads have become 
old-fashioned. Creativity has come to be associated with brevity and a belief 
in advertising, that all persuasion should reside in a single proposition, 
usually expressed in a sentence. And that this single thought, if continuously 
repeated in some creative form, will do 100% of the job of selling. 

But this sits at odds with us. We are after all a social species; we need 
stories not only to encourage us to buy something, but to explain to our 
friends why we are clever to buy it. Reading, is a very late evolutionary 
development among humans, but talking and storytelling are millions of years 
old. They are what make us human. Cavemen would gather around camp-fires to 
exchange stories, the Greeks revelled in the myths of ancient heroes and gods – 
and now storytelling is intrinsic to us. We are a species ofstorytellers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2012/may/23/storytelling-key-audience-consumer-engagement>
. 

Long copy has moved on with the industry, but the craft and skill involved 
remains the same. Now long copy is the bard that ensures the brand’s story is 
told across multiple communication channels, successfully binding together the 
different chapters of the brand’s story.

As an industry we must nurture and cherish this craft. This means working with 
clients, some of whom are guilty of critiquing every word of long copy, which 
make the process of getting approval unbelievably time consuming and 
frustrating. David Abbott famously switched to posters to advertise The 
Economist partly because of his frustration at the publication’s approval 
process. Investment also plays a key role in helping to encourage the use of 
long copy.  

Agencies need to invest to develop talent, especially as good copywriters are 
outnumbered by those who can’t write well. Or they can, but they find it hard 
work – which, to be fair, it is.  More importantly, we need to champion longer 
copy again. Despite the lack of recognition (long copy ads do not win awards – 
at least not international ones) we need long copy to be able to give meaning 
and context. To convey the messages we want to communicate. And tell the brand 
stories we want shared.

As guardians of this craft, we need to do more to promote it and make sure 
that it is not lost. Otherwise, as ad people, where would we be?

Jo Coombs is the managing director at OgilvyOne London <http://ogilvy.co.uk/>

More like this

• Content planning – mastering the basics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/09/content-planning-marketing-master-digital>
• Advice from Vice: six lessons from a publishing outsider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/08/vice-digital-media-publisher-investment>
• i100 and Quartz prove homepages are increasingly irrelevant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2014/sep/02/i100-quartz-show-homepages-are-irrelevant>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled ‘Advertisement feature’. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 