
Investing in overseas development is sometimes a hard sell when our own 
country is focused on economic recovery and job creation. Sustainable 
development creates stronger economies, with more consumers to trade and do 
business with in our interconnected global marketplace. This, in turn, creates 
growth opportunities at home and abroad. Effective development directly 
improves the lives of the world's poor and contributes toward a thriving 
international economy that serves our shared economic interests. That's why, 
even in these tough times, foreign assistance is a good investment and, when 
done right, delivers results.

So, when government leaders, the aid community and civil society organisations 
from around the world meet in Busan, South Korea, next week to discuss making 
development assistance a more effective investment, development experts might 
look toGhana <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ghana> for insights.

In 2000, Ghana recognised that growing its economy depended on increasing 
agricultural productivity. The challenges were immense. In many rural areas,
nine out of 10 people 
<http://siteresources.worldbank.org/GHANAEXTN/Resources/Ghana_PRSP.pdf> were 
living in poverty. Use of modern farming techniques was rare, and 
infrastructure to expand agricultural exports was inadequate. Between harvest 
and market, farmers often lost as much as30% of their yields 
<http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTRANETTRADE/Resources/Ghana_Food_Safety_Action_Plan_Revised.pdf>
.

To address this challenge, Ghana funneled development assistance, including a 
$547m (£344m) grant from <http://www.mcc.gov/pages/countries/overview/ghana> 
the US government'sMillennium Challenge Corporation <http://www.mcc.gov> (MCC), 
toward improving agricultural productivity and food security. The country 
embraced MCC's approach, requiring partners to consult with their citizens to 
determine their constraints to growth and then reform policies and design 
programmes to tackle them. Ghanaians used this strategy along the entire 
agricultural value chain – including training farmers, opening post-harvest 
cold storage facilities and building roads to markets – and factored in 
measures to monitor progress.

Although Ghana has a way to go, the efforts are already paying off.

The Overseas Development Institute calculates that 
<http://www.developmentprogress.org/progress-stories/ghanas-sustained-agricultural-growth-putting-underused-resources-work>
, since 1983, Ghana's agricultural sector has grown by more than 5% a year, 
helping to fuel the economy's overall growth. According to theWorld Bank, the 
poverty rate has been nearly halved 
<http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTGHANA/Resources/CEM_poverty.pdf> from 
51.7% in 1991 to 28.5% by 2006, and Ghana is poised to meet the UN millennium 
Development Goal of halving extreme poverty by 2015.

Why are these returns in Ghana so impressive? They exemplify the principles 
that make development a prudent investment: a partnership rooted in 
country-owned solutions, a demand for results and a commitment to transparency.

Effectively targeted development investment allows countries to prioritise 
their needs, design and implement programmes and build for sustainability in 
consultation with their citizens. The growth of Ghana's agricultural sector, 
and its impact on the poor, depends on the participation of small shareholder 
farmers, particularly women who run subsistence farms.

An environment that encourages participation of civil society organisations is 
also necessary to ensure that non-governmental voices are not just tolerated 
but heard. An inclusive, enabling environment improves opportunities for trade 
and investment too.

Results are fundamental to making the case that foreign assistance is a good 
investment. The evolution from aid inputs to development outcomes means 
improving technically rigorous, systematic and transparent methods for 
projecting, tracking, evaluating and communicating impact. This process must be 
inclusive and not overlook the poor, ensuring that economic growth improves the 
lives of the vulnerable and marginalised. MCC, for example, tracks a continuum 
of results throughout the lifecycle of its programmes. MCC captures policy and 
institutional reforms countries make from the start to ensure sustainability.

As programmes mature, interim outputs and outcomes are assessed, like the 
MCC-funded training so far ofmore than 64,000 Ghanaian farmers 
<http://www.mcc.gov/documents/reports/qsr-2010002030705-ghana.pdf>. MCC's 
continuum includes post-programme impact evaluations to understand if income 
increases are attributable to MCC's investments and to learn whether programmes 
were designed correctly.

Maximising the impact of development requires embracing transparency as the 
basis for accountability and good governance. Partner governments must be held 
to account, both to donors and to their own citizens for how development 
resources are used and what they achieve.

In these ways, Busan can push the practice of development effectiveness, 
grounded in a non-negotiable commitment to responsibility, accountability and 
transparency. Because of this approach, Busan can reaffirm that development is 
a good investment worth making.
 