
I like a good comedy. I love a good science-fiction film. But you can’t beat a 
frickin’ sports movie.

Raging Bull: an undisputed historical heavyweight
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/may/09/raging-bull-reel-history-martin-scorsese>
Speeches, stakes and cheerleaders … either the name of the greatest restaurant 
I have yet to be thrown out of or three of, the clearest signs that you’re 
watching a genre that can bump my goose like no other.

Asking me to pick my top five, though, is like asking me to rank my limbs. I 
mean how do you tell Karate Kid he’s benched and Rocky got the nod? How do you 
tell Rocky that Raging Bull is way better over 90 minutes? And how do you tell 
Raging Bull that you’re actually more in the mood for Space Jam?

So truss yourself up, stretch yourself out and take a long hard hit of Deep 
Heat, as I guide you through my starting lineup of iconic nipple-stiffeners.

Forgive me Shooter McGavin <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=713v5H8ERKg>, 
wherever you are …

5. Friday Night Lights (TV series)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D779blnz0JU8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D779blnz0JU8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D779blnz0JU8&media=>
I’m cheating here already! The film is terrific, but the TV series is 
something else. Pitch-perfect in every way. If you don’t want to be a better 
person having spent just one episode in the company of coach Eric Taylor, then 
you are truly a lost cause. Wait, what am I saying? Coach Taylor would never 
give up on you. He’d put one hand behind your head, look you deep in the eyes 
and say “I trust you”, before cueing those chiming guitars. Kyle Chandler is 
the best screen coach of all time. That scene where he writes State on the 
chalkboard … man alive. Clear eyes, full hearts …

4. Jerry Maguire
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFFrag8ll85w&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFFrag8ll85w>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DFFrag8ll85w&media=>
I think this qualifies, doesn’t it? Set in the world of sports, just from an 
agent’s POV. So many great moments and lines: “If this [taps heart] is empty, 
then this [taps head] doesn’t matter 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MwYfVVJN3ko>.” Gets me every time. Cameron 
Crowe said he wanted to make a movie about a guy who arrives at his greatest 
success from incredible failure, which just happens to be the story of my life, 
albeit one stalled at the incredible failure mark. Career best for all involved.

3. Animalympics
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2IyAVPIFSNU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2IyAVPIFSNU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2IyAVPIFSNU&media=>
Probably the first sports movie I saw and boy is it a doozy! Amazing voice 
cast, brilliant songs and fresh animation that isn’t too Disney while still 
being enough Hanna-Barbera. Hard to pick who I want to be most in it, then and 
now! Decathlete alligator Bolt Jenkins? Tail-surfing otter Dean Wilson? No no, 
it has to be the long-distance running-goat Rene Fromage, forsaking the love of 
a beautiful lioness in his pursuit of Olympic gold … or does he? Vive le 
victory!

2. Hoop Dreams
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPh2Y-epihlk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPh2Y-epihlk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPh2Y-epihlk&media=>
A very special documentary that I won’t spoil if you haven’t seen it. Suffice 
it to say: young shoulders, fathers and sons, basketball. Impeccable and 
lasting.

1. Kevin Costner
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fforget-rocky-and-raging-bull-these-are-the-top-five-sports-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439378336193%2F5e2478af-6718-4f36-a3b4-62352bd2a077-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Forget%20Rocky%20and%20Raging%20Bull%3A%20these%20are%20the%20top%20five%20sports%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fforget-rocky-and-raging-bull-these-are-the-top-five-sports-movies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Forget%20Rocky%20and%20Raging%20Bull%3A%20these%20are%20the%20top%20five%20sports%20movies&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Faug%2F13%2Fforget-rocky-and-raging-bull-these-are-the-top-five-sports-movies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F12%2F1439378336193%2F5e2478af-6718-4f36-a3b4-62352bd2a077-1020x612.jpeg>
 Riding high … Kevin Costner in Open Range Photograph: Disney/Everett/Rex 
Features 
I mean, need I say more? If you’ve read this far, then you know exactly what 
I’m talking about.Kevin Costner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kevin-costner>
 is my favourite sports movie of all time. Even in Waterworld.

 * Adam Riches is performing in Coach Coach 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/adam-riches-is-coach-coach> at 
Edinburgh, until 30 August. Box office: 0131-226 0000.  