
Forty-two years after the Chilean military murdered the poet and musician 
Víctor Jara, ten of the alleged perpetrators have finally been called to face 
justice after a judge announced charges against a group of former officers.

Agony of Chile's dark days continues as murdered poet's wife fights for justice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/sep/11/chile-coup-anniversary-victor-jara-murder>
Four of the suspects immediately handed themselves in and other arrests were 
expected to follow.


Jara – who was also a folk singer, theatre director and communist party member 
- was taken prisoner during the coup by GeneralAugusto Pinochet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pinochet> in September 1973. 


Military officers tortured him, broke his wrists and hands, played Russian 
roulette with him and then on 16 September executed him with 44 bullets.

He remains arguably the best-known victim of the coup, but there are many 
other outstanding cases.

According to Chile’s truth and justice commission, 3,095 people were killed 
during the 1973-90 Pinochet dictatorship, including about 1,000 who 
“disappeared”. Bodies are still being found today.

Judge Miguel Vázquez Plaza also indicted several of the officers in the 
kidnapping and murder of former prison director Littre Quiroga Carvajal. Like 
Jara, he was held prisoner at the national stadium in Santiago, then singled 
out and taken into the dressing rooms where he was tortured and executed.

 This step in the legal process is more advanced than a simple charge. The 
next stage will be a trial on charges arising from both cases, which will 
probably take place around the end of this year or early next year.


Jara’s widow, Joan Turner Jara, originally from Britain, called the charges “a 
message of hope” but said much work still needed to be done to secure justice 
for her husband and other victims of the Pinochet dictatorship.

“If Víctor’s case serves as an example, we’re pushing forward in demanding 
justice for Víctor with the hope that justice will follow for everyone,” she 
told reporters.


 Others involved in the long struggle to hold the military accountable said 
the judge’s announcement was an important step forward.

 “These are important advances that are also healing in terms of the 
psychological and moral [wellbeing] of family members. But it is also healing 
for society. We want a society built upon truth and justice,” said Alicia Lira, 
president of AFEP, a support group for relatives of political prisoners 
executed during the dictatorship.

Human Rights lawyer Nelson Caucoto said the courts were moving closer to a 
judgment in the Jara case, and pointed to progress recently made in another 
emblematic human rights case, that of activists Rodrigo Rojas and Carmen Gloria 
Quintana, who were burned alive by military officers in 1986.


Chilean army officers in custody over 1986 attack on activists burned alive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/22/chile-army-custody-carmen-gloria-quintana-burned-alive-augusto-pinochet>
Earlier this week, a judge ordered the arrest of seven army officers for their 
role in the attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/22/chile-army-custody-carmen-gloria-quintana-burned-alive-augusto-pinochet>
 in which Rojas and Quintana were drenched in petrol, set alight and then left 
for dead. Rojas died from his injuries, and Quintana was severely injured.

“These are cases that are burned into Chile’s historical memory,” said Caucoto 
in a telephone interview with the Guardian. “They are crimes committed during a 
dictatorship and supposedly to never be solved. Now, the accused will be 
planning their defense and this year we may have sentencing.”

The Chilean courts are not the only setting for the long struggle for 
accountability. In 2013, Joan Jara and her daughters Amanda and Manuela filed a 
civil lawsuit in the US for torture and extrajudicial killing against former 
lieutenant Pedro Barrientos Nuñez, who fledChile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile> in 1989.

Barrientos, who has US citizenship through marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/23/florida-safe-haven-war-criminals-federal-prosecutors>
, is alleged to have played Russian roulette with Jara before ordering his 
troups to open fire. Attempts to extradite him to Santiago have so far proved 
unsuccessful, but the Jara family’s lawyers are hopeful about the prospects of 
taking him to court in the US.

“We are gearing up for a trial. I am gathering evidence and interviewing 
[former] members of the Chilean military,” said Almudena Bernabéu, a human 
rights attorney with San Francisco-based Center for Justice and Accountability 
(CJA).


“Barrientos denies he was physically at the stadium [where Jara was shot] but 
the conscripts say he was there and was in the room when Jara was shot,” said 
Bernabéu who filed a civil lawsuit on behalf of Jara’s wife Joan and the folk 
singer’s two daughters, Amanda and Manuela.

Barrientos was not included in the latest list of indictments in Chile because 
prosecutors wanted to prevent the case being held up by his attempts to resist 
extradition from the US. He may be added to the case later if he is eventually 
returned to his homeland.
 