
Australia's Anzac carnival of commemoration leaves some things not talked about
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/postcolonial-blog/2016/apr/25/australias-anzac-carnival-of-commemoration-leaves-some-things-not-talked-about>
Scott McIntyre, the former SBS sports reporter who lost his job last year 
after Malcolm Turnbull complained about his “despicable”Anzac Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/anzac-day> tweets, has doubled down on the 
controversy.

On Monday afternoon McIntyre began tweeting images and blocks of text 
describing Australian soldiers involved in instances of rape, murder, riots and 
pillaging.

“Brave Anzacs rioting, pillaging and murdering in Egypt, 1915. Via war 
memorial website,” he captioned one.

McIntyre’s tweets, posted on Anzac Day, contained no other statement or links, 
but clearly mirrored the controversial posts from one year ago which led to his 
sacking.
Scott McIntyre (@mcintinhos) 
Anzacs murdering, in cold-blood, villagers in Surafend in 1918: the first hand 
account from trooper Harold O’Brien.pic.twitter.com/FdwUSOOfoz 
<https://t.co/FdwUSOOfoz>
 <https://twitter.com/mcintinhos/status/724458833309888512> April 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mcintinhos/status/724458833309888512> Scott McIntyre 
(@mcintinhos) 
Australian troops involved in frequent, often pack, rape of Japanese in Kure, 
1940s. Via army translator A. Clifton.pic.twitter.com/K7V5dL9kYx 
<https://t.co/K7V5dL9kYx>
 <https://twitter.com/mcintinhos/status/724457828790853632> April 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/mcintinhos/status/724457828790853632> 
The response online was mixed. One person replied: “Its amazing how you will 
have a go at the soldiers who sacraficed [sic] so much for your country every 
Anzac day.”

Another said it was worth reading.
Na'ama Carlin (@derridalicious) 
Good thing @mcintinhos <https://twitter.com/mcintinhos> can't be fired again. 
Some difficult Anzac Day tweeting on his TL. Do read. Let's not glorify war.
 <https://twitter.com/derridalicious/status/724465612479586304> April 25, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/derridalicious/status/724465612479586304> 
On Anzac Day last year McIntyre, then a football journalist for SBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sbs>, criticised what he described as the 
“cultification [sic] of an imperialist invasion”.

“Remembering the summary execution, widespread rape and theft committed by 
these brave Anzacs in Egypt, Palestine and Japan,” he wrote in one tweet.

“Wonder if the poorly-read, largely white, nationalist drinkers and gamblers 
pause today to consider the horror that all mankind suffered,” he said in 
another.

The following day McIntyre was sacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/26/sbs-sports-reporter-scott-mcintyre-sacked-over-direspectful-anzac-tweets>
, with SBS CEO and managing director, Michael Ebeid, saying his remarks made 
his position at the broadcast “untenable”.

SBS staff were later told McIntyre was fired for refusing to remove the tweets.


Turnbull, who was then the minister for communications, tweeted his disgust 
and said the posts were “despicable remarks which deserve to be condemned”.

He also revealed on his blog he contacted Ebeid as soon as he saw McIntyre’s 
tweets, but denied he had any influence over the decision to sack him.

In October the Fair Work Commission granted McIntyre permission to sue for 
unfair dismissal.


Earlier this month McIntyre and SBS resolved their dispute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/11/sbs-reporter-scott-mcintyre-resolves-dispute-over-anzac-day-tweets>
 before a scheduled hearing in the federal court.

“SBS acknowledges that Mr McIntyre was a well-respected sports reporter with 
SBS for a period spanning over a decade, andSBS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sbs> is disappointed that it was unable to 
continue with his services following his Tweets,” a joint statement said on 11 
April.

“Mr McIntyre acknowledges that the views expressed in his Tweets on 25 April 
2015 were his views and that they were contentious. Mr McIntyre regrets any 
attribution of his views to SBS and acknowledges that SBS was drawn into 
controversy following the expression of his views.”

McIntyre could not be reached for comment.
 