
The former boss of the defunct Anglo Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/anglo-irish-bank> has apologised for 
comments made by senior executives in 2008 mocking the institution's mounting 
losses and its need for a multibillion euro bailout.

David Drumm, who was chief executive at the time the comments were recorded, 
said he was "shocked and embarrassed" by thecontent of the telephone 
conversations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/25/anglo-irish-bank-tapes-bailout>
 which were leaked to an Irish newspaper last week.

There was "no excuse for the terrible language or the frivolous tone," he 
said. "I sincerely regret the offence it has caused. I cannot change this now 
but I can apologise to those who had to listen to it and who were 
understandably so offended by it."

The tapes were made in 2008, when the Irish government was in talks to bail 
out a number of the country's troubled banks.

German money flowed to Irish banks after the government issued a blanket 
guarantee for deposits.

In the recordings, Drumm can be heard laughing while a fellow Anglo Irish 
executive sings the German national anthem.

The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, reacted with anger to the tapes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/28/angela-merkel-anglo-irish-bank-scandal?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and expressed her contempt for the disgraced bankers.

"This is simply very hard to swallow for people who go to work normally every 
day, who earn their money. It really damages democracy, the social market 
economy and everything that we are working for," she said.

Drumm's colleague John Bowe was recorded saying he picked the figure of €7bn 
(£6bn) "out of my arse" when authorities asked him how much would be needed to 
rescue the bank.

"Listening to a recording made almost five years ago at a highly stressful and 
volatile uncertain time is both embarrassing and a shocking reminder of how 
much pressure my colleagues and I were under at that time," Drumm said over the 
weekend.

The failed bank was nationalised in 2009 and a year later the Irish government 
needed a €30bn bailout from the European Union and the International Monetary 
Fund.
 