
Four Americans were killed and 17 people, 16 of them American, were wounded 
when a Taliban suicide bomber dressed as a labourer blew himself up at a Nato 
airbase inAfghanistan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> on 
Saturday.

At least four killed in Taliban raid on German consulate in Afghanistan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/taliban-attack-german-consulate-mazar-i-sharif-afghanistan-nato-airstrikes-kunduz>
In a statement 
<http://www.defense.gov/News/News-Releases/News-Release-View/Article/1002539/statement-by-secretary-ash-carter-on-bagram-air-base-explosion>
, US defense secretary Ash Carter said: “I am deeply saddened to learn that an 
explosion early this morning at Bagram airfield in Afghanistan has resulted in 
US casualties. An apparent suicide bomber has taken the lives of two US service 
members and two US contractors working on the base.

“The explosion wounded 16 other US service members and one Polish soldier 
participating in our Nato mission.”

Before Saturday, seven US service members 
<http://www.military.com/daily-news/2016/10/04/seventh-us-service-member-killed-in-afghanistan-this-year.html>
 had been killed by hostile action in Afghanistan in 2016. The Bagram attack 
was the most deadly in the country since21 December 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/21/suicide-bomber-attacks-us-afghan-patrol-near-bagram-airbase>
, whensix service members <http://icasualties.org/oef/Fatalities.aspx> were 
killed in a blast at the same airfield. According to the websiteicasualties.org 
<http://icasualties.org/>, the US military has suffered 2,391 casualties in 
Afghanistan since 2001.

Those killed and wounded in Saturday’s attack were not immediately named.

Carter said: “I want to express my sincere condolences to the families of the 
fallen, and I want to reassure the loved ones of those injured that they are 
getting the best possible care. Force protection is always a top priority for 
us in Afghanistan, and we will investigate this tragedy to determine any steps 
we can take to improve it.

“For those who carried out this attack, my message is simple. We will not be 
deterred in our mission to protect our homeland and help Afghanistan secure its 
own future.”

Bagram map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/11/bagram/giv-1572660Ps3TERPftl/>
The attacker was reportedly standing in a queue with labourers at Bagram 
airfield, north of Kabul, when he detonated the explosives.


“An explosive device was detonated on Bagram airfield resulting in multiple 
casualties,” the Nato-led mission to Afghanistan said in an initial statement. 
“Response teams at Bagram continue to treat the wounded and investigate the 
incident.”

Waheed Sediqqi, a spokesman for the Parwan provincial governor, said the 
bomber detonated a suicide vest after entering the heavily protected site, the 
largest US base in the country.

The attack underlines the foreign policy challenge that will face US 
president-elect Donald Trump when he takes office in January. It followeda 
suicide attack on the German consulate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/taliban-attack-german-consulate-mazar-i-sharif-afghanistan-nato-airstrikes-kunduz>
 in the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif late on Thursday night, which killed 
four people and wounded more than 100. That attack was in retaliation for 
airstrikes near the northern city of Kunduz last week thatkilled more than 30 
civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/two-us-service-members-killed-in-northern-afghanistan>
.

Barack Obama had hoped to have all US forces out of Afghanistan by the end of 
his term, but was forced to abandon that aim as Afghan forces struggled to 
contain the Taliban insurgency.


Under current plans, 8,400 US troops will remain as part of the Nato-led 
operation and a separate US counter-terrorism mission after Obama decided to 
slow down a planned reduction of the force, leaving it to his successor to 
decide future strategy.

The Taliban’s spokesman, Zabihullah Mujahid, said Saturday’s attack, which had 
been planned for four months, had caused heavy casualties, killing 23 Americans 
and wounding 44. The movement often exaggerates the number of casualties its 
operations cause.
 