
Shadow defence secretary Jim Murphy has sent a list of 10 questions to David 
Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, which he says 
remain unanswered about Liam Fox's use of his best friend Adam Werritty as his 
personal foreign envoy in defiance of parliamentary rules.

In a letter sent on Sunday to No 10, Murphy demands that the prime minister 
"reveal the full extent of the wrongdoing which took place at the heart of 
government". Murphy's letter, seen by the Guardian, calls on Cameron to detail 
exactly who funded Werritty's jetset lifestyle and whether they were seeking 
political favours from Fox in return.

"We still do not know the full facts about the money trail which led to the 
resignation of the Rt Hon Member for North Somerset, we do not know the true 
role and motivations of Mr Werritty, and we do not know who exactly in the 
government met Mr Werritty and whether there was any prior knowledge of the 
former defence secretary's activities."

Murphy also demanded a "categorical guarantee" that no other ministers have a 
similar unorthodox relationship with an unofficial adviser â€“ a question Cameron 
has repeatedly refused to answer.

Murphy's letter also demands publication of a full list of all ministers, MPs 
and government officials that Werritty has met since the election. It has 
emerged that Werritty also met Gerald Howarth, minister for defence exports, 
and Lord Astor, Lords spokesman on defence, on "social occasions", which 
suggests no civil servants were present.

He also called on Cameron to publish a "full list" of the people and 
organisations that funded Pargav, the "slush fund'' created to support 
Werritty's lifestyle. "In particular will you provide the details of which IRG 
Ltd the cabinet secretary's report makes reference to," Murphy asks. There are 
more than 30 companies and organisations that use the initial IRG.

Murphy said the cabinet secretary Sir Gus O'Donnell's report into Werritty's 
activities failed to address serious issues that raise further questions that 
"go to the heart of trust in the government and the country's political 
system". The Labour MP for East Renfrewshire said Cameron's "dismissal" of 
direct questions fromLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
leader Ed Miliband during prime minister's questions last week was "completely 
at odds with the transparency of which you have regularly spoken".

"As you have said in the foreword to the ministerial code, 'people have lost 
faith in politics and politicians. It is our duty to restore their trust. It is 
not enough simply to make a difference. We must be different.' It is your 
responsibility to give these words meaning by publicly providing answers to 
these questions," Murphy said.

"Throughout this scandal it has been clear that you have tried to avoid public 
association with it. It is not credible to continue to refuse to answer the 
questions about the actions of the individual you chose as your first defence 
secretary at such a crucial time for our country."

The letter was sent as reports emerged that William Hague, the foreign 
secretary, had told Fox to rein in Werritty after MI6 warned that the 
self-styled adviser was attempting to interfere in official government policy 
in Iran. The Guardian understands Werritty has held several meetings with 
Iranian opposition groups, who were led to believe that the 33-year-old was an 
official government adviser.

The fresh revelations about Werritty's role in Iran come a week after Hague 
told the BBC that the suggestion that Fox and Werritty were running a 
"completely separate [foreign] policy is a fanciful idea".

"One adviser or non-adviser, whatever he may have been to one minister, isn't 
able to run a totally different policy from the rest of the government. And I 
think people can at least be reassured about that," Hague told the Andrew Marr 
show last Sunday.

Murphy also asked whether Cameron was aware that Howard Leigh, the 
Conservative party treasurer, introduced Fox to rich Tory donors who went on to 
fund Werritty. Number 10 has declined to comment. The parliamentary standards 
watchdog is already investigating whether Fox breached the rules by allowing 
Werritty to run a right-wing charity from his Portcullis House office.

The City of London police are considering launching a fraud investigation into 
Werritty's attempts to pass himself off as Fox's official adviser by handing 
out Westminster-style business cards describing himself as "an adviser to the 
Rt Hon DrLiam Fox <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liamfox> MP".

Additional reporting by Saeed Kamali Dehghan
 