
A “multi-layered page-turner” set in the fiercely male-dominated Victorian 
scientific community has became only the second children’s book to win one of 
the UK’s most prestigious literary prizes.


Frances Hardinge’s The Lie Tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/27/the-lie-tree-frances-hardinge-review-teenage-fiction>
 was named the Costa book of the year at a ceremony in central London on 
Tuesday night.

The prize has been selecting a book of the year since 1985, choosing from the 
categories of novel, first novel, biography, children’s book and poetry. It has 
been compared to choosing between “bananas and chicken curry” by one former 
judge. The only other children’s book to win was The Amber Spyglass, byPhilip 
Pullman <https://www.theguardian.com/books/philippullman>, in 2001.

The Lie Tree tells the story of Faith, a bright 14-year-old girl who wants to 
follow in her father’s footsteps and study natural science.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Ffrances-hardinges-the-lie-tree-wins-costa-book-of-the-year-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9392a70c0913ed11e24f1bbf6471a292278f6f71%2F0_0_1536_2327%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frances%20Hardinge%E2%80%99s%20The%20Lie%20Tree%20wins%20Costa%20book%20of%20the%20year%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Ffrances-hardinges-the-lie-tree-wins-costa-book-of-the-year-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frances%20Hardinge%E2%80%99s%20The%20Lie%20Tree%20wins%20Costa%20book%20of%20the%20year%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Ffrances-hardinges-the-lie-tree-wins-costa-book-of-the-year-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9392a70c0913ed11e24f1bbf6471a292278f6f71%2F0_0_1536_2327%2F1536.jpg>
 The Lie Tree: ‘Not only is it cleverly the voice of a 14-year-old girl ... but 
it is also the voice of a precociously intelligent girl within what is a very 
male-dominated society.’ Photograph: Frances Hardinge 
The 42-year-old writer, whose hobbies include scrabbling about on volcanoes, 
described her book as “a Victorian Gothic mystery with added paleontology, 
blasting powder, post-mortem photography and feminism.”

Hardinge said the win was a total surprise and she felt transported to another 
dimension “which feels implausibly idyllic, but I like it here and I’m staying.”

There will be delight in the world of children’s fiction. Hardinge said: “In 
the wider world sometimes children’s fiction is seen as a bit lightweight in a 
way that is not deserved. The fact that it has been recognised is, from my 
point of view, completely lovely but from a less selfish point of view I would 
see this recognition of the wonderful work which is being done throughout in 
children’s and YA writing.

“There is a lot of exciting stuff going on and increasing awareness of 
diversity, there is some very interesting literature.”

Asked the staple book award question of what she would spend her money on? “I 
have no idea … at least a portion of it might be spent on Champagne I think.”

The chair of judges, the former bookseller James Heneage, described it as a 
fantastic, page-turning read, but also an important book.

“It is part horror story, part detective story and part historical novel. The 
tone throughout is extremely accurate, not only is it cleverly the voice of a 
14-year-old girl ... but it is also the voice of a precociously intelligent 
girl within what is a very male-dominated society.”

It is set in Victorian scientific society, where even women were not meant to 
speak out, let alone young girls. “It is an important book, not only because it 
is a great narrative, with great characterisation, but because its central 
message is of possibility for an intelligent girl who is out of touch with the 
age in which she lives.”

Heneage said that message was as relevant today as it was in the 19th century. 

“Lots of 14-year-old girls today would also feel they are out of touch. I have 
daughters and I know they have quite often in their lives felt out of touch and 
this book brilliantly articulates what goes on in a clever 14-year-old girl’s 
mind.”

It was not a unanimous decision, said Heneage, but “consensual” after a 
meeting of one hour and 40 minutes.

“It was a pretty even field. There were some dissenters, not everyone was in 
agreement, but I think you can have dissent at the same time as consensus. 
There was a general consensus that the book that won was the right book to win.

Hardinge’s book is very much aimed at teenage girls but could easily be read 
by adults, Heneage said. “It has so many great themes and works on so many 
levels. It is a richly multi-layered book and very clever.

“It is a book to read in one or two sittings, a real page-turner.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Ffrances-hardinges-the-lie-tree-wins-costa-book-of-the-year-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09de46be958c0afc2c66c2663f64d379c07bcc58%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frances%20Hardinge%E2%80%99s%20The%20Lie%20Tree%20wins%20Costa%20book%20of%20the%20year%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Ffrances-hardinges-the-lie-tree-wins-costa-book-of-the-year-2015%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frances%20Hardinge%E2%80%99s%20The%20Lie%20Tree%20wins%20Costa%20book%20of%20the%20year%202015&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fjan%2F26%2Ffrances-hardinges-the-lie-tree-wins-costa-book-of-the-year-2015%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09de46be958c0afc2c66c2663f64d379c07bcc58%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
 The Loney author Andrew Michael Hurley, The Invention of Nature author Andrea 
Wulf, Frances Hardinge, and 40 Sonnets poet Don Paterson pictured at the Costa 
Book Awards. Photograph: Richard Kendal/Barcroft Media 
Heneage said the criteria for judges was readability and accessibility – a 
book people wanted to read.


It had a great message for girls but “first and foremost it is a fantastic 
story with great characterisation, great narrative tension, a fabulous ending”, 
he said.

The win was a surprise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jan/25/debut-novel-loney-favourite-win-costa-book-year-award-prize>
, with the bookmakers William Hill offering odds of 5/1 on Hardinge to win, 
making her the joint outsider.

The favourite had been Andrew Michael Hurley for his debut novel, The Loney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/aug/23/the-loney-michael-andrew-hurley-review>
. Many had also backed Kate Atkinson to triumph forA God in Ruins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/10/a-god-in-ruins-kate-atkinson-observer-review>
. The other category winners were Don Paterson in poetry for40 Sonnets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/sep/26/40-sonnets-don-paterson-review-poetry-collection>
; and Andrea Wulf forThe Invention of Nature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/13/the-invention-of-nature-the-adventures-of-alexander-von-humboldt-andrea-wulf-review>
, a biography of the scientist Alexander von Humboldt.

Frances Hardinge scoops the Costa children’s book award 2015 with The Lie Tree
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/04/frances-hardinge-costa-childrens-book-award-2015-the-lie-tree>
Hardinge, a former technical author for a software company, wins £30,000 to 
add to the £5,000 shehas already won as a category winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2016/jan/04/frances-hardinge-costa-childrens-book-award-2015-the-lie-tree>
.

However, it is the spike in sales that will likely be the real prize. Claire 
Tomalin, who won the overall prize in 2002 for her Samuel Pepys biography, 
said: “The effect on the sales of both my book on Pepys and my husband’s 
[Michael Frayn’s] novel Spies has been phenomenal. It is lovely to win a prize 
but we and our publishers are all amazed by the surge into the bestseller 
lists.”

Each category prize winner was decided by a three-person judging panel. The 
overall winner was agreed by a panel consisting of Heneage, actor Jane Asher, 
comedian Katy Brand, former Blue Peter presenter Janet Ellis, and 
representatives from the category panels: Louise Doughty, Matt Haig, Penny 
Junor, Martyn Bedford and Julia Copus.

 * The Lie Tree 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280959/s/the-lie-tree/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by Frances Hardinge (Macmillan Childrens Books, £7.99). To order a copy for 
£4.99, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/280959/s/the-lie-tree/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.
 