
Investigative reporter Khadija Ismayilova says the Azerbaijani government 
released her from prison after 18 months because her detention had failed to 
prevent other reporters from pursuing stories about high-level corruption.

In an interview after the supreme court unexpectedly ordered 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/azerbaijan-ismayilova-khadija-supreme-court-appeal/27756276.html>
 her released from a Baku prison, the journalist vowed to continue her work and 
shrugged off fears for her safety.

Investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova freed in Azerbaijan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/investigative-journalist-khadija-ismayilova-freed-azerbaijan-radio-free-europe>
“My mother joked about this. She said: ‘When you’re in prison, you’re safer 
than when you’re free because they wouldn’t just kill you [in there]’,” the 
reporter said, speaking from her home in the capital.


“[But] I can’t let it bother me. I’m going to continue my investigations. 
There is always work to do in a country likeAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan> where corruption is on such a 
large scale.”

Ismayilova was detained in December 2014. In September she was sentenced to 
seven years in prison after being convicted on charges widely seen as 
retaliation for her award-winning reporting on the secretive wealth Azerbaijani 
president Ilham Aliyev’s family.

Her most notable investigations include a report on how Aliyev’s relatives 
allegedly profited 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/azerbaijan_first_family_build_eurovision_arena/24575761.html>
 in the construction of a $134m concert hall built for the 2012 Eurovision song 
contest in Baku.

Evidently, the pressure put on the authorities to release me was very effective
Khadija Ismayilova 
Amid a mounting campaign against independent media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/dec/05/azerbaijan-press-freedom-emin-milli-bloggers>
, civil society activists and opposition politicians, her arrest elicited 
international condemnation against the Aliyev government.

Ismayilova agreed the decision to suspend her sentence on the 25 May was 
unexpected given the continuing pressure on journalists and activists.

The US-based rights watchdog Freedom House 
<https://freedomhouse.org/country/azerbaijan> estimates there are still more 
than 80 political prisoners in Azerbaijan, while at least five reporters remain 
jailed on a range of charges, including alleged hooliganism and drug-related 
offences.

“I wasn’t convinced that the government was prepared to show goodwill toward 
political prisoners and prisoners of conscience,” she said.

“But evidently, the pressure put on the authorities to release me was very 
effective, and the government realised in the end that holding me in prison was 
more costly than letting me go, and therefore they simply released me.”

Ismayilova said that by arresting her, the government had clearly hoped to 
frighten others from investigating high-level corruption and cronyism.

Journalist's release highlights plight of Azerbaijan's other political 
prisoners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/azerbaijan-khadija-ismayilova-political-prisoners-ilham-aliyev>
“This didn’t happen. There weren’t fewer [reports]. In fact, there were more. 
There were a greater number of investigations published both in the 
international media and the national press. Therefore, they didn’t succeed,” 
she said.

She called on Azerbaijan’s government, which denies that it has political 
prisoners, to allow Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty, where she worked until her 
arrest, to reopen its Baku bureau,which was shuttered by authorities in 
December 2014 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/release-rferl-condemns-azeri-raid-on-baku-bureau/26764363.html>
.

“It’s important for the Azerbaijani people to receive the professional and 
unbiased news coverage,” she said. “It’s very important for the Azerbaijani 
audience that the radio staff should be able to continue to work.”

Ismayilova, who turned 40 just two days after her release, said she hoped 
others would continue to work to free the political prisoners still being held 
in Azerbaijan.

“My birthday wish is: keep doing whatever you can to get someone out of 
prison, because it is important,” she said. “It worked with me. It can work 
with others.”

A version of this article first appeared on RFE/RL 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/khadija-ismayilova-vows-to-continue-investigations-azerbaijan-aliyev/27759570.html>
 