
Chris Marker, the enigmatic master of left-field French cinema, has died at 
the age of 91. The artist and film-maker was best known for his award-winning 
documentarySans Soleil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/35650/sans.soleil> and for his haunting 
dramaLa Jetée <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/76696>, charting the 
quest for memory in the aftermath of a nuclear apocalypse.

Born Christian François Bouche-Villeneuve, Marker fought for the French 
Resistance and then cut his teeth as a journalist and a critic for Cahiers du 
Cinéma. He made his film debut with Olympia 52, a documentary on the 1952 
Helsinki Olympics, and went on to become a leading light of the Left Bank 
Cinema movement alongside his friends Agnès Varda and Alain Resnais. In 1961 he 
sparked controversy with the documentary Si Cuba, a film that praised Fidel 
Castro, denounced America and was promptly banned in the US.

Marker's other notable pictures include 1985's AK, an essay on the work of the 
Japanese director Akira Kurosawa, and 1977'sA Grin Without a Cat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/124093/grin-without-a-cat>, charting 
the socialist struggle in the period before and after the 1968 Paris uprisings. 
He scored an arthouse hit with 1983'sSans Soleil 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sans_Soleil>, his elliptical meditation on travel 
and memory that darted from Japan to Africa via an appreciation of the 1958 
thriller Vertigo. Hitchcock's movie, said the director, was the only film 
"capable of portraying impossible memory, insane memory".

Yet Marker's most influential production remains 1962's La Jetée 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1WXMp5BHZ_o>, a 29-minute drama composed almost 
entirely of still images and tracing one man's attempt to reclaim an image from 
his past. Marker's poetic, provocative meld of global catastrophe and human 
frailty went on to inspire the 1987 drama The Red Spectacles and Terry 
Gilliam's 1995 blockbuster12 Monkeys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/35199/twelve-monkeys>.

The teasing, elliptical nature of Marker's work was reflected in the man 
himself. He refused to give interviews, hated being photographed and claimed to 
have born in Mongolia despite contradictory sources that suggested he was a 
native of Paris. All of which,wrote the critic David Thomson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2002/nov/08/artsfeatures2>, fostered the 
notion of Marker as "some mysterious if ideal figure, a hope or a dream more 
than an actual person". He was, Thomson added, "the essential ghost".

• This article was amended on Monday 30 July 2012. We originally said that La 
Jetée was "composed entirely of still images", when in fact there is limited 
use of moving images in the short film. This has been corrected.
 