
Davey Moore, the 29-year-old coloured boxer who lost his featherweight 
championship on Thursday in the city where he won it, lost his life today in 
White Memorial Hospital, Los Angeles.

Governor Brown of California renewed his pledge today to seek a referendum in 
the State Legislature to ban all boxing in California. In the United States 
Senate, Senator Estes Kefauver, Democrat, of Tennessee, said he would 
reintroduce an old bill for Federal regulation of boxing. "The death of Davey 
Moore," he said, "is another milestone in the boxing industry's history of 
mistreated human beings."

While other governors and legislators were looking into their own laws, and 
possible ways of stiffening them, and the Roman Catholic hierarchy was echoing 
in several cities the Pope's denunciation of boxing as "barbarism," the boxing 
industry itself had good cause to complain that for once it was more sinned 
against than sinning. For overnight it became pretty certain that Davey Moore's 
fatal injury was not due to any blow he received from the victorious Sugar 
Ramos.

Neurosurgeons at the Los Angeles hospital spent yesterday comparing their 
clinical findings with slow-motion film tape of the whole ten rounds that were 
fought, and especially of the last moments of the bout. They had been puzzled, 
and reluctant to ascribe Moore's peculiar injury to any human blow known to the 
books. It was, said Dr Cyril Courville, the chief of the three-man team, "a 
tiny bruise on the front stem at the base of the brain." The coma was caused by 
swelling, not (as it invariably is in cases of excessive punishment) by 
haemorrhage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIssR_J0QWr4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIssR_J0QWr4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DIssR_J0QWr4&media=>
The television tape showed that after the knock-out blow Moore landed on his 
seat in the corner of the ring, with his head slightly tilted towards the rope. 
In the blur of the next split second the rope (which at that point has little 
flexibility but much snap) jerked outward and then snapped back against the 
nape of the boxer's neck.

Consequently, last night the doctors announced that this was "the major 
probable cause" of Moore's brain damage.

Dr Courville's diagnosis was corroborated by the other two neurosurgeons. 
After they had tentatively made it, they played the tape over many times and 
scrutinised Moore's carriage and muscular behaviour in the last round. There 
was no doubt that he was in good fettle for the first two minutes of the round 
until a left hook made his knees wobble. He fell on to one knee but, after a 
quick ruling of a slip, was up again. But he never got back his balance and 
Ramos caught him in his stumble with three straight left jabs. Then he keeled 
over backwards towards the corner and the floor, and the flicking rope.

An autopsy failed to establish whether it was Moore's fall or the blows he 
received moments earlier that caused his death. Bob Dylan later wrote a song 
called Who Killed Davey Moore in response to the growing outrage directed at 
the sport of boxing following Mooreâ€™s death.
 