
What’s on tonight? Thanks to the tyranny of digital choice, the answer’s never 
been less clear.

Each month online services add new films and series, and subtract older ones, 
so we’ve trawled the major Australian streaming sites for highlights to save 
you an hour-long scroll.

Stan

Film: Truth (2015, US), director James Vanderbilt – out now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-z_eJjgilUQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-z_eJjgilUQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-z_eJjgilUQ&media=>
Truth review – Cate Blanchett in the eye of a journalistic storm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/06/truth-review-cate-blanchett-60-minutes-george-w-bush-war-record>
Shot in Sydney with an ensemble of supporting Australian actors, Truth 
dramatises 60 Minutes’ 2004 exposé of the period in which then-president George 
W Bush went awol from the military in the 1970s. At the time, 60 Minutes’ story 
was so scandalous that, although it was largely right, the authenticity of key 
documents was questioned, and producer Mary Mapes (Cate Blanchett as a fierce 
woman pushed to the edge of self-doubt) and anchor Dan Rathers lost their jobs.

With Robert Redford cast as Rathers, the shadow of journo classic All the 
President’s Men looms tall over Truth. Though Truth doesn’t reach those 
heights, it’s a pretty good iteration of the genre, wrapping you up in the 
ethos of table-slamming self-righteousness, just as a good journo movie should. 
And from the mad vantage point of the US election campaign, it’s fascinating to 
see the disgracing of Mapes and Rathers as part of a broader political 
witch-hunt in what we thought at the time were the USA’s gloomiest days.

Truth is like a devoted fan’s love letter to the great newsroom dramas that 
preceded it, and an enjoyable and smart film for a night in.

Film: Alice (1990, US), director Woody Allen – out now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoFOsWXU06c8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoFOsWXU06c8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DoFOsWXU06c8&media=>
Woody Allen: 'There are traumas in life that weaken us. That’s what has 
happened to me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/25/woody-allen-traumas-in-life-weaken-us-cafe-society-amazon>
Woody Allen’s latest, Cafe Society, is in theatres, but his magical, odd film 
from 1990 makes for far less masochistic viewing: it’s Woody in a good mood.

With her wide, anxious face and hurried eyes, Mia Farrow’s heroine is a Woody 
stand-in: a Manhattanite whose existential dissatisfactions coalesce into a 
longing for an affair with a divorced musician called Joe. Alice’s treatments 
from a Chinese doctor (please turn your Hollywood-racism filters to HD) 
supernaturally switch off her inhibitions.

There are two lovely observations at the heart of Alice: the first is that 
there is a particular type of person for whom infidelity is actually incredibly 
difficult, even when they desire it; and the second is that all types of people 
have ways of insisting on unhappiness via increasingly elaborate forms of 
self-sabotage. On the surface, Alice has everything she should want (wealth, a 
husband, lovely children); as a character, she also has the compassion of her 
film-maker – an unusual thing to treasure in an Woody Allen film.

Film: Volcano (Ixcanul) (2015, Guatemala/France), dir. Jayro Bustamante – out 
now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6j7cGoccPAk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6j7cGoccPAk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6j7cGoccPAk&media=>
Ixcanul review – a fascinating blend of modernity and ritual
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/12/ixcanul-review-fascinating-blend-of-modernity-and-ritual-toronto-film-festival>
An Australian theatrical release evaded this Berlin film festival competitor, 
but it’s well worth a look on VOD.

Volcano is a small, simple, clash-of-civilisations arthouse film set on a 
coffee plantation on the low banks of a volcano in present-day Guatemala. Our 
Mayan heroine María is set for a local arranged marriage, but yearns to run 
away with another man, Pepe, for a new life in the United States. She is torn: 
“What else is there?” in the US, she asks Pepe. “Money. Dollars,” he replies 
while the camera remains on María’s face. “What does the air smell like there?” 
He doesn’t know. “Here, the air smells of coffee. And of the volcano.”

The really special thing about Volcano is its palpable creation of this remote 
place, with clean cinematography that captures life in the plantation in long, 
wide, unmoving shots. Through that honest film-making approach, debut 
writer-director Jayro Bustamante lets the story unfold like a fable, and makes 
Volcano a lovely, living eulogy to a culture that may soon be lost.

• Honourable mentions: Frackman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/23/frackmans-accidental-activist-theres-blood-in-the-water-and-im-the-shark>
 (film, 5 November),Nightcrawler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/06/nightcrawler-review-jake-gyllenhaal-toronto-film-festival>
 (film, 18 November),What We Do In the Shadows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/20/what-we-do-in-shadows-review> 
(film, 25 November),Nick Cave: 20,000 Days on Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/19/20000-days-on-earth-review-nick-cave-artistic-legacy-documentary>
 (film, 27 November),No Activity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/no-activity-patrick-brammall-and-darren-gilshenan-deliver-australian-farce-at-its-finest>
 (TV, season one, out now)

Netflix Australia

TV: Black Mirror, season three (2016, UK), created by Charlie Brooker – out now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrvvMdJUz3rc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrvvMdJUz3rc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DrvvMdJUz3rc&media=>
Black Mirror review – this nightmare sterile world is only five minutes away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/21/black-mirror-review-charlie-brooker-nightmare-sterile-world-is-only-five-minutes-away>
“There’s no cure for the internet. It’ll never go away.” It’s always been 
pessimistic, but episode three of Black Mirror’s new season delivers the 
dystopian drama’s thematic mandate in two brutal sentences.

Now a Netflix <https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> Original, the latest 
Black Mirror instalments continue the template set early in the series: each 
hour-long episode is a self-contained, speculative science-fiction about one 
element of technology gone rogue – episode one, for instance, shows a 
Pinterest-y pastel world in which every person is reduced to a numerical rating 
via a social media app – with a twist in the final moments that usually sends 
the protagonist to madness, social expulsion or death.

The difference now is that showrunner Charlie Brooker’s bleak outlook is 
increasingly expressed in classical horror conventions, most notably in episode 
two’s haunted house concept. Black Mirror is not always subtle and never light 
viewing, but it remains anchored in beautifully observed truths about how tech 
amplifies existing anxieties and unhappinesses.

TV: The Crown, season one (UK/US, 2016), created by Peter Morgan – 4 November
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqTfo44bGXdg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqTfo44bGXdg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqTfo44bGXdg&media=>
Netflix’s entry into British longform storytelling and the company’s most 
expensive production to date, The Crown is indeed a must-watch – but not for 
the reasons you might think.

Based on a viewing of the first two episodes, Netflix has applied the 
sensibility of prestige UK film-making to television production: Stephen Daldry 
(The Reader, Billy Elliot) directs a script from Peter Morgan (The Queen) 
presenting an origin myth of Queen Elizabeth II, beginning with the decline of 
King George VI’s health in late 1940s and newlywed Elizabeth’s premature ascent 
to throne.

With its original programming, Netflix’s genius may be its ability to tap into 
the cultural zeitgeist of each country: where House of Cards is a melodramatic 
thriller that undermines US political institutions, The Crown is an 
immaculately-art-directed propaganda biopic aimed athumanising those in the 
monarchy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/27/the-crown-writer-peter-morgan-ducked-chance-to-meet-queen>
 and positioning the Queen as a kind of proto-feminist.

Mmmmm, politically dubious addictive longform prestige trash. Thank you, 
Netflix.

Film: The Big Short (US, 2015), director Adam McKay – out now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvgqG3ITMv1Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvgqG3ITMv1Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvgqG3ITMv1Q&media=>
Housing blew up the global economy in 2008 and we learned nothing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jan/29/housing-global-economy-2008-the-big-short-financial-crash>
This Oscar-winner (for best adapted screenplay) is part of a subgenre of 
post-GFC dramas like Arbitrage and 99 Homes — talky, officey, dramatic affairs 
that make mortgage securities sexy. In The Big Short, big-time corporate 
trickery, fraud and corruption is unlaced by nerdy dudes who balance throwaway 
lines with Hollywood’s idea of financial-speak.

It’s a love/hate genre. If you like Aaron Sorkin stuff 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0815070/>, chances are this will be right up your 
alley.

From the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/24/the-big-short-review-crash-riveting-steve-carell-christian-bale>
: “A blackly catastrophic comedy, a story of greed, venality, incompetence and 
barefaced corruption in which the good guys are the renegades who see disaster 
coming and stake their shirts on the apocalypse. Unlike the slick suits and 
killer sheen of Oliver Stone’s Wall Street, this is a world of chaos and 
disorder filled with misfits who understand numbers more than people.”

• Honourable mentions: Zootopia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/21/disney-diversity-animation-zootopia-zootropolis>
 (film, 15 November), Hook (film, 16 November),Gilmore Girls: A Year in the Life
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/25/gilmore-girls-revival-netflix-first-trailer-watch>
 (series, 25 November).

Foxtel Play

Film: Brooklyn (2015, UK), director John Crowley – 12 November
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D15syDwC000k&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D15syDwC000k>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D15syDwC000k&media=>
Brooklyn review – Saoirse Ronan shines in a heartfelt and absorbing adaptation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/05/brooklyn-review-saoirse-ronan-shines-in-nick-hornby-colm-toibin-drama>
Set between Ireland and Brooklyn in the 1950s, this terribly romantic drama is 
a New York story and an immigrant story. It’s about the finality of 
cross-continental immigration for previous generations – no yearly trips home, 
no weekly Skype calls – and what it might mean to marry somebody who your 
mother and your sister will never meet; to have your heart cleaved between two 
places, and everything that goes with that.

Beautifully old-fashioned in its sensibility, with a script by Nick Hornby 
based on Colm Tóibín’s novel, it features a performance of great stillness and 
sensitivity from Saoirse Ronan as a young woman caught between two continents.

Film: 45 Years (2015, UK), director Andrew Haigh – 4 November
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqXAnjA9tAnQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqXAnjA9tAnQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DqXAnjA9tAnQ&media=>
45 Years review – Tom Courtenay and Charlotte Rampling superb as couple 
freshly possessed by the past
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/27/45-years-review-tom-courtenay-and-charlotte-rampling-superb-as-couple-freshly-possessed-by-the-past>
45 Years plays out like a horror relationship drama – an anti-romance – in 
that it preys on your worst fears about your partner, and unspools in a 
slow-motion pace to engage a feeling of pure dread.


On the week before their 45th wedding anniversary party, Kate (Charlotte 
Rampling) learns of a past relationship of her husband (Tom Courtenay) that 
throws the nature of their own marriage into doubt; the discovery is a poison 
compelling her on a search for more clues that plays out until the very moment 
of their party.

In any other relationship drama, the revelation would be of rank infidelity, 
but director Andrew Haigh’s script is unusual in its non-idealism and its 
emotional intelligence: it is founded on the notion that a large part of your 
partner is a stranger to you, and that although you needn’t share everything 
with them, those very unshared things can open an unbridgeable chasm. 
Newlyweds: avoid this.

• Honourable mentions: Divorce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/11/divorce-review-sharon-horgan-sarah-jessica-parker>
 (TV, season one, through November),The Wire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/series/the-wire-re-up> (TV, out now), Bran 
Nue Dae 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/jul/25/bran-nue-dae-germaine-greer> 
(film, 20 November).

SBS On Demand

Film: Body Melt <http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/11694659590/body-melt 
http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/11694659590/body-melt> (1994, Australia), 
director Philip Brophy – out now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNuWL3YbEXAg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNuWL3YbEXAg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DNuWL3YbEXAg&media=>
Overlooked in the story of Australian cinema, artist Philip Brophy’s trashy 
horror follows a marketing scheme gone wrong: an effervescent vitamin drink 
designed to advertise a luxury homeworld actually melts people’s bodies from 
the inside out.

Drenched in fake blood and green slime, Body Melt evolves the George Romero 
horror tradition of portraying zombie shoppers in shopping centres to satirise 
consumerism: Brophy’s vision of a dead-end upper-middle-class housing estate is 
scarier than any American slasher and remains politically on-point today.

Harold from Neighbours as the villainous doctor screaming “Fuck the chain 
stores!!!” could be a key moment of Australian film. Listen for a scrambled 
sample of the 1990s aspirational health series Healthy, Wealthy and Wise jingle 
in the soundtrack.

Film: Oldboy <http://www.sbs.com.au/ondemand/video/328368707566/oldboy> (2003, 
South Korea), director Chan-wook Park – out now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2HkjrJ6IK5E&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2HkjrJ6IK5E>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2HkjrJ6IK5E&media=>
How would you make Oldboy's ending darker?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/29/oldboy-remake-darker-ending>
A fall-down drunk is bailed out of a police station by a mate and immediately 
recaptured by a mystery lunatic and imprisoned in a seedy hotel room. For 15 
years. He’s fed nothing but valium gas, fried dumplings and television; he 
tattoos the years on his forearm and plots his escape to find his captor and 
claim his vendetta, all the while wondering what landed him in that police cell 
in the first place.

Oldboy’s art-direction is reminiscent of the paintings of David Lynch 
<https://www.google.com.au/search?q=paintings+of+David+Lynch&source=lnms&tbm=isch&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwib6tbkvvrPAhUFVxoKHVKnC8IQ_AUICCgB&biw=1440&bih=761>
, its neo-noir vision of Seoul like the run-down, acid-rain shine of Blade 
Runner, while its thematic obsession with hyper-cruelty and the crime genre 
itself recalls a less slick, lower-budget David Fincher.

Director Chan-wook Park has gone on to be one of the most acclaimed and 
adventurous figures of global art cinema, at the helm of which is South Korean 
cinema. His latest, The Handmaiden, is an erotic thriller about lesbians who 
must kill to free themselves from male tyranny (!) and is currently in select 
theatres. If you want to know more about where this auteur started, queue up 
Oldboy at once.

ABC iView

TV: You Can’t Ask That 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/you-cant-ask-that/LE1517H003S00> (2016, 
Australia) – out now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2FABCTV%2Fvideos%2F10157134650085543%2F&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2FABCTV%2Fvideos%2F10157134650085543%2F>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2FABCTV%2Fvideos%2F10157134650085543%2F&media=>
Screen bites: can a show like You Can't Ask That change the conversation?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/01/screen-bites-can-a-show-like-you-cant-ask-that-change-the-conversation>
This clever single-concept show leaps over taboos to ask the unaskable 
questions. Fat people are asked “Why don’t you eat less”; transgender people, 
“Have you had the surgery?” Anonymous viewers pose the questions online and 
people from the relevant marginalised group give their answers. They do it with 
great insight, self-awareness and snappy, self-deprecating humour, and the show 
becomes an exemplar of allowing diverse people their own voices in media.


Simon Copland wrote for Guardian Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/01/screen-bites-can-a-show-like-you-cant-ask-that-change-the-conversation>
: “Yes, there are questions about sex, drugs and crime – some that could be 
considered extremely insulting. But the show doesn’t treat those issues as 
scandalous but rather just as a normal part of people’s lives. It ends up being 
extremely genuine and heartfelt: real people, sitting with friends, families or 
lovers, having real conversations about the realities of their lives. From 
these conversations, we can actually learn a lot.”

TV: The Not So Secret Life of the Manic Depressive: 10 Years On 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/programs/not-so-secret-life-of-the-manic-depressive-10-years-on/ZW0916A001S00>
 (2016, UK) – out now
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSLCH9k0oATU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSLCH9k0oATU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DSLCH9k0oATU&media=>
Stephen Fry opens a window on to male depression – we must let boys cry | Ally 
Fogg
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/11/stephen-fry-male-depression-boys-cry>
A decade ago, a BBC series about Stephen Fry’s bipolar disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/jul/21/mentalhealth.broadcasting> 
helped to shift the national dialogue about mental health in the UK. This yeara 
follow-up doco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/01/stephen-fry-to-feature-in-bbc1-mental-health-season>
 picked up the conversation, and was released in Australia to coincide with the 
ABC’s Mental As programming.


The centrepiece of the program is filmed sessions with Fry’s psychiatrist, in 
which they discuss his terrifying self-management habits like “creating sleep” 
via a nightly cocktail of Xanax and vodka.

The documentary sensitively asks difficult questions. Are treatments 
improving? Does diagnosis always result in better management of symptoms? To 
those profiled, including Fry, the answers are clearly often “no”.

In going beyond the positive spin of much public mental-health discussion and 
into the much greyer realm of shifting diagnoses and burdensome medications, 
this program makes an unusually candid contribution to the destigmatisation of 
psychiatric illnesses.
 