
I was discussing with Litvinoff the seemingly dual character of Russian 
policy, the seemingly contradictory aims of the Jekyll of an International 
Society and the Hyde of a national Government, when after some small deadlock 
in the argument he said, "The best thing you can do is to get Trotsky to state 
the position, for he is at the same time a member of the Communist 
International and a member of the Soviet Government."

I drew up a short questionnaire, and Trotsky, taking my questions as his text, 
wrote the statement printed below.

Question: You are a member of the Third International. You are also head of 
the Russian War Office. Are there not moments when Trotsky of the International 
disagrees with Trotsky the War Minister of a particular country? If not, why 
not?

Trotsky: "It is not clear to me why and whence could arise contradictions 
between the interests of the Soviet Republic and those of the Third 
International. The Russian proletariat is a most important constituent part of 
the Third International. The working class throughout the world is interested 
in the strengthening of SovietRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>
, and has given proof of this on several occasions.

Soviet Russia is interested in the growth of powerful labour organisations and 
in the heightening of their class consciousness. You know that in our view only 
the programme ofCommunism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/communism> fully 
corresponds to the interests of the working-class. The contrast itself is 
possible only if one contrasts the 'national' interests of Russia with the 
international interests of the working class.

But, from our point of view, what is national does not exist outside what 
belongs to a class. Throughout the world the bourgeoisie gives out its class 
interests as national interests: that it does this successfully we, to our 
sorrow, have seen clearly during the world war. The national interests of 
Russia coincide with the interests of her ruling class, i.e. the proletariat. 
But the genuine interests of the working class cannot be satisfied otherwise 
than by international means, i.e. by means of the establishment of a world 
federation of republics based on labour and its solidarity."

Question: The same differences of motive and interests must exist in the army, 
which, surely, is more Russian than revolutionary?

Trotsky: "What I have already said applies fully to this question also. You 
say that the Red Army is more Russia than revolutionary. You forget, first, 
that the Red Army in its composition is not Russian only, for in it are 
Ukrainians, White Russians, Georgians, Armenians, Tartars, &c., and, secondly, 
that in the White Armies against which we fought were also Russians. It is 
absolutely clear that the Red Army's objectives had and continue to have a 
revolutionary character.

Question: If the French had marched into the Ruhr in 1919 I feel that the 
crisis would have been judged in Moscow exclusively as a revolutionary crisis. 
Why is that not so today?

Trotsky: "You ask why we do not greet the French invasion of the Ruhr as a 
revolutionary stimulus. Certainly we are interested in the victory of the 
working class, but it is not at all to our interest that the revolution should 
take place in a Europe exhausted and drained of blood, and that the proletariat 
should receive from the hands of the bourgeoisie nothing but ruins, as we 
received them after Tsarism and the Russian bourgeoisie. The working masses of 
Europe are only gradually learning the lessons of the Imperialist war. This is 
expressed by the gradual growth of the Communist lnternational. Without 
permitting ourselves prophecy about dates, we none the less have no doubt that 
this process will lead to the victory of the working class in all Europe and 
throughout the world.

If, however, the bourgeoisie should succeed in dragging Europe into yet 
another devastating war, this would mean first, the bleeding and destruction 
primarily of those generations of the working class which are the bearers of 
the future, and, secondly, the economic beggary of Europe. That is why we, from 
a revolutionary point of view, are vitally interested in the preservation of 
peace."

[Arthur Ransome, author of Swallows and Amazons, was the Manchester Guardian's 
Russian correspondent from 1919 until 1924. He was suspected of being a 
Bolshevik yet he also spied for MI6 â€“ find out more about his extraordinary 
careerhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/archive-educational-resource-may-2012>
]
 