
What should you do when you’ve finished binge-watching your favourite TV 
series and are anxiously waiting for more? Or when you need a screen break 
(books, especially real books, are so much gentler on the eyes). Here’s a list 
of recommended books that are the perfect accompaniment or replacement (even if 
temporary) for some of your favourite TV shows.

Doctor Who <http://www.doctorwhotv.co.uk/> (BBC1)

A classic British science-fiction show can only be matched by classic British 
science-fiction books. In addition to the numerous Doctor Who books out there 
(and please don’t miss the extra-wonderfulDoctor Who, Twelve Doctors, Twelve 
Stories 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/doctor-who-12-doctors-12-stories-2.html>), 
The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/hitchhiker-s-guide-to-the-galaxy-3.html> by 
Douglas Adams has the fast-paced action and British humour that makes Doctor 
Who so iconic. We follow Ford Prefect, an alien who gets embroiled in a series 
of adventures alongside his human friend, Arthur Dent. If the time travelling 
side is more your thing, thenSlaughterhouse-Five 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/slaughterhouse-5.html> by Kurt Vonnegut may 
be the book you’ve been searching for. It features Billy Pilgrim, a world war 
two soldier who has the unfortunate habit of time-travelling through his life. 
Slaughterhouse-Five is surreal and funny, with serious glimpses of war, a bit 
like the tougher side of Doctor Who.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ftv-show-book-recommendations-teen-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442308419369%2Fbbd0a174-5930-42ca-89d9-02990a4db694-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Doctor%20Who%20to%20Once%20Upon%20a%20Time%3A%20books%20to%20match%20your%20favourite%20TV%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ftv-show-book-recommendations-teen-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Doctor%20Who%20to%20Once%20Upon%20a%20Time%3A%20books%20to%20match%20your%20favourite%20TV%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ftv-show-book-recommendations-teen-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442308419369%2Fbbd0a174-5930-42ca-89d9-02990a4db694-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Natasha Lyonne, Kimiko Glenn, Laverne Cox star in Orange is the New Black: 
popular with teens despite or maybe because of its adult themes. But what can 
you read while you wait for new episodes? Photograph: Netflix/Courtesy Everett 
Co/RE 
Orange is the New Black <http://oitnb.tumblr.com/> (Netflix)

If there ever was a YA book version of OITNB it would be Beauty Queens  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/jun/05/review-beauty-queens-libba-bray>
by Libba Bray. Featuring a diverse cast of women, plenty of pop culture 
references, and a social commentary on society, Beauty Queens is about 13 teen 
beauty contestants who get stranded on a desert island. Or try a classic,The 
Colour Purple <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/color-purple-2.html>by Alice 
Walker, which is about the lives of African-American women in the 1930s. 
Provocative and compelling, much like the backstories of the women from OITNB.

New Girl <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/new-girl> (E4)

Jess is quirky, strong, and funny, much like Harriet from Geek Girl 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/geek-girl.html> by Holly Smale; bar Harriet 
is 15-years-old, British, and not living with three guys. Harriet is unpopular 
at school and doesn’t feel like a beauty but, much to her surprise, she becomes 
a supermodel. Full of mishaps and mayhem, Geek Girl embodies the funny spirit 
of New Girl. And there are lots of books in the series to enjoy, so far we have
Geek Girl <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/geek-girl.html>, Model Misfit 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/model-misfit.html>, Picture Perfect 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/picture-perfect-7.html> and the latest book 
All That Glitters 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/all-that-glitters-251680.html>. 

My Mad Fat Diary <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/my-mad-fat-diary> (E4)

OK I’m cheating a bit here, as the TV version of My Mad Fat Diary 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-mad-fat-diary.html> is based on the 
autobiographical books by the real Rae Earl. But it cover so many excellent 
themes that are rarely seen on TV, so here’s some recommendations of fiction to 
go with it, once you’ve devoured Rae Earl’sMy Mad Fat Diary 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-mad-fat-diary.html> and My Madder Fatter 
Diary <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-madder-fatter-diary.html>. 

My Mad Fat Diary deals with the serious issues surrounding mental health in an 
engaging way with humorous interludes, andIt’s Kind of a Funny Story  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/it-s-kind-of-a-funny-story.html>by Ned 
Vizzini does the same thing. It’s about Craig, who checks himself into a mental 
hospital and encounters a whole cast of characters there as he deals with his 
depression.Eleanor and Park  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/eleanor-park-4.html>by Rainbow Rowell is also 
about growing-up, first love, and dealing with issues, from family to 
body-image, much like the problems Rae deals with.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ftv-show-book-recommendations-teen-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442308532040%2F4ca6f6f5-c892-4a3c-8acd-8dabb8cb6bde-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20Doctor%20Who%20to%20Once%20Upon%20a%20Time%3A%20books%20to%20match%20your%20favourite%20TV%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ftv-show-book-recommendations-teen-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20Doctor%20Who%20to%20Once%20Upon%20a%20Time%3A%20books%20to%20match%20your%20favourite%20TV%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fchildrens-books-site%2F2015%2Fsep%2F15%2Ftv-show-book-recommendations-teen-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F15%2F1442308532040%2F4ca6f6f5-c892-4a3c-8acd-8dabb8cb6bde-1020x612.jpeg>
 Sharon Rooney, star of the TV version of Rae Earl’s My Mad Fat Diary. 
Photograph: Channel 4/PA 
Once Upon a Time  <http://onceabc.tumblr.com/>(Netflix)

Much like Once Upon a Time, The Mortal Instruments Series 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/310372/> by Cassandra 
Clare is about someone stumbling upon a dark magical world within their own 
reality. The Mortal Instruments follows Clary, who uncovers the secret 
Shadowhunter world and then slowly starts to piece together the truth about 
herself, while meeting some unique characters along the way.

Stardust  <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/stardust.html>by Neil Gaiman is 
sure to please fairytale fans, invoking traditional mythology and some of 
Gaiman’s own design, as we follow Tristan’s quest for a fallen star.


Can you match TV shows with brilliant books? We want this blog to grow so give 
us your recommendations! Tell us on emailchildrens.books@theguardian.com 
<mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com> or on Twitter @GdnChildrensBks 
<https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> and we’ll add them to this blog. 
Palimpsest (@_Palimpsest) 
.@GdnChildrensBks <https://twitter.com/GdnChildrensBks> What about Robin 
McKinley's BEAUTY and SPINDLE'S END for Once Upon A Time?http://t.co/S9JmvGo9xA 
<http://t.co/S9JmvGo9xA>
 <https://twitter.com/_Palimpsest/status/643721192541655040> September 15, 2015
 <https://twitter.com/_Palimpsest/status/643721192541655040>  