
If there's one thing that allows a politician to appeal to members of the 
public who would otherwise despise them, it's the ability to make them laugh. 
Politics can be a tragically earnest pursuit, especially since there are so 
many clamouring for the moral high ground, in the absence of any recognisable 
policies. Ed Miliband permanently seems to want to "do the right thing". All 
parties talk vaguely of "fairness", something so subjective that it means 
nothing. The overall effect is that the political class appears distant and 
even weird.

In a landscape parched of charisma at leadership level, it's no wonder we're 
happy to have Nigel Farage andBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> around – even if we would never 
vote for them. Both carry a chaos with them, a sparklingly unpredictability and 
at times outrage which means watching them becomes sport. You have no idea what 
will happen next. Who will Nigel offend next? Will Boris get trapped on a 
highwire? Don't pigeonhole them as buffoons though – both men are canny 
political operators.

The reason Nigel and Boris are so successful is something that's vital in 
comedy: a bulletproof persona. They know who they are and they know which 
facets of themselves to show. The biggest challenge in comedy, apart from 
continually making people laugh, is finding your voice. The great comedians 
find it quicker than the rest. As well as being very funny, Michael McIntyre, 
Sarah Millican and Frankie Boyle all have clearly identifiable onstage 
personas. Michael McIntyre is an energetic observationist. Sarah Millican is 
softly spoken with a ferocious mind and Frankie Boyle is inventively brutal. 
Once people buy into a comedian's persona it gives them room to make jokes 
about things that other people couldn't. It's the same with politicians. If
Nigel Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> joked about 
being hungover, we'd get it; if Nick Clegg joked about being hungover, we'd 
wonder what the hell he was on.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGk2FpJyHMHw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGk2FpJyHMHw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2FGk2FpJyHMHw%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click to view <http://www.youtube.com/embed/Gk2FpJyHMHw>

That is why other politicians desperate to copy Nigel and Boris should be 
careful. Just throwing some naff gags into your conference speech or being a 
bit daft isn't enough. There have been some notable failures over the years, 
but the ones that stand out for me are Sarah Teather and Sion Simon.Sarah 
Teather performed an attempted standup routine 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2011/09/19/sarah-teathers-awful-stan_n_969945.html>
 at the Lib Dem conference three years ago that still makes me feel sick. It 
included such zingers as "I heard [Strictly Come Dancing] have got Peter Hain 
booked for the next series. He's doing the tango. Or has he been tangoed?" I'll 
give you a moment to stop wincing.

Sion Simon was a Labour MP when he pretended to be David Cameron in a spoof 
video <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/6044222.stm>, seven years ago. It 
caused offence because of the content, in which he suggests that Cameron would 
happily let the viewer sleep with his wife and take his kids. The offended 
missed the point. It was just woefully unfunny. It was an MP trying to be 
humorous and failing spectacularly. As an impressionist myself, it was 
offensive to see David Cameron portrayed with a broad West Midlands accent.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fyn4IpyVViw4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fyn4IpyVViw4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2Fyn4IpyVViw4%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on mobile? Click to view <http://www.youtube.com/embed/yn4IpyVViw4>

Humour and personality aren't the most important things in politics. 
Competence, decency and intellect are also necessary. However, the reason so 
many in politics fear those who are funny is because it's an unattainable to 
them. They can't compete with it so they seek to denigrate it and humiliate it. 
Writing people off as a joke because they're funny is a mistake that Labour in 
particular continues to make. They tried to do it to Boris Johnson and Nigel 
Farage but they've both had the last laugh …

• Matt Forde's 24 Hour Political Party People 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/matt-forde-24-hour-political-party-people>
 is on at the Pleasance Courtyard until 24 August

• Edinburgh festival 2014: what's hot and what's not? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/05/edinburgh-festival-2014-hot-not-fringe-james-acaster-adam-riches>

• Des Bishop: an Irish-American standup in China – Edinburgh review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/05/des-bishop-review-edinburgh-festival-2014-standup-china-american>
 