
When Ira Aldridge <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ira_Aldridge> stepped on 
stage as the first black actor to play Othello, the Moor of Venice, he had an 
insight into the role shared by no other performer of the day. Arriving in 
England from America in the early 1820s, he had been met with prejudice and 
suspicion, like Shakespeare’s hero, especially when he went on to marry an 
Englishwoman. But the towering theatrical reputation that Aldridge built up 
across Europe during the mid-1800s rested just as much on his portrayal of a 
full range of leading roles as on his unusual racial status.

Now the people of Coventry are finally to claim the actor as a key part of 
their cultural heritage and plan to celebrate his achievements with a series of 
readings, performances and guided walks. The city was already proud of its 
connection with Aldridge, recognised now as Britain’s first black theatre 
manager because of his 1828 stint running the formerCoventry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/coventry> Theatre. But the full impact of 
Aldridge’s career has come to light. New research reveals the extent of his 
role in the political campaign against slavery in the colonies.

“Aldridge chose to play a lot of anti-slavery roles, including Othello, as 
well as the standard lead parts in the repertoire,” said Tony Howard, professor 
of English at Warwick University. “And at the height of his influence in 
Coventry, there was actually a public petition held at County Hall for all 
those against slavery to sign.”

The activities are designed as part of Coventry’s bid for the title of City of 
Culture in 2021 and include the staging of a new docu-drama about the life of 
Aldridge at the Belgrade Theatre, as well as a guided walk to the site of the 
former Coventry Theatre, later called the Theatre Royal and Empire. Extracts 
from several plays Aldridge programmed in his 1828 Coventry season, including
Othello, The Taming of the Shrew, the anti-slavery melodrama The Revenge and a 
musical calledThe Slave, will also be staged as part of Against Prejudice – Ira 
Aldridge in Coventry 1828 
<https://coventry2021.co.uk/whats-on/?curr-event=prejudice-ira-aldridge-coventry-1828#modal>
.

Aldridge’s story clearly provides a welcome alternative to other 
well-rehearsed stories about the city, fromLady Godiva’s mythical horse ride 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/dec/30/puppet-lady-godiva-first-steps-coventry>
 through its streets to the destruction wrought by the Blitz more than 70 years 
ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fblack-theatre-ira-aldridge-coventry-slavery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6128739316965bf699fde6ad100bd8320838bd8b%2F0_231_1948_2433%2F1948.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%2019th-century%20black%20pioneer%20to%20cultural%20ambassador%20of%20Coventry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fblack-theatre-ira-aldridge-coventry-slavery%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%2019th-century%20black%20pioneer%20to%20cultural%20ambassador%20of%20Coventry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F13%2Fblack-theatre-ira-aldridge-coventry-slavery%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6128739316965bf699fde6ad100bd8320838bd8b%2F0_231_1948_2433%2F1948.jpg>
 Ira Aldridge. Photograph: Alamy 
Aldridge, who was also known as FW Keene, appears to have felt equally 
positive about the city that had given him a chance to run his own theatre. 
David Burbidge, chair of the Coventry City of Culture trust, cites a letter of 
thanks the actor wrote to the local newspaper almost 180 years ago. It first 
details his plans to “improve the fittings” at the theatre and make sure that 
curtain up always commenced “precisely at seven”. Then it continues: “FWK [FW 
Keene] might have feared that, unknown and unfriended, he had little claim to 
public notice, did he not feel that being a foreigner and a stranger are 
universal passports to British Sympathy. He desires only to be judged by his 
actions and relies on that discrimination and generosity which appreciates 
endeavour and rewards effort.”

Burbidge believes this makes Aldridge the perfect embodiment of culture in a 
diverse city. “In other words, he felt he might not be welcome but rather than 
being held back, the city judged him not on his colour or creed but on what he 
wanted to achieve and his clear talent … In adopting Ira Aldridge’s story we 
hope to inspire young people in particular to learn from this ambition and 
talent of nearly 200 years ago,” he writes.

Many black performers, inspired by Aldridge’s legacy, have gone on to become 
well-known names, from Paul Robeson toAdrian Lester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/07/red-velvet-tricycle-lester-chakrabarti-rubasingham-interview>
, but the story of the man himself has been slow to re-emerge.

“Aldridge has always interested black stars, but the wider influence he had is 
not well known,” said Howard. “Robeson was a great fan of his, and when he came 
to London to play Othello in 1930 at the Savoy, he put on an exhibition about 
Aldridge in respect of his memory.”

In 2012, Lester starred at the Tricyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/oct/07/red-velvet-tricycle-lester-chakrabarti-rubasingham-interview>
 Theatre in north London inRed Velvet, a new play about Aldridge, written by 
Lester’s wife, Lolita Chakrabarti. The acclaimedproduction was revived early 
this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/feb/02/red-velvet-review-adrian-lester-lolita-chakrabarti-garrick-theatre>
 at the West End’s Garrick, with Lester earning renewed plaudits for his 
rendering of soliloquies in the authentic 19th-century declamatory manner.

The phrase “political theatre” is more usually associated with the modern era, 
and yet Howard believes there is no clearer example of it than in the close 
relationship between Aldridge’s work and shifting social attitudes.

“He really was able to make the most of good timing. He came into Coventry at 
the age of 20 and wanted to meet the important people of the town. He then went 
through the most extraordinary change of circumstance in the course of just two 
months. By the end of it, he was running a theatre,” said Howard.

The Coventry Theatre <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> had been 
built by the theatre manager Sir Skears Rew but, by the time Aldridge arrived 
in the city, Rew was very ill and the venue had fallen into disrepair. The 
actor must have impressed Rew, an alderman, fervent anti-Tory campaigner and 
abolitionist. Before he died on 23 April he had handed over the theatre to 
Aldridge in what Howard believes was both a political move and a leap of faith.

“It seems such an extremely young age to have the responsibility,” Howard 
said. “It is the one time the community took a bet on Aldridge and he made a 
success of it in only a few short months. Both the shows and the standards of 
rehearsals were much improved.”

Aldridge was born in New York and, as a teenager, had been involved in an 
attempt to create a black theatre company. These plans were effectively 
destroyed by a rival New York manager who, according to Howard’s research, 
“hired thugs to beat up the actors”. The theatre subsequently burned down and 
the actors were victimised by the New York police. Aldridge managed to board a 
ship to England but initially encountered the same sort of racist treatment. He 
was regarded as something of “a circus freak,” said Howard. He toured Britain 
in serious productions but was first billed to West Midlands audiences as a 
“Most Extraordinary Novelty, a Man of Colour”.

“But audiences were then utterly astonished by the skill of his acting. 
Critics said he was one of the two or three best they had ever seen,” said 
Howard.

Aldridge’s first wife was the daughter of a member of parliament, something 
anti-abolitionists regarded as a real provocation. “From one political 
perspective he was your worst nightmare come true, for others he was a symbol 
of all that might be possible,” said Howard.

Aldridge toured Europe and was hailed by fans as the “African Roscius”, after 
the actor popular in ancient Rome, Quintus Roscius Gallus. Aldridge was fêted 
in Russia, too. But once work in England had dried up, he was forced to 
consider returning to America.

He died in 1867 in Poland, after both the end of slavery and the American 
civil war. He had been about to go back to America, where several prominent 
white actors had declared that they were ready and willing to act with him in 
New York. Next summer, 150 years after his death, the City of Culture trust in 
Coventry hopes to put up a plaque to his memory on the site of his lost theatre.

CULTURAL CAMPAIGN

■ Coventry’s celebration of its links with Ira Aldridge 
<http://www.belgrade.co.uk/event/against-prejudice-ira-aldridge-in-coventry-85105>
 are part of its bid for City of Culture status in 2021. Coventry, now home to 
250 Syrian immigrants, hopes to underline its diversity.

■ The bid trust is also showcasing the work of Indian photographer Maganbhai 
Patel, 94. His exhibition at Fargo Village, to 20 November, chronicles south 
Asian immigrants since the 1950s.

■ Coventry also hopes to establish itself as the home of peace studies and 
research, withan annual Peace Festival 
<http://www.coventry.gov.uk/info/218/peace_festival/2861/coventry_peace_festival_2016>
, set up in response to the destruction after second world war bombing. The 
Lord Mayor’s Annual Peace Lecture was given byWar Horse author Michael 
Morpurgo, and a Remembrance Sunday service and parade are to be staged at the 
city’s War Memorial Park.
 