
Solo albums. The very concept seems like a relic from rock’s bloated heyday, 
invariably bringing to mind the classic story about the four members of Kiss 
all releasing dodgy solo efforts on the same day, thus bringing their record 
company to its knees.

Pretty things: Arcade Fire and fans throw Bowie a New Orleans send-off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/18/arcade-fire-win-butler-david-bowie-new-orleans-funeral-march>
Not saying that Arcade Fire <https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcadefire> are 
the Kiss of our times, but next month drummer Jeremy Gara will become the 
fourth member of the Canadian troupe to release a solo album in the last two 
years, following violinist Sarah Neufeld, guitarist-keyboardist Will Butler and 
utility man Richard Reed Parry (bassist Tim Kingsbury also has a solo album in 
the works). Gara’s ambient electronica doesn’t sound much like Rebellion 
(Lies), but his PR team couldn’t resist billing him as “Arcade Fire’s Jeremy 
Gara”, suggesting that his “collection of organised improvisations” might have 
been a harder sell if he wasn’t a member of a famous band.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpRrEyPgeGUo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpRrEyPgeGUo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DpRrEyPgeGUo&media=>
Ultimately, Gara falls foul of one the two biggest solo album cliches. Usually 
they are experimental odysseys that would never be sanctioned by their regular 
bands (democracy works, folks); or they are stripped-down confessionals, 
because the world really needs to hear about the personal travails of the 
guitarist from Paramore. Both are a kind of hubris, and both are almost always 
rubbish.

Side projects can serve a useful purpose for the music business, maintaining 
visibility for the umbrella brand while the main songwriters take a breather. 
Often they are hobby projects, requiring little A&R investment: LNZNDRF, a new 
album of passable krautrock by sundry members of the National and Beirut, was 
recorded in just two-and-a-half days. And they keep the artists fulfilled. So 
what’s the harm?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ8GNEFd306A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ8GNEFd306A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQ8GNEFd306A&media=>
Solo albums aren’t merely isolated salvoes of disappointment; they are also a 
sign of the rot setting in. Just as Lennon and McCartney’s patchy solo careers 
signalled the end of the 60s dream, and the spate of tedious 
Ashcroft/Butler/Coxon solo albums in the late 90s drummed the final nails into 
Britpop’s coffin, this current rash of Arcade Fire/Vampire Weekend/National 
solo records is sounding the death knell for 00s Pitchforky indie as a cultural 
force. The zeitgeist is rarely defined by musicians, four albums in, who fancy 
a change of scenery.

El Vy: Return to the Moon review – Matt Berninger’s low-key side project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/01/el-vy-return-to-the-moon-review-4ad-im-the-man-to-be-no-time-to-crank-the-sun>
There have already been repercussions: just weeks after unveiling his debut 
solo single, Vampire Weekend keyboard-prodder Rostam Batmanglij announced he 
was quitting the band because his “identity as songwriter and producer needs to 
stand on its own”. Sure, it must be a bummer when the good-looking guy at the 
front gets all the credit. But when a band subdivides, the maths rarely add up: 
Batmanglij’s single basically just sounds like Vampire Weekend with some vital 
bits missing. Noel Gallagher plus Beady Eye does not equal Oasis. Thinking of 
going solo? Just say no.
 