
Finding a good app is sorting the wheat from the chaff. With new releases 
appearing all the time, it can be difficult to know where to begin. Here is a 
selection of genuinely useful applications to try out on your mobile.

iPhone

● LifeForceTeam Fertility 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fitunes.apple.com%2Fgb%2Fapp%2Flifeforceteam-fertility%2Fid364583650%3Fmt%3D8&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEjQbdlB9iw-rky1_z0zxCxzeS1IA>
 (Back Door Productions, £3.99)

A unique application which provides fertility advice straight to couples, 
without the hassle of lengthy waiting lists. With advice from Harley Street 
expert Dr Lawrence Shaw, this application provides a comprehensive knowledge of 
everything you need to know through videos and text.
 The LifeForceTeam fertility app for iPhone 


● PolyTune 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fitunes.apple.com%2Fus%2Fapp%2Fpolytune%2Fid364009203%3Fmt%3D8&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNEToGK9TdxXEYKN3_E4BuL0QYEK-A>
 (TC Electronics, £5.99)

Polyphonic guitar tuning allows you to tune all your guitar strings at once, 
instead of plucking one at a time. Available within a pedal for a smooth 
£75.00, this app provides the same functionality for a fraction of the cost.

iPad

● Brushes 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fitunes.apple.com%2Fus%2Fapp%2Flivepitch%2Fid377081188%3Fmt%3D8&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNE_ZgyFyread8h3gxstwGNtQB9lDw>
 (Steve Sprang, £4.99)

This week's internet hit has been the artistic work of David Kassan 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.davidkassan.com&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNH2OZRR4O7oJH0-eM3VFSBQib8YCg>
 who has created stunningly realistic portraits with an iPad and easel. Even if 
your skills do not match the level of his, you can certainly have fun with this 
easy to use painting application.
 The Brushes app for iPad 


● Live Pitch 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fitunes.apple.com%2Fus%2Fapp%2Flivepitch%2Fid377081188%3Fmt%3D8&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNE_ZgyFyread8h3gxstwGNtQB9lDw>
 (Mint Digital, free)

The best iPad <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ipad> apps are designed 
from the ground up to take advantage of the huge screen. One such example is 
Live Pitch - which provides real time information with from each World Cup 
match. A must have for any football fan, provides an entirely new way to 
experience football.

BlackBerry

● UNO 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fappworld.blackberry.com%2Fwebstore%2Fcontent%2F1480&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHfOrBnRi51Ga5iai1Erq9tQKm9ZA>
 (Gameloft, $4.99)

Relive summers of the playing this classic card, number and colour game, UNO 
is a realistic interpretation of the original game and ideal for those morning 
commutes.
 Blackberry's YouTube app 


● Player for YouTube 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fappworld.blackberry.com%2Fwebstore%2Fcontent%2F9001&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNH_NwD28bcVRltsm2ENSoFsQDyYIw>
 (Smarter Apps, free)

Simple, yet extremely useful, this handy application allows you to watch high 
quality videos straight from YouTube. Be sure to make sure your WiFi is turned 
on, or watch your data costs soar with each passing second.

Android

● Pocket IKEA <http://www.android.com/market/#app=com.lyy.pocketikea> 
(Go2mobile, free)

Ever tried to remember the name of that BILLY bookcase in the corner? Pocket 
IKEA allows you to browse thousands of items from everyone's favourite 
do-it-yourself furniture store. Avoid the crowds and spend your time somewhere 
leisurely than trailing around a warehouse.
 The National Rail app on Android 


● National Rail 
<http://www.android.com/market/#app=com.croworc.nationalrail.live> (ATOC, £4.99)

The official application from the all the rail operators, National Rail 
provides the latest service updates, journey planning, fare information, 
platforms as well as live departures and arrivals. Essential for any commuter, 
and more reliable than the train services too.

Java

● iSpyCams 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.getjar.com%2Fmobile%2F32487%2Fispycams-for-apple-iphone%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNF9CFtB9iDYeBaNXmz87YfL0GV-jg>
 (Warelex, free)

Fancy spotting what is happening at Abbey Road? Watch boats floating down the 
Seine? Check if someone is parked outside your garage? iSpyCams allows you to 
connect to thousands of free web cams around the world, as well as your own at 
home.
 The Java iSpyCams app 


● UrbanDaddy 
<http://www.google.com/url?q=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.getjar.com%2Fmobile%2F29160%2Furbandaddy-for-apple-iphone%2F&sa=D&sntz=1&usg=AFQjCNHZkzbA9Qw10JCROYV-gXvILza2JA>
 (UrbanDaddy, free)

Whether you are stumbling around for some fried chicken at midnight or looking 
for a cocktail bar at lunch time, UrbanDaddy will help you find the best 
locations. Providing comprehensive guides and articles to the major cities, 
this is an essential companion to exploring.

 