
Just before Christmas, I went to a daffy treasure hunt hosted by Katie Grand, 
who founded Pop magazine and is now about to launch Love. It was held at the 
Royal Academy and there was a great mob of paparazzi outside so I asked who 
they were waiting for. They said Ag, which wasn't very helpful, but I found out 
later they were waiting for the modelAgyness Deyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/agyness-deyn>, 25, who is supposed to be 
'the new Kate Moss'. Of course she is not remotely like Kate Moss either in 
looks or in character, but she is the latest English model to take the world by 
storm.

I found her wearing a pink satin dress, which Giles Deacon made her for the 
party, sipping tea with her friends, but when Grand introduced us, Deyn leapt 
to her feet with the sort of old-fashioned good manners I thought no one 
learned any more. She was friendly and sweet, so when Grand suggested I 
interview her, we arranged to meet at the Russian Tea Room in Primrose Hill.

She looked extremely pretty at the Katie Grand party, but next morning, in the 
Russian Tea Room, she looked utterly amazing. She was wearing a man's black 
jacket and denim shirt, with a red beret perched on her platinum hair, her pale 
porcelain skin set off by black Alistair Darling eyebrows, her long long long 
legs encased in red snakeskin jeans ending in patent Doc Martens. Her delicate, 
almost ethereal beauty reminds me a bit of the young Debbie Harry, but she says 
her idol as a teenager was the model Stella Tennant - she liked her beetling 
eyebrows, pierced nose and unconventional attitude.

Talking in her flat Rochdale accent, she explains that she always uses 
Primrose Hill as her base in London because she used to have a flat here and 
nowadays stays with a friend round the corner. She has lived in New York for 
the past three years but had come over to London for the Katie Grand party and 
a Mystery Jets gig and was planning to spend a few days hanging out with 
friends before going to stay with her parents (her mother and stepfather) in 
Manchester and catching up with her elder brother, a pilot, and her younger 
sister, an artist. Then back to New York to spend Christmas with her boyfriend, 
Albert Hammond Jr of the Strokes, and her two dogs.

Given that she is obviously such a sensible down-to-earth Mancunian lass, why 
does she have such an irritatingly affected name? It sounds all right - 
pronounced Agnes Dean (Agnes was her grandmother's name) - but then the silly 
spelling makes it an anagram of Deny Gayness, which is daft (although she has a 
big lesbian following, she is not a lesbian). Why couldn't she have stayed 
Laura Hollins? But she changed her name long before she started modelling, and 
explains as follows: 'I was into numerology at the time, and I was talking to 
my mum about it and saying: "Mum, I'm thinking of changing my name because I've 
added up all the numbers and I think I want to change it." And we were actually 
in a health food shop and walking round the aisles and we get to the counter 
still talking about it and on the counter was a magazine that said: "Change 
your name, change your life." And I was, like: "It's a sign!" So then I 
decided: "Right, I'll change."' I stare at her blankly. Does she really believe 
all that stuff? 'Well, it's not like your name is set in stone. I'm the kind of 
person that is not really attached to anything - I would never be attached to a 
name or a dress or a house or a car - so whatever makes you happy. And at that 
point in time I was like, wow!' Nobody in the family calls her Laura any more, 
and her mother and sister have also changed their names. Maybe she just wanted 
to shed her father's name.

Her father works for the Royal Mail; her mother is an ENT nursing specialist 
at Liverpool Hope Hospital. Despite being practising Roman Catholics, they 
divorced when Agyness - or Laura in those days - was 12 or 13. Was that 
upsetting? 'Yeah. Yeah it was. But I was always quite quiet - I was never 
really a drama queen, so I kind of, like, blocked it out.' Her mother remarried 
and Deyn talks fondly of her stepfather, who works as a food technologist. But 
when I ask about her father, her beautiful eyes fill with tears. 'He remarried 
and stuff, but I don't really see him that much. Every now and then. It is sad. 
But sometimes it goes so far, you can never get back, you know?'

She was born in Littleborough, near Rochdale; she grew up in Rawtenstall, 
Lancashire and went to a Catholic school where her favourite subjects were 
music and drama and, more surprisingly, maths and business studies. She claims 
to love maths, and I imagine she has a good financial head on her shoulders. 
Her mother encouraged all three of the children to take part-time jobs to pay 
for their extras, and one of her jobs was in the local fish and chip shop - a 
fact the tabloids will never let her forget. When she was voted Model of the 
Year at the 2007 British Fashion Awards, the Manchester Evening News produced 
the immortal headline: 'Chippie girl to conquer the world'.

The great influence in her childhood, apart from her mother, was Henry 
Holland, her gay best friend. They met when they were about 13, and he 
remembers being struck by 'just this huge big smile, with braces on her teeth, 
and the fact she was so sweet and friendly'. He, Deyn and another friend called 
Jessica Fletcher, who now works with Holland on his fashion label House of 
Holland, spent their teens hanging out together - they all had their heads 
shaved and they'd sit in the pub and people would stare at them. When Holland 
moved to London to study fashion journalism, Deyn missed him so much she kept 
going to London to stay with him. He was living in university halls of 
residence where he wasn't allowed to have guests overnight but he used to sneak 
her in to share his single bed.

Holland remembers that her style changed when she came to London and 
discovered charity shops and car-boot sales. 'Up north, it's much more about 
labels. In London she started to develop her own style.' And in one of her 
forays to a charity shop in Kentish Town she was spotted by a model scout, who 
signed her up. 'And then everything just kind of happened,' recalls Deyn. 'It's 
really funny, because both of us have always been such dreamers, and Henry 
would say: "When you're a famous model" and I'd say: "When you're a famous 
fashion editor", and then I was signed up by a model agency and he became 
fashion editor of Smash Hits, which was one of his dreams. So it was like we 
were ticking them off the list, and it was kind of: whoa, this is strange!'

She was 19, still intending to go to university, when she started modelling. 
She loved the work. 'It didn't matter what the job was - I loved it, I just 
loved it.' But she hated all the go-sees and inevitable rejections. 'I used to 
go around London seeing clients, and you used to have to queue up for an hour 
with all these other girls to get a job and then you wouldn't get it, or you'd 
be down to the last two for a job and you wouldn't get it. But you just have to 
take that on the chin. People used to get really competitive with each other, 
but you know, no one looks the same, so it just depends on what they're looking 
for.'

But it forced her to grow up quite quickly. 'I think modelling was like the 
university of life, really. You get to travel but you get thrown into this 
adult world, which is kind of quite scary.' She remembers one particular trip 
abroad when no one spoke to her and she felt very isolated. 'It can be really 
lonely sometimes if they don't talk to you and it was, like, a week. But there 
were lads on the shoot as well and they were great, so I just hung out with 
them. I've always got on with lads, more than I have with girls.'

As a model based in London she was in demand, but mainly for poorly paid 
editorial work, and she often had to take bar jobs to make ends meet. It was 
only when she moved to New York three years ago that her career really took 
off. This was all thanks to Katie Grand, she says - 'She's great. She's been a 
real mentor for me.' Deyn had been sent to New York on a photo shoot for a 
British magazine and Katie Grand saw her sitting in a caf√© and asked what New 
York agent she was with. Deyn said she didn't have a New York agent, so Katie 
Grand took a napkin and wrote down the number of the DNA agency and said: 'Ring 
Louie [Chaban].' So that's what Deyn did, and that's when her career took off.

She walked into the agency and the receptionist said, 'Oh sorry, but we don't 
do walk-ins.' Deyn wailed: 'Oh, but I'm going home tomorrow and I don't think 
I'll ever be coming back!' So the receptionist went round the back, where Louie 
was having lunch, and said: 'You should really see this girl', and he groaned 
but came out and saw Deyn and immediately said he'd like to represent her. But 
when she told her English agency that she'd signed with a New York agent, they 
sacked her. So then she moved to New York and went to work for Louie, who 
totally supported her. In London, she recalls, her agency was always telling 
her to look more feminine, to wear heels and dresses, but when she asked Louie 
what to wear for her first casting, he said: 'I don't care what you wear - wear 
what you're wearing now.' 'And I was wearing Doc Martens and a ripped-up 
T-shirt and I thought: "Brilliant! I can just be myself!" And going to New York 
made me think: "OK, this is a career now."'

She likes New York so much she'll probably stay there. She says it's much 
easier working there, and she loves the way of life. And of course her 
boyfriend Albert Hammond Jr is American. When I ask how long she has been going 
out with him, she says promptly: 'Since May 31st - that was our first date.' He 
is only her third boyfriend ever. 'I had one boyfriend from when I was 12 all 
the way through school and college, and then we split up and I went out with 
Josh [Hubbard, of the Paddingtons] for four years and, like, now I'm with 
Albert.' Had she already split up with Josh Hubbard? 'Yes, a few months before 
we'd officially split up, but it's hard, you know - you don't see each other 
for six months because we lived in different places and were both working [he 
lives in Hull]. It was kind of like a mutual decision.' So it wasn't too 
heartbreaking? 'Oh it was. Because you're with someone for so long and they're 
your best friend, so it's like losing a friend as well. But I'm just so happy 
at the moment.' One of the tabloids recently said that she was engaged to 
Hammond. She says she's not, but obviously would like to be - 'I suppose if you 
know, you know.'

Recently Deyn did a shoot for Katie Grand when she had to spend the whole day 
jumping off a New York fire escape, naked, for the photographer Ryan McGinley. 
She did it for 11 hours, landing on a pile of mattresses, and was black and 
blue the next day. So why did she agree to do it? 'Oh, Ryan. I love his 
pictures, and I totally trusted him. But it was like the fourth leg of the fire 
escape and I was jumping off naked, and I was in a robe and I'd climb to the 
top and then you threw your robe down, so when you jumped down you could just 
put it back on. But once you've thrown the robe down, either you jump off or 
you walk down naked. So I would just have to jump off! But it was really funny 
because it was a residential building, and through the window where I was 
jumping off, there were two old guys playing cards. And the first time they saw 
this naked girl outside their window they looked a bit surprised, but then I 
was jumping off all day and by the end they were like: "Hi Agyness!" People 
were watching from the windows and there must have been some paparazzi there 
because it ended up in the Sun newspaper.'

Paparazzi are a constant presence in her life but, unlike most celebs, she 
refuses to grumble about them. 'I don't want to stop being normal,' she says. 
'Like yesterday, I was walking from Primrose Hill to Henry's office at 
Tottenham Court Road, a really nice walk through the park, and there were some 
guys taking my picture and I stopped and we had a chat and shared a few Wine 
Gums. I think they're just earning their wage and everyone's got to do their 
job. Or, you know, at the Katie Grand party there were about 15 of them 
outside, and I was like: "Guys, do you mind if I have a cigarette first?" And 
they're: "Sure, if we can have a picture after you're finished." And then one 
of them went to take a picture and the others were all like: "Hey, Agyness is 
smoking! You can't take her picture now." So I think if you're, like, give and 
take, you can get on with them. But in New York you never see them, because 
they use long lenses, so you never have any contact and they're always at the 
end of the block. I have more of a rapport with the English ones than I do with 
the Americans.'

But she is sometimes annoyed by made-up stories in the British press, like a 
recent one that said she was going backpacking round Europe for a year. It was 
news to her. Or another that said she had lied about her age. It's true, she 
says, that when she first gave an interview to Pop magazine she said she was 15 
or something, just taking the mick, but she was amazed when the Mail translated 
that as lying about her age. (For the record, she will be 26 on 16 February.) 
And she worries about reporters harassing her family and friends. 'It got a bit 
weird because newspapers started knocking on my parents' front door and asking 
around at my old school. But, you know, what are they going to find out? That I 
was in the netball team? I don't really read the papers anyway.'

In the past she was sometimes photographed stumbling out of parties looking a 
bit the worse for wear, but she doesn't drink any more. She stopped when she 
started going out with Hammond because 'he doesn't drink or anything, so I 
decided I wouldn't either because it's weird if you're on different levels. 
Sometimes I'll have a glass of champagne, or a really nice glass of wine if I'm 
having a steak and chips in a good restaurant, so I'm not, like, never say 
never. But I don't really drink any more.'

Anyway, she's not really a party girl. She used to be, when she first came to 
London, but nowadays she usually only goes to things like the Fashion Awards or 
the Katie Grand party when it would be rude not to turn up. Quite often she is 
in bed by 10. She gets up at seven, does yoga, walks the dogs, and sometimes 
gets up even earlier in New York to attend a 6.45 yoga class. She has no 
particular beauty routine - 'I tried going for facials, but they made my skin 
worse so I just stopped' - though she does try to keep out of the sun. She eats 
healthily and has never suffered from anorexia. She and Hammond like going out 
for dinner but often spend evenings at home listening to music. She has many 
acquaintances but few close friends - 'Henry and Jessica will always be there, 
but sometimes our schedules are so busy that I won't speak to them for a week.'

Although she is reluctant to criticise the fashion industry, there are hints 
that she has seen its dark side. She was comparatively old when she started - 
19 - but even so found it 'scary' to be thrown into this adult world and 
worries about what happens to girls who start at 12 or 13. And there are 
monsters out there. 'There are people - I've heard them saying: "Oh, you're too 
fat to be in the show" right in front of everyone. You've got to have a really 
tough skin. I hate to say it's all bad, because it isn't, but then there are 
people who are absolute monsters and make you feel like shit and you think: 
why? It's not as if I block it out - I'm aware of all the negativeness around - 
but I kind of don't choose to register it. I just think: "That's how they are, 
those people, and it's not their fault."' Will she name names? 'No!' she 
laughs. 'And then there are some amazing people who make you feel so inspired, 
like John Galliano, or Christopher Bailey from Burberry - he's just the nicest 
northern lad you'll ever meet. And Giles [Deacon] and Katie [Grand] - they're 
quite real at the bottom of it.' But when I ask whether she meet lots of very 
self-obsessed people in the fashion world, she agrees fervently: 'Yes, I do.

I don't have that many friends.'

Are there any models she would refuse to work with? 'No. I'd never do that. 
I've had people do that to me, though. I don't know why. But if a younger model 
came along and they were getting, like, really successful, I would never be 
jealous, because they don't even look like me.

I think you should help people that are coming up in the industry, especially 
with it being quite scary sometimes.' She remembers that Stella Tennant was 
kind to her at the beginning, when she was working on her first Burberry 
campaign and very nervous, and Karen Elson has also been 'really nice'. How 
does she feel about being called the new Kate Moss? She answers diplomatically: 
'I think Kate's had an amazing career - I mean, she still has an amazing career 
- and she's really beautiful. But no one's the same. I'm not the new anything; 
I'm just Agyness.'

But there are hints that she is looking for a career beyond modelling. Until 
recently she sang in an indie group called Lucky Knitwear, but that has petered 
out. So now she is attending acting school in New York and has just made a 
short film called The Right Side of my Exultant Brain for a friend from New 
York Film Academy, and says: 'It was really good fun and it was great being 
surrounded by friends for the first thing I did, so you can kind of feel freer 
to explore it a little bit more.' Does she hope to do more acting? 'Yes. I need 
to have a lot of things going on; I can't just do one thing. Like, I can't only 
do modelling because then I'd hate it.'

But in a way, she says, modelling is acting. 'It's so weird because it's like 
I'm pretending to be a model. And when I get on a shoot, and they say, "Be 
sexy" or "Be ladylike", I have to think: OK, I'm turning into that character. 
And then after the shoot I'm back to normal.' She once said: 'I'm not sexy' and 
I wondered whether she meant in photographs or in real life. 'I don't think of 
myself as sexy. But I think when I'm doing a shoot that I'm being sexy.' And in 
real life? 'I suppose growing up I didn't think I was, but now more and more 
I'm feeling comfortable with myself.'

What does she expect to be doing in 10 years' time? 'I think I'll still be in 
New York. I want to have a family, but I want to start doing stuff - I don't 
know what it is, but I feel that in 10 years' time I want to be doing something 
that benefits people, and I don't know what it is, but I just have this feeling 
inside me.' Does she mean, say, like Angelina Jolie being an ambassador for 
Unicef, that sort of thing? Mmm, she says, doubtfully, obviously not meaning 
that but too polite to say so. And then she tells me where she is going after 
our interview - to Great Ormond Street Hospital, to visit some children who 
wrote to say they'd like to meet her. 'I love doing stuff like that,' she 
confides. It could be quite upsetting, I warn her. 'Yes,' she says earnestly. 
'But if I can help in any way, even just by going in... And if it is upsetting, 
it just puts things in perspective and makes you appreciate your own life. When 
bad shit happens, you get over it. But some people don't, you know.' Agyness 
Deyn is more than just a pretty face.

‚Ä¢ This article was amended on Wednesday 21 January 2009. Rawtenstall is in 
Lancashire, not Greater Manchester. This has been corrected.
 