
[Mr. Arthur Ransome  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/nov/11/michelle-magorian-on-arthur-ransome-my-inspiration>
needs no introduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2014/nov/11/michelle-magorian-on-arthur-ransome-my-inspiration>
 to our readers. He has written for us from many lands - from Russia, China, 
and Egypt, as well as, latterly, from the homely banks of the Lune and Ribble. 
Now, he will write a weekly article which will draw upon his varied experiences 
as well as upon his great gifts as an imaginative writer, and which will, as 
the title indicates, give him wide scope for a more contemplative observation 
of life.]

I do not propose to discuss here the reason why Saturday articles appear on 
Saturday. To open that question is to open an infinite vista of other questions 
concerned with the development of the newspaper - the great change in newspaper 
readers, the enormous encroachment of the irrelevant on time that should 
properly be devoted to reading, the strange fact that, while we have invented 
refrigerators that keep cold mutton fresh for months, dodges in tinning and 
canning that make salmon and peaches edible all the year round, and seem about 
to invent a means whereby man himself shall be able to live for ever and to 
preserve a sandboy jollity throughout eternity, we have invented nothing to 
preserve the freshness of news.

Rather the other way. News that at one time used to keep fresh for weeks now 
goes stale in twenty-four hours, sours like cream in a thunderstorm, and if it 
is not read first thing in the morning is not worth printing at all. Morning 
newspapers are thrown away before the afternoon, and if an article that is not 
closely connected with the news is to have its best chance of being read it 
must be printed on that day of the week on which, with play as well as work 
before them, men do but glance through their morning newspapers and lay them 
aside to be looked at in a more convenient time.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Farthur-ransome-on-writing-saturday-articles-1929%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436439816845%2F6742f32f-9c42-4bab-9f69-ba11259277aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arthur%20Ransome%20on%20writing%20Saturday%20articles%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%2013%20July%201929&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Farthur-ransome-on-writing-saturday-articles-1929%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arthur%20Ransome%20on%20writing%20Saturday%20articles%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%2013%20July%201929&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Farthur-ransome-on-writing-saturday-articles-1929%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436439816845%2F6742f32f-9c42-4bab-9f69-ba11259277aa-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Strikers read the latest news during the General Strike, 1926. Photograph: Fox 
Photos/Getty Images 
The Saturday article as I understand it evades any close connection with 
rapidly decomposing news. It should not need at all costs to be read at once, 
before the news is stale. It assumes in its reader a temporary freedom from the 
treadmill of economic compulsion. It may discuss things of to-day or to-morrow 
or yesterday, but it harks back for its mood to the time when the reading of a 
newspaper was a leisurely affair. It has no need for headlines. It is without 
authority. It lays down no law. Not for it is the easy, confident attitude that 
announces, “I’m not arguing. I’m telling you.” It does not gather its readers 
by asking them if they have heard the latest. It does not recognise hurry. 
Nobody in a hurry will read it, anyhow. It is more of a conversation than a 
lecture. There are two sides to a conversation, and more than any other part of 
the paper the Saturday article depends on the collaboration of its readers. The 
writing of Saturday articles is one of those businesses in which the goodwill 
is much more valuable than the stock-in-trade.

It is consequently extremely hard to begin. Let me explain by an illustration 
what I mean by the collaboration of readers. It is generally recognised that no 
public performer has a harder job than the man whose turn is the first in the 
programme at a music-hall. He addresses himself to an audience still in process 
of formation, to people looking for their seats, and to people who have come to 
the theatre to see someone else and are impatient to have him off the stage so 
that their favourite may the sooner come on. He has to work without the 
collaboration of the house, whereas the star performer hears the noise of his 
welcome beginning before ever the curtain rises on his turn. Collaboration 
between performer and spectators is half the battle, and it cannot begin until 
the audience know what to expect.

Writers, of course, are spared the sight of their readers. They do not, like 
the music-hall performer, see the man in the front row, with his back to them, 
making signs to a friend and taking more than half the attention of the house. 
They do not know how often the cumulative effect at which they aim is destroyed 
by the ticket-collector in the morning train. They are happily ignorant that 
the man who is half-way through their column has his mind drawn, like his eyes, 
irresistibly sideways to advertisements of motor-cars or to some irrelevant 
picture. They assume that their readers read them through, and that while 
reading them they are deaf and blind to everything but the print. Really, of 
course, theirs is, almost always, the task of the music-hall performer who 
takes that difficult first turn.

For many years now I have been writing a weekly article on fishing, a subject 
on which one would imagine there was really very little to say. I still 
remember how difficult were the first few weeks, and how, as time went on, I 
came to find myself merely an amanuensis for my fellow-fishermen. They wrote my 
articles, not I. I only held the pen. Fishing, however, is a subject on which 
fishermen feel passionately. It is impossible to say a word about it that will 
not rouse some heat of disagreement or agreement. It warns off everybody who is 
not interested in it. The material of Saturday articles is as boundless as life 
itself. The man who writes them cannot be sure of his audience. I must just 
draw my bow at a venture and hope for the best.

This is an edited extract, read the full column 
<http://static.guim.co.uk/sys-images/Guardian/Pix/pictures/2015/7/9/1436440622241/13-July-1929-Manchester-G-001.jpg>
 