
During the past few years it has become apparent that science fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/science-fiction>, long regarded as a 
self-contained m√©lange of post-Wellsian fantasies about time and space, is 
dividing itself into two separate and opposed forms. On the one hand is the 
traditional science fiction of interplanetary travel and alien cultures, in its 
heyday thirty years ago an authentic popular image of the future, but now 
identified with a few declining magazines and a group of older American and 
British writers unable to add anything substantially new to their repertory of 
ideas.

Their failure, and that of the entire genre, in spite of the heroic efforts of 
intelligent apologists such asKingsley Amis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/kingsleyamis> and Edmund Crispin, not to 
mention the millions of dollars' worth of free publicity given by the 
Russo-American space programmes, lies in its mistaken appeal to realism rather 
than to fantasy. Once it gets off the ground into space all science fiction is
fantasy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fantasy>, and the more serious it 
tries to be, the more naturalistic, the greater its failure, since it 
completely lacks the moral authority and conviction of a literature won from 
experience.

On the other hand has emerged a more speculative form of science fiction, one 
that is crossing the horizon of general fiction at an increasing number of 
points. Where the older science fiction has been most involved with outer 
space, this new offshoot is concerned with "inner space," the surrealists' 
"landscapes of the soul," and in creating images where the outer world of 
reality and the inner world of the psyche meet and fuse. Indeed, for those 
writers science serves much the same role as did psychoanalysis for the 
surrealists - a standpoint rather than a subject matter.

Recognising that the whole of science fiction's imaginary universe has long 
since been absorbed into the general consciousness and that most of its ideas 
are valid only in a kind of marginal spoofing, as inWilliam Burroughs's "The 
Ticket that Exploded," 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/00/02/13/specials/burroughs-ticket.html> they 
have set about trying to create a new set of conventions with which to explore 
their subject matter. As distinct from the teleological ends of science fiction 
in the past, with its explicit social and moral preoccupations, the new science 
fiction is devoted to ontological objectives - the understanding of time, 
landscape, and identity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2014%2Fapr%2F09%2Fj-g-ballard-reviews-science-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F8%2F1396968556776%2Fc17bd7c8-0e06-46d2-853d-24b948e9b114-1629x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Down%20to%20Earth%20-%20JG%20Ballard%20reviews%20science%20fiction%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%209%20April%201965&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2014%2Fapr%2F09%2Fj-g-ballard-reviews-science-fiction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Down%20to%20Earth%20-%20JG%20Ballard%20reviews%20science%20fiction%3A%20from%20the%20archive%2C%209%20April%201965&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftheguardian%2F2014%2Fapr%2F09%2Fj-g-ballard-reviews-science-fiction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F8%2F1396968556776%2Fc17bd7c8-0e06-46d2-853d-24b948e9b114-1629x2040.jpeg>
 JG Ballard at his typewriter, March 1989. Photograph: David Montgomery/Getty 
Images 
This distinction between outer and inner space is apparent in the latest 
Kingsley Amis <https://www.theguardian.com/books/kingsleyamis> and Robert 
Conquest collectionSpectrum IV (Gollancz, 21s). As usual, the sharpness of the 
editorial eye produces many stories that convince by sheer expertise, but the 
best are those, such as the late C. M. Kornbluth's "The Marching Morons" and 
John Brunner's "Such Stuff," which are extrapolations of the immediate present, 
nightmares at noon earned from the abrasive dust of the pavements we all walk.

Telepathy, one of the most hazardous subjects, succeeds in the skilled hands 
of John Brunner inTelepathist (Faber, 18s). The full implications of telepathy 
require nothing less than genius to do them justice, but in his tale of a 
deformed and neglected child who meets a deaf-mute he convinces us that some 
kind of extrasensory perception might be the only spark to cross the gap 
between them. Intelligently and humanely told, the novel succeeds more by the 
use of traditional literary devices than those of science fiction.

An Arthur C Clarke <https://www.theguardian.com/books/arthurcclarke> Omnibus 
(Sidgwick and Jackson, 30s) contains two novels, "Childhood's End" and "Prelude 
to Space," and a short-story collection, "Expedition to Earth." Reprinted after 
a ten-year lapse, they illustrate the failure of traditional science fiction. 
Wholly concerned with an outer space seen in terms of the crudest 
extrapolations, these stories are dated not only by their superficial 
scientific gimmickry, but by the trivial dialogue and characterisation. The 
difference between the old and new science fiction is the point where invention 
ends and imagination begins.
 