
First Test, day five (Eng 435, Aus 674 for 6 dec, Eng 22-2)

Hello. So are England good enough to save this? Probably not. In recent times, 
asking England to bat out the final day of the first Ashes Test has usually 
meant defeat: in 1989 they gave one of the most execrable batting performances 
in Test history, in 1994-95 they were undone by Warne on a Bunsen, and in 
1998-99 they were saved by a thunderstorm of such ferocity I thought the world 
might end.

13th over: England 41-3 (trailed by 239 on first innings; Strauss 12, 
Collingwood 9) It's a bit early to draw conclusions given that Collingwood's 
faced, err, six balls, but he looks good. "Chris Tavare is only 54," says Iain 
Chambers. "Does anyone know whether or not he is free?"

WICKET! Prior c Clarke b Hauritz 14 (England 70-5) Another dreadful dismissal. 
Prior went to cut a ball that was already too close for the shot and then got 
really big on him out of the rough. Who would have scripted this: Nathan 
Hauritz is winning the Test for Australia.

63rd over: England 151-6 (Collingwood 48, Broad 10) I may regret typing this, 
but Collingwood is playing Hauritz brilliantly: low backlift, going back 
whenever possible, Andrex-soft hands, playing only when he absolutely needs to, 
and completely at peace with such a one-paced approach.

90th over: England 225-8 (trail by 14 runs with 15 overs left; Collingwood 74, 
Anderson 2) Tony Soprano constantly wondered, "Whatever happened to Gary 
Cooper? The strong, silent type." He's out there now, and I have more man-love 
for him than I could possibly articulate.

WICKET! England 233-9 (Collingwood c Hussey b Siddle 74) I don't believe it. 
Collingwood slaps a cut stroke off Siddle to gully, where Hussey takes the 
catch at the second attempt. Collingwood walks off to a standing ovation but he 
couldn't care less: he is broken, staring at the floor.

99.1 overs: England 245-9 (Anderson 19, Panesar 3) This is awful. Just too 
much. Let me go. Let me work at McDonald's. Anywhere but here. Anything but 
this. I can't feel my fingers. Siddle screams for lbw against Panesar first 
ball. It was clearly going down leg, but for a horrible moment I thought Billy 
Doctrove was going to give it.

102 overs: England 251-9 (lead by 12 runs; the match finishes at 6.50pm; 
Anderson 21, Panesar 7) England are timewasting at every opportunity. Bilal 
Shafayat came on with a drink at the end of the last over, and now the end of 
this over too. Even the physio with the moobs is on! He came on, tapped 
Anderson's backside and then went off.

MATCH DRAWN England have done it! They finish on 252-9 and, incredibly, Jimmy 
Anderson and Monty Panesar have survived 69 balls to save a Test. England were 
poor but, make no mistake, it took serious courage to save that after being 
five-down at lunch. A last-ball finish; an atmosphere to shiver the spine; 
fingernails bitten to the quick: it can only be an Ashes summer.

Second Test, Day five (Eng 425 & 311-6 dec, Aus 215 and 313-5)

Don't panic Oh what's the use of telling you that. You're going to anyway 
aren't you? Australia need 209, England five wickets.

WICKET! Haddin 80 c Collingwood b Flintoff (Australia 313-6, chasing 522) 
GOTTIM! Flintoff finds Haddin's edge and the ball shoots straight into 
Collingwood's hands at third slip. A fierce, short and snorting delivery that 
flew off the edge.

90th over: Australia 317-6 (Clarke 127, Johnson 0) Flintoff fires down a 
bouncer, Clarke's face as the ball hits his helmet is a picture of a man struck 
with shock and awe. Awesome stuff from Flintoff. Every ball has been above 
90mph.

98th over: Australia 356-6 (Clarke 136, Johnson 26) "What is it with the 
English mentality?" asks Neil Toolan, as though 2,000 years of cultural 
development could be distilled into one pithy OBO entry. "Before any major 
sporting competition we have this blind faith that we are going to win, but 
when it comes to squeaky bum time we always fear the worst. If the boot was on 
the other foot I doubt there would be a single Australian thinking they could 
lose this."

WICKET! Clarke 136 b Swann (Australia 361-7) A gambler's gambit from Strauss, 
throwing the ball to Graeme Swann. He's gone! Swann has struck! Clarke almost 
yorked himself, coming down the pitch and being beaten by a ball that dipped, 
turned and ripped out off stump.

WICKET! Hauritz 1 b Flintoff (Australia 367-8) And there goes Hauritz! These 
are now Flintoff's best figures (24-4-69-4) at Lord's, in his final Test 
innings at the ground.

103rd over: Australia 385-8 (Johnson 48, Siddle 6) "Can I be the first one to 
propose that Flintoff be knighted," shouts Richard Harris. "Is the Queen at 
Lord's today? If someone has a rusty sword she could do the job on the 
outfield!" Good grief. This is the man who urinated in Tony Blair's rose bush.

WICKET! Siddle 7 b Flintoff (Australia 389-9) Flintoff has his five-for, his 
first since 2005. He sticks both arms aloft and turns to wave to the cheering 
crowd.

103rd over: Australia 393-9 (Johnson 51, Hilfenhaus 3) "Urinated on Blair's 
roses?" scoffs Alastair Morrison. "Elevate the man to the peerage – can I be 
the first to propose his Lordship?"

WICKET! Johnson 63 b Swann (Australia 406 all out) Swann takes the final 
wicket and it's all over. England are 1-0 up in the Ashes, having beaten 
Australia at Lord's for the first time since 1934. Fred leads the team off the 
field, saluting the deafening roars of the crowd. He finishes with figures of 
27-4-92-5.

Third Test, day two (Aus 126-1)

Hello everyone. The news from Edgbaston is that the skies are souffle white 
and Cambridge light blue, without a rain cloud in sight. Still, even on day 
two, time is against Australia. Having lost so much time yesterday, they will 
want to score at four an over to push them up towards 500 by the close.

WICKET! Watson lbw Onions 62 (Australia 126-2) A surprise as Onions starts – 
and what a start as he gets Watson's wicket first ball with one that nipped 
back and would have hit the top of middle stump.

WICKET! Hussey b Onions 0 (Australia 126-3) Unbelievable! Hussey goes after 
leaving a delivery that pitched on off and held its line. Onions is now on a 
hat-trick.

Hat-trick delivery Michael Clarke makes Onions wait, and wait some more. 
Finally to a huge 'Woahhhhh!' Onions delivers a bouncer that nearly tickles 
Clarke's glove on its way to Matt Prior behind the stumps.

34th over: Australia 148-3 (Ponting 26, Clarke 10) Ricky Ponting becomes 
Australia's leading run-maker in Tests (11,176 runs from 134 matches at an 
average of 56.44) with a push off his pads. It was a bit too close to Ian Bell 
at short leg for comfort though. Flintoff responds with a throat-busting 
bouncer to Clarke.44th over: Australia 171-4 (Clarke 19, North 1) "I know that 
Onions has had a good morning, but please spare a thought for us Australians," 
begs Kev McMahon. "I sat down to watch the first few overs, and I seemed to 
stumble upon a highlights package from 1985, or some other horrible year. It's 
really still raining, isn't it? This isn't really happening?" Oh it is, Kev. It 
is. For Richard Ellison in 1985, read Graham Onions in 2009.

WICKET! North c Prior b Anderson 12 (Australia 202-6) What a catch from Prior! 
Anderson slants a fullish delivery wide of off-stump, North chases and slashes 
behind, and Prior leaps to take a full-length catch in front of first slip.

WICKET! Johnson lbw Anderson 0 (Australia 202-7) Now Anderson is on a 
hat-trick! He bowls an absolutely straight one, which Hawkeye shows would have 
gone over the stumps, and Johnson just decides not to play a shot. Incredible 
scenes. "Easy! Easy!" chant the England fans.

52nd over: Australia 202-7 (Manou 8, Hauritz 0) Anderson's hat-trick ball 
swings violently from left-to-right, like a drunk stumbling home after a night 
out, but hits Hauritz's pads wide and high.

And that's lunch What a morning it's been for England, who have taken seven 
wickets for 77 runs in the session.

Fourth Test, day one

First things first: Fred's not playing. This is the right move, surely, but 
you have to wonder whether he agreed with it. I wouldn't fancy being the one 
telling him he's not in the side.

England did not have the best night's sleep, as a fire alarm went off at their 
hotel at 4.30am.

Matt Prior could be out of the Test. He suffered a back spasm playing football 
on a wet outfield – "it's been waiting to happen" fumes Beefy, who is in a 
majestic comedy funk – and now Paul Collingwood is practising with gloves on.

10.25am Prior is trying to do some catching practice, but he is moving 
gingerly to say the least. Apparently England wanted Bruce French, Prior's 
coach, to take the gloves until another keeper arrived. French is 49. I feel 49 
after the last half-hour.

WICKET! England 11-1 (Strauss c North b Siddle 3) What a catch! Strauss threw 
everything at a full, wide delivery from Siddle, and it flew high to third 
slip, where North stuck out his right hand to take a stunning catch.

WICKET! England 16-2 (Bopara c Hussey b Hilfenhaus 1) What a pathetic, feeble 
dismissal. Bopara simply hung the bat out at a nothing delivery.

WICKET! England 42-4 (Collingwood c Ponting b Clark 0) Clark picks up his 
bunny with the minimum of fuss. "Is there a reverse F5 shortcut that can take 
OBO-ers back to an unsullied scorecard. F4 perhaps?" asks Tom Aldred.

WICKET! England 72-6 (Broad c Katich b Clark 3) Clark was working Broad over 
with full inswingers, and after surviving a big shout for LBW Broad then 
clipped one off his pads and straight to Katich at short square leg. So that's 
the last ball before lunch, and Clark has figures of 6.5-3-7-3. No fuss, no 
sledging, no bluster, just a magnificent adherence to the fundamentals. England 
are in an almighty hole.

Fifth Test, day two (Eng 332)

So this is it. The moment in which we find out whether English hopes will be 
dashed, whether our optimism is entirely futile, whether Australia's 
statistical superiority will amount to a series win.

22nd over: Australia 66-0 (Watson 34, Katich 27) Fred (6-3-7-0) replaces 
Harmison (4-1-15-0), and the crowd rise from their slumber.

WICKET! England 73-1 (Watson lbw b Broad 34) Stuart Broad strikes in his first 
over! Watson played around a good off-cutter and was absolutely plumb in front. 
He escaped one earlier but Al Pacino in Scent Of A Woman would have given that 
out.

WICKET! Australia 85-2 (Ponting b Broad 8) Stuart Broad has just become a man. 
Ponting has dragged one on! It was a really good, lifting off-cutter that 
cramped him for room and took the inside-edge.

WICKET! Australia 89-3 (Hussey lbw b Broad 0) Another one! This is staggering 
stuff. Broad has three for eight in 16 balls.

WICKET! Australia 93-4 (Clarke c Trott b Broad 3) A brilliant catch from 
Jonathan Trott and Broad has four! Clarke reached for a wider outswinger and 
flapped it to short extra cover, where Trott crouched to take a beautiful 
reaction catch just inches off the ground as he fell to his right. That's a 
stunning piece of fielding, and Broad – Sir Stuart Broad – has four for eight 
in 21 balls. What the hell's going on?

WICKET! Australia 109-6 (Katich c Cook b Swann 50) A wicket maiden. Australia 
have lost six for 36 in just over an hour."You're really that delirious Rob 
that'll you publish anything?" says Lenny Dalby. "Cos you never publish emails 
from me..." I love you, Lenny Dalby. I want to ravage your body with my 
fingernails while we watch Murder, She Wrote episodes. I never want us to be 
apart, if not in body then at least via Twitter. I love you, Lenny Dalby.

WICKET! Australia 111-7 (Haddin b Broad 1) I swear I am not making this up: 
Broad has just bowled Brad Haddin, and taken his five-for, with an absolute 
jaffa. This is mind-blowing. 
 