
The Tupolev pitches and yaws its way down through the Arctic cloud, seat belts 
dangling in the aisle, a grey curtain, tightly drawn, separating the gloomy 
throng of passengers from the party going on in the pilot's cabin.

 Three and a half hours of foodless flight from Moscow and you will find 
yourself landing in Vorkuta, my candidate for the least friendly place on earth.

I don't want to be unkind to the 180,000 people who still eke out a living in 
the former Gulag mining town carved from the permafrost. But I would be 
prepared to bet that 179,999 would be on the plane out if they could afford the 
fare.

The exception is the KGB guard at the airport terminal who still derives 
evident satisfaction from perusing each stamp on your passport, and every line 
of your three-page visa. He behaves as if he is unaware that the town has been 
"open" to foreigners for about a decade.

And yet, as I was to discover, it's not getting into Vorkuta that is the 
problem, but getting back out again.

Vorkuta only exists because a demonic dictator called Stalin put it there, 
creating a hard labour camp which killed up to half a million people. Their 
graves are marked by wooden crosses, upon which only numbers and letters 
appear. A-Gl, A-53, A-79. Many of the crosspieces have fallen off, leaving only 
wooden stumps shivering in the wind. Officially the graveyards are found beside 
the mines, but in reality the whole city is built on the bones of Stalin's 
victims. They are under the railway, under the streets, under the buildings, in 
the fields.

Founded 67 degrees north of the equator, Vorkuta is not a place where people 
should be asked to live. Last winter temperatures reached -50C: cold enough to 
turn cars into frozen blocks of metal. Winter lasts for eight months a year 
here, although in fairness the weather isn't always that bad: the temperature 
has been known to reach a balmy -15C in May.

On last inspection, the city boasted one hotel which managed to feel 
cavernously empty while simultaneously being fully booked. Boris Yeltsin's 
bodyguards - I was there to cover an election campaign - weren't in a party 
mood. By my calculation, they appeared to require one floor each. The old 
communist neon slogans, praising the miners of Vorkutaugol (Vorkuta coal) for 
their record breaking production, hung unlit from one of the tallest buildings 
on Lenin Street.

 It was not long after El Presidente himself had left that my gaze turned 
longingly to the Tupolev still parked at the end of the main street.

 The flight out was overbooked. I presented myself at the kiosk and 
confidently placed my ticket down on the worn ledge. The oxygenated blonde on 
the other side of the glass counter was unimpressed and kept examining her 
cracked purple nails. Nothing moved her. Accreditations, business cards, the 
ceaseless patter of how if the president had moved on, we journalists needed to 
move on with him. As the Tupolev started its engines up, a weekend in Vorkuta 
loomed.

 I had a brainwave. I stopped behaving like a preposterous, overblown 
westerner and started bleating, pleading, begging. I was, after all, just 
another of life's supplicants. Out came the photographs of my baby twin sons. 
Suddenly it was their birthday. Look, I had already bought their presents, I 
said, pointing to the bag which contained a battered laptop wrapped in the 
day's papers. Who would give them their presents if I was stuck in Vorkuta?

The ice-maiden began to thaw. She sighed. She too was a parent, with children 
living far away. Out came her family snaps. Her hand moved reluctantly and ever 
so slowly over to the thumbed wad of boarding passes. I began praying. Five 
minutes later I was back on the Tupolev, listening with pleasure to the party 
going on in the pilot's cabin. A tune came into my head as we lurched into the 
Arctic cloud. Arrivederci Vorkuta.

Â· David Hearst is assistant foreign editor of the Guardian
 