
Two moose were recently discovered frozen in battle and encased in ice near a 
remote village on Alaska’s unforgiving western coast.

Brad Webster, a middle school social studies and science teacher in 
Unalakleet, captured images of the huge animals poking through the ice as they 
lay on their sides with antlers apparently locked together.

He had taken a friend who recently moved to the village for a walk on 2 
November near a frozen slough at Covenant Bible camp, where Webster volunteers 
as a camp steward.

Moose on the loose have Alaskans documenting their fun around town
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/02/moose-birth-anchorage-alaska-wildlife-news>
“That’s when we saw it,” he said in a phone interview Friday. He initially 
thought it was just one moose that had been shot but when he got a closer look, 
he saw the second moose.

It took him a moment to realize what he was seeing, he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Falaska-frozen-moose-fighting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F619b944ad24e976ade031f97a9e075e27808e8ec%2F0_225_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frozen%20pair%20of%20fighting%20moose%20discovered%20in%20remote%20Alaska%20village&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Falaska-frozen-moose-fighting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frozen%20pair%20of%20fighting%20moose%20discovered%20in%20remote%20Alaska%20village&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Falaska-frozen-moose-fighting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F619b944ad24e976ade031f97a9e075e27808e8ec%2F0_225_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Moose antlers are visible in the snow. Photograph: Jeff Erickson/AP 
It was the end of moose rutting season, and the animals were probably fighting 
over a female moose. Webster speculates that one of the animals was wounded by 
the other animal’s antlers, and perhaps died as their antlers were caught 
together, dragging the rival down with it.

“It was a very interesting experience,” Webster said of the discovery.

On the way back to Unalakleet, he and his friend kept thinking about it and 
saying, “We really saw that,” in amazement, Webster recalled.

Jeff Erickson, student activities director of Bering Strait school district in 
Unalakleet, also captured the images when he went to check out the scene a 
couple days later with Webster.

Erickson grew up in the area and has hunted for 50 years but has never seen 
anything like this, “frozen in time”, he said in an email to the Associated 
Press.

“It was such a surreal sight – so serene and quiet, but a stark vision of how 
brutally harsh life can be,” he wrote.

Webster, Erickson and a few others went back later and removed the animals 
from about 8in of ice covering open water, recovering some of the spoiled meat 
for dog food and trapping bait. Webster said the meat was left at the site for 
anyone wanting it.

They took the heads, which are still frozen and being kept for now in 
Webster’s yard. The plan is to clean them out for mounting as bleached skulls 
at the Bible camp.
 