
A volatile trading session ended with leading shares edging higher after three 
days of decline.

Poor manufacturing figures from China overnight renewed fears of a slowdown in 
the country's economy, but were outweighed by better than expected results from
Apple, helping to push shares higher in early trading. Positive manufacturing 
and service surveys from the eurozone helped the upbeat mood, but disappointing 
results from Caterpillar in the afternoon took some of the shine off shares. 
The US construction equipment group cut its full earnings forecast, partly 
blaming a fall in demand from the mining industry.

With vague talk of a possible downgrade of Germany's credit rating - which so 
far has come to nothing - theFTSE 100 finished up 22.99 points at 6620.43 after 
earlier climbing as high as 6662, its best level since May.

A dip in the gold and silver price hit precious metal miners, with Randgold 
Resources down 108p at £47.37, Fresnillo falling 22p to £10.89 and B 3.7p lower 
at 113.1p.

Apple's better than expected results overnight  
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2013/jul/23/apple-profits-second-quarter-iphone-sales>
showing rising iPhone sales initially gave a lift to the UK technology sector, 
withArm also boosted by news of a better than expected 30% rise in adjusted 
second quarter profit to £86.6m. But later profit taking saw the chip designer 
close 9.5p lower at 888.5p.

Meanwhile Imagination Technologies, hit on Tuesday after it was left out of a 
Samsung product in favour of Arm 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/marketforceslive/2013/jul/23/imagination-technologies-arm-samsung-apple>
, recovered 3.9p to 254.6p following the figures from Apple, a key customer.

EasyJet led the FTSE 100 risers, up 49p to £13.85. The airline fell on Tuesday 
on fears that the UK heatwave could hit last minute bookings 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/marketforceslive/2013/jul/23/easyjet-heatwave-ftse-lower-us-manufacturing>
. But its third quarter results showed a 10.5% rise in revenues and it said it 
expected full year profits of between £450m and £480m, assuming no significant 
disruption, compared to estimates of £433m.

Elsewhere Tate and Lyle added 29.5p to 853p after it said a cold spring in the 
US hit its bulk ingredients business but it still expected to meet full year 
forecasts.

Kingfisher climbed 11.8p to 396.6p as the B&Q owner said it was in line to 
meet expectations for its first half figures, as the hot weather encouraged 
consumers to snap up barbeques, hosepipes and garden furniture.

Among the mid-caps TalkTalk Telecom fell 6.6p to 245.4p after its latest 
update, while defence groupChemring lost 5.8p to 300.3p after its shares went 
ex-dividend.

National Express accelerated 9p to 254.5p despite a drop in profits.

The transport group said first half profits fell by 12% to £71.8m following 
the ending of its East Anglia rail service in 2012, the UK coalition's 
austerity cuts hitting concessions and rising fuel costs.

But the figures were better than expected and it won £1.7bn worth of contracts 
in the UK, Germany, Tangiers and the US during the six months.

On the rail front it has seen its c2c franchise extended until September 2014, 
and plans to bid for the full Essex Thameside tender due later this year, while 
it has already been shortlisted for the Crossrail service.

Online grocer Ocado - a strong market recently - slipped 5p to 320p as Exane 
BNP Paribas cut its rating from outperform to neutral with a 300p price target.

Finally Hibu, the Yellow Pages business, fell 22% to just 0.17p as investors 
awaited news of a proposed refinancing which could leave shareholders with 
nothing.
 