
Could Intel be about to spend £10bn on Arm? That was the speculation in the 
markets on Monday: after Hewlett Packard spent £7bn on Autonomy, the gossip was 
that another promising Cambridge technology group was set to fall into American 
hands.

The speculation that Arm might be a target for Intel has reared its head 
before. Monday's rumour was that the bid would be pitched at £7.50-a-share, and 
that an announcement could come within 24 hours. The rationale for a bid has 
always been that Intel wants Arm's smartphone expertise.

If a bid at that level did materialise, Intel would be paying a hefty price - 
Arm's pre-tax profits are expected to be just short of £200m this year, 
implying a valuation of 50 times expected earnings. Skeptical investors sat on 
their hands on Monday, with Arm shares rising 0.4% to close at 492p.

Arm underperformed a surprisingly buoyant market. The FTSE 100 closed 54 
points, or 1% up. Oil majors contributed the bulk of the increase as investors 
hoped for a post-Gaddafi bounce.

Brokers benefitted from a positive trading statement from IG. Market 
volatility may have given the group a 19% boost in revenues, it said. 
Inter-dealer brokerIcap rose 3.8% to 425p on the news, while Tullett Prebon was 
up 1.7% to 336p.IG <https://www.theguardian.com/business/iggroupholdings> 
itself rose 4% to 409p.

Gulfsands Petroleum was a big faller among the smaller caps. The oil group has 
significant operations in Syria, and the prospect of tougher EU sanctions on 
the country following recent unrest prompted investors to take fright. The 
shares fell 20% to close at 143p.

Banks did not join in the rally, suggesting that fears of a profits-destroying 
recession had not receded.Royal Bank of Scotland was the biggest faller on the 
FTSE 100, falling 5.3% to finish at 19.7p.Lloyds Banking Group was off 2.9% at 
27.6p, andBarclays ended 2.8% lower at 146p.

Lloyd's of London insurer Amlin fell 3.8% after revealing a £192m pre-tax loss 
caused by claims from the Japanese earthquake and other natural disasters.

Micro Focus was down 3.4% after confirming suggestions that bid interest had 
died off. Private equity groups Bain and Advent International had been sizing 
the IT group up.

Gold miners got another boost after Citigroup raised its forecast for the 
precious metal, to $1,650 an ounce in 2012 from $1,325. Gold is currently 
trading well above that - reaching $1,895 on Monday.Randgold Resources was the 
main beneficiary of the rising forecast, and price, up 3.9%. Its shares, which 
were trading for just over £1 ten years ago, closed on Monday at £68.70.
 