
As the market ended the week on a downbeat note, one share to sparkle was 
mining groupAnglo American.

The company's first half profits fell 10% to $2.9bn, in line with analyst 
forecasts, and helped by a good performance from its De Beers subsidiary, which 
accounts for around a sixth of the group's earnings. The figures came despite 
strikes at its platinum subsidiary in South Africa, and it repeated it would 
dispose of unwanted assets. Analysts at Liberum repeated their sell rating but 
said the results were decent:
 Strong result from diamonds at $765m, 30% higher than consensus was offset by 
weaker results elsewhere (particularly platinum). On the bottom line it was an 
8% beat, due to a much lower effective tax rate of 28.2% versus estimated 31.0% 
and 34.0% in the prior period. A large factor of the lower rate is the 
incorporation of De Beers, whose tax arrangements with the Botswana government 
are not captured in the rate. 
Yuen Low at Shore Capital said:
 Anglo reported what we felt were reasonably good first half 2014 interim 
results (particularly given the strikes at Anglo American Platinum), with 
operating profits and net income slightly ahead of our expectations (and that 
of consensus).

Anglo emphasised that divestments of a number assets (notably the Rustenburg, 
Union and Pandora platinum group metal assets) would be made in order to 
"redeploy the capital" to "support [Anglo's] drive for higher returns". The 
Minas Rio white elephant in Brazil doesn't appear to be on the chopping block; 
the project is expected to be completed within the budgeted total capital cost 
of $8.8bn and on-track for first shipment by end 2014. 
Anglo ended 54.5p higher at 1639.5p. Other miners to please with their updates 
includedLonmin, up 11.3p at 241p, and African Barrick Gold, which added 5.8p to 
259.8p.

Elsewhere Royal Bank of Scotland roared ahead 35.4p to 364.2p after forecast 
beating results, released ahead of schedule. RivalBarclays was 3.55p better at 
218.05p andLloyds Banking Group was lifted 0.86p to 74.81p.

But this was not enough to end the week on a positive note. The FTSE 100 
finished 29.91 points lower at 6791.55, not helped by weakness in US markets 
following disappointing results from key companies like Amazon, which fell 11% 
in early trading.

Over the week the leading index added around 42 points as geopolitical 
concerns began to ease, although uncertainty over sanctions against Russia over 
Ukraine and the continuing violence in Gaza meant investors had a volatile time 
of it. Jasper Lawler, market analyst at CMC Markets UK, said:
 European stocks have a faced numerous headwinds this week, not least the 
repercussions of the downing of MH17 purportedly by pro-Russian separatists in 
Eastern Ukraine and the ongoing human tragedy of Israel's invasion of Gaza. 
Nonetheless the FTSE 100 [closed] the week higher while the German Dax [ended] 
the week near on flat.

This week's geopolitical tensions proved as short-lived as those from the 
annexation of Crimea as well as the emergence of the ISIS insurgents in Iraq.

Overall, the bull market is being supported by very accommodative central 
banks including in the UK and US where the economies appear to be staging 
decent economic recoveries and in China which is growing by 7.5% per annum. 
Among the other risers, J Sainsbury added 3.2p to 320.2p on a report 
<http://www.thisismoney.co.uk/money/markets/article-2704645/MARKET-REPORT-Qatar-weighs-new-Sainsbury-swoop.html?ito=feeds-newsxml>
 that the Qataris, holders of a near 26% stake as the legacy of a failed bid in 
2007, could be interested in taking another tilt at the supermarket group.

Vodafone was up 4.2p at 202.05p after it confirmed its outlook for the year 
despite a dip in first quarter revenue, thanks to a slowdown in Spain and South 
Africa.

But BSkyB dropped 50.5p to 874.5p on news of the £4.9bn purchase of Rupert 
Murdoch's pay-TV businesses in Germany and Italy. It helped pay for the deal 
with a placing of 156m shares at 870p each to raise £1.35bn.

Meanwhile GlaxoSmithKline fell 46.5p to £14.23 as UBS cut its recommendation 
from neutral to sell and its price target from £15 to £13.80 in the wake of the 
pharmaceutical group's disappointing results and questioned whether the 
dividend was sustainable.

United Utilities dipped 10p to 894p after an in line trading statement. In a 
hold note analyst Angelos Anastasiou at Whitman Howard said:
 There do not appear to be any surprises in this, with the trading update 
stating that "current trading is in line with the group's expectations". To 
reiterate, the outcome of the water price control review remains of greater 
interest, with United now awaiting its draft determination on 29 August, and we 
would still anticipate a reasonable final outcome here. The water subsector's 
takeover attractions remain over the medium term, but United has had a very 
strong run this year, and it is up 35% year to date.

Leading the mid-cap index were Balfour Beatty, 21p better at 253.1p, and 
Carillion, up 24.3p to 362.8p, after the two construction groups confirmed 
reports they were in merger talks.

Finally Greenko, a green energy company with wind and hydro assets, slipped 2p 
to 166p despite successfully issuing a $550m bond, believed to be the largest 
done by an Aim company. It was backed by institutional investors in the US, 
Asia and Europe, and should save the company around $15m a year in interest 
payments.
 