
A rare positive surprise from the US jobs market and more bid talk helped the 
FTSE 100 end the week on a high note as worries about a dip back into global 
recession receded.

M&A chatter around various London-listed firms and news that the US economy 
shed far fewer jobs than expected in August 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/business/2010/sep/03/markets-rally-america-unemployment-figures>
helped the bluechip index add 57.1 points, or 1.1%, to 5428.2 - its highest 
close in three and a half months.

Aggreko, the temporary power supplier behind the football world cup, Vancouver 
winter olympics and Glastonbury festival, was the top riser on the back of 
positive broker comment and word in the market that it had become an attractive 
buyout target. The company declined to comment on reports that it may have 
caught the eye of of Swiss engineering group ABB but its shares still rose 79p, 
or 5.5%, to £15.15.

Software company Autonomy was also boosted by M&A talk and rose 59p, or 3.4%, 
to £17.75 andCable & Wireless Worldwide continued to climb following rumours 
earlier this week that American giant AT&T is considering a bid for the business
 <http://www.guardian.co.uk/global/marketforceslive/2010/sep/01/cablewireless>. 
The shares, which are set to drop out of the FTSE 100 in the latest reshuffle 
of the index next week, closed up 3.2p, or 4.5%, at 72.95p and rose more than 
10% over the course of the week.

Manufacturer Weir Group, set to join the bluechip index in the quarterly 
rejig, ended up 35p, or 2.8%, at £13.06 after Evolution Securities raised its 
price target on the shares to £14.50 from £14.00.

In the absence of much company news, broker comment also moved a clutch of 
insurers. Collins Stewart altered its recommendations on several stocks in the 
sector. Among them,Amlin fell 4.6p, or 1.1%, to 414.8p after it was moved to a 
"sell" from "hold" recommendation, while a cut to "hold" from "buy" forHiscox 
left it down 5.1p, or 1.4%, at 360.5p.

Elsewhere, Deutsche Bank made price target changes on a swathe of European 
telecoms companies. Among them,Vodafone rose 1.7p, or 1.1%, to 159p after 
analysts at the investment bank raised their price target on the shares to 200p 
from 190p.

Wm Morrison was headed the other way, however, ahead of new chief executive 
Dalton Philips presentation next week on where to take the business. The grocer 
ended down 1.7p, or 0.6%, at 289.3p, putting it among the day's biggest 
bluechip losers. Rival J Sainsbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/j-sainsbury> lost 1.7p, or 0.5%, to 
368.6p.

Among the midcaps, oil explorer Soco International was one of the biggest 
losers, down 40p, or 8.4%, at 436.6p after it disappointed investors with news 
that a well being drilled in Democratic Republic of Congo had been abandoned. 
Analysts at RBS, however, said the dip could provide a good buying opportunity. 
It said Soco's findings overall at the site provided "encouragement for the 
future".

Finally, Aqua Bounty, the company that has genetically engineered salmon to 
grow twice as fast as normal, leapt after its fish were deemed safe to eat by 
US regulators. It closed up 3.25p, or 26%, at 15.75p.
 