
Leading shares are searching for direction at the start of the new trading 
week, butRoyal Mail has risen sharply after positive comments about last week’s 
results.

Its shares are up 17.6p or 3.5% to 509.5p as analysts at RBC moved their 
recommendation from underperform to sector perform and lifted their target 
price from 445p to 525p. Meanwhile Cantor Fitzgerald issued a buy note with a 
forecast raised from 530p to 550p. Cantor’s Robin Byde said:

Royal Mail’s full year update was encouraging. Revenue and operating profits 
were up year on year and ahead of consensus estimates. European parcels 
continue to drive growth with cost cutting and productivity gains helping to 
protect margins in UK letters. Following the update, our forecast changes are 
minor. We expect parcels in the UK and Europe to drive the top-line and 
restructuring and productivity gains to support the bottom-line. Even with 
forecast hefty capex, free cash should be healthy.Royal Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> faces potentially tough wage 
and pension negotiations this year but the risks are probably overstated. The 
stock is good value, trading on a calendar 2016 estimated PE discount of 16% to 
the sector. Our forecast dividend yield is 4.8%.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently up 12.19 points at 6178.51, recovering from 
an initial fall.

Mining shares are under pressure once more after weak manufacturing and trade 
data from Japan, and the continuing rise in the dollar.Anglo American is down 
17.6p at 582.7p whileBHP Billiton has lost 13.8p to 804.1p.

Inmarsat continues to decline following its recent disappointing update, down 
20.5p at 734.5p as it faces the prospect of being relegated from the FTSE 100 
at next week’s quarterly reshuffle. At the same time Morgan Stanley has moved 
from equal weight to overweight and slashed its price target from £13.50 to 
800p:

We lower earnings per share forecasts by 18-22% for 2017-2018, assume the 2018 
guidance is dropped, and move to equal weight.

Among the mid-caps Sports Direct International - which lost its place in the 
leading index at the last reorganisation - is down 19.9p at 349.1p as Goldman 
Sachs cut from buy to neutral.
 