
Leading shares have fallen to their lowest level for twelve weeks - since the 
UK Budget in March - on growing worries about the state of the global economy.

A speech by Ben Bernanke, the chairman of the US Federal Reserve, started the 
rot after he made cautious comments about the US recovery and gave no 
indication of further quantitative easing - QE3 - once the current programme 
ends. Moody's warning of a threat to the UK's Triple A credit rating - albeit 
the agency said nothing new - also helped to unnerve investors. So theFTSE 100 
fell 55.76 points to 5808.89, providing more ammunition to those analysts who 
advise selling in May and going away.

Mining companies were among the leading fallers, with Antofagasta down 64p at 
£12.26 andVedanta Resources 54p lower at £20.26. But banks moved higher as 
their bosses appeared before the Treasury select committee, withLloyds Banking 
Group 1.075p better at 48.68p.

Arm continued a recent decline, down 8.5p at 565.5p on talk that Apple would 
move from the company's chip designs to rival Intel. ButRoyal Dutch Shell B 
shares added 3.5p to £21.36 as Opec decided not to increase oil production.

Among the mid-caps Punch Taverns rose 4.75p to 74.95p after an upbeat trading 
statement and confirmation its proposed demerger was on course to be completed 
by the end of this summer.

But African Barrick Gold slumped 35p to 415p after reports of a supertax to be 
imposed by the government of Tanzania, where the company has four mines.

IT group Misys added 9.2p to 388p as investors hoped that having been pared 
down to two divisions, banking and capital markets, it could be a takeover 
target. US groups such as Sungard, FIS and Fiserv could be interested, 
according to analyst Milan Radia at Jefferies, as could Indian vendors such as 
Infosys or TCS. HCL or Temenos are also names being mentioned, so the number of 
possible predators does seem to indicate a deal may take place.

Online shopping phenomenon Asos added 57p to £23.74 as Goldman Sachs put an 
heroic £35 price target on the business, supposed based on the prospects for 
the business in China. It said:
 We believe that successful strategy execution in China by Asos and [US rival] 
Yooz could result in upside potential to our previous analysis based on online 
penetration, addressable market and spend per user assumptions in China for 
both companies.

Lower down the market Servoca added 0.25p to 8.25p as its growing outsourcing 
business - in particular domiciliary care - made up for a fall in its 
recruitment division. Revenues for the half year were flat at £25m with profits 
edging down from £950,000 to £800,000. The company expects to meet full year 
expectations - house broker FinnCap is going for £2m pretax profit - but warned 
of some uncertainty over its educational business, which is highly dependent on 
the September start of the school year. Servoca is looking for bolt on 
acquisitions in domiciliary care, while disposals - especially in healthcare 
recruitment - are also on the cards.

Desire Petroleum added 2.5p to 23.5p on vague talk of a 50p a share offer, 
perhaps from Falklands rivalRockhopper Exploration, down 6p at 270.75p.
 