
Leading shares are pausing for breath after China’s economy grew in line with 
expectations, and ahead of the final US presidential debate.

Disappointing results from Travis Perkins and Reckitt Benckiser have helped 
undermine any gains the market might have been contemplating, so theFTSE 100 is 
down 15.50 points at 6984.56.Unemployment and average earnings figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/19/markets-uk-unemployment-wage-growth-brexit-report-business-live?page=with:block-58072eefe4b005f21833af24#block-58072eefe4b005f21833af24>
 have had little impact so far.

Travis Perkins is the biggest FTSE 100 faller, down just over 5% at £14.10 as t
he builders merchants group warned on 2016 profits and said it would close 30 
branches putting 600 jobs at risk. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/19/travis-perkins-close-branches-jobs-risk-wickes>

But Reckitt is close behind, falling 250p to £70.77. The Dettol to Nurofen to 
Durex business reported a bigger than expected slowdown in third quarter like 
for like sales growth, up just 2% compared to expectations of a 2.8% rise. 
Including currency movements reported sales rose 17% as the slump in the pound 
boosted overseas revenues.

But it reported disappointing sales in Europe and North America, especially 
for new Scholl products, and continuing weakness in Russia. Its Korean business 
fell back after its handling of a scandal involving the death of 92 people.

The company said if the performance in the fourth quarter was the same as the 
third, it would not make its full year targets. It would not comment on the 
impact of sterling’s fall on pricing in the UK. George Salmon, equity analyst 
at Hargreaves Lansdown, said:

The group’s image has been seriously damaged in Korea after it recently 
accepted a RB product was responsible for spate of fatal lung problems. The 
inevitable slowdown there was enough to dent group sales. Having already set 
aside £300m for the issue, investors will hope that there are no further 
charges to come in relation to the tragic episode.

Declining sales in Korea might have been expected, but today’s results also 
confirm weaker trends in other areas. While the disappointing performance from 
the latest Scholl products may not be the end of the world, the group will hope 
for improvements in the future.

But Burberry is 31p better at £14.34 after positive analyst comment after its 
falls after Tuesday’s update. Barclays raised its target price from £13.50 to 
£14.50, saying:

Expectations were running high coming into the figures following LVMH results 
last week - so in line figures have been met with some disappointment with the 
stock down high single-digits. We have raised both the EPS and price target by 
7% based on 19 times 2017 calendar PE.

UBS was also positive, issuing a buy note:

Although expectations on Burberry had been high into the quarter, we believe 
that the share price weakness (-7%) was an overreaction given in line figures 
and no change to consensus pretax profit excluding foreign exchange. Our buy 
rating onBurberry <https://www.theguardian.com/business/burberrygroup> is based 
on our view that the share price does not reflect the true value of the retail 
productivity improvements and cost savings plan laid out at the strategy update 
on 18th May.

We believe that the return to positive like for like of +2% in the second 
quarter should give confidence in this longer term potential. Additionally we 
were positively surprised that cost control measures will now come in above 
expectations for both the full year and the first half so offsetting the 
downgrade in wholesale guidance.

Mining companies are also generally higher after the Chinese GDP figures 
reassured investors about the country’s economic outlook.Anglo American has 
added 25.5p to £10.55 andRio Tinto has risen 2p to 2617.5p. But BHP Billiton 
has slipped 5p to £12.07 as it met analysts expectations for iron ore and 
petroleum production, but disappointed on coal.

Among the mid-caps Apple-supplier Laird has slumped nearly 50% to 160.8p after 
a shock profit warning. Analyst Nick James at Numis said:

Laird <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lairdgroup> has warned that 2016 
profit will be around 36% short of our expectations, with pretax profit now 
expected to be around £50m (Num £77m). This is despite an incremental foreign 
exchange tailwind of around £5m to pretax profit since we cut estimates at the 
interims.

The huge shortfall is attributed to the Performance Materials division, where 
volumes, pricing and margins at Apple appear to be well short of expectations. 
Given recent Apple supply chain data is suggesting solid end demand for 
iPhone7, the issues appear to be Laird specific.

We cut earnings per share by 36% in 2016 to 14.3p from 22.2p and by 39% in 
2017 to 15.5p from 25.5p. Sentiment and confidence in forecasts will clearly be 
significantly dented and we place recommendation under review. Net debt should 
still be within covenants at year end (Num 3.2 times versus covenant at 3.5 
times), although the balance sheet also now comes into focus.
 