
The FTSE <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ftse> 100 closed just the right 
side of the 4000-point mark today as it recorded its fifth successive day of 
decline.

The blue-chip index spent much of the day beneath the psychologically 
important level amid a sense of pervasive gloom about the economy.

It closed down 27.30 points at 4006.83, its lowest point since 21 November.

Financial companies, energy groups and property developers were among those 
sending the index lower.

Banks slipped as investors weighed up how much they would have to pay in fees 
for putting toxic assets into the government's insurance scheme.

Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>, which is 
70%-owned by the government and may have to pay more than £5bn to participate 
in the scheme, was the FTSE 100's biggest faller, sliding nearly 13% or 2.6p to 
18.1p.

Lloyds, in which the government holds a 43% stake, slipped 0.7p to 50.8p, while
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> dropped 3.3p to 93.3p.

Asia-focused bank Standard Chartered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered> closed the day 20p off 
at 690p, although HSBC ended the day in positive territory, up 9.5p to 504p.

The insurers were also ailing, chief among them Legal and General 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/legalandgeneralgroup>, down nearly 12% or 
5.3p at 40p.

The company's announcement yesterday that it had doubled its credit default 
reserves appeared not to have calmed investors' nerves about its funding 
arrangements.

Other insurance groups were also down, with Prudential 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/prudential> off 18.5p at 261p, Aviva 
losing 2.75p to 304.25p and Amlin down 5.25p to 355p.

However, the motor insurance specialist Admiral lifted 34.5p to 874.5p, while 
Standard Life <https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardlife> rose 2.1p to 
184.6p

The property sector sagged again on fears that too many companies are 
scrambling for fresh capital at the same time.

Today it was the turn of the FTSE 250 companies Brixton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/brixton> and Segro to reveal that they 
could tap investors for cash to shore up their finances.

Brixton shares, which plunged 28% yesterday, slid another 14% or 6.75p to 
41.25p after it said its options included an equity raising.

Berkshire-based Segro <https://www.theguardian.com/business/segro> shed 1.25p 
to 108.75p after it said it was "assessing all financing options including 
equity issuance" but had yet to make a decision.

The two groups that have already embarked on rights issues – Hammerson and 
British Land <https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishlandcompany> – both 
lost further ground, the former down 9.25p at 342p and the latter slipping 
10.5p to 426.25p.

And Land Securities <https://www.theguardian.com/business/land-securities>, 
which said on Monday it was considering a rights issue, edged down 0.5p to 568p.

However, Liberty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/libertyinternational> bucked the negative 
trend on rumours that it could avoid going down the same route as its peers by 
spinning off its non-retail division and opting for a share placing with 
selected investors such as the government of Singapore or the family of founder 
Sir Donald Gordon.

Liberty shares rose 19.25p to close at 365.25p.

Shares in the brokerage Numis fell 9.5p to 125.5p as it announced that Michael 
Spencer, the Conservative Party treasurer, would step down as its chairman and 
that IPGL, the company controlled by Spencer and his family, had sold its 12.2% 
stake.

Spencer will carry on in the job until a successor is found, Numis said.

 