
The run on leading shares continues, with the FTSE 100 now down more than 4% 
on the back of further declines among the banks afterHSBC's Â£12.5bn cash call.

Insurers are also weaker, following confirmation of a near $62bn quarterly 
loss by struggling US business AIG. The company has negotiated a new bail-out 
from the government, which is intended to give it more flexibility.

Back in the UK, the leading index is now 164.72 points lower at 3665.37, with 
HSBC <https://www.theguardian.com/business/hsbcholdings> accounting for around 
46 points of the decline.

This is virtually the intra-day level reached in October, and sees the index 
well on course for a new six year low. In November it closed at 3780.96, its 
worse performance since the eve of the Iraq war in March 2003 when it dropped 
to 3287.

More gloom on UK manufacturing has not helped, with the EEF predicting 140,000 
job losses and the purchasing managers index for February close to its record 
low of November. The news puts more pressure on the Bank of England, which 
meets this Thursday, to cut interest rates further and begin quantitative 
easing. On top of that mortgage applications continue to fall sharply. Later 
this week come US non-farm payroll figures, which could cause yet more mayhem.

As for the banks, HSBC has slumped 98.75p to 392.5p - a 20% decline - despite 
a generally kind reception to its cash call from analysts.Lloyds Banking Group, 
which is still negotiating terms of its participation in the government's 
insurance scheme, is down 5.5p at 52.8p. Asia-focussed bankStandard Chartered, 
undermined by HSBC's poor Hong Kong results, is down 70p at 594p.

Legal & General has lost 3.3p to 36.9p while Prudential - which has been 
tipped as a potential buyer of AIG's Asian business - is 20.25p lower at 
260.25p.

Among the few bright spots in the leading index was Amlin - bucking the 
downtrend trend in insurers. Shares in the Lloyds underwriter are up 10p to 
353p after its profits came in line with expectations and it issued a 
relatively upbeat outlook statement.

Publisher Pearson was also wanted after its results, up 1p to 660.5p.
 