
After the week’s gains so far, leading shares are taking a breather.

Financial shares are among the fallers following lower than expected quarterly 
earnings from US payments technology group Verifone. The news has sentWorldpay 
down 4.8p to 275.6p, while banks are under pressure withRoyal Bank of Scotland 
4.5p lower at 225.2p and Barclays falling 2.25p to 178p.

Overall the FTSE 100 is currently down 7.42 points at 6277.11, despite better 
than expected UK manufacturing and industrial production figures.

Mining shares are edging higher despite weak Chinese trade data, with Glencore 
up 3.05p at 143.05p andAnglo American adding 11.7p to 677.2p. Commodity 
companies are also benefiting from another rise in oil prices. Brent crude is 
up 0.12% at $51.5, helped by a weaker dollar, a larger than expected fall in US 
inventories and worries about militant attacks on pipelines in Nigeria.

So Royal Dutch Shell B shares are up 28p at 1792.5p but travel companies are 
lower on concerns about dearer fuel costs. British Airways owner International 
Airlineshas dipped 0.5p to 521p and easyJet is down 16p at £15.05.

Sainsbury has reversed earlier gains following its latest update 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/08/sainsburys-sales-fall-food-price-deflation>
 and is now down 3.4p at 243.3p, whileWH Smith has lost 53p to £16.87 after 
reporting flat like for like sales in the 14 weeks to the start of June. 
Analysts at Investec said:

Another robust trading performance from WH Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/whsmith> with the the third quarter 
update (14 weeks to 4 June) in line with expectations. Travel has good momentum 
ahead of its key summer trading period and High Street continues to be tightly 
managed. No change to forecasts expected. Despite strong, defensive cash 
generation, we see valuation (2017 estimated PE 16.3 times) up with short-term 
earnings momentum and it is difficult to see material upside from here without 
M&A activity within Travel. We maintain our hold recommendation.

But Coca-Cola Hellenic Bottling is 28p better at £14.38 after Credit Suisse 
recently raised its target price from £14.80 to £15 after what the bank called 
an upbeat investor day.
 