
Leading shares pushed past a new five year high before falling back as Wall 
Street fell in early trading.

The FTSE 100 climbed as high as 6384, its best level since January 2008. But 
it closed at 6359.11, up 20.73 on the day. But that was not a bad performance 
given that more than 17 points was wiped off the index due to a number of major 
companies going ex-dividend.

One reason for the gain was the weakness in sterling, hit by the Bank of 
England cutting its growth forecasts. Analysts anticipated further quantitative 
easing and inflationary pressures, which could continue to undermine sterling. 
The pound hit a fresh low against the dollar of $1.5533, and has lost 4% 
against the US currency and 6% against the euro so far this year. Michael 
Hewson, senior market analyst at CMC Markets, said:
 These recent gains [by the FTSE 100] have no doubt been helped by the current 
weakness in sterling as investors start to look at the UK index through the 
same lens as the weak yen, strong Nikkei trade, helped by the number of 
companies in the UK index who generate the majority of their earnings in US 
dollars. 
Miners benefited from that principle, with Eurasian Natural Resources 
Corporation up 11.9p at 409.6p and Xstrata adding 28.5p to 1183.5p.

Tullow Oil gushed up 80p to £12.60 after full year profits of $1.1bn, up 4%, 
came in as expected and the company made positive noises about the prospects 
for its Twiga South well in Kenya. It said tests there provided "the first 
potentially commercial flow rates achieved in Kenya."

Elsewhere Reckitt Benckiser rose 56p to £44.19 after it benefited from a heavy 
cold and flu season in the US. The maker of Strepsils - as well as Cillit Bang, 
Durex and heroin substitute suboxone - said full year operating profits climbed 
6% to £2.57bn.

Chief executive Rakesh Kapoor said the company was targetting revenue growth 
of between 5% and 6% in 2013 as it increasingly moved its focus to fast growing 
emerging markets.

Among those shares quoted without the right to the dividend was AstraZeneca, 
down 68.5p at £29.50.

But UBS repeated its buy recommendation on the pharmaceutical business:
 The market recently gained visibility on the costs associated with Astra's 
desire to "invest for long-term growth". We believe the next step of the story 
may involve management communication on the 21 March strategy day of the 
outputs of the invested costs. Better visibility we think could upwardly bias 
consensus long-term estimates.


If the company successfully executed its opportunities for heart drug 
Brilinta, its diabetes joint venture, emerging markets and Japan, UBS said its 
shares could re-rate by 25% to 30%.

Others going ex-div were Royal Dutch Shell - whose B shares fell 29p to £21.86 
- BP, down 6.45p to 453.6p, and Sage, 9.9p lower at 333.3p.

Petrofac put on 33p to £16.55 as UBS raised its recommendation on the energy 
services business. The bank said:
 We think Petrofac has a solid business model within the onshore engineering 
and construction end market. While [rival] Saipem's warning may have cast doubt 
on the business model, we think that Petrofac's portfolio of projects is 
profitable and the order intake momentum is strong and hence we upgrade the 
stock to buy [from neutral].


CRH climbed 64p to £14.20 after Goldman edged up its price target on the 
building materials group from £16 to £16.50. Meanwhile Blackrock announced it 
had bought around 7m shares to take its stake to 5%.

But Vodafone fell 1.85p to 171.65p following a report in Germany's Manager 
magazine <http://www.manager-magazin.de/unternehmen/it/0,2828,883068,00.html> 
that it was interested in a £5bn-plus takeover of Kabel Deutschland. Analysts 
at Espirito Santo said:
 We can see the strategic rationale for such a transaction and believe the 
potential for synergies would be material in terms of both revenue benefits and 
cost savings. We can also understand why Vodafone could potentially be looking 
at such a deal now. Vodafone has recently missed out on the opportunity to 
acquire cable assets in UK and Portugal, the threat of cable operators entering 
mobile markets has become more evident given Telenet's gains in Belgium, and 
Liberty Global, its likely rival for the asset, has just made its move for 
Virgin Media.

News that their proposed merger had been referred to the competition 
commission sentBritvic 40p lower to 420p and Irn Bru maker AG Barr down 39.5p 
to 515.5p.

African Barrick Gold dropped 39p to 302p after it reported a 40% decline in 
full year earnings to $330m, with a 9% fall in production. It forecast 2013's 
production could fall another 14%. A possible takeover by China National Gold 
came to nothing in January. Kate Craig at Liberum Capital issued a sell note, 
saying:
 Weak 2012 results [showed] a 9% earnings miss on Liberum numbers (8% miss 
consensus), 2013 guidance is even worse than expected at 540,000-600,000 ounces 
per annum versus Liberum [forecast of] 636,000 ounces. We had already brought 
down our numbers substantially (last year's guidance was 675,000-725,000 
ounces, they only achieved 626,000.) 
Lower down the market Nasstar, a specialist in cloud computing services, rose 
2% to 12.75p added another 80 subscribers to its platform, though one of its 
partners, ihotdesk Limited.

Finally Crest Nicholson returned to the stock market five years after the 
upmarket housebuilder was taken private at the peak of the property cycle,

In the biggest flotation so far this year and the largest since Direct Line, 
the company priced its shares at 220p, the top end of its last indicated range. 
They closed up 35p at 255p.
 