
On a recent visit to a Curzon cinema in London I sat (lay, really) on a 
steeply pitched chair that had been upholstered in red fur. Outside in the 
lobby, the snacks for sale included prosecco-laced ice lollies and popcorn 
flavoured with specific French cheeses; I chose a wedge of iced sponge cake 
that was on display under a cloche. Inside the screening room, I wasn’t the 
only one clacking tableware while we waited for the feature – Woody Allen’sCafé 
Society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/04/cafe-society-woody-allen-review-hollywood-jesse-eisenberg-kirsten-stewart>
– to start.

A pre-film advert played, promoting the Curzon’s app. Audiences were advised 
that, next time, they could simply stay at home and use their phones to stream 
selected newly released films direct to their TVs.Café Society had a 1930s 
setting, a jazz soundtrack, Allen’s usualWindsor font 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/apr/05/windsor-woody-allen-type> 
in the credits. But the preamble to it had been powerfully, pungently modern, 
illustrating the lavishing-up of many cinemas and the spread of home-streaming 
services, developments that have come to characterise movie‑watching in 2016.

As Allen’s film played I lay on the near-horizontal, watching it down my nose 
and trying not to fall asleep during the slow bits like an old man in front of 
the snooker – asking myself how we’d got here. To cinema seats resembling pool 
loungers. To phones that with the right software could call up hundreds of 
thousands of feature films. Just under a third of the UK population now streams 
films and this year sales of digitally streamed or downloaded movies 
outstripped sales of DVDs for the first time.

As traditional behaviour has changed, so has tradition: that well-grooved 
route for a movie, for instance, from cinema to DVD to telly, is now 
crisscrossed and complicated by internet-enabled detours. Last autumn, the 
independent British film45 Years  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/30/45-years-charlotte-rampling-tom-courtenay-review-mark-kermode>
was made available to stream on the same day it premiered in cinemas. And in 
this way it took a robust £1m at the UK box office.

Dozing in the screening of Café Society, expensively sugared and with a 
preposterous little garden of legroom to unfurl into, and now clued up to the 
option to skip the cinema entirely next time in favour of a stream, I thought 
about how that term “box office” and how it was more unhelpful, more 
figurative, than ever. How had we come to watch the way we watched?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f306a20bd99c08e359749a384226d02882d6ffb%2F314_34_1765_1059%2F1765.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f306a20bd99c08e359749a384226d02882d6ffb%2F314_34_1765_1059%2F1765.jpg>
 Rare gem? Sean Penn, right, in Woody Allen’s Sweet and Lowdown. Photograph: 
Colombia Tristar 
I went to see my first Woody Allen on the big screen in the summer of 2000. 
That was a real rite-of-passage outing – to seeSweet and Lowdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/jun/09/culture.reviews>, the director’s 
eccentric ode to Prohibition-era jazz musicians, starring Sean Penn and 
Samantha Morton. The choice was a friend’s: I had to be persuaded. I was 18 at 
the time but by no means finished negotiating the borderland between teenage 
and adult tastes and I still favoured films with bangs and airborne car crashes 
and orchestra-scored baddie kills. I could be persuaded to go outside the 
action genre, but drama usually had to mean time travel and comedy a steady 
rate of jokes about penises.Sweet and Lowdown, about a virtuoso guitarist 
called Emmet (Penn) and his laundress wife, Hattie (Morton), seemed a terrible 
prospect.

Inside the screening room, people were drinking wine. Wine!

We went, not to one of our usual city-size multiplexes in the retail parks of 
north London, or to the run-down three-screen Odeon in near-ish Muswell Hill, 
but to a cinema I’d never visited before – the Barbican in the City. I remember 
noting with alarm, taking in the Barbican’s lifts and cloakrooms, its muted, 
theatre-like best-behaviour crowd waiting in the lobby. I complained to my 
friend. Why didn’t the Barbican have nachos? Or the tarry yellow cheese liquid 
that wenton the nachos? Coke came in a glass and in what seemed a comically 
small measure. Inside the screening room, people were drinking wine. Wine!

Even to the regular Barbican crowd, back then, some of this must have seemed 
like outlier stuff, an unconventionally grown-up cinema experience, at least 
when compared with the bolshier, brighter nights out offered by the Odeons, 
ABCs and UCIs that then dominated. As Edward Humphrey, digital director at the 
British Film Institute, explained to me recently, the retail-park multiplexes 
haven’t really declined. (At the end of 2015 the UK had 4,046 screens in 751 
cinemas, a figure that was up, slightly, on the year before.) What has changed 
in the last decade or so is that the smaller, urban cinemas, in tandem with the 
public’s idea “of what constitutes a cinema”, have evolved. These cinemas, said 
Humphrey, had started explicitly selling “an evening out experience”.

Catharine Des Forges, director of the Independent Cinema Office, said this 
move towards “the boutique-y” was really a matter of survival. By the middle of 
the 00s, new forms of media were competing for people’s attention; cinema 
attendance began to dip. Certain venues, and in particular the smaller 
independent chains, could not reduce ticket prices and still turn a profit so 
they tried to work the opposite strategy – go grander and increase the frills. 
“These cinemas had to become more of a destination, like going to the theatre,” 
said Des Forges. “They became treat-y.”

The cinema-going public, or at least that part of it willing or able to pay 
for tickets in the £15-£20 range, seemed to approve. In its end-of-year 
accounts for 2015, the Everyman chain, self-consciously sleek, a major player 
in the new age of boutique film-showing, reported an annual rise in revenue of 
44%, from £14m to £20.3m. For a bunch of Britons, the experience of going to 
see a movie was coming to be associated less with the nacho and its cheese 
liquid, more about waiter-serviced sofas, fancier upholstery – and emptier 
wallets, most likely, as the credits rolled. My cruddy local Odeon in Muswell 
Hill, renowned for its frayed and caved-in chairs, its carpeting of old popcorn 
kernels and Opal Fruit wrappers, became one of the growing number of Everymans. 
These days, there are five kinds of red available at the bar and puddings 
served in jam jars. Terence Rattigan plays sometimes get beamed in from the 
National Theatre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d1d2b720b97da62f3bebf89d4b36036f6ab5715%2F177_338_4657_2793%2F4657.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d1d2b720b97da62f3bebf89d4b36036f6ab5715%2F177_338_4657_2793%2F4657.jpg>
 The Everyman Cinema on the Great North Road, Barnet, London. Photograph: David 
Levene for the Guardian 
But all this change was still to come in 2000. When I left the screening room 
at the Barbican, I was a filmgoer transformed.Sweet and Lowdown – bloody loved 
it! And for no obvious reason I could make out. It was twinkly, twee, strangely 
paced, without knob gags or car chases and with only one sustained burst of 
cinematic action, when Penn smashed his antique guitar against a lamp post. But 
I loved it inexplicably as great art will make you love it inexplicably and all 
at once realised that films outside the narrow conditions I’d allowed for could 
be charming. In the days after the screening, I hit Our Price or Virgin 
Megastores to buy a few older Woody Allens on VHS. Then I settled in for the 
standard six months to wait to be able to buySweet and Lowdown on VHS too.

This was how it was: a film had a theatrical release, then everything went 
terribly quiet for a full six months before it showed up on the high street on 
video or (marvel!) DVD. Another year of patientRadio Times-scouring and it 
might appear on Sky. Another year and it might come on terrestrial TV. At the 
time, this felt like a pretty luxurious set-up, particularly as anyone a 
generation or two older would always remind you, as you tended your movie 
collection, how much harder it was to see movies before the revolution of VHS.

Actually, something was brewing, that summer in 2000, which would usher in the 
next movie-watching revolution. In June, the rental chain Blockbuster announced 
an ambitious partnership with a broadband provider to offer 500 movies over the 
internet by the end of the year. Blockbuster was about a decade away from 
filing for bankruptcy protection (in the US) at the time; closer to its own 
famous demise was the company Blockbuster had entered into partnership with –
Enron <https://www.theguardian.com/business/2001/nov/30/corporatefraud.enron3>, 
the too-big-to-fail firm that failed so spectacularly in 2001. The two 
companies’ fantastic notion to stream movies online came to nothing. But the 
idea was sound, and revolutionary, soon to be chased into reality by others.

The launch and popularity-explosion of YouTube, in 2005, familiarised the 
public with the idea of streaming short videos on their computers. Later, in 
the UK, the 2007 introduction of the BBC’siPlayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/may/01/newmedia.bbc> service accustomed 
people to watching longer programming in the same way. “Video on demand”, or 
VOD, became the industry’s accepted term for streaming movies. Efe Cakarel, who 
founded the VOD serviceMubi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/apr/25/mubi-online-cinema-club> in 
2007, told me the technology that enabled it had been around for while; what 
changed was “audience behaviour… [People] needed to get used to their idea of 
watching feature-length media on their computers.”

Netflix, then a rent-by-post subscription service that traded in tangible 
DVDs, joined the streaming market in 2007. Amazon bought a rival service, 
LoveFilm, and rebranded it Amazon Prime. (Both Netflix and Amazon have since 
moved into the production of their own films and TV programmes. Last year, 
while filmingCafé Society, Woody Allen was also working on a TV series for 
Amazon calledCrisis in Six Scenes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/05/woody-allen-tv-sitcom-crisis-in-six-scenes>
.)

In the UK, Sky developed its own VOD service, as did the Curzon group, which 
launchedCurzon Home Cinema 
<https://www.curzonhomecinema.com/?utm_source=curzon&utm_medium=website&utm_campaign=curzonwebtopbar>
 in 2010. In 2013, the BFI unveiled theBFI Player; 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/18/bfi-player-a-homespun-alternative-to-the-vod-giants>
 the institute was openly concerned, Edward Humphrey said, that “if we didn’t 
embrace that change [towards streaming], we’d be left disconnected from an 
audience that was evolving in their tastes, their expectations, their use of 
technology”.

At the Curzon, as Café Society wound towards its conclusion, I decided to 
conduct an experiment. When I got home I’d stream as manyWoody Allen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/woodyallen> films as I could, via as many 
different platforms as were available. Maybe I’d learn something large and 
profound about our consumption of film in 2016. Maybe I’d only finally get some 
value out of a dormant Netflix account I’d signed up for, years earlier, in 
order to watch the first season ofHouse of Cards.

And why wait to get home? Outside the cinema, I hopped on to the No 19 bus and 
sat down on the empty upstairs deck. I downloaded the Netflix app using the 
phone’s 4G connection and browsed the choice of Allens to watch. There were 
plenty.Annie Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/oct/18/annie-hall-comedy> (1977), The 
Purple Rose of Cairo(1985), Radio Days (1987), Match Point (2005). I chose the 
most recent film available,To Rome with Love (2012), which I’d missed when it 
came out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F917e69b29027b0dd4b682c8757eab03e07122369%2F0_501_3891_2335%2F3891.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F917e69b29027b0dd4b682c8757eab03e07122369%2F0_501_3891_2335%2F3891.jpg>
 Netflix converted itself into a streaming service after starting out by 
posting DVDs to customers. Photograph: Elise Amendola/AP 
I had no headphones with me, so I let the sound play through the phone’s small 
speakers. The connection held steady as we drove into London’s West End and for 
a good while the bus made a pretty decent mobile cinema, at least until some 
subtitled scenes in Italian, which required some serious squinting at the 4in 
screen. In Knightsbridge, I met a character played by Jesse Eisenberg; at 
Piccadilly Circus his love interest, Ellen Page. In Charing Cross Road, a group 
of passengers came to sit upstairs and I felt self-conscious playing the film 
aloud. When Page delivered a risque line of dialogue to Eisenberg – “As great 
as the orgasms were with Victoria, they were stronger with Jamal” – I panicked 
and pocketed the phone.

At home, I signed up to more services, subscribing to ones I already knew 
about, including Amazon Prime, Mubi, the BFI and Curzon, and downloading apps 
and software for all the competing firms I could find: Wuaki.tv, Now TV (a 
budget service run by Sky), TalkTalk TV and Chili Cinema. I bought a little 
gadget called aChromecast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/13/google-chromecast-review-make-your-tv-smart>
, made by Google, which allows me to redirect streamed content from my phone or 
laptop to my TV. I typed “Woody Allen” into a lot of search bars and usually 
found lots of options –Blue Jasmine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/sep/29/blue-jasmine-review> (2013) on 
iTunes and Wuaki and Chilli,Bananas (1971) on Netflix and iTunes and Amazon. 
Everyone had 2004’sMelinda and Melinda, but only Now TV and Sky Go were 
streaming 2015’sIrrational Man.

I spoke to Philip Mordecai, director of Curzon Home Cinema, and Efe Cakarel at 
Mubi, who explained that the reason the choice of films splattered across the 
various platforms is uneven and inconsistent is the inconsistent nature of the 
deals done between distributors and VOD operators. Sometimes, the VOD people 
would negotiate rights to single films, sometimes for access to catalogues. 
Sometimes, a movie would go to one platform exclusively and sometimes its 
rights holder might try to spread it about as thinly as it would go, to get as 
many eyes on it as possible. I opted to watch Allen’sVicky Cristina Barcelona 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/feb/08/woody-allen-barcelona-review> 
(2008), on Amazon Prime.

It took quite a lot of time, a lot of trackpad-wrangling, to work out how to 
access Amazon’s hoard of movies. Unlike the reasonably intuitiveNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> homepage, Amazon seemed to bury 
movies on demand among other products. A Spanish novelisation ofVicky Cristina 
Barcelona, a secondhand DVD, an autographed 8x12 of the movie’s star Scarlett 
Johansson… By all means streamVicky Cristina Barcelona if you want to, Amazon 
seemed to be saying to me, but why not buy a very best of Spanish guitar CD too?

Humphrey at the BFI explained why this might be. “As a standalone, streaming 
services are very difficult to make profitable and sustainable,” he said. 
“That’s why most of the big ones are connected to another business.iTunes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/itunes> works as part of a wider Apple 
products universe, Sky’s supports the wider customer offer and Amazon Prime 
Video is deeply connected with Amazon’s retail business.”

As I delved further into my streaming options, I was asked to pay for my 
Allens in different ways. Netflix and Amazon took a monthly subscription fee 
(both £5.99) while the majority of other services asked a one-off payment to 
“rent” – as in to buy temporary access to a stream, usually for a period of 
about 48 hours. Streaming Woody Allen movies was an activity that rewarded 
bargain-hunting. Google wanted £2.49 forCelebrity (1998), Curzon Home Cinema 
£2.20 and iTunes and Amazon just 99p.

I was helped in this messy search process – of finding Manhattans and finding 
them cheapest – by a nifty website calledJustWatch 
<https://www.justwatch.com/uk>. Run by a German tech firm (its business built 
on collecting data about people’s viewing habits), JustWatch’s website 
functions roughly like a VOD-eraTime Out or Radio Times. It sorted through the 
34 Allen films that were available to stream on a dozen platforms and told me 
how much each would cost to watch.

When I got in touch with JustWatch’s chief executive, David Croyé, he said the 
site existed in part because of “a big oversupply of [streamable] content and a 
really fragmented market of where to watch it”. When I asked Croyé if there was 
a risk of a surfeit when it came to VOD – the consumer choked by consumables – 
he said: “Big time.”

Everyone I spoke to in the industry expressed some version of this concern. 
Mubi’s Cakarel said that VOD firms had to consider “an issue of drowning” and 
pointed out that his own service presented its subscribers with a neat choice 
of just 30 movies at any one time. “These films are chosen not by algorithms,” 
Cakarel said, “but by our programmers, who are out in the world, attending 
festivals, meeting film-makers.”

Mordecai at Curzon Home Cinema said his service limited its cache of 
streamable titles to a plumper 650, but added: “We have themed collections that 
help customers navigate those films. We also get respected directors and actors 
to curate collections for us. If you and your partner can’t agree on what to 
pick, then trusting a Palme d’Or winner saves an argument.”

Des Forges at the Independent Cinema Office said that, from the viewer’s 
perspective, the boom in streaming services had to be a good thing. At a time 
when a night out at the multiplex, let alone the grander cinemas, can cost £30 
for two, the option to stream movies at home “lowers the barrier for entry”, 
she said. She thought that audiences might be more inclined to choose riskier, 
more unusual films at home-streaming prices too.

Technology has revolutionised movie watching but it has revolutionised 
movie-making too, and in a digital world, with production methods becoming ever 
cheaper, more films now arrive on the marketplace than in the past: somewhere 
between 18 and 22 a week, Des Forges said, as opposed to about half that number 
at the end of the 1990s. In a flooded market, it was increasingly difficult to 
give every film a worthy showing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a1db2081288b29dfcf06a1ac94143b0a6fb277d%2F0_445_2503_1501%2F2503.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a1db2081288b29dfcf06a1ac94143b0a6fb277d%2F0_445_2503_1501%2F2503.jpg>
 Sean Parker, the founder of Napster, now has his sights set on a 
movie-streaming service. Photograph: Jordan Strauss/Invision/AP 
Unless we were talking about one of the other big directors, most film-makers 
just want their films to be seen
Des Forges 
Des Forges described a process whereby distributors bought up films in larger 
numbers than they used to, earmarking them for different destinations: some to 
be sold to cinemas, some to TV, some to VOD platforms. Des Forges called this 
speculating or hedging. Independent films have been prominent in the VOD 
revolution because, unlike their more expensive and oomphier studio 
equivalents, indie films are not so tightly bound to the traditional agreement 
between cinema operators and distributors that a new movie will get an 
unchallenged 17-week theatrical run before it is made available for home 
viewing.

I asked Des Forges about film-makers. What do they tend to think about their 
loving creations appearing not on the big screen but, perhaps, on the rather 
less grand Sony Bravia in my living room? Unless we were talking about 
Christopher Nolan or one of the other big directors, Des Forges said, “most 
film-makers just want their films to beseen”.

Could there come a time when all films become available for home viewing at 
the same time as their release in cinemas? Last month, about a year after the 
success of45 Years, Louis Theroux’s My Scientology Movie was given the same 
treatment – £13 for a ticket at Everyman Leeds,£4.50 for a stream on BFI Player 
<http://player.bfi.org.uk/film/watch-my-scientology-movie-2015/?gclid=CKL156LVwdACFQ5mGwodfQcAhA>
. It made more than £600,000 inside a month. Distributors around the country 
will have paid attention to this.

Meanwhile in America, in March, Napster founder Sean Parker announced plans 
for a start-up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/mar/10/napster-founder-plans-to-screen-movies-at-home-on-day-they-hit-cinemas>
 called the Screening Room, intending to make more big-budget studio films 
available to watch at home at the same time as they are released in cinemas. 
Parker’s proposed price for this – $50, or about £40, a pop – raised eyebrows, 
until people started calculating how much they spent getting a whole family 
along to the newStar Wars last Christmas.

Mordecai at Curzon thought the idea of walking into our living rooms “to find 
the latest instalment ofStar Wars or X-Men available to stream the weekend of 
release is still a distant reality”. But Parker’s scheme had some prominent 
backers, at least back in March, including Steven Spielberg and Martin 
Scorsese. So who knows.

Towards the end of my Woody Allen stream-binge I needed a break. One Friday 
evening, I browsed the choice of newer films on Curzon Home Cinema, looking 
through streamable titles that were also out in cinemas that week. After 
consulting my wife, we chose a documentary calledThe First Monday in May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/02/the-first-monday-in-may-review-andrew-rossi-met-gala-documentary>
, which is about the staging of the lavish Met Gala in New York every spring. 
Telling as it did of neurotic and fragile Manhattanites, I thought it just 
about fitted the Woody theme.

Tax breaks and talent fuel UK’s creative industry boom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/29/tax-breaks-and-talent-fuel-uks-creative-industry-boom>
Simultaneously, that night, there were people watching the same film at 
Curzons and other cinemas around the country. Tickets at about £15 each, plus 
extra for the prosecco icepoles or whatever. My wife and I watched the film in 
the living room for a cool tenner, all in. I wouldn’t have called the 
experience “boutique-y”. That afternoon, I’d streamedAntz, the animated feature 
featuring voice work by Woody Allen for my three-year-old and the couch still 
had the damp, biscuit-crumby sheen that tends to be left behind by the toddler 
at rest. Still, it was a cosy Friday night in, easy to arrange – nice. When I’d 
asked people in the VOD industry what they thought the future held for home 
streaming and the cinema, they spoke of virtual-reality goggles, of “smart 
contact lenses”.

But maybe this was a more likely vision of the future, for better or worse: a 
further domestication of movie watching. Premieres in our pyjamas. The newStar 
Wars on the sofa. Maybe we’d stop noticing the means of a film’s delivery 
entirely and get as much out of a feature played on a 4in screen as on a 40ft 
one.

When the fashion doc had finished, I thought I’d top off the evening with one 
last Allen film –Sweet and Lowdown, which I hadn’t watched for years. I’d once 
waited six months to get a hold of a copy of it on VHS. Now perhaps 90 seconds 
went by after the whim to see it struck before I hadSweet and Lowdown up and 
streaming on my laptop. Still wonderful, of course, whatever the format, 
however the means.

The best boutique cinemas
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e2ada155b41821f178f0b2d0a29f335202388e7%2F0_0_4265_3246%2F4265.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e2ada155b41821f178f0b2d0a29f335202388e7%2F0_0_4265_3246%2F4265.jpg>
 Bristol harbour, home to The Watershed (over the bridge and right). 
Photograph: Alamy 
The Tyneside, Newcastle <>

Conceived as a newsreel cinema in 1937, this art deco gem was built by Dixon 
Scott, great uncle of director Ridley. Today, cineastes lounge on leather sofas 
to watch the likes ofPaterson, but it still makes room for newsreels.

The Watershed, Bristol  <http://www.watershed.co.uk/>

Former harbour-side transit sheds remade as the UK’s first dedicated media 
centre. Its three cinemas share the space with conference rooms, a cafe and 
studios catering to local artists.

The Lexi, Kensal Rise, London  <https://thelexicinema.co.uk/>

A short tube ride from the garish dazzle of Leicester Square sits cinema’s 
equivalent of the corner shop, mainly staffed by volunteers, with profits 
channelled to various charities. There is a private screening room for up to 12 
people.

The Hyde Park Picture House, Leeds <http://www.hydeparkpicturehouse.co.uk/> 
This has been a Leeds institution for 102 years. An old-school box office 
points the way to a gaslit interior complete with balcony seating. But the 
Dolby digital sound system is bang up to date.

Glasgow Film Theatre <http://glasgowfilm.org/>

If there was an Oscar for programming, the GFT (juggling new releases, 
classics, cult favourites and talks) would be among the nominees. The 
auditorium’s raked flooring ensures everyone gets an unobstructed view.Xan 
Brooks

Stream on: a guide to the services, including Observer critic Guy Lodge’s pick 
of the menus
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5b1ba9fd03e80588cb71ff11c17481d40185c7f%2F0_0_1500_1000%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5b1ba9fd03e80588cb71ff11c17481d40185c7f%2F0_0_1500_1000%2F1500.jpg>
 Little Men… available on the BFI Player. 
Amazon Prime 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/prime/pipeline/landing?ie=UTF8&*Version*=1&*entries*=0>

Catalogue: more than 50,000 films, from blockbusters to indie and arthouse 
titles. Amazon started producing its own films last year with Spike Lee’sChi-Raq
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/23/spike-lee-chi-raq-controversial-strong-reviews>
 and plans to increase this to 12 per year.

Available on: website or mobile app. Also on smart TVs, via Blu-ray players, 
games consoles or the Amazon Fire TV stick.

Cost: subscription is £5.99 a month with 30-day free trial or included with an 
Amazon Prime shopping subscription (£79 a year). Some streamable films are not 
included and incur an extra one-off rental fee. Non-subscribers can rent Amazon 
Video titles from £2.49.

Guy’s top five: April and the Extraordinary World ( steampunk-flavoured French 
animation),A Girl Walks Home Alone at Night, Black Coal, Thin Ice, Meet Me in 
St Louis, Rain (Joan Crawford hits the South Seas in gloriously humid 1932 
melodrama).

Netflix <https://www.netflix.com/gb/>

Catalogue: mostly two years old or more. Netflix recently started producing 
its own movies for simultaneous theatre/streaming release, so far without much 
impact (Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon: Sword of Destiny, Adam Sandler’s The 
Ridiculous 6). The UK catalogue is inferior to the US due to licensing 
restrictions.

Available on: website or mobile app and on smart TVs, games consoles and 
Blu‑ray players.

Cost: £5.99-8.99 per month.

Guy’s five: Divines, Victoria (2016), A Syrian Love Story, Nashville (1975), 
It Happened One Night.

Now TV 
<http://www.nowtv.com/?referrer=nowtv&DCMP=KNC-Brand-nowtv-Core-NOWTV-NC-Google&gclid=CjwKEAiA1ITCBRDO-oLA-q_n8xYSJADjBQfGS-VM8pdRuvYVIXoADF-A4y-mriU8kpkuG9NgjIh7PBoCZXDw_wcB>

Catalogue: Sky’s budget option; more than 800 Sky Cinema films. Mostly 
blockbusters; it claims to get new films sooner than any other service after 
their theatrical release.

Available on: via a £5 set-top box for non‑smart TVs or via internet or mobile 
app etc.

Cost: monthly, contract-free subscription to Sky Cinema is £9.99. Sky Box 
Office (pay-to-view movies available to Sky TV subscribers before they premiere 
on Sky Cinema) is not available.

Guy’s five: Joy, Evolution, Dog Day Afternoon, Ace in the Hole, Beauty and the 
Beast.

Mubi <https://mubi.com/>

Catalogue: just 30 indie/cult/classic films are available at a time; one new 
film is released per day and is available for a month. It hosts seasons 
featuring particular actors or directors.

Available on: website or mobile app, smart TVs, games consoles.

Cost: £5.99 a month; 30-day free trial.

Guy’s five: The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner, Office Killer, The 
Others, Heremias (Book One, The Legend of the Lizard Princess) – iconoclastic 
Filipino auteur Lav Diaz mixes crime and psychology in a nine-hour epic,The 
Bishop’s Wife(Cary Grant as a very dapper angel in a slice of Christmas comfort 
viewing).

BFI Player <http://player.bfi.org.uk/>

Catalogue: more than 300 films hand-picked by the British Film Institute from 
its cultural programme and the BFI National Archive. Runs parallel to seasonal 
programming at the BFI’s home on the South Bank.

Available on: website or mobile app, some smart TVs.

Cost: £4.99 a month with a 30-day free trial or pay-per-view films are 
available from £3.89. Some of the BFI catalogue is free.

Guy’s five: Little Men, Napoleon, Black Girl, Imitation of Life, Jemima & 
Johnny.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cbe1f3778bfe696871ae8f2b845a486e2849f02%2F0_0_2468_1024%2F2468.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cbe1f3778bfe696871ae8f2b845a486e2849f02%2F0_0_2468_1024%2F2468.jpg>
 A Girl Walks Home Alone at Night… available on Amazon Prime. 
Curzon Home Cinema <https://www.curzonhomecinema.com/>

Catalogue: more than 400 Curzon-distributed independent films, available to 
watch at home on the same day as their cinema release, plus exclusive 
collections and classic movies.

Available on: website or mobile app, smart TVs.

Cost: £2.50-£4.50 (non-members), 15% discount for Curzon Cinema members (which 
offers perks when visiting the Curzon cinema chain).

Guy’s five: Things to Come, My Scientology Movie, Johnny Mad Dog, Nostalgia, 
Spring in a Small Town.

Yaddo <https://yaddo.com/>

Catalogue: just documentaries, including shorts and TV documentaries.

Available on: website or mobile app.

Cost: subscription-only, £3.99 per month.

Guy’s five: Man With a Movie Camera, Pink Saris, Joan Rivers: A Piece of Work, 
Sons of Perdition, Imaginary Witness: Hollywood and the Holocaust.

Wuaki <https://uk.wuaki.tv/>

Catalogue: More than 2,000 films from studios including Warner Bros, Disney, 
Sony and 20th Century Fox. Owned by Japanese broadband company Rakuten.

Available on: website, mobile app, smart TVs.

Cost: £2.45 to £4.45 (48-hour rental); £7.99 to £13.99 (to buy limited titles).

Guy’s five: Love and Friendship, Disney Short Films Collection, Weekend, 

A Streetcar Named Desire (1951), A Star Is Born (1937).

Chili Cinema <https://uk.chili.tv/>

Catalogue: mainstream titles. It describes itself as “the largest online video 
archive with thousands of movies”.

Available on: website, mobile app, smart TVs or games consoles.

Cost: rent recent films from £3.49 and older titles from 99p (for 48 hours). 
Buy films for £7.99-£13.99.

Guy’s five: Maggie’s Plan, Absolutely Fabulous: The Movie, Unforgiven, An 
Unmarried Woman, Blow-Up (1966).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F181cf0002d34f386311ccfa91bebb7eefcf76c39%2F0_0_2240_892%2F2240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Full%20stream%20ahead%3F%20The%20brave%20new%20world%20of%20cinemagoing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Ffilm-streaming-future-of-movie-going%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F181cf0002d34f386311ccfa91bebb7eefcf76c39%2F0_0_2240_892%2F2240.jpg>
 Force Majeure… available on TalkTalk TV Store. Photograph: Courtesy Everett 
Collection/Rex 
TalkTalk TV Store <https://www.talktalktvstore.co.uk/>

Catalogue: about 15,000 pay-to-view films, including a decent selection of 
recent releases.

Available on: website or mobile app, smart TVs, games consoles.

Cost: no subscription. Rent films for 30 days for £2.49 to £4.49 per movie or 
buy from £9.99 to £13.99 for new films; from £6.99 for older ones.

Guy’s five: Under the Shadow, The Neon Demon, Force Majeure, Belle de Jour 
(1967), Dark Victory (1939).
 