
A new report 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/2014/04/24/comparison-student-loans-england-australia/> 
by the Higher Education Policy Institute (Hepi) recommends that UK policymakers 
pay much closer attention to Australia's "advanced" university funding system, 
which shares many of the features of the UK system, but at considerably lower 
taxpayer expense.

It is easy to see why higher education finance policymakers might be tempted 
to look at Australia for inspiration. The recent finding that the resource 
accounting and budgeting (RAB) charge – or the proportion of unpaid student 
loan debt that is covered by the taxpayer –may reach 45% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/mar/21/student-fees-policy-costing-more>
 shocked many.

An Institute for Fiscal Studies report 
<http://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7175> put the figure at 43.3%. This means 
that for every £1 lent to students, 45p is not recovered. By contrast, the 
Australian equivalent – 25% for standard tuition fee loans – is a much 
healthier figure.

On the surface, this would seem reason enough to adopt the features of the 
Australian tuition fee system. But this could result in unintended consequences.

Australian fees are lower

A central reason the Australian loan system is so much cheaper to the taxpayer 
is that tuition fees in Australia are significantly lower than they are in the 
UK.Fees <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/fees> are a 
maximum of £5,500 per year (and often much less) in Australia, compared with up 
to £9,000 per year in the UK.

The high debt levels in the UK hugely reduce graduates' chances of fully 
repaying their loans. With lower debt levels, it is hardly surprising that the 
Australian government finds it easier to recoup their fee money.

The Australians further reduce their RAB charge by varying fees according to 
subject. Fees are lower for subjects that typically render lower returns 
(humanities and education students pay the lowest fees and tend to be 
low-earning graduates) whereas those subjects that turn out the highest-earning 
graduates (economics) and high-cost (medicine)have the highest fee caps 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1468-0297.1997.tb00039.x/pdf>.

By linking likeliness to repay to tuition fee levels, the Australian system 
minimises the probability of non-repayment of the loan.

But it is not clear why the UK would want to emulate such a system. Charging 
fee levels according to how much one might earn in the future, rather than 
according to the cost of actually providing the degree, could exacerbate 
socioeconomic inequalities if debt-averse students (usually from poorer 
backgrounds) choose to study low-priced subjects that will go on to deliver 
lower wages.

There have been murmurings of a similar system in the UK, but with fees linked 
to the institution attended rather than the subject studied. Such a system 
would suffer from the same kinds of problems, with debt-averse students 
potentially staying away from high-fee elite institutions.

Taxpayers pay more

Furthermore, while the Australian system has a lower taxpayer loss in the form 
of unpaid tuition fees, the taxpayer contribution in the form of teaching money 
is considerably higher in Australia. For example, for a humanities student, the 
Australian government contributes around £3,000 per year (versus zero 
contribution in the UK) – making the total government spend on fees for 
humanities students roughly the same in each country, assuming a UK RAB of 43% 
of £8,500.

If the UK government really wanted to minimise the RAB charge, it could do so 
by lowering fees. If it wanted to reduce the RAB to zero – as is the case for 
some Australian loans – it could similarly do so by going back to the pre-1998 
system of having no fees at all.

Another feature of the Australian system that the Hepi report highlights is 
the removal of caps on student numbers. The UK currently enforces a system of 
fee caps to control the high cost of the university system, though the controls 
are set to be removed in 2015. Here, we can learn from Australia's experience, 
given their removal of number caps in 2008.

There are many positives coming out of the Australian experience. Universities 
have been able to meet the massive over-demand for places, with student numbers 
increasing by around 20% on average, and a slight rise in the share of places 
for low socioeconomic status students.

Lack of regulation leads to declining standards

But the Australian experience also highlights some downsides. The surge in 
student numbers has led to larger class sizes and, as popular courses balloon, 
there are reports of the graduate labour market becoming flooded in fields with 
limited job prospects. More worryingly, the policy was not accompanied by any 
kind of regulation on entry or exit standards, and has led to an inevitable 
decline in standards.

Universities have been quick to relax entry requirements, and some have 
removed requirements for certain subjects – for example, it is now possible for 
some students to read engineering without having studied mathematics up to the 
age of 18.

It would be deeply concerning if the UK were to make the same mistake here and 
let our reputation as a world leader in higher education decline. The 
Australian government now recognises this, and is considering applying a 
minimum entry standard that must be met before a place will be funded. The UK 
would do well to consider a similar type of regulation in time for 2015. Now 
that really would be learning.

Gill Wyness is a researcher at the London School of Economics and lecturer in 
economics at the Institute of Education.

Richard Murphy is a researcher at the London School of Economics and UCL. 
Follow him on Twitter@EconomicsofHE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/twitter.com/search?q=%40EconomicsofHE&src=typd>.

Join the Higher Education Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 