
Three quarters of a century ago, Virginia Woolf posed the question: if you had 
just three guineas to share, what would you support?

In each age we face ostensibly insurmountable challenges that require choices 
to be made, resources to be allocated and areas to be ignored. This is 
particularly the case in the US, which has seen an explosion in the number of 
registered philanthropic organisations, as well as a rethinking of what it 
means to be philanthropic. According to the Foundation Center,81,777 
foundations and charitable entities 
<http://foundationcenter.org/media/news/20131001.html;jsessionid=XIF0SFPKTDQBDLAQBQ4CGW15AAAACI2F>
 dot the US social landscape.

The American Academy of Arts and Sciences argued in a recent report 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0CDMQFjAB&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.humanitiescommission.org%2F_pdf%2Fhss_report.pdf&ei=Ze_fUv_vHrSy7AaxnIHYAQ&usg=AFQjCNFJPYpjgK3c-mmRJwu_b5EuEhdCNQ&sig2=SW7l6aMG-Q6Kqa151Z61xQ&bvm=bv.59568121,d.ZGU&cad=rja>
 that we live in a world characterised by change, and therefore a world 
dependent on the humanities and social sciences. "How," asked the academy, "do 
we understand and manage change if we have no notion of the past? How do we 
understand ourselves if we have no notion of a society, culture or world 
different from the one in which we live?"

When thinking about how to insert the humanities into a dialogue about a 
nation and its future we must start with a narrative – what story do we seek to 
tell?

Take, for instance, the story of demand for greater attention to science, 
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM). For those of us born in the 60s 
or earlier, a generation might be thought to last 25 years. In the new digital 
age, generations are defined in terms of 18 months. A typical undergraduate 
might experience two or three technological generations during university. That 
sense of acceleration became part of the narrative that pushed STEM into the 
national consciousness.

And if we look at the number of US students graduating in the humanities, two 
storylines emerge. First, the number peaked in the early 1970s, hit an all-time 
low in the 90s, and has been on a steady rebound ever since. Second, as a 
percentage of overall graduates, the humanities have always been between 8% and 
12% – a significant number.

Why young people choose to study the humanities is a complicated question. We 
have to consider that the humanities continue to demonstrate the vibrant and 
dynamic tension between continuity and change. Longstanding disciplines such as 
literature, history and philosophy remain important to scholarship and 
discovery. And for nearly a quarter of a century we have also been embracing 
interdisciplinary scholarship – many of us took part in the creation of gender 
studies, women's studies, sexuality studies and African American and ethnic 
studies, among others.

These examples remind us of the invention and creativity that have exploded in 
recent decades. New questions, new approaches, new answers and new ways of 
knowing are the legacy of interdisciplinary work in the humanities.

Attendance at museums and historic sites suggests the broader public takes an 
interest in what we produce. Last year, thousands of people lined the pathways 
around the National Archives building in Washington DC to view a copy of the 
emancipation proclamation – Abraham Lincoln's edict that freed enslaved African 
Americans in states at war with the US government. They did so, presumably, 
because the document carries with it contemporary meaning.

The fact that anyone showed up for its public viewing is to be celebrated; the 
fact thousands did reminds us that the humanities give us a fuller 
understanding of our world – past, present and future. Forms of representation 
and expression as old as rock art and ancient lyric, as well as newer graphic 
novels and digital music, have helped deepen our understanding of the human 
condition and foster more durable institutions and societies.

The use of one's precious guineas in support of the humanities must start with 
a clear sense of its narrative, backed up by data. Investment then follows 
because the case for support is clear. That is why it is in everyone's 
interests to support the humanities and the public good – doing so advances our 
shared future.

Earl Lewis is president of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation 
<http://www.mellon.org/>, a philanthropic organisation supporting the arts and 
humanities

He presents a keynote on 27 January at the University of Oxford in the 
Humanities and the Public Good <http://www.torch.ox.ac.uk/publicgood>series 



This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian jobs 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/education/higher/job-vacancy/direct-employer/?INTCMP=BACJOBBTN6240I2>
 for hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts
 