
FX, the TV network that dominated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/14/emmy-awards-2016-game-of-thrones-23-nominations-full-list>
 this year’s Emmy nominations thanks to The People v OJ Simpson and Fargo, is 
taking action to improve diversity behind the camera.

The recent development comes in the wake of statistics compiled by the 
Directors Guild of America, which found that only 12% of the directors hired to 
helm episodes during the channel’s 2014-15 season were women or people of 
color. AsVariety 
<http://variety.com/2015/tv/news/diversity-directors-tv-amc-fx-hbo-netflix-showtime-1201633122/>
 revealed in 2015, FX had the worst track record of all networks.

Game of Thrones dominates Emmy awards list with 23 nominations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/14/emmy-awards-2016-game-of-thrones-23-nominations-full-list>
FX has since proactively turned that trend around: 51% of the channel’s roster 
of directors are currently men and women of color or white women, the network 
revealed at the FX’sTelevision <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/television> 
Critics Association panel in Los Angeles on Tuesday.

“We just happened to all be working in a system that was racially biased, and 
weren’t taking responsibility for stepping up and acknowledging that and 
saying, ‘OK, we will be the change,’” FX CEO John Landgraf said, reported by
Variety 
<http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/fx-diversity-directors-hiring-ceo-john-landgraf-interview-1201831409/>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffx-diversity-racially-biased-tv-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff31f148bd043e5191ba9f038059e985b11a495ad%2F0_90_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FX%20takes%20major%20steps%20to%20improve%20diversity%20in%20'racially%20biased'%20TV%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffx-diversity-racially-biased-tv-directors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FX%20takes%20major%20steps%20to%20improve%20diversity%20in%20%27racially%20biased%27%20TV%20system&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Ffx-diversity-racially-biased-tv-directors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff31f148bd043e5191ba9f038059e985b11a495ad%2F0_90_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 FX’s Fargo. Photograph: Fox 
As he put it bluntly during the presentation: “White males are only, depending 
on how you count them, somewhere between 31% and 36% of the US population. 
There’s nothing in my mind that says they ought to have 50% of the directing 
jobs. It’s not a panacea. It’s a beginning.”

Landgraf revealed that he instituted the change by sending a letter to his 
network’s showrunners in January, urging them to diversify their pool of 
directors, and encouraging them reach out toFX 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/fx> executives for assistance in finding new 
and diverse talent.

Jonathan Frank, FX’s executive vice-president of current series, added that 
candidates with no prior TV-directing experience were considered. Instead, they 
had to demonstrate that they had “an aptitude for finding character moments and 
emotional moments and could execute them and translate them so that they shine 
through”.

Landgraf said FX is also intent on diversifying its pool of creators as well.

“Ultimately that changes the composition of the way a story is told and 
presented and it does ultimately change the composition of the employee base,” 
he said.

He said that Donald Glover’s Atlanta 
<http://www.highsnobiety.com/2016/08/08/donald-glover-atlanta-teasers/> and 
Pamela Adlon’s Better Things 
<http://www.indiewire.com/2016/07/better-things-teaser-pamela-adlon-louis-ck-fx-2-1201702929/>
, both of which premiere in September, are two of the shows resulting from this 
new approach.
 