
At the entrance of Brisbane festival’s Fear & Delight 
<http://www.brisbanefestival.com.au/whats-on/fear-delight> theatre and dining 
show, guests are greeted by a woman in black lipstick, holding out a pile of 
sparkly, gold capsules in her gloved hand. “Swallow this,” she urges us.

Pushing aside memories of my days as a teen raver, I take one and gulp it down.

“What was that?” I whisper to the woman. She gives me a closer look. Each pill 
is filled with glitter.

I feel mildly disappointed, then hit by a flash of concern. Is glitter even 
edible? (Later I hear a woman exclaim: “we’ll all be pooping gold!”)
Monica Tan (@m_onicatan) 
It was glitter. #FearAndDelight 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/FearAndDelight?src=hash> #BrisFest 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/BrisFest?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/tfYkcqsPqF 
<http://t.co/tfYkcqsPqF>
 <https://twitter.com/m_onicatan/status/641539938052280320> September 9, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/m_onicatan/status/641539938052280320> 
No time to worry about that now, though; there are more gastric mysteries to 
be had inside the tent. From a wooden box protrudes a hand, occasionally 
offering guests a shiny, deep-purple grape. Plastic bags of ink-black liquid 
sit on a large candlelit table, with barber-striped straws inviting anyone who 
dares take a sip.

For five bucks a pop, a man in priest’s robes pours out an unlabelled red 
liquid from a beaker. I watch guest Nina Traber from Switzerland pay and down 
her shot. “I have no idea what I’m drinking!” she exclaims. “It was good, very 
tasty. Bit sour.”

The man hands her a white envelope, to be opened at “her own pleasure”. She 
rips it apart and we laugh when she finds a crisp five-dollar note staring back 
at her.

Inside we are seated in long rows around the stage and directed to inject a 
shot of tomato consommé into our mouth. Waiters begin to serve 15-hour 
slow-cooked lamb, roasted vegetables and golden polenta. There are brushes for 
us to paint onto our plates a black garlic aoili sauce and mint jelly served 
from tin cans.

Chicken off the bone, dripping in juices, its head and feet still intact, is 
delicious – although a few guests seem fazed when feed is scattered on the 
stage and two live chickens (hopefully no relation) begin happily pecking away.

Is this the point at which festival foodie culture in Australia jumps the 
shark? By far the most popular event at Tasmania’s Dark Mofo each year is its
medieval-esque winter feast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/jun/22/eat-drink-be-merry-hobarts-dark-mofo-winter-feast-reviewed>
. Elsewhere, food trucks have become a festival mainstay and events like
Peninsula Picnic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/mar/31/peninsula-picnic-review-gourmet-fare-first-class-tipple-and-top-tunes>
 put music and food on equal footings.

Eat, drink, be merry: Hobart's Dark Mofo winter feast reviewed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/australia-food-blog/2015/jun/22/eat-drink-be-merry-hobarts-dark-mofo-winter-feast-reviewed>
But it was Sydney’s TedX this year that truly upped the stakes in conceptual 
dining, with guests treated to buttered bread sprinkled with a handful of ant 
carcasses, and ash cakes with clotted cream and bone-marrow marmalade.

Back in Brisbane <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane>, after 
a high-energy performance by circus-cabaret artists The Correspondents, I end 
the night in the tent’s gin and tonic vapour chamber. It is designed by UK 
culinary artists Bompas and Parr, famed for their giant sculptures made of 
jelly. This latest project, dubbed “alcoholic architecture”, is described as “a 
gin and tonic based weather system for your tongue”.

We are given biohazard-style suits to wear, and asked by attendant Roxanne 
Walker to “please don’t lick the walls”. I’m incredulous someone has actually 
done that. She has also seen guests battle rap and do dance-offs inside.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fa-new-high-for-festival-foodies-licking-the-walls-in-a-biohazard-suit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3a30ad95d3b750543db7d6b0977f04c9b45c8f4%2F0_303_4551_2732%2F4551.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=G%26T%20vaping%20and%20glitter%20pills%3A%20one%20high%20too%20many%20for%20Brisbane%20festival%20foodies%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fa-new-high-for-festival-foodies-licking-the-walls-in-a-biohazard-suit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=G%26T%20vaping%20and%20glitter%20pills%3A%20one%20high%20too%20many%20for%20Brisbane%20festival%20foodies%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F11%2Fa-new-high-for-festival-foodies-licking-the-walls-in-a-biohazard-suit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3a30ad95d3b750543db7d6b0977f04c9b45c8f4%2F0_303_4551_2732%2F4551.jpg>
 The Correspondents – an international cast of contortionists, acrobats, 
dancers and comedians. Photograph: Justin Nicholas/Atmosphere Photography 
Brisbane show to fill theatre with gin and tonic vapour for guests to absorb
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/sep/02/brisbane-show-to-fill-theatre-with-gin-and-tonic-vapour-for-guests-to-absorb>
We enter a shipping container lit in a calming blue and filled with a slightly 
sweet, slightly tart cocktail fog. Everyone is giggling. Even though we have 
been told it takes an hour to soak in one standard drink, and we will only have 
five minutes, there’s a strange and wonderful novelty in drinking through your 
lungs, your eyeballs – the alcohol passing straight into your bloodstream.

Guest Renee Harper is all grins and says “it’s kind of nice. Taking a deep 
breath and the taste on your tongue.” Her friend Kiera Doherty nods, and says 
she can pick up “a little bit of juniper, that tartness”. (Later on we will 
head to the bar and share liquid G&Ts. They taste vaguely coarse and the 
flavours muted after having inhaled its perfume form.)

Our five minutes expires far too quickly, and as we take off our suits 
outside, I ask Walker what is the longest time she’s spent inside. She says 
that even after an hour and half, it takes so long for one drink to pass 
through the body that the effect is minimal. Guests get silly because of “the 
placebo effect” more than anything.

That’s the magic of Fear & Delight, she says, this feeling you are “walking 
into an entirely different world”.

“You take the pill, which is sort of like going down the rabbit hole. Then 
there are all these incredible experiences, fun hidey-holes and little secret 
things happening. It’s exactly what you want when you go out for a dinner and a 
show.”

 * Fear & Delight <http://www.brisbanefestival.com.au/whats-on/fear-delight> 
runs until 25 September at Brisbane festival  