
“It’s been hard, I’m not going to lie,” whispered the elfin figure of Galen 
Rupp in a voice so tender it could have melted in the 92-degree heat. A sweaty 
cat’s cradle of arms and Dictaphones strained to get closer, but only those 
nearest heard the pledge that will be broadcast repeatedly if the smoke 
swirling around Rupp and his coachAlberto Salazar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/alberto-salazar> erupts into fire. “I 
believe in clean sport and I believe the truth will prevail.”

Moments earlier, Rupp – a silver medallist at London 2012 and a training 
partner of Mo Farah – had found his feet to win his seventh consecutive US 
10,000m championships. Finding his voice took longer. But nervously, 
hesitantly, he rediscovered it.

“The people here are so great,” he said, when asked about the standing ovation 
he received after crossing the line. “The support has been tremendous. I was 
obviously pleased to get another championship and to do it here in Eugene, it’s 
always special.”

Mo Farah: ‘I want to make it clear – I will continue working with Alberto 
Salazar’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jun/26/mo-farah-continue-working-with-alberto-salazar>
This was Rupp’s first race since a BBC Panorama documentary accused him of 
stretching and snapping anti-doping rules. But back at Hayward Field, where he 
ran in college for Oregon, he was greeted as more of a homecoming hero than 
someone fighting to remove a stain against his name.

Not everyone was cheering. One coach, who did not want to be named, feared the 
allegations were “the tip of the iceberg” and said USA Track and Field had not 
done enough to investigate. Not that he was surprised. “Look around you at the 
billboards,” he said. “And ask yourself who sponsors this championship and 
Alberto?”

Along the back straight there was a ready answer: a Nike.com/running sign was 
stapled to a USA Track and Field one.

Earlier, while other athletes warmed up in the practice field or had their 
muscles shaken into life on one of 28 massage tables, Rupp limbered up in 
private. Only when the final call for registrations crackled through on the 
public address system did he trot over to Salazar for final instructions. He 
then crossed himself twice before hugging the man he sees as a second father.

As Rupp went to the start, Salazar spoke for the first time since being 
accused of giving Rupp testosterone as a 16-year-old. He insisted he was 
“feeling good” despite the allegations swimming around him and ruled out legal 
action against the BBC and the US news website ProPublica, adding: “I’m not a 
vindictive person.” Despite Salazar’s upbeat words, his face told a different 
story. It looked tired and withdrawn. Apparently his blood pressure has been 
through the roof, which is not good for someone whose determination to be the 
greatest distance athlete of his age – and arguably he was in the early 80s – 
has left him with health problems. Remember, too, that he was clinically dead 
for 14 minutes after suffering a heart attack in 2007.

But Salazar lives and breathes every race that Rupp enters and watching his 
friend from the corporate hospitality area proved a sprightly pick-me-up. There 
were shouts of lap splits and encouragement, including a happy cry of “Let’s 
go, Galen!” as his athlete powered clear to victory in the final kilometre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fgalen-rupp-alberto-salazar-eugene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435348002893%2F75d43b4b-d6c9-46c2-ad75-469ab354f1a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Galen%20Rupp%20and%20Alberto%20Salazar%20meet%20applause%20and%20scepticism%20in%20Eugene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fgalen-rupp-alberto-salazar-eugene%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Galen%20Rupp%20and%20Alberto%20Salazar%20meet%20applause%20and%20scepticism%20in%20Eugene&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2015%2Fjun%2F26%2Fgalen-rupp-alberto-salazar-eugene%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F26%2F1435348002893%2F75d43b4b-d6c9-46c2-ad75-469ab354f1a2-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Alberto Salazar looks on at Eugene before the start of the men’s 10,00m. 
Photograph: Don Ryan/AP 
It was an impressive performance, especially in conditions more like a steam 
room. But while Rupp was being photographed hugging his baby twins, the 
second-placed athlete, Ben True, was explaining why he had a very different 
ethos from his Nike Oregon Project rival.

“Allegations are allegations and rumours are rumours but I am very much 
against doping,” he said. “Use of therapeutic use exemptions, legal or not, are 
against the spirit of the sport. I don’t even take ibuprofen. I don’t drink 
recovery drinks. I have Gatorade maybe twice a year. I take acidophilus now and 
again and vitamin D in the winter. But I don’t even eat energy bars.”

Elsewhere on the first of four days at these US Trials, Dee Dee Trotter – the 
400m bronze medallist at London 2012 and founder of Test Me I’m Clean, which 
promotes drug-free sport – called for a renewed push to stop people cheating or 
playing the system.

“I think drugs in the sport are devastating,” she said. “It’s a tragedy for 
the hardworking athletes like myself, I consider it to be similar to crime. 
When you cheat you’re taking something from the person behind you.”

When asked if sport was winning the fight, her answer brought to mind an 
unending tango between right and wrong, testers and cheats. “I think drugs in 
the sport are continuing,” she said. “You think we’re getting better then we 
take two steps forward and two steps back.”

Meanwhile, in the mixed zone interview area, Rupp had moved from the press 
scrum to the TV cameras and was repeating a familiar mantra. “I believe in 
clean sport and I believe the truth will prevail.”
 