
Miners seeking the green light to dig up Queensland’s Galilee basin should be 
stopped as a priority, according to a new report showing existing fossil fuels 
projects worldwide are enough to push global warming beyond 2C.

The report by the research and advocacy group Oil Change International 
<http://priceofoil.org/2016/09/22/the-skys-limit-report> argues there is a 
compelling case for the six Galilee coalmining proposals in the hands of 
Australian regulators to be axed in line with a “managed decline” of global 
coal, oil and gas supplies already on tap.

It shows the embedded carbon emissions from operating fields and mines 
worldwide, if run to the end of their projected lifetimes, would drive warming 
beyond the 2C limit laid down by last year’s Paris agreement. Developed oil and 
gas reserves alone would take warming beyond the aspirational 1.5C target.

Adani Carmichael coalmine faces new legal challenge from conservation 
foundation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/adani-carmichael-coalmine-faces-new-legal-challenge-from-conservation-foundation>
The report shows that if Australia fully exploited its untapped coal reserves 
– the third largest in the world behind the US and Russia – the resulting 
emissions would blow almost a third of the world’s carbon budget for 1.5C.

About a fifth of these emissions (24 gigatonnes) would come from the six 
Galilee mining hopefuls who have applied for permits.

The largest is Adani’s Carmichael mine, which over its lifetime would 
contribute more than half of these emissions through 5 bn tonnes of coal.

The China First mine proposal by Clive Palmer’s Waratah Coal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coal>, which like others in the 
Galilee appears to hinge on Adani paving the way with rail infrastructure, is 
the third largest at 1bn tonnes.

The report singles out Australia and the Galilee as being on the “frontline of 
expansion” of the global coal industry and stopping this development “must be a 
priority”.

“The consequence of our analysis is that no new extractive or facilitating 
infrastructure should be built anywhere in the world,” it says.

Fellow coal giants China and Indonesia have enacted temporary bans on new 
coalmines and the US has a limited moratorium on new mines on public land.

That leaves Australia as one of just “two countries that are currently 
proceeding with major coalmining development”, along withIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, the report says.

India, with its urgent need for economic uplift and relatively low 
contribution to historical emissions, could be given a “generous support 
package” funded by wealthy countries to pursue low-carbon development.

Gaping chasm between Coalition's climate mantra and the real debate | Lenore 
Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/gaping-chasm-between-coalitions-climate-mantra-and-the-real-debate>
But the “hard choices” by governments about phasing out existing projects 
should start in the developed countries such as Australia, the report says.

Adani, an Indian conglomerate, has argued its Australian mine would be pivotal 
in helping the Indian electricity sector move towards making cheap energy 
available to the impoverished. The “energy poverty” argument iscontested by 
Adani’s critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/05/linking-adani-coal-mine-to-social-uplift-in-india-ridiculous-says-conservationist?CMP=soc_567>
.

The company, which has been embroiled in a long series of legal challenges in 
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> from 
traditional owners and conservationists, has reportedly downsized the first 
phase of its mine and put off an investment decision till the end of 2017.

The mine would now cost $4bn to get off the ground and initially produce 25m 
tonnes a year, with 80% slated for its sister energy company Adani Power, the
Australian Financial Review 
<http://www.afr.com/opinion/columnists/adani-prepares-for-an-end-to-lawfare-with-a-smaller-cheaper-carmichael-20160921-grla4o>
reported.

Tim Buckley at the Institute for Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Economics and Financial 
Analysis said Adani’s scaled-down plans remained “unbankable” for a company 
that held US$2.6bn net debt beside a market capitalisation of just US$1.2bn.

Adani Power was in even worse “financial distress”, with net debts of more 
than US$7.3bn against market capitalisation of US$1.4bn, Buckley said. It was 
also yet to build most of the large power stations in western India which 
Carmichael would supply.

“Lacking economies of scale, this low-quality thermal export coal proposal 
lacks strategic relevance in India where the installed cost of solar is now 
lower than that of imported thermal coal,” he said.

This casts doubt on broader development prospects in the Galilee basin, which 
Buckley said was “still stranded 400km inland from the coast without any 
industrial-grade power, road, water, aviation or rail infrastructure in place”.

The report’s author, Greg Muttit, said there were “only three possibilities” 
to consider in the future of fossil fuels extraction.


“We can manage the decline of our existing fields, shifting to clean energy 
and redeploying workers,” he said. “Or we continue to develop new reserves that 
then have to be shut down suddenly, stranding assets, costing investors, and 
causing havoc in fossil fuel extraction-dependent communities.

Adani's Carmichael mine approval labelled 'economic stupidity'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/04/adanis-carmichael-mine-approval-labelled-economic-stupidity>
“Or we just carry on as we are – and wreak economic, ecological and human 
catastrophe on the world.”

Stephen Kretzmann, the executive director of Oil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/oil> Change International, said: “If 
the world is serious about achieving the goals agreed in Paris, governments 
have to stop the expansion of the fossil fuel industry.

“The industry has enough carbon in the pipeline – today – to break through the 
sky’s limit.”

The report says the study was the first to examine the climate change 
implications of potential emissions from current oil, gas and coal operations 
in light of the Paris agreement. It draws on industry data from the oil and gas 
consultancy Rystad Energy and carbon budgets derived from the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change.
 