
As an art student eager to know about the latest arts discourse and reviews, I 
thought nothing of spending hours poring over the library’s copy of 
contemporary art journalStudio International 
<http://www.studiointernational.com/>. With dictionary to hand, I would 
assiduously look up the unfamiliar words and decipher all the specialist 
concepts and terms. I was there to study. I had time and inclination to 
understand the theories of fine art practice. I needed to understand, 
appreciate and critique art and after all, this publication wasn’t aimed at the 
general public.

Nowadays, surveys such as Taking Part 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/438442/Taking_Part_2014_15_Quarter_4_Report.pdf>
 tell of high levels of general public interest in the contemporary visual 
arts. According to Tate director Sir Nicholas Serota, thePlus Tate 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/about/our-work/national-partnerships/plus-tate> network 
of galleries small and large across the UK are pulling in the punters, their 
programmes “enthusiastically adopted 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/download/file/fid/45299> by their local communities”. 
So have contemporary art galleries adapted their language, in recognition of 
their now wider (and more culturally diverse) audiences?

Does knowing that Peter Fraser has always been a “poet of the quotidian” 
galvanise interest to go along to a recentphotographer’s talk 
<http://www.openeye.org.uk/events/peter-fraser-a-city-in-the-mind/> at 
Liverpool’s Open Eye Gallery? Are Piers Calvert’spaintings 
<http://www.sandrahiggins.com/future-exhibitions.php> made more appealing to 
visitors because they contain “faces that at the same time are millenary and 
somehow totally contemporary”? Or is the statement: “Alfred Wallis was an 
artist and mariner. He painted from the memory of his experiences, depicting 
ships at sea, wrecked, and at harbour, houses and landscapes” – about a 
Kettle’s Yardexhibition 
<http://www.modernart.net/read.html?id=1,4,885,1303,1339> – easier to 
understand?

Manchester International Festival’s outgoing artistic director Alex Poots 
observed that many of the divisions in the arts are human-made. Current art 
language is one such barrier, overwhelming you with adjectives, superlatives 
and jargon. For example, there’s a “fascinating and engaging introduction” to 
Towner Gallery’s collection; “friendly and knowledgeable” gallery staff at the 
Hepworth Wakefield; and “exciting and ambitious” programming at Edinburgh’s 
Collective.

Today’s contemporary art … well, it’s got to be hyped up as the best. It’s 
variously unique, brilliant, cutting-edge or – at the very least – 
high-quality. Arts institutions (that often reside in “landmark buildings”) 
claim to be centres of excellence, world-class and inspiring.Exhibitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/exhibition> are ground-breaking, 
blockbuster and vibrant. Curators are renowned, respected and innovative. The 
work presented is offered as thought-provoking, experimental, playful and 
absurd.

 Why is it necessary for exhibitions to have such pompous, overblown 
statements? The 56th (this year’s) Venice biennale intro gets my Twitterati’s 
gong for one of the best/worst examples of such artspeak: “Rather than one 
overarching theme that gathers and encapsulates diverse forms and practices 
into one unified field of vision,All the World’s Futures 
<http://www.labiennale.org/en/art/exhibition/enwezor/> is informed by a layer 
of intersecting filters, namely Garden of Disorder, Liveness, On Epic Duration 
and Reading Capital. These filters in their iterative choreography across the 
exhibition represent a constellation of parameters that circumscribe multiple 
ideas, which are touched upon to both imagine and realise a diversity of 
practices.”

I agree with writer and artist Alistair Gentry 
<https://careersuicideblog.wordpress.com/>: such excessive art jargon seems 
only to “grant power and prestige to a minority of privileged insiders while 
trying to withhold access by the rest of us.”

If public galleries really want to make themselves more accessible, do 
exhibition titles such asThe Heart is Deceitful Above All Things 
<http://homemcr.org/exhibition/the-heart-is-deceitful-above-all-things/> (an 
extract from Jeremiah 17:9) andHappiness is a New Idea 
<http://www.ngca.co.uk/home/default.asp?id=222&prnt=18> (a phrase apparently 
first coined in the French revolution) assist?

Surely more user-friendly are descriptions such as those for John Virtue: The 
Sea <http://www.firstsite.uk.net/page/john-virtue-the-sea> (“large paintings 
and works on paper, studies of the North Norfolk coast”);American Dream 
<http://newlynartgallery.co.uk/americandream/> (“a response to capitalism and 
our consumption-driven society”) andReal painting 
<http://www.castlefieldgallery.co.uk/event-type/exhibition/#sthash.nRUeQPWv.dpuf>
 (“an exhibition of new and existing work by ten artists working nationally and 
internationally”).

 If you’re working in the contemporary visual arts and want to attract wider 
and more diverse audiences, the verbosity andartybollocks 
<http://www.artybollocks.com> will just have to go. Instead, try plain English 
<http://www.plainenglish.co.uk/how-to-write-in-plain-english.html>, “written 
with the reader in mind and with the right tone of voice” – or take sometips 
<http://www.orwell.ru/library/essays/politics/english/e_polit> from George 
Orwell:

 * Never use a metaphor, simile, or other figure of speech which you are used 
to seeing in print. 
 * Never use a long word where a short one will do. 
 * If it is possible to cut a word out, always cut it out. 
 * Never use the passive where you can use the active. 
 * Never use a foreign phrase, a scientific word, or a jargon word if you can 
think of an everyday English equivalent. 
 * Break any of these rules sooner than say anything outright barbarous. 
Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 