
Steep bends come in all shapes and sizes, but when, at only a month’s notice, 
you take on a competitive, organised ride that takes in some of the toughest 
parts of the Giro D’Italia and Tour De France, they are learning curves in the 
extreme. In a 10-day period of tackling theHaute Route 
<http://www.hauteroute.org/> Dolomites, from Venice to Geneva, and the Haute 
Routes Compact (Geneva to Courchevel) over some of Europe’s highest peaks, I’ve 
never felt so exhausted, exhilarated, or relieved in my life. I’ve crawled up 
20km climbs at a slow 7kph, made 25km of vertical gain, and during long 
descents, hit an exhilarating 84kph. I’ve seen grown men weep at the top of 
mountains. But I have survived. Well, just.


It began in Venice, about as inappropriate, but magnificent a location you 
could imagine for any cycling event. Around 400 international riders paraded in 
a short prologue on the outskirts of the canal-filled city to herald the start. 
Even then tragedy struck for more than one rider – months of training down the 
drain by crashing when a wheel got caught in a tramline rail.
 The first of the Dolomites climbs was a mere warm-up, featuring a series of 
tunnels and hairpin bends. Photograph: Manu Molle 
The next morning, after a transfer to the true start at Conegliano, we set off 
to climb the first ascent – Passo San Boldo. I was pleasantly surprised at how 
manageable it was, enjoying the sprightly lightness of a new carbon-framed 
Boardman and friendly chats with other riders through a series of tunnels and 
hairpin bends. However, as the day wore on, we gradually approached the longer, 
much steeper Passo Giau near the 123km finish. It felt back-breaking in its 
steepness. Many riders had to stop more than once to eat extra energy gels. I 
pressed on and gradually made it to the chilly 2,236-metre peak. Tough, but 
rewarding. The final hailstone-peppered descent was unpleasant, and my bike 
wobbled as I shivered, but was pleased to make it through the first day 
unscathed.
 Haute Route Dolomites day two. Climbing, climbing, climbing ... Photograph: 
Manu Molle 
Day two (Cortina D’Ampezzo to Merano) moved from a three-star up to a 
four-star day of difficulty with three big climbs including Passo Pordoi at 
2,239m the toughest. Again the jagged-rock scenery was magnificent, but also as 
soon as we hit anything above 2,000 metres, the altitude made every pedal 
stroke twice as hard. Before this trip I had never in my life experienced 
climbing uphill for 90 minutes without stopping, and was sweating out what 
seemed an entire lifetime of beer and cake. I was also suffering from the 
effects of a 7am start (up at 5am for breakfast), but still really enjoying it. 
And for the second day I’d arrived almost about hour under the cut-off time. 
But was it all going too well?

It is easy to underestimate the other aspects of cyclosportive preparation 
aside from training and riding a bike. The daily packing, preparing kit, 
forcing down your breakfast at 5am, leaving one large bag in one place, small 
bag in another, preparing your bike, finding the start line. All are hard 
enough, let alone feeling awake and well enough to cycle. Then when you’re 
finished, doing all the same again, finding your hotel, perhaps a bus transfer, 
plus eating, getting a massage (always very good) and attending a nightly 
briefing. It’s a military operation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2F-sp-cycling-dolomites-alps-haute-route%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409932891811%2F2ebb4dfc-7580-4fef-9468-72dc36744fbc-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gears%2C%20tears%20and%20breathtaking%20ascents%3A%20how%20I%20cycled%20the%20Haute%20Route%20Dolomites%20and%20Alps%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2F-sp-cycling-dolomites-alps-haute-route%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gears%2C%20tears%20and%20breathtaking%20ascents%3A%20how%20I%20cycled%20the%20Haute%20Route%20Dolomites%20and%20Alps%20%7C%20Peter%20Kimpton&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fbike-blog%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2F-sp-cycling-dolomites-alps-haute-route%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409932891811%2F2ebb4dfc-7580-4fef-9468-72dc36744fbc-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Haute Route Dolomites: Peter emerges from a tunnel Photograph: PhotoRunning.fr 
Haute Route is a highly organised event, but with its first venture into the 
Dolomites, there were some moments of chaos, especially in the Italian 
sections. It is no mean feat putting several hundred people across as many as 
27 hotels over a single night at the height of the holiday season, but somehow 
they managed it. The information staff were overworked, but always very 
helpful. However, there were a few confusing, and also amusing moments. In one 
very grand Italian hotel, after a long day in the saddle, reception staff sent 
me to three different rooms in error. Each door was answered by pairs of tired 
French or Italian men standing in just their underpants, gesticulating in 
confusion. I assume they were also cyclists.
 The Haute Route is a timed event, except on certain descents. Roads were not 
closed to traffic. Perhaps it was not only cyclists who were barking. 
Photograph: Manu Molle 
With a twin-room two-star hotel package the norm (different accommodation 
arrangements were also available at various price levels) it is also important 
to quickly get used to sharing a room with a stranger. My room-mate for the 
first week, Nuno Luz, was both charming, clever, upbeat, funny but also highly 
eccentric – to me a Portuguese version of the comic Italian actorRoberto Benigni
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7rK3s_BP9kE>. He would eat about a dozen 
yoghurts (or vanilla/chocolate puddings) every day, often in bed, or in the 
bath. And cheerfully commentate with clockwork regularity on his bodily 
functions and dietary needs. It’s also not easy getting used to the stench of 
another man’s kit. But that’s cycling for you. But we had very few tense 
moments, far more of laughter. Our first hotel in Venice, the Belle Epoque, had 
mirrored ceilings. What a terrible waste, we both joked, looking up as we both 
lay there in our twin beds.

 Haute Route Dolomites - whatever the weather, the 1km sign to the top of a 
col is always welcome. Photograph: Manu Molle 
But after the adrenalin of the first two days, despite trying not to overdo 
it, and several days short of sleep, I wasn’t quite right on day three to 
Bormio. I began to feel extreme pain in my left knee on the flat sections. Then 
my right knee also began to complain. I was going slower and slower. After 
100km and towards the last climb of the day, the killer Passo Di Gavia (14% 
gradient in parts), my eyes were watering with the pain. With the broomwagon 
fast approaching, suddenly it just happened. I just stopped and got in, while 
my bike was put in the back. But I wasn’t alone. Several other riders were 
already on the bus. I was both relieved, but then felt a creeping, desperate 
disappointment. Was this all over for me? I’d never given in on a bike ride 
before. What would I do for the rest of the week? That night we stayed in a 
hotel in the Passo di Stelvio at above 2,700m. I woke in the night with heart 
palpitations. Was I having a panic attack? No, I realised, but only in the 
morning. It was just the altitude. “Now I need to go to the toilet,” said Nuno.
 Passo di Stelvio on Haute Route Dolomites day four. Terrifying. Photograph: 
Manu Molle 
Day four heralded the Passo di Stelvio, a time trial up what is possibly the 
most dramatic and challenging road in Europe: a 22km climb up more than 1,500m 
of ascent. The rain was torrential. It was a hairpin maze twisting through 
cloud. It was the shortest day of riding, but I simply wasn’t ready for it. 
Back in Bormio I had a massage and saw the osteopath. They advised me to rest 
for a day, and then see how I felt. I was disappointed, but determined to 
return. I adjusted my saddle position a little to ease my knees. But to make a 
comeback on for day five, a marathon stage of 175km from St Moritz to 
Andermatt? It became a defining day of what seemed biblical proportions. And it 
was do or die for me.

Comeback in the cold


It is usually cold at 7am when you set off, but day five was even colder than 
usual. And that was at the foot of the first climb. But as we approached the 
top, Julierpass at 2,284m, we could not see 10m in front of us. We were in 
near-freezing fog and constant rain. In the ascent, the effort keeps you warm, 
but after the refreshment point at the top, you get cold very rapidly. I 
stuffed the usual energy bars and gels down my mouth and a piece of cardboard 
down my jersey. I put on long gloves – essential – and my waterproof gilet. I 
set off down the long, wet, windy descent, chattering swearwords to myself, and 
taking the water-logged bends carefully.
 Misty morning on the Haute Route. Photograph: Manu Molle 
After several kilometres, wet through, I hit the foot of the next climb. It 
was there I witnessed 20 more riders climbing into an ambulance, shaking 
uncontrollably, wrapped in foil and suffering from hyperthermia, some of them 
in tears. The medical staff on hand were invaluable. Several more dived into a 
cafe and scrambled for hot chocolates and toilet roll. At this moment I gave 
myself a private talking to. I’m from the north, I said. I’m not giving in. I 
must not stop now or I’ll never ride again this week. So I rolled on, like some 
yellow-jacketed fiend, through the wind and rain. And so came the next climb, 
and then the next. And gradually the rain stopped. I began to dry out. On the 
beautiful valley floor I even stopped to take a photograph. And eventually I 
made it to the last, and fifth tortuous climb. Every day of cycling to school 
in winter, every gritty bit of walking in hills in British weather – they all 
got used that day. I’ve become an animal, a cycling animal, I said to myself. 
Dozens dropped out that day. But I have survived! The rain poured again, but I 
grinned for every 10km of the final non-timed descent to Andermatt.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzTy8_vEVhr0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzTy8_vEVhr0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DzTy8_vEVhr0&media=>
 Haute Route Dolomites - on the fifth day. Just a snippet of the suffering. 
“I need my food,” said Nuno, already at the hotel. “I need my sleep.” There 
was no stopping him. I was doing two events, and classed as an “iron rider” – 
irony rider would be more apt. But Nuno, alongside 10 others, was doing the 
Triple Crown – Dolomites, Alps and Pyrenees over three weeks. It is amazing how 
humans are hardwired to forget pain as soon as the finishing line is crossed. 
Either that or we’re all idiots.


And so for the rest of the Haute Route Dolomites I continued, painkillers 
helping, under the cut-off times, and day six’s spectacular view as we climbed 
out of Andermatt was my favourite. I was usually in the bottom 20%, but didn’t 
worry. The last Dolomites day from Crans Montana was a marathon 180km, but it 
was all a blissful blur to me. We finished, officially in Yvoire outside 
Geneva. I was given a medal. It was a beautiful day and I ate a triple 
ice-cream to celebrate. Together, feeling like battle-worn heroes, we all then 
rolled into the Swiss city to complete the ride in a mass peloton, the iconic 
giant fountain on Lake Geneva spurting through a beautiful rainbow in the 
sunlit sky.
 Haute Route day six – a recovering Peter Kimpton climbs up among the clouds 
on the Furkapass out of Andermatt. Photograph: Fergus Grant/@HRLanterneRouge 
With only a short prologue time-trial alongside the lake the next day, there 
was time to reflect on other riders. Most were incredibly fit. Haute Route is 
all about climbing and individual fitness, so there were few large pelotons in 
which to shelter. It was only at the beginning of the Alps event, on a long 
flat non-timed section, where there was a large peloton, that I realised just 
how high the standard was – it was cruising along at a professional level 50kph.
 Haute Route Dolomites Day 6: climbing above the clouds Photograph: Manu Molle 
Despite taking in the Col de La Colombière, the first say of the Alps Compact 
was the smoothest of all days for me (although no day is easy), and I felt like 
I was nearly done. The last day up to Courchevel was much tougher, with two 
hard climbs, but somehow the Compact, a two-day taster for the rest of the full 
Alps event, while wonderfully scenic, was oddly anti-climatic. For me the main 
event was the Dolomites, the toughest ever Haute Route – and my first. With a 
time-consuming transfer back to Geneva, I felt that others who had only come 
for the Compact may have felt they were spending almost more time travelling 
than riding.

 Warming up on Haute Route Alps Compact Day two, Peter’s final day. 
Photograph: Manu Molle 
But overall while my greatest joys were arriving at the top of cols, and 
speeding down descents in dramatic scenery, the event is also about being among 
a mass of riders, all celebrating cycling – often against all the odds and 
perhaps in a collective expression of madness. Only about 10% of the riders 
were women, but most were outstandingly fast, several competing with the men in 
the top 10% overall. Olympic medallist and world record-breakerEmma Pooley  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/emmapooley>was among several stars to 
appear, very much enjoying herself, and revealed how challenging she found it, 
was also generous enough to pay tribute to the riders at the back.
 A fast descent on the first day of the Haute Route Compact. Peter discovered 
his top speed to have reached 84kph. Photograph: Peter Kimpton 
I very much enjoyed meeting a variety of characters en route, including a 
group who rode with custom-made bamboo frames, a 70-year-old Swiss rider (the 
average age was early 40s), cyclists from theTeam Type 1 Foundation charity 
<http://teamtype1.org/> helping fight diabetes in developing countries, and the 
talented and highly-trained Mike Gluckman, who did the entire Dolomites 
standing up on a single-speed model. As Nuno put it to him: “I wouldn’t want to 
be your quads.” I also enjoyed several bouts of hilarious banter withFergus 
Grant <https://twitter.com/HRLanternerouge>, a French-fluent Mancunian and 
superfit cyclist employed as the Lanterne Rouge rider, who, like a court jester 
on wheels, has the job of jollying and speeding up the rear of the pack.


But the one who made the greatest impression on me was the extraordinary 
disabled athlete Christian Haettich, who, riding with only one leg and arm, was 
on his way to completing all three events. This courageous individual attracts 
huge respect and inspiration. I feel humbled to have even been in the same ride 
as him. And, if I find the time to train, perhaps I will be worthy enough to 
join him again next year.

 The incredible Christian Haettich on Haute Route Dolomites, only a third of 
the way through a three-week marathon. Photograph: Manu Molle 
Peter rode the Haute Route on a Boardman Pro Carbon SLR 
<http://www.halfords.com/cycling/bikes?brand=Boardman>

For more information on the Dolomites, Alps and Pyrenees rides, including 
videos and to take advantage of early booking discounts in September for next 
year’s events, visit theHaute Route website
 <http://www.hauteroute.org/>


 <http://www.halfords.com/cycling/bikes?brand=Boardman>
 