
Geelong rejoined the AFL’s top four in staggering fashion, piling on six 
consecutive goals in the fourth quarter to defeatRichmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richmond> by four points at the MCG. The 
match was in the balance up until the final siren, with Tigers’ 200-gamer Jack 
Riewoldt unable to reel in a spectacular mark that would have given him a shot 
at goal and chance to snatch victory.

The Cats triumphed 10.22 (82) to 12.6 (78) in a bizarre game of football, 
doing enough in one quarter to rise above Greater Western Sydney and claim 
fourth spot on the ladder.

Swans emphatic, Dees comfortable, Lions and Eagles home in thrillers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/afl-saturday-round-21-roundup> 
They started sluggishly and up until three-quarter-time it looked like being 
their worst performance of the season. The Tigers held a 35-point lead and all 
the momentum at the final break, having restricted a fumbling and stagnant
Geelong <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/geelong> outfit to just 4.13.

Whatever Cats coach Chris Scott said at three-quarter-time, it worked. The 
Cats took just 20 seconds to work the ball forward to Josh Caddy, who roared 
with belief after kicking a goal. It started a run of 15 consecutive scoring 
shots from Geelong.

Scott’s side remained wasteful in front of the goal posts, managing 6.9 in the 
fourth term, but created so many opportunities it didn’t matter. They moved the 
ball with the sort of pace and precision that had been missing in the first 
three terms, with Patrick Dangerfield among many Cats to lift.

Cats defender Harry Taylor, who celebrated his 200th game with a clutch goal, 
was swung forward by Scott late in an act of desperation. Taylor won a late 
freekick and converted his set shot, putting the Cats in front for the first 
time since the opening term.

Tom Hawkins, one of many Geelong stars well below their best in the opening 
three terms, then kicked a goal off the ground to give his side a nine-point 
buffer. Ty Vickery responded with Richmond’s only goal of the quarter to give 
his side hope but Riewoldt was unable to conjure a miracle.

The triumph extended Geelong’s winning streak over Richmond, which started in 
2006, to 12 matches. The Cats, who face Brisbane and Melbourne in the final two 
rounds, are well placed to secure a coveted double chance in finals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fessendon-stun-gold-coast-to-end-afl-losing-run-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F452c8cf0f615f44ce607d4c86982c865869e09e8%2F0_48_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Geelong%20rally%20in%20fourth%20quarter%20to%20edge%20Richmond%20in%20AFL%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fessendon-stun-gold-coast-to-end-afl-losing-run-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Geelong%20rally%20in%20fourth%20quarter%20to%20edge%20Richmond%20in%20AFL%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fessendon-stun-gold-coast-to-end-afl-losing-run-in-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F452c8cf0f615f44ce607d4c86982c865869e09e8%2F0_48_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Josh Jenkins and Taylor Walker of the Crows celebrate their 72-point win over 
Fremantle. Photograph: Paul Kane/Getty Images 
Adelaide <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/adelaide> remain hot on the heels 
of Sydney in the race for second spot on the AFL ladder after posting a 
72-point win over Fremantle at Domain Stadium in the last game of the day. 
Eddie Betts booted six goals and Josh Jenkins kicked five in the 21.16 (142) to 
11.4 (70) rout on Sunday afternoon.

The result kept Adelaide in third spot – only a few percentage points adrift 
of the second-placed Swans. Greater Western Sydney’s upset loss to West Coast 
on Saturday means the Crows are a win clear of fifth spot before games against 
Port Adelaide and West Coast. Fremantle remain mired in 16th spot with a 3-17 
record.

Assistant coach Peter Sumich has already departed, and president Steve Harris 
has announced he will follow suit at the end of the season, with vice-president 
Dale Alcock to replace him. The Dockers were dealt another blow when ruckman 
Aaron Sandilands failed to play out the match.

Fremantle skipper Matthew Pavlich booted two majors to move to 699 career 
goals. Forward Michael Walters (five goals) fought bravely until the end, but 
Adelaide boasted far more match-winners all over the park. Crows speedster 
Charlie Cameron provided the highlight of the match in the fourth quarter when 
he took four bounces and burned off Connor Blakely to set up Jenkins’ fifth 
goal.

Betts booted two goals in the first term to help set the tone while spearhead 
Taylor Walker was kept goalless by Dockers defender Alex Silvagni in the first 
half. But with the Crows boasting eight separate goal-kickers, the visitors 
went into the long break with a commanding 31-point lead.

Pavlich showed some spirit just before half-time, booting a long-range goal 
before fighting back at the niggle of Adelaide defender Kyle Hartigan. The 
stand-off sparked a mini-melee as players from both sides rushed in, and 
Pavlich unleashed a couple of gut punches that might be looked at by the AFL’s 
match review panel.

However, given he will be rested for next week’s clash with GWS anyway, a 
one-match ban won’t bother him too much. Jenkins booted three goals in the 
third term as the margin started to get ugly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fessendon-stun-gold-coast-to-end-afl-losing-run-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cdc5777291bb476ab4a3169c4104288d52bb61d%2F0_88_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Geelong%20rally%20in%20fourth%20quarter%20to%20edge%20Richmond%20in%20AFL%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fessendon-stun-gold-coast-to-end-afl-losing-run-in-style%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Geelong%20rally%20in%20fourth%20quarter%20to%20edge%20Richmond%20in%20AFL%20thriller&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Faug%2F14%2Fessendon-stun-gold-coast-to-end-afl-losing-run-in-style%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8cdc5777291bb476ab4a3169c4104288d52bb61d%2F0_88_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 Zach Merrett and David Zaharakis stood out for the Bombers in their win over 
the Suns. Photograph: Scott Barbour/Getty Images 
After an AFL year of hurt, Essendon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/essendon> have given their suffering fans a 
slice of late-season reward, downing Gold Coast by six points to end the club’s 
worst losing streak. The Bombers were full of effort and heart at Etihad 
Stadium on Sunday afternoon, running Gold Coast ragged to finish 11.9 (75) to 
6.15 (69) winners – their first victory in 18 matches.

The match was in the balance right until the final siren. After butchering 
opportunities all match, Gold Coast captain Tom Lynch’s goal left the Suns six 
points behind with 14 seconds to play but there would be no last-gasp effort, 
with John Worsfold’s side completing an improbable comeback win.

There were seven lead changes on an afternoon when two injury-hit sides needed 
to improvise their way to a result. The Suns’ tall timber of Tom Lynch, Sam Day 
and Peter Wright stole the momentum in the third term, each kicking goals to 
have the Suns 13 points ahead.

It looked as though Rodney Eade’s side would kick clear but Essendon stood up. 
The makeshift Bombers side kicked five-straight goals, giving the 16,622 crowd 
the first chance to sing the club song since April.

David Zaharakis (40 disposals) and stand-in captain Zach Merrett (38 
disposals) were mighty for the Bombers, with Orazio Fantasia’s three goals 
proving vital. Jake Long, son of club legend Michael Long, made a promising 
debut with two goal assists and 13 touches with few errors.

For the Suns, Touk Miller (39 disposals) was one of few that could hold their 
head high. The loss will matter little to the Suns in the short term, having 
already missed out on a finals campaign but the manner of the capitulation is 
likely to raise plenty of question marks about the playing group.
 