
Geena Davis <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/geena-davis> is tall, very 
tall. In her bare feet, she reaches 6ft. Today, she is wearing 5in wedge heels 
and towers over everyone in the near vicinity.

This is worth remarking upon not because Davis’s appearance is the most 
interesting thing about her – it isn’t, not by a long mark – but because it 
shows her willingness to occupy a space, to lay claim to it. There is an 
assertiveness to her physical presence. Most tall women feel the need to slouch 
or wear flats or somehow make themselves seem that little bit less 
intimidating. Davis clearly has no truck with this. As she walks across to meet 
me, shoulders back, smile in place, arm outstretched to shake my hand, her 
entire stance is one of easy confidence.

Davis has long made it her mission to ensure women occupy more space in a 
notoriously sexist business. The film industry has never been an equal 
opportunities employer. But we are meeting at a time when the plates seem to be 
shifting. Several actresses have recently spoken out about unequal treatment 
and an increasing number of films are being made with complicated, interesting 
female protagonists at the helm. Are we at a watershed moment?

“The women in the industry, I think, are remarkable,” Davis says cautiously. 
“A lot of people are becoming very comfortable about saying it’s not fair.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2iBFmKlO4BY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2iBFmKlO4BY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2iBFmKlO4BY&media=>
 Thelma & Louise trailer. 
For her part, Davis has a reputation for making empowered, counter-intuitive 
choices. She is probably best known as Thelma Dickinson, the radicalised 
anti-hero in Ridley Scott’s 1991 feminist box-office smash,Thelma & Louise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/26/thelma-louise-french-classic-dvd>
, or as the feisty Dottie Hinson in the 1992 women’s baseball movie,A League of 
Their Own.

“Having been in some roles that really resonated with women, I became 
hyper-aware of how women are represented in Hollywood,” she says.

That awareness has tipped over into activism. In 2006, she founded the Geena 
Davis Institute on Gender in Media <http://seejane.org/>, the only 
research-based organisation that works to promote gender balance in the media 
and entertainment industries. Next month, the institute will launch itsGlobal 
Symposium on Gender in Media 
<http://www.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/news-bfi/announcements/geena-davis-launch-global-symposium-gender-media-bfi-london-film>
as part of the BFI London film festival. It comes at an opportune moment.

Patricia Arquette used her Oscars acceptance speech in March to issue a 
rallying cry for equal pay – top-earning female dramatic actors take home around
 40% of the salaries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/american-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism>
 of their male co-stars. In April, Carey Mulligan, who stars in the forthcoming
Suffragette, <https://www.theguardian.com/film/suffragette> the story of 
19th-century campaigners fighting for women’s right to vote, called the movie 
industry“massively sexist” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/18/carey-mulligan-attacks-sexist-film-industry-ahead-of-suffragette-release>
. That same month, her co-star Meryl Streep announced she was funding a
screenwriters’ lab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/11/meryl-streep-female-writer-program-reveals-participants>
 for women writers over 40. In May, the actor Elizabeth Banks, who had just 
directed her first feature,Pitch Perfect 2, admitted there were “systemic 
problems” regarding gender inequality in the movie business. In July, Emma 
Thompson claimed that “some forms of sexism and unpleasantness to women have 
become more entrenched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/21/emma-thompson-sexism-in-acting-industry-is-worse-than-ever>
 and indeed more prevalent”. Earlier this month, Anne Hathaway told theNew York 
Times that, professionally speaking, she had been “treated differently because 
I was a woman”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL-EmDy3w1X8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL-EmDy3w1X8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DL-EmDy3w1X8&media=>
 Patricia Arquette Oscar acceptance speech. 
Has Davis ever experienced sexism in the industry?

“Yeah, you know, I’ve definitely seen sexism on the set, though not that much 
directed at me.” She’s been lucky, she says. The only thing that comes to mind 
is an occasion when a director commented on how much he enjoyed hugging her 
each morning because: “It’s the only chance I get to feel you up.”

Davis wasn’t having any of it: “I said, ‘OK, that made me uncomfortable’… And 
he would not stop defending himself, saying: ‘But I am a feminist, I am such a 
feminist, and you know that.’ I said: ‘Nevertheless, I didn’t like it, that’s 
all. Just deal with it.’”

From 2007 to 2014, women made up only 30.2% of all speaking or named 
characters in the 100 top-grossing films distributed in the US, according to 
research conducted by Dr Stacy Smith at USC Annenberg. A staggeringly low 1.9% 
of those films were directed by women. Success stories such as Kathryn Bigelow, 
who was the first woman to win theAcademy Award for best director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/08/kathryn-bigelow-oscars-best-director>
 withThe Hurt Locker (2009) are extremely rare (and when I ask one Hollywood 
producer why Bigelow broke through where others did not, he replies without 
missing a beat: “Because she was married to [Titanic director] James Cameron. 
They knew if she fucked it up, he could step in and save the day.” This in 
spite of the fact the couple had divorced several years before she made the 
film in question). In fact, the proportion of female directors handed the reins 
on the highest-grossing films has actually fallen over the past 17 years, and 
only 5% of cinematographers are women. The same study revealed that a paltry 
19.9% of female characters were 40 to 64 years old.

The real Hollywood scandal: why Jennifer Lawrence, Angelina Jolie and other 
female stars get ripped off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/american-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism>
At 59, Davis is familiar with the crushing silence of a phone that never 
rings. Women in film are, she says “definitely” discriminated against because 
of their age.

“I was averaging about one movie a year my whole career and that was because 
I’m fussy. I probably could have done more. And then in my 40s I made one 
movie… And I was positive it wasn’t going to happen to me because I got a lot 
of great parts for women. I was very fortunate to have all that stuff happen 
and never get typecast, so I was just cruising along thinking: ‘Well yeah, it 
won’t happen to me.’ It did.”

How did she cope with that?

“It’s frustrating and it certainly made me angry at different times… It’s 
tough.” She smiles that familiar grin, cheeks pressing upwards. We are sitting 
in an empty studio at the YouTube offices in Los Angeles where Davis is staging 
an event the following day. She arrived carrying several bags, refusing all 
offers of help as if astonished anyone should think she couldn’t manage.

These bags are now placed strategically around her feet like well-behaved 
puppies. I’m not sure what is in them – not her laptop because she thinks she 
left that in the car, and when she starts rooting for a tissue, she can’t find 
one. Eventually, her work colleague passes her a packet of Kleenex.

She blows her nose, then continues: “The big takeaway I got from Thelma & 
Louise was the reaction of women who had seen the movie being so profound, so 
different. It was overwhelming and it made me realise how few opportunities we 
give women to feel excited and empowered by female characters, to come out of a 
movie pumped.”

When Davis’s daughter Alizeh was born in 2002 she started noticing something 
else: when she watched animated or children’s films, Davis was struck by the 
lack of female characters on show.

It's an image we have that women only need to take up a certain amount of 
space and then we've done right by them

“It was really shocking,” she says. “I first just mentioned it to my friends 
and said, ‘Did you notice in that movie that just came out there was only one 
female creature in the whole movie? Besides the mother who dies in the first 
five minutes?’ And none of them had noticed. Feminist friends, mothers of 
daughters, none of them noticed until I pointed it out.”

She started talking to studio bosses and industry figures. Across the board, 
she was told gender representation was not a problem. It had been fixed: “And 
very often they would name a movie with one female character as proof.”

So Davis sponsored the largest ever study on gender depictions in family-rated 
films and children’s television (“I take everything too far,” she admits). The 
research spanned a 20-year period. It found that for every female speaking 
character there were three males, while female characters made up just 17% of 
crowd scenes.

“I told somebody that just the other day and they said, ‘Well it seems like 
you’d have to work at making it that few,’” Davis says with a chuckle.

Her point is that even in a fictional setting, created from our collective 
21st-century imagination, we seem – subconsciously or otherwise – to believe a 
17% female representation is the natural state of affairs.

“That ratio is everywhere,” Davis says. “US congress? 17% women. Fortune 500 
boards are 17%. Law partners and tenured professors and military are 17% 
female. Cardiac surgeons are 17%. That’s the percentage of women in the 
Animation Guild. Journalists, print journalists, are 19% women. So why, across 
all these major sectors of society, does this percentage of women in leadership 
positions stall at about the same range?

“I mean, it’s freaky when you start examining it. For decades it’s been the 
same ratio – we’ve all grown up on that ratio. Could it be that women’s 
presence stalls at about the rate of female participation in the fiction that 
we watch? Could it be you get to that level and you feel done? That that looks 
normal?

“It’s just a completely unconscious image that we have in our heads that women 
only need to take up a certain amount of space and then we’ve done right by 
them.”

Davis is quoting American figures. The data in the UK is a fraction better but 
not much: women make up23% of FTSE 100 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/25/all-time-high-uk-women-boardroom-members>
 boardroom roles and29% of all MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/08/record-numbers-female-minority-ethnic-mps-commons>
. But statistics only go so far. What of the experience of real women who work 
in film – not just on-screen, but the cinematographers and writers and costume 
designers and sound engineers who make a production happen? The anonymous 
Tumblr,Shit People Say to Women Directors (& Other Women in Film) 
<http://shitpeoplesaytowomendirectors.tumblr.com/> has some choice anecdotal 
evidence of women being asked to “smile more!” and of being routinely mistaken 
for secretaries on set.

The director Lynne Ramsay (Ratcatcher, We Need to Talk About Kevin) cites a 
handful of occasions when a predominantly male crew would underestimate her 
because of her diminutive height and would call her “bitchy or bossy” where a 
male director would simply be regarded as assertive.

The cinematographer Tami Reiker, the first woman to win an American Society of 
Cinematographers 
<http://www.indiewire.com/article/8-female-cinematographers-you-should-know-about-20141104>
 award, has spoken in the past about how having children affected her career 
prospects. “It’s a real thing. And we work so hard and when do we have our 
babies? Between 38 and 44, right at the peak of our careers… I think it’s 
harder and harder for more [women] to come up through the system.”

The long, unpredictable hours and lack of affordable childcare means many 
women in film find it nearly impossible to achieve a reasonable work-life 
balance. Several of those I speak to suggest that one solution to the drastic 
under-representation of women is to have on-set creches.

It might go some way towards correcting the imbalance in behind-the-scenes 
roles: in 2013, women accounted for 2% of composers, 4% of sound designers and 
2% of special effects supervisors on the 250 top-grossing films, according to 
research by theCenter for the Study of Women in Television and Film 
<http://womenintvfilm.sdsu.edu/research.html>. It gets worse if you are a woman 
of colour: out of the 565 directors of the top-grossing films from 2007 to 
2012, according to the USC Annenberg study, only two were black women.

That seems odd, given the preponderance of films in recent years featuring 
strong female leads, such asTrainwreck, Bridesmaids, The Hunger Games franchise 
or evenMamma Mia!. But, says Davis: “In fact, the ratio of male to female 
characters has been exactly the same since 1946. So all the times that the 
press has announced that now things are better, or now things are changing, 
they haven’t.

Just before you cast a film, change a bunch of the first names to female – 
hooray! Now you've got a gender balance

“There always comes a point where they’re trying to spot a trend, which would 
be great. The year thatMamma Mia! and Sex and the City were both gigantic hits 
internationally [the media were saying] ‘Now, beyond a doubt, we’ve proven 
giant summer blockbusters with women will change [the industry]…’ Nothing 
changed.

“And it happened to me twice. That’s how I became aware of the phenomenon. 
AfterThelma & Louise, which was pretty noticed and potent and significant, 
[people were saying] ‘This changes everything! There’s going to be so many 
female buddy movies!’ and nothing changed. And then the next movie I did wasA 
League of Their Own, which was a huge hit and all the talk was, ‘Well now, 
beyond a doubt, women’s sports movies, we’re going to see a wave of them 
because this was so successful.’ That’s balls. It took 10 years untilBend It 
Like Beckham came out. So, there was no trend whatsoever.

“It keeps happening, and we keep falling for this notion that now there’s 
Bridesmaids, now there’s Hunger Games…” She trails off. “It hasn’t started a 
trend.”

Why does sexism in film remain so pervasive? As with wider society, part of 
the problem lies in the fact that the key decision-makers remain overwhelmingly 
white, male and middle-aged. The majority of studio bosses are men – with one 
notable exception in the form of Donna Langley, the chief executive of 
Universal Pictures, who in July this year ensured the studio became the fastest 
ever to make $3bn, thanks to a roster of films including the female-ledFifty 
Shades of Grey, Pitch Perfect 2 and Trainwreck.

The success of Universal prompted AO Scott, the chief film critic of the New 
York Times, to say earlier this month that “there does seem to be something of 
a shift under way 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/09/13/arts/hollywood-retooling-subjects-broaden-but-studio-films-remain-essential.html>
”, despite Hollywood remaining “a hotbed of sexism and retrograde gender 
politics”.

He continued: “This fall, amid the difficult-man dramas and great-man biopics, 
there will be a decent smattering of woman-centred movies: Todd Haynes’s 
Cannes-belovedCarol <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lt-WC9xa7qs>, starring 
Cate Blanchett and Rooney Mara; John Crowley’sBrooklyn 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=szRFS4NO6f8>, starring Saoirse Ronan; and 
Sarah Gavron’sSuffragette <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=056FI2Pq9RY>, a 
movie about feminists.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgeena-davis-institute-sexism-in-film-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442939288760%2F3a4b5228-457e-47de-8269-8e52ec87f079-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Geena%20Davis%3A%20%E2%80%98After%20Thelma%20%26%20Louise%2C%20people%20said%20things%20would%20improve%20for%20women%20in%20film.%20They%20didn%E2%80%99t%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgeena-davis-institute-sexism-in-film-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Geena%20Davis%3A%20%E2%80%98After%20Thelma%20%26%20Louise%2C%20people%20said%20things%20would%20improve%20for%20women%20in%20film.%20They%20didn%E2%80%99t%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgeena-davis-institute-sexism-in-film-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442939288760%2F3a4b5228-457e-47de-8269-8e52ec87f079-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Anne-Marie Duff and Carey Mulligan in Suffragette. Photograph: Focus 
Features/Allstar 
But with men dominating positions of power, the suspicion is they will 
continue to hire directors or approve projects that appeal to their own tastes. 
It is interesting to note that not one of the nine Oscar nominees for best 
picture of 2014 has a female protagonist.

Jill Soloway, the creator and director of the hit Amazon TV drama Transparent 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/video/detail/B00NTOLOHW?ie=UTF8&*Version*=1&*entries*=0>
, put it this way in a speech at aWomen in Film 
<http://variety.com/2015/scene/vpage/transparent-jill-soloway-women-in-film-barneys-1201544690/>
 event in July: “Male creators, show runners, producers and directors have to 
really face the immorality – their own immorality – of hiring their friends, of 
telling male stories, of perpetuating male privilege through protagonism. The 
male gaze – men as subject, women as object – is business as usual for men to 
be able to keep telling their stories from their point of view.”

That might partially explain the recent slew of comic book adaptations with 
male superheroes front and centre. It is not the whole story, however. The 
unspoken subtext behind much of this is money. And the received wisdom is that 
women simply don’t make enough of it.

The producer Cassian Elwes, whose credits include Dallas Buyers Club and Blue 
Valentine, admitted last year that it was “tricky” to sell the idea of a female 
director to foreign territories. Seventy-two cents in every dollar made from US 
movies is garnered internationally, so this is a crucial market.

“The moment that you mention it’s a female director, you can see the eyes 
start to roll,” said Elwes. “The buyers want action films and they don’t see 
women as action directors. That’s where the whole thing kind of blows up.”

With the bar already set much higher for female directors than male, they are 
also given fewer second chances. Women with a box office failure don’t get 
hired again. Even when they succeed, they struggle: Lisa Cholodenko received 
four Academy Awards nominations forThe Kids Are All Right 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bdDSqgZ87fM> in 2011, including one for best 
picture. Afterwards, she was rewarded with almost exclusively small-screen 
offers.

Mimi Leder directed the sci-fi disaster flick, Deep Impact 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fLgSKv2P-ow> in 1998, then took time off to 
have a child. She returned with the box-office flop,Pay It Forward 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_pCtXRP1edo> in 2000 – a move that, by her own 
admission, landed her “in movie jail”. Since then, she too has been directing 
TV shows.

“If a movie starring or written by or directed by a man flops, people don’t 
blame the gender of the creator,” the writer and director Diablo Cody told
Variety magazine last July. “It’s just kind of weird how the blame is always 
immediately placed on female directors.”

Davis is pretty dispirited about the paltry number of women directing: “I 
mean, we’ve known the numbers for years… and they are absolutely stagnant. 
Sometimes it gets a little worse, but there’s no trajectory of getting better 
whatsoever.”

Paul Feig: Ghostbusters reboot criticism is 'vile, misogynistic shit'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/mar/16/paul-feig-ghostbusters-reboot-criticism-is-vile-misogynistic-shit>
In May, the American Civil Liberties Union asked state and federal agencies to 
investigate the “gross statistical disparities” and “purposeful discrimination” 
behind the recruitment practices of major Hollywood studios, networks and 
talent agencies.

Then there’s the merchandise, which counts for an increasing amount of 
revenue. According to Bloomberg, if a movie reaches $1bn at the box office, 
associated merchandise sales (action figures, lunch boxes,T-shirts, Darth Vader 
Colour Change Lightsabers and so on) will average between $250m and $300m. The
Star Wars franchise alone has generated $12bn in toy sales.

The rumour in Hollywood is that female action figures don’t have shelf-appeal 
and are harder to shift. Apparently, studio executives are worried they will 
take a hit on the merchandise revenues for the next year’s all-female
Ghostbusters movie, directed by Paul Feig, for just this reason.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgeena-davis-institute-sexism-in-film-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442938676348%2Fbbcaf6c8-b461-4805-8748-6af16a11c66c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Geena%20Davis%3A%20%E2%80%98After%20Thelma%20%26%20Louise%2C%20people%20said%20things%20would%20improve%20for%20women%20in%20film.%20They%20didn%E2%80%99t%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgeena-davis-institute-sexism-in-film-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Geena%20Davis%3A%20%E2%80%98After%20Thelma%20%26%20Louise%2C%20people%20said%20things%20would%20improve%20for%20women%20in%20film.%20They%20didn%E2%80%99t%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fsep%2F27%2Fgeena-davis-institute-sexism-in-film-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F22%2F1442938676348%2Fbbcaf6c8-b461-4805-8748-6af16a11c66c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Director Kathryn Bigelow on the set of 1995 sci-fi thriller Strange Days. 
Photograph: Ronald Grant 
And yet because so much of this has for so long gone on behind closed doors, 
it is difficult to quantify the problem. It was only after 170,000 internal 
emails were leaked in the Sony Pictures hacking scandal last November that it 
was revealed the female leads ofAmerican Hustle – Amy Adams and Jennifer 
Lawrence – wereearning considerably less 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/12/sony-email-hack-jennifer-lawrence-paid-less-american-hustle>
 than their male co-stars. This, in spite of the fact that Jennifer Lawrence 
had won an Oscar the previous year and turned in a performance that was, for 
many, the highlight of the film.

The revelation prompted several other high-profile actresses to demand a pay 
hike, including Charlize Theron, who insisted on a $10m raise to be on a par 
with her male co-star Chris Hemsworth inSnow White and the Huntsman.

Lawrence, too, took action. When it came to signing up for Passengers, a new 
space-age romance for Sony, Lawrence asked for a $20m fee – and was given it, 
making her the world’s highest-paid actress. (Her co-star, Chris Pratt, is on 
$12m.)

Women who have established themselves in front of the camera are turning their 
hands to producing (Reese Witherspoon and Sandra Bullock both have successful 
production companies) and directing (Angelina Jolie is increasingly creating 
her own material to star in), while streaming services such as Netflix and 
Amazon Prime have encouraged a new generation of risk-taking, culturally 
diverse films and television shows.

And the Geena Davis Institute is doing interesting work in advocacy and 
education – running workshops and discussion groups where issues are chewed 
over and women in the industry are encouraged to come along and share their 
stories.

The day after I interview Davis, I go to one of these events. It’s a panel 
entitled The Power to Greenlight (to “greenlight” means to commission) and it’s 
open to members of the institute. The audience is full of feisty, eloquent 
women, from a twentysomething YouTube vlogger worried about how to deal with 
online bitchiness to an ageing actor incensed she can no longer get work.

Davis introduces the event with a dazzling smile. She’s still wearing her 
wedge heels, I notice. Afterwards, she mingles with the audience, stooping 
occasionally to hear what people are saying. Events like this are the closest 
thing many of these women have to an informal support network. In pockets, 
then, the situation is getting better. And it is a sign of progress that female 
actors feel more able to speak out about discrimination, rather than being 
silenced by a culture of fear.

In the past, there has been a sense that women who challenge sexism in the 
industry will be quietly blackballed. And in my experience, the number of 
actresses I’ve interviewed over the years who react with horror when the word 
“feminist” is raised far outweighs those – like Davis – who happily identify 
themselves as such. Once, an actress even got in touch with me via her 
publicist to complain she had been depicted as too feminist – even though they 
were all her own words.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtkZTcofj3wU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtkZTcofj3wU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtkZTcofj3wU&media=>
 A League of Their Own trailer. 
Davis has no such qualms: “I remember when A League of Their Own was coming 
out in ’92, when I was doing interviews it seemed like every interviewer at 
some point would say, ‘So… would you consider this afeminist movie?’ People are 
worried that it’s a taboo thing, so I took great relish in saying, ‘Yes, I 
would. Write that, yes.’”

Davis’s feminism was shaped by the strong women she worked with, most notably 
herThelma & Louise co-star Susan Sarandon. She tells a story about the first 
day of a script meeting with Sarandon and the director Ridley Scott, during 
which Davis had made intricate notes on every point she wanted altered so that 
she could bring them up without offending anyone.

“And for each one, I had planned out exactly when I was going to say it and 
exactly what way I was going to say it to get it across in the least 
objectionable way… I actually planned how disarming I could be. [It was] ‘Don’t 
mind me, I’m not really asking for things.’

“So we sit down, open the scripts and, I swear, it was like page one and Susan 
says, ‘My first line here, I think that line, see, the second line is such a 
better first line. I think we take that line and put it at the end of the 
scene…’ And Ridley’s going, ‘Oh, yeah. Uh huh, uh huh.’ I was in shock. I was, 
like: ‘Wait a minute, people can talk like that?’ It was an hour of revelation 
about just saying what you think.”

Is that a particularly female trait: not wanting to cause trouble and needing, 
above all, to be liked?

“Yeah. [It’s] ‘I don’t want you to think I have needs or anything.’ I was 
very, very, very much that way.”

Of course there is no simple solution to the endemic problem of the 
under-representation of women in film. Davis is not a fan of quotas for the 
creative industries but she says one of the easiest ways to make an impact is 
to smash the psychological barrier of 17% on screen and to start doing that now.

“The one area where we could reach parity overnight is on screen, absolutely 
overnight… My two-pronged solution to the entire problem is just before you 
cast a film or a TV show, go through the characters and change a bunch of first 
names to female – hooray! Now you’ve got a gender-balanced cast, you’ve got 
female characters who are un-stereotyped because they were written actually for 
a man and then, wherever it says, ‘a crowd gathers’, put ‘which is half 
female’. And that’ll happen.”

Her suggestion is a valid one: the more representations there are of women 
doing interesting or unexpected or powerful things, the more we become 
culturally acclimatised.

“I really think if we change what kids see from the beginning, it will change 
how they grow up,” Davis says. “You know, we’re creating problems that we have 
to solve later… If we show them that women take up half the space and boys and 
girls share the sandbox equally from the beginning, it will change everything.”

In 2005, Davis starred in a TV drama called Commander in Chief in which she 
played a female president. True, she ascends to the post from vice-president 
after the incumbent dies in office – the gender-blindness didn’t extend so far 
as to suggest a woman could actually have been elected – but she didwin a 
Golden Globe <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Jj-ZXdTC8gQ> for best actress.

“I was only in office for one season – I had a tragically short 
administration,” says Davis (who, incidentally, is a Hillary Clinton supporter 
in the race for US president). “But they did a survey afterwards that showed 
that people were 63% more likely to vote for a female candidate for president.

“Isn’t that extraordinary? And I was behind the desk 19 times, 19 episodes. So 
that’s an enormous impact and it’s true everywhere. When we studied the 
occupations of female characters on television, one of the most 
well-represented occupations was forensic scientist for women. Because of all 
theseCSI shows and Bones and all that, there’s a lot of female forensic 
scientists. In real life, so many women are seeking to get into that profession 
that colleges are scrambling to keep up with it. Because they saw it on TV!”

These days, Davis says, she’s more depressed than angry about sexism. She’s 
told her agent to start looking at the male parts rather than just the female 
ones “because there’s so many male parts that could easily be a woman”.

Yes, I suggest, she could be the female Jason Bourne.

“I was!” Davis replies, “In The Long Kiss Goodnight.”

It’s true: she’s always been way ahead of the curve.

Geena Davis will appear at the Global Symposium on Gender in Media at the BFI 
London film festival 
<https://whatson.bfi.org.uk/lff/Online/default.asp?BOparam::WScontent::loadArticle::permalink=geenadavis>
 on 8 October.Suffragette opens at the festival on 7 October and nationwide on 
12 October

• This article was amended on 29 September 2015 to correct the fact that 
research originally attributed to the Geena Davis Institute was actually 
carried out by Dr Stacy Smith at USC Annenberg.

 