
On Monday morning, we woke up to the news that gender matters 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/about_us/new_directions/Gender-Matters/default.aspx>
 – at least to Screen Australia, which has launched a scheme of the same name 
dedicating $5m to developing and promoting professional opportunities for women 
working in the Australian film industry over the next three years.

“This is a targeted and practical plan to combat gender inequality in our 
industry, starting from now,” Screen Australia deputy chair Deanne Weir said.

Women in Australian film: 'Change is not happening quickly enough'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/24/women-in-australian-film-change-is-not-happening-quickly-enough>
Why only now, some might ask? Weir heads up the Gender Matters taskforce 
alongside a number of prominent female screen professionals including Sue 
Maslin, producer ofThe Dressmaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/17/the-dressmaker-review-jocelyn-moorhouse-blows-small-town-drama-sky-high>
.

Based on the novel by Rosalie Ham and directed by Jocelyn Moorhouse, The 
Dressmaker took seven years to get financed. Even with big names Kate Winslet 
and Judy Davis attached, the film was considered too risky for investors – that 
is, until they had the male leads (including Liam Hemsworth and Hugo Weaving) 
attached.

This week, The Dressmaker became one of Australia’s highest-grossing films of 
all time, reaching $16m at the domestic box office, proving that Australian 
movies made by women for women have a mass appeal.Research shows 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/getmedia/511b73c6-5276-4701-828c-46916e74f29d/Rpt_BeyondBoxOffice.pdf>
 that women are more likely than men to go to the cinema or sit down and watch 
a DVD/Blu-ray. So how can male cast members be an accurate way of securing a 
film’s worth? Surely it’s time we stopped measuring things against male 
members, period.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fthe-dressmaker-trailer-kate-winslet-liam-hemsworth-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436764660213%2FThe-Dressmaker-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Dressmaker%3A%20watch%20Kate%20Winslet%20and%20Liam%20Hemsworth%20in%20the%20first%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fthe-dressmaker-trailer-kate-winslet-liam-hemsworth-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Dressmaker%3A%20watch%20Kate%20Winslet%20and%20Liam%20Hemsworth%20in%20the%20first%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fthe-dressmaker-trailer-kate-winslet-liam-hemsworth-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436764660213%2FThe-Dressmaker-001.jpg>
 Watch the trailer for the Dressmaker 
Gender Matters presents a five-point plan 
<https://vimeo.com/147555828?utm_content=buffer3a527&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
, including sweeping reform to promote gender and cultural diversity across all 
Screen Australia’s funding guidelines as well as specialised, female-focused 
initiatives.

The Enterprise Women scheme will generate screen industry infrastructure for 
women practitioners. Attachments forWomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> presents opportunities for 
emerging filmmakers to gain hands-on production experience. The Matched 
Distribution Guarantee Support will offer up to $300,000 to enhance marketing 
for female-driven projects, locally and internationally.The Women’s Story Fund 
will offer funds specifically for female screenwriters.

“My vision for the future is a world where stories about women, told by women, 
are equally of interest to all audiences,” Maslin said. “I look forward to 2018 
and more diversity and richness on screen.”

The optimism is necessary; the encouragement profound. Currently, only 29% of 
the people working in Australian film production are women. In the past 40 
years, women have made up less than 50%  
<https://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/research/statistics/employmentfeaturefilmmakersactivity.aspx>
of writer, director, producer credits on Australian feature films. Combine this 
with risk-averse financiers and thedoubt women naturally internalise 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2014/05/the-confidence-gap/359815/>
 and it’s easy to see why women may have shied away from the industry.

My vision for the future is a world where stories about women, told by women, 
are equally of interest to all audiences
Sue Maslin, producer 
The Dressmaker is the perfect example of the genre-blending, narrative-rich 
and – this bit is key – entertaining films Australian women can produce. The 
possibilitiesGender <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> Matters is 
promising for women professionally should only help strengthen our industry 
output and stimulate audiences for this kind of film.

Australia is not the first country to institute these kind of 
anti-discriminatory measures. Anna Serner, the chief executive of the Swedish 
Film Institute since 2012, has worked tirelessly to establish gender parity in 
Swedish cinema.

Since Screen NSW appointed Courtney Gibson as CEO earlier this year, all but 
two state screen funding bodies are led by women in the top executive role. 
Likewise, Sandra Levy runs the Australian Film Television and Radio School, the 
head of Victorian College of the Arts’ Film and TV School is Nicholette Freeman 
and Jennifer Bott heads up the board at the National Institute for the Dramatic 
Arts.

So, why did Gender Matters take so long? The Glass Ceiling, The Confidence 
Gap, and Imposter Syndrome might all sound like high-concept movie titles, but 
they’re real issues women face on a daily basis. The irony is that while we 
have a number of women in significant policymaking roles, they haven’t been 
empowered to institute change from within, to help breed confidence in the 
women to follow.

Australia’s population is 51% women. How much longer can we marginalise a 
majority? It’s refreshing to see people tweeting“Great news from Australia!” 
<https://twitter.com/sheobjects/status/673704867383275521> across the world and 
even more so to see people linking to a federal government initiative 
supporting an otherwise deflated arts community. But best of all, these 
celebrations include the hashtag#GenderMatters 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/gendermatters>. Because it really does.

Gender equality is a theatre issue, too
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgender-matters-in-australian-film-and-equality-cant-come-soon-enough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F226f91a4126a4d72054a6fe23d431d506c748d0a%2F0_0_700_420%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gender%20matters%20in%20Australian%20film%20and%20equality%20can't%20come%20soon%20enough%20%7C%20Stephanie%20Van%20Schilt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgender-matters-in-australian-film-and-equality-cant-come-soon-enough%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gender%20matters%20in%20Australian%20film%20and%20equality%20can%27t%20come%20soon%20enough%20%7C%20Stephanie%20Van%20Schilt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fdec%2F08%2Fgender-matters-in-australian-film-and-equality-cant-come-soon-enough%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F226f91a4126a4d72054a6fe23d431d506c748d0a%2F0_0_700_420%2F700.jpg>
 Playwright and actor Nakkiah Lui, recently awarded the Philip Parsons 
Fellowship for Emerging Playwrights. Photograph: Supplied/Belvoir 
Maryann Wright: The battle cry in Hollywood has never been louder. Jennifer 
Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/jennifer-lawrence-hollywood-gender-pay-gap>
,Patricia Arquette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/feb/22/patricia-arquette-oscars-speech-equal-pay-women>
,Reese Witherspoon 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/reese-witherspoon-her-production-company-833137>
,Meryl Streep 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/11/meryl-streep-female-writer-program-reveals-participants>
,Geena Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/27/geena-davis-institute-sexism-in-film-industry>
,Bradley Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/14/jennifer-lawrence-emma-watson-bradley-cooper-hollywood-pay-gap>
, the list goes on. Every month another celebrity takes to the headlines to 
demand equal pay and treatment. In Australia, where the audience and therefore 
salaries will always be smaller, there is a steady and fierce grassroots 
movement building momentum – and not just in film but in theatre, too.

Research shows 
<http://www.australiacouncil.gov.au/workspace/uploads/files/research/women-in-theatre-april-2012-54325827577ea.pdf>
 that, on average, only 21% of playwrights and 25% of directors in Australian 
main-stage theatre seasons between 2001 and 2011 were women. Next year, only 
three of the country’s 10 main-stage companies will reach gender parity of 
writers and directors in their2016 seasons 
<http://aussietheatre.com.au/news/new-statistics-show-severe-lack-of-gender-parity-in-theatre-and-screen>
.Statistics suggest 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/AUSSTATS/abs@.nsf/Lookup/4102.0Main+Features40Jun+2011> 
more women go to the cinema and theatre than men – the case is there forwhy 
gender parity makes marketing sense 
<http://letstalkmarketing.me/2015/11/01/why-gender-parity-makes-sense-from-a-marketing-perspective/>
. But this disconnect between the voices telling our stories and the audiences 
watching them is frightening.

Grace Barnes, speaking at the inaugural Women in Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> and Screen (WITS) think tank in 
Sydney last month put these inequalities down to a wide-spread “boys club” in 
both industries, and a lack of women actively putting themselves forward. 
Barnes had numerous case studies of bias towards hiring men in the cultural 
workplace. The position of assistant director became available while Barnes was 
directing a multi-million dollar musical. When she recommended an experienced 
female colleague, she was told “there are already enough female voices in the 
room”. How many voices was that? Barnes and one other colleague.

The Women’s Voices <http://www.womensvoicestheaterfestival.org/> festival in 
Washington DC made history in October, hosting world premieres of 50 female 
playwrights and there are plans for a similar event in Sydney, following the 
success of Melbourne’sGirls on Film 
<http://www.girlsonfilmfestival.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/GOFF-Program-Resize1.jpg>
 festival. Through slow but steady grassroots change and women proactively 
creating more work for themselves, there’s no reason we can’t self-right a 
century-old wrong. As Lizzy Schebesta said at the WITS event: “Reaching gender 
parity through equal representation is not a gift to women, it is a right.”

Maryann Wright is an organiser of the Women in Theatre and Screen think tank

 