
Hein Vanhaezebrouck could not help himself when he walked up to collect 
Belgium’s coach of the year award in mid-January. “We can be heroes just for 
one day,” the Gent manager told his audience before reverting to more standard 
platitudes. Three days had elapsed since David Bowie’s passing but 
Vanhaezebrouck’s reference was also intended to encompass an unusually high 
number of those sitting in front of him.

Wolfsburg finally get into gear before journey to Gent | Andy Brassell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/feb/15/wolfsburg-bundesliga-gent-champions-league>
If Gent did not quite sweep the board in the 2015 prizegiving, they came 
close. Their captain, Sven Kums, became the club’s first Belgian golden boot 
winner as best player since 1958, his team-mates Laurent Depoitre and Danijel 
Milicevic ranking second and third; their goalkeeper, Matz Sels, was deemed 
peerless in his own position. An unprecedented level of domestic recognition 
was reward for groundbreaking acts on the European scene: Gent, who were almost 
forced to reform beyond recognition in 1999, face Wolfsburg on Wednesday and do 
so as the first Belgian side toreach the knockout stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/gent-zenit-st-petersburg-champions-league-match-report>
 of the European Cup’s present incarnation.

“It would be our last miracle act,” says the Gent chairman, Ivan De Witte, of 
any victory against the Bundesliga side, and he has certainly seen enough to 
know. De Witte took over a modestly successful club – two Belgian cup wins and 
a league runners-up finish – that had overreached during a spell of progress in 
the 1990s. Its debt had hit €23m and showed little sign of easing; the best an 
insolvent club could hope for without prompt assistance was relegation by a 
couple of divisions and reappearance as a phoenix organisation. But the 
combination of De Witte – acharcutier’s son who founded a successful consulting 
business – and strong municipal goodwill succeeded in turning their fortunes 
around.

“My wife will tell you what a difficult decision it was to take on the 
challenge,” says De Witte, who had joined the club’s board several years 
previously. “She was not happy, absolutely not. But I was in the mood to 
believe we were going to make it. I felt a lot of people were inclined to help 
us, and it made me think this could work.

“The situation we were in was one that, for any company, means bankruptcy. It 
would have been very hard for the club to come back from there. We took three 
steps to solve it: selling our old stadium to the town; making long-term 
settlements with the banks, the government and the rest of our creditors; and 
trying to get some value from our playing squad. It was unbelievably hard work, 
but together we turned it around.”

Among the player sales to make a difference was that of the former Fulham 
forward Bryan Ruiz, who joined Twente for €6m in 2009. By 2013 De Witte was 
able to announce Gent were debt-free and working entirely from their own 
revenues. They had already managed a first shot at theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> by then, losing 6-1 on 
aggregate to Dynamo Kyiv in 2010-11 after coming second in the league again; a 
first-ever title followed in 2015 and their flowering has owed much to the 
vision shared by De Witte and Vanhaezebrouck, who joined from unfashionable KV 
Kortrijk the previous year.

“The vision is, and was, that we were only going to recruit players with the 
right attitude and mentality,” De Witte says. “Even if other players were 
better on the technical side, we didn’t take them. Our plan has been to work on 
fighting spirit, a little bit more of that than innate talent. We value 
solidarity above anything and you saw that in the group stage – the players 
were unbelievable.”

Few expected Gent to compete seriously for qualification from Group H, which 
matched them with Zenit St Petersburg, Valencia and Lyon. A single point from 
their first three games suggested respectability would be the aim, buta Kums 
penalty beat Valencia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/04/gent-valencia-champions-league-match-report>
 at the Ghelamco Arena, Gent’s home since 2013, and when Kalifa Coulibaly – 
with perhaps the most dramatic late winner of the entire round – headed them to
a 2-1 victory in Lyon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/nov/24/lyon-gent-champions-league-match-report>
 the impossible moved close to reality.Defeating Zenit on the final matchday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/gent-zenit-st-petersburg-champions-league-match-report>
 was the crowning achievement, althoughLyon’s win at the Mestalla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/09/valencia-lyon-champions-league-match-report-gary-neville>
 ensured they would have progressed anyway.

“That goal [by Coulibaly] may have been the most important goal in our 
history,” De Witte days. “It was 1-1 and I was hoping to keep the draw; it was 
an unbelievable moment. Nobody in Belgium gave us a chance – never. But 
suddenly there we were, one game from the next round.”

Champions League round of 16: previews for this week's matches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/who-scored-blog/2016/feb/16/champions-league-fixtures-psg-chelsea-roma-real-madrid>
Coulibaly’s intervention was certainly crucial but Kums epitomises Gent’s 
approach. A youngster with Anderlecht, he had gone on to win Belgium’s second 
tier with Kortrijk under Vanhaezebrouck, but a middling career only ignited 
after his old manager recruited him to Gent. Kums, a driving force in midfield, 
is the team’s heartbeat and has given the national team coach Marc Wilmots a 
credible domestic-based option to add to his trove of riches – along with Sels 
and the striker Depoitre, he was called up for the first time in November.

Scouts will be out in force to watch them attempt that final miracle – 
Manchester United, Manchester City, Arsenal, Tottenham and Leicester will be 
among those represented whenWolfsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/wolfsburg> visit, according to local 
media – but Gent have already moved quickly to ensure their star turns are 
heroes for a few more days yet.

“In the last few weeks we’ve signed almost every key player to a new contract 
and the aim is to keep them for next season,” says De Witte, whose team are 
well placed to win a second successive title. “Our first objective now is to 
compete at the top of the Belgian league, and then think about the European 
level. We have managed to solve the past; then we found the oxygen to look to 
the future.”
 