
Geoffrey Rush is playing King Lear 
<https://www.sydneytheatre.com.au/whats-on/productions/2015/king-lear?gclid=CPP1kfOUpMkCFYSWvAodI4YFEw>
, which opens this week at the Sydney Theatre Company’s Roslyn Packer theatre 
and continues until 9 January. In an interview with Guardian Australia’s Nancy 
Groves, the Oscar-winning actor talked about playing a part the 19th century 
essayist Charles Lamb said was “essentially impossible”.

Geoffrey Rush:

My career turned a sudden corner in my mid-40s when I did Shine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2013/dec/27/shine-rewatching-classic-australian-films>
. I kept doing theatre but I overindulged in cinema. Interesting films, and 
less interesting films. I dropped out of theatre for a period of about 10 years.

And then I ran into Stephen Daldry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-daldry> at a party in New York. It 
must have been whatever yearBilly Elliot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/sep/29/1> was up for everything. I don’t 
really know him, but I loved that film. One of those where I sobbed from the 
first to the last frame, I found it so emotional. We might have been in a 
fairly intoxicated party mood but Stephen came up to me and said: “Geoffrey, 
Geoffrey, what are you doing?” (I think I had just done a not very good film). 
He said: “You should be playing the great parts.”

If the character is unlikeable, don’t pussyfoot around

And that really stuck with me. I was heading into my 50s and started working 
with this voice coach on thePirates films  
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0325980/>who used to say: “Where’s your Arturo Ui 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Resistible_Rise_of_Arturo_Ui>? You’re not 
getting any younger.” And so, subsequently, I did some theatre likeExit the 
King with Neil Armfield 
<http://www.australianstage.com.au/reviews/melbourne/exit-the-king--malthouse/company-b-256.html>
 and playedLady Bracknell in Melbourne 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/theatre/lady-geoffrey-rush-no-drag-for-those-wilde-about-oscar-20111118-1nn3v.html>
 andA Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum.  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mT73yGzdDsg>

And it was then Neil and I decided on King Lear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/king-lear>. Lear is a confrontational play, 
not just in what it demands of the main actor but of all the actors; it’s 
really not a one-man show. I went online to find out the line count – it varies 
because of the quarto, the folio and the bad quarto – but roughly, it’s 3,200 
lines of which only 900 are Lear. That’s just under a third. There’s the 
interweaving subplot of Gloucester and Edmund and then there’s the war and 
encroaching France. It’s a box set.

I had to do my homework. I knew from when I did A Funny Thing Happened on the 
Way to the Forum that it took me a long time to cram in Stephen Sondheim’s very 
fast patter lyrics at a comfort-zone level. So I started working on Lear early, 
absorbing it, talking around it, finding out about the history. I had no qualms 
about whether any of this would influence me. I just thought: it’s a 
fascinating play.

Choosing my 101 greatest plays – and why I left out King Lear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/26/choosing-101-greatest-plays-michael-billington>
It’s the greatest in the English language, I think, certainly Shakespeare’s 
greatest achievement. It’s so nihilistic, talking about a world completely, 
irredeemably out of balance. Have we actually reached, as they say in the play, 
the promised end? And is there any way back to a balance or stability?Charles 
Lamb came out and said it was unactable <http://king-lear.org/charles_lamb>. 
But I don’t know if anything is unactable. That would be like saying 
Beethoven’s Ninth is unperformable or the Sistine chapel is unpaintable.

If you look at Hamlet – not that I’ve played him myself – each actor has to 
find their own Hamlet. Certainly with Lear, you have to credibly enter an 
acceptable zone of seeming like an octogenarian. And you can reference 
behaviours and family members to get there but, ultimately, it’s got to be your 
own. If the character is unlikable, don’t pussyfoot around that. And with Lear: 
what’s to like? His parenting skills are appalling!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgeoffrey-rush-on-playing-king-lear-whats-to-like-his-parenting-skills-are-appalling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F842dc2d8928f5fb3b74bfc6767f56fa2707bc6ba%2F0_0_1280_851%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Geoffrey%20Rush%20on%20playing%20King%20Lear%3A%20'What's%20to%20like%3F%20His%20parenting%20skills%20are%20appalling!'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgeoffrey-rush-on-playing-king-lear-whats-to-like-his-parenting-skills-are-appalling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Geoffrey%20Rush%20on%20playing%20King%20Lear%3A%20%27What%27s%20to%20like%3F%20His%20parenting%20skills%20are%20appalling%21%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fnov%2F23%2Fgeoffrey-rush-on-playing-king-lear-whats-to-like-his-parenting-skills-are-appalling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F842dc2d8928f5fb3b74bfc6767f56fa2707bc6ba%2F0_0_1280_851%2F1280.jpg>
 Geoffrey Rush in rehearsal for King Lear at the Sydney Theatre Company. 
Photograph: Heidrun Löhr/STC 
There are hardly any soliloquies. Edgar has them, Edmund has them. But Lear 
doesn’t. Not really. He has prayers that are pretty much interwoven into the 
scene. Like his curse to Goneril about childbirth: he is frothing at the mouth 
with a rage that I think implies that it hasn’t been a happy father-daughter 
relationship since she was slamming thick oak doors as a teenager.

But the point of that speech as I see it is: I want you to have the ugliest, 
most deformed experience of childbirth so you can feel how I feel when I’m 
being bitten by the serpent’s tooth of my own child.

Oliver Ford Davies: Playing Lear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2003/jan/11/theatre.artsfeatures> 
Lear is fascinating with the brilliance of his kingly language. It’s not like 
he’s inarticulate. But this is not a poetic play in the sense that you can say 
A Midsummer Night’s Dream is a poetic play, rich in illusions and deep 
metaphors. They exist, of course. But this is also a play driven by plot: an 
abdication, conflict between the inheritors of the estates. It’s all about 
property and selfishness and greed.

Lear has obviously been on the throne since before puberty. There is that one 
line: “They flattered me like a dog and told me I had white hairs in my beard 
ere the black ones were there.” And you think: this guy has been king forever. 
People have flattered and praised him all his life.

So he is offended to the core when Cordelia will not flatter him. She’s got 
his pride gene. In the same way that Goneril has his anger gene. And he chucks 
the biggest old man tantrum just because he can. Arrested development or 
something. And after his wobbly, his frustration grows and grows until the 
great wheel runs away for the rest of the play. Everyone’s worst self emerges.

I don’t know how virginal people will be on the play – there will be people 
who come who’ve never seen Lear, never seen Shakespeare. But this play works a 
kind of dark magic. It goes into every individual audience member’s mind until 
you start to think: well, really he’s just an old version of me. Not being 
loved, wanting to be loved, and transcending to a point where he actually feels 
empathy for others – that’s massive.

Neil came in and blew me away. I said: “Neil, it’s a very bleak play, not what 
you call a happy night out at the theatre.” And he said: “No, I think it’s 
about the miracle of life.” And he’s right. When you get the odd glimmer of a 
positive, humane, caring consideration of someone else, it’s glorious. Just 
beautiful. That moment when Lear and Cordelia find each other in prison, it’s 
almost a happy play. And then you get the final scenes … well, let’s just say 
Shakespeare must have been in a very dark place when he wrote it.



 