 Poor Geoffrey Robinson - if that is the right adjective for the rich New 
Statesman owner, industrialist and MP. He wants to be liked and he is generous 
enough to ensure it but his political career has brought little but trouble to 
those he has helped.
Gordon Brown and his playmates no longer use Mr Robinson's Park Lane penthouse 
as their private dining room, as they did after the 1997 general election. The 
prime minister no longer uses Mr Robinson's luxurious Nice flat or his palatial 
Tuscan villa for free holidays. And Peter Mandelson, to whom he lent Â£373,000 
to pay for a Notting Hill home, failed even to invite him to his house-warming 
party.

As if that snub was not enough, both Mr Mandelson and Mr Robinson - paymaster 
general from 1997 - had to resign in December 1998 when details of the loan 
became clear. It hurts him all the more because if he was lavish with his 
hospitality, it was not to corrupt New Labour in his own interest but because 
he wanted to share its crusade as an insider.

For Geoffrey Robinson is a middle class idealist. His family owned a furniture 
making plant and he joined Labour after meeting Harold Wilson while studying at 
Yale, after graduating from Clare College, Cambridge.

He worked for the party as a researcher for four years, succeeding the 
novelist Maurice Edelman as its MP for Coventry North West in a 1976 
byelection. But Robinson's gaze stretched beyond the House of Commons, to the 
world of commerce and finance.

His strong suit has always been his belief in a government aided revival of 
British manufacturing industry. He failed as the unpaid top man in the 
shortlived 1970s Meriden motorcycle cooperative, but earned his good reputation 
as chief executive of Jaguar cars.

He aimed to apply to industry the best ideas from British universities - a 
clever idea but one that crashed with TransTec, a company he founded and served 
as non-executive director, when it failed to deliver on a Ford contract (of 
which he was unaware). He lost both money and some of his good name.

But it did not dent his rather admirable brass neck. He stuck with Labour 
through the dark years of the 1980s and the defeats of the early 90s, earning 
his reward when Tony Blair appointed him paymaster general, a Treasury job 
serving Mr Robinson's ally, Gordon Brown.

All that came to an end just before Christmas 1998. Since then he has been a 
less than welcome face, thanks to Tory-inspired doubts concerning connections 
with Robert Maxwell. That said, Labour activists are happy enough to drink his 
beer at the annual New Statesman party at Labour's autumn conferences.

In his recently published memoirs, he proved to himself - if not everyone else 
- that he was "totally blameless". But his former political friends do not want 
him too near. He wonders why he should suffer for helping Mr Mandelson with his 
house loan while the man himself is allowed to make what proved to be a 
shortlived comeback.

The relative success of the New Statesman must be a consolation. It has 
returned to the mainstream of journalism, even if it has lost pull among old 
Labour activists. He also retains his dressy Maltese opera-singer wife and the 
bulk of a tax-free inheritance left to him by a Belgian millionaire. The money 
has enabled him to buy two Luytyens mansions. But at 62, after an operation for 
colonic cancer, he must be wondering whether he took the right decision to 
continue as an MP or whether he should retire to enjoy the good things of life.

Ask Aristotle about Geoffrey Robinson 
<http://politics.theguardian.com/person/0,9290,-4472,00.html>
 