
National selector Geoff Miller believes England's Ashes triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/aug/23/england-win-ashes-oval-test-australia>
 is just reward for sticking by their youngsters throughout a topsy-turvy 
series.

Andrew Flintoff returned in place of Graham Onions for the fifth Test at The 
Oval and Jonathan Trott's inclusion ahead of Ravi Bopara was the only other 
change to the England line-up from the team which slumped to defeat inside two 
and a half days at Headingley.

Warwickshire batsman Trott justified his selection with a debut second-innings 
hundred while young all-rounder Stuart Broad was one of those who came good 
under pressure after a difficult start. Miller now wants the team to build on 
their success.

"It's always easy to gamble," he said in an interview with BBC Radio 5 Live. 
"We're not in the throes of gambling. We've set out the way we want to go 
forward â€“ the word we use so often and it's important now is 'consistency'.

"We'll continue to do that. It's proved that is the way forward. The 
youngsters, when they feel they're secure and part of a unit, they start 
getting better and better and that augurs well for the future. Everyone played 
really well. We scored 700 runs on that wicket so we deserved the victory."

Broad, whose five wickets for 37 runs in the first innings at The Oval earned 
him the man-of-the-match award, has been tipped as the natural successor to 
Flintoff. But Miller warned not to heap too much expectation on the 
23-year-old's shoulders.

"It doesn't necessarily just fall on Stuart, we'll have to assess it," he 
said. "We know Fred [Flintoff] is not going to be part of our middle order but 
we're looking at players continually who can fit into that category."

Of Flintoff, who bowed out from Test cricket in style with the crucial run-out 
of Australia captain Ricky Ponting, Miller added: "He's been absolutely 
fantastic for the game of cricket worldwide and certainly for England.

"We will miss him but he's made a decision. He knows what his body's like so 
we'll run with that. He's not packed up on one-day cricket so wheneverything's 
sorted out with his operation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/aug/24/andrew-flintoff-england-return-surgery>
 we'll take it from there.

"It might be a long break but we know what he's capable of doing. We know what 
he wants, he's passionate to play for England and you saw it yesterday."

Hugh Morris, managing director of England cricket, was equally delighted with 
the progress made by the team.

"I was lucky enough to be in the team hotel last night. You could just see the 
boys were absolutely elated with their performance," he said. "I think we've 
come a long way over the last eight or nine months. The way Andrew Strauss and 
Andy Flower, as team director, have led the team and the team have responded, I 
think is fantastic, and I'm a very, very proud person to work with them."

Morris insists the celebrations will not be too boisterous, though, with a 
busy schedule ahead.

"We've got a one-day international with Ireland in a few days' time, two 
Twenty20 internationals, seven one-day internationals so we've got a pretty 
busy programme," he added. "We'll be looking forward to the challenges of those 
games."
 