
George Gregan smiles when asked about Eddie Jones’s reputation as a workaholic 
and the most demanding of coaches. The 139-cap scrum-half, who spent a decade 
working under Jones with the Brumbies and Australia, captaining the Wallabies 
at the 2003 World Cup, recalls that the players called the then Australia 
assistant coach Ewen McKenzie “Moth” – attracted to a flame that never burned 
out.

“I think Eddie has mellowed,” says Gregan, now an HSBC rugby ambassador. “It 
was different when he was younger and he is like green tea compared to how he 
was then. He is not renowned for sleeping eight hours a night and we used to 
joke that the only time he slept was after a plane took off.

Glen Ella installing family principles among England’s young backs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/07/glen-ella-family-principles-england-young-backs-australia-tour-rugby-union>
“He is an incredible worker and the 5am starts for the England players are 
typical, but while he is direct, people do respond to him. He has a track 
record of making players better and that is down to the way he coaches. I was 
not surprised that he took the England job because coaches are like players: 
they want to be involved at the highest level and Eddie loves the World Cup.”

Jones is one of the game’s great networkers, with contacts all over the world, 
regularly on the phone or picking brains over a coffee. Gregan met him during 
the World Cup, along with Glen Jackson and Rod Kafer, who had also played under 
Jones, and asked him about the rumours he had been approached by England.

“We met up for a coffee and although Eddie is a direct guy, when we asked him 
about England – Japan had just been knocked out of the World Cup – he became 
noncommittal, talking about great resources and an incredible player pool. He 
just loves coaching international teams and making good players better and he 
has a great thirst for knowledge. He improved me as a player and the 
environment he creates is all about getting better, no matter how many Test 
matches you have been involved in. It does not surprise me that players who 
endured a disappointing World Cup are better under his influence.”

Thirteen years ago Jones and Gregan were preparing for a home World Cup. The 
tournament was won by England,who defeated the Wallabies in the final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/nov/23/rugbyworldcup2003.rugbyunion3> 
at the end of extra time after two monthsof hostile media there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/nov/20/rugbyworldcup2003.rugbyunion9>. 
This time it is Jones who is on the receiving end of a barbed welcome, clearing 
customs in Brisbane on Thursday only afterhis bags had been rigorously searched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/02/eddie-jones-arrives-in-australia-expecting-coordinated-attack-on-england>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fgeorge-gregan-australia-eddie-jones-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23850abf90df63652a5ad094778466eed635dee5%2F0_170_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Gregan%3A%20%E2%80%98Everyone%20in%20Australia%20is%20excited%20about%20Eddie%20Jones%20returning%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fgeorge-gregan-australia-eddie-jones-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Gregan%3A%20%E2%80%98Everyone%20in%20Australia%20is%20excited%20about%20Eddie%20Jones%20returning%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fgeorge-gregan-australia-eddie-jones-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23850abf90df63652a5ad094778466eed635dee5%2F0_170_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
 Eddie Jones and George Gregan during an Australia press conference in Brisbane 
during the 2003 World Cup. Photograph: Odd ANDERSEN/AFP/Getty Images 
“Everyone in Australia is excited about Eddie returning with England,” says 
Gregan. “He has thrown a few hand grenades already and he has got people 
talking about the three-Test series, which is sold out. Rugby is a hot topic 
again and the timing is perfect because it will allow our game to build on the 
gains we made in last year’s World Cup. The task for Australia is to become 
consistent and there is no point in either side looking ahead to the next World 
Cup. It is all about the here and now.”

Jones has made changing England’s style his priority, adding to set-piece 
prowess by developing a fluid attacking game based on what players see rather 
than what they have been coached to do. He has hired the former Australia 
full-back Glen Ella as a backs coach for the series to help with the heads-up 
approach.

“Glen and Eddie have a history of working together,” says Gregan. “Glen is 
good at getting players to play what is in front of them, focusing on 
decision-making, giving guys the flexibility and the confidence to move the 
ball and back their skillsets to find space. I would call him a feel rather 
than a super technical coach and he will give England a nice balance, promoting 
a positive attitude so that the ball will be moved when it is on. He will get 
players thinking about the game, when to run, kick or pass, and he will benefit 
England.

“The semi-finalists in last year’s World Cup were all proficient passers from 
the southern hemisphere and that is how the game has developed there. When I 
played, some of the boys who played in the front five would not have 
contemplated throwing a pass, but now they need to be able to and watching Glen 
pass the ball is an education in itself. It is a fundamental aspect that allows 
you to play better: rugby is about more than the set pieces and Eddie is 
changing England’s balance.”

Jones has described Saturday’s first Test in Brisbane as “massive”. Australia 
have not played sincethe World Cup final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/31/new-zealand-australia-rugby-world-cup-final-match-report>
 at the end of October, while England followed up a Six Nations grand slam by
defeating Wales handsomely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/29/england-wales-international-match-report>
 at Twickenham last month.

“The first Test of any series is crucial because it is tough for the home 
side,” says Gregan. “No matter what Australia say, there will be rust not 
having played together for so long. England will have the advantage of being 
more match-hardened and familiar with each other. I remember when Wales came 
here in 2012, the series was so tight that although the Wallabies won it 3-0, 
they only scored 11 more points than Wales across the three matches. I think 
this series will be as close with both sides coached by strong, demanding 
characters who both care for their players. It will be fascinating, and fun.”
 