
The owner of Boots the Chemist, Alliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots>, has reported a global tax 
charge of just £2m after George Osborne's tax changes wiped more than £100m off 
its liabilities.

The group, which is part-owned by the private equity firm Kohlberg Kravis 
Roberts (KKR) and the Italian billionaire Stefano Pessina, saw a 16% increase 
in annual pre-tax profits to £973m.

It paid £90m in tax in the UK for the year to March, 40% more than the 
previous year, and a further £51m elsewhere. But these payments to the taxman 
were almost entirely offset in the group's 2014 accounts by a £113m credit, 
largely due to a reduced calculation of Boots' colossal deferred tax bill.

Like many large corporations in the UK, Boots has been able to boost profits 
by tearing up calculations on the tax it is due to pay in coming years after 
Osborne introduced a series of cuts to the corporation tax rate.

"This is a huge gift from the chancellor to big business," said the accountant 
and tax campaigner Richard Murphy. "Osborne has just written off future tax 
liabilities, and the rest of us will have to foot the bill."

Boots has previously been criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/oct/15/boots-targeted-campaigners-over-tax>
 by tax campaigners for loading the company with debt in a way that depressed 
taxable profits. Some campaigners have also argued that the group's UK tax bill 
is further distorted as heavy tax-deductible interest payments are borne in 
Britain despite more than two-thirds of sales coming from overseas.

"The public expects a company like Alliance Boots, which makes profits from 
the taxpayer-funded health service, to be paying their fair share," said Owen 
Espley, senior economic justice campaigner at War on Want. "The government has 
the powers to stop this kind of abuse, and yet is failing to act."

KKR and Pessina prised Alliance Boots off the stock exchange in 2007 in a 
controversial £12.2bn takeover backed with £9bn of debt. The following year 
they moved Alliance Boots' headquarters to Zug, Switzerland. In 2012 they sold 
a 45% stake to Walgreen for £4.3bn and from February the US drugstore has a 
six-month window to buy the remainder for a mixture of cash and shares.

For the year to March, net debt was reduced by £842m to £5.1bn but its finance 
costs, which are tax deductible, increased from £373m to £387m.

Last year, the G20 group of nations started a radical programme to reform the 
tax treatment of multinational corporations so as to curb what world leaders 
unanimously agree is a problem threatening both developed and developing 
economies around the world.

Tax experts from the OECD have promised action in relation to companies that 
borrow aggressively and, in doing so, depress their tax bills.

Pessina, who is based in Monaco, said considerable management time had been 
devoted to preparing for an "anticipated full merger".

In March, Walgreen said the deal, now into its second year, would deliver 
annual cost-savings of up to $425m. The tie-up means well-known Boots brands 
such as No7 and Soltan are now sold in Walgreens stores.

In the UK, the Boots the Chemist chain took market share despite an 
"increasingly competitive and promotion-led trading environment" with 
like-for-like sales up 1.3%.
 