
The Australian arts sector held a crisis meeting in Sydney on Thursday night. 
More than 120 arts leaders from around the country attended to discuss what to 
do about one of the gravest threats to Australian culture in decades. 
Meanwhile, I received an email from a commissioning producer at a Melbourne 
performing arts centre. “Dark days,” he wrote. Several of his friends in small 
performing arts organisations are being laid off.

George Brandis will have final say on arts funding, draft guidelines suggest
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/02/george-brandis-> 
I spoke to one of them on Friday morning, who did not wish to be named. The 
chaos in the industryafter the massive cuts  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/12/budget-takes-100m-from-australia-council-to-establish-arts-excellence-program>
to the Australia Council funding announced by arts minister George Brandis in 
May’s federal budget was directly responsible.

“There’s really no clear pathway towards multi-year funding, or even project 
funding for organisations where you need a small subsidy to underwrite 
management,” she told me. The uncertainty created by the 28% cut to the 
Australia Council is flowing through to job losses across the sector.

Bad news is starting to filter in. “I have also heard from lots of other 
people about how their funding is simply running out and they don’t know what 
is going to happen next year and if they will have jobs,” the producer said. “I 
think any organisation that went for the Australia Council’s six-year 
organisational funding round that was cancelled is now looking at laying off 
staff or folding.”

What was the six-year funding round? Only the Australia Council’s most 
important funding program for the so-called small-to-medium sector of small, 
innovative cultural organisations. After more than 400 organisations spent 
months developing their applications, the entire round was cancelled after
Brandis ripped $104.7m from the Australia Council’s funding in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/01/arts-groups-call-for-examination-of-brandis-105m-cuts-to-australia-council>
the May budget, in order to create his new national program for excellence in 
the arts.


For those not intimately acquainted with the arts in Australia, it can be hard 
to get your head around a complex and multilayered industry. The cultural 
industries employed 311,000 workers at the 2011 census, and account for around 
7% of Australia’s economy.

Australia culture: arts funding crisis special episode - podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/audio/2015/may/27/guardian-australia-culture-podcast-arts-funding-episode>
At the core of this vast enterprise, relatively small amounts of federal 
funding catalyse huge amounts of cultural activity. The Australia Council plays 
a crucial role, supporting a large and highly innovative cluster of small 
companies, galleries, publishers, collectives and individual artists.

Small investments in talent at an early stage can pay big dividends. To take 
just one example, Aussie songstress Courtney Barnett was the recipient of an 
innovative Australia Council-PPCA recording grant to record her first 
full-length album. You might have heardit’s done quite well. 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/music/courtney-barnetts-pedestrian-at-best-named-the-best-song-of-2015-20150701-gi220m.html>

The Australia Council currently funds 145 “key organisations” with ongoing 
operational funding 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2015/06/15/the-145-arts-companies-gutted-by-brandis-swingeing-cuts/>
. The list includes some of the nation’s best-known cultural exports:Back to 
Back theatre <http://backtobacktheatre.com/> in Geelong; Circa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/19/circa-beyond-review-this-is-what-feminist-circus-looks-like>
 from Brisbane;Lucy Guerin dance  <http://lucyguerininc.com/>from Melbourne. It 
includes every funded literature organisation, scores of galleries, the entire 
federally-funded community arts sector, and most small Indigenous performing 
arts companies.

Now all bets are off. The key organisations funding runs out at the end of 
2016, and no one has any clue about what will happen – least of all the 
Australia Council. This crisis has been caused by one man:George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>.

A quick list of some of Brandis’s actions makes for sobering reading. As 
opposition arts spokesperson in 2013, he tried to amend the Australia Council 
Act to include more ministerial discretion over funding. Since taking office in 
September 2013, the Abbott government has slashed Commonwealth funding for the 
arts: the 2014 federal budget saw $87m slashed from the federal arts portfolio 
and there were further efficiencies in the 2015 budget.

After the budget: shh! Australia's era of artistic silencing begins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/commentisfree/2015/may/13/after-the-budget-shh-australias-era-of-artistic-silencing-begins>
Despite reductions overall, the arts minister has been active in individual 
funding allocations. One of his first moves was to give $1m to the Australian 
Ballet School, an organisation with the wife of a former Howard government 
cabinet minister on its board. “‘I have taken a close interest in the 
Australian Ballet School and visited their facility on 6 February,”Brandis told 
journalists at the time 
<http://www.artshub.com.au/news-article/features/trends-and-analysis/ben-eltham/minister-admits-close-interest-in-ballet-school-244056>
.

The minister then gave Melbourne classical music record label Melba Recordings 
a$275,000 grant 
<http://www.artshub.com.au/news-article/features/grants-and-funding/ben-eltham/exclusive-brandis-275-000-grant-to-melba-bypasses-scrutiny-245881>
. It was not part of any official funding round and the grant was not 
peer-assessed, but Melba did lobby the minister about funding. The funding was 
decided in April 2014, but the Melba grant was not publicly announced in any 
media release or listed in the May 2014 budget papers. The first official 
acknowledgment was in an obscure attorney general’s department spreadsheet. 
Melba’s patrons and supporters include a cavalcade of highly-connected 
individuals, including a former Howard government cabinet minister.

Brandis has also given $1.15m in non peer-reviewed funding to the Australian 
World Orchestra, a company closely associated with his policy advisor Michael 
Napthali. Napthali wasa director of the orchestra 
<http://www.crikey.com.au/2015/06/26/brandis-adviser-reveals-secret-tantalising-details-of-new-arts-slush-fund/>
 immediately before taking up his role in Brandis’s office, although the 
ministry insists he was not involved in any Australian World Orchestra funding 
decisions.

George Brandis in art – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/jun/19/the-art-of-george-brandis-in-pictures>
In 2014, the Sydney Biennale controversy blew up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/mar/14/australian-artists-respond-brandis-intervention-biennale-transfield>
. A boycott of the visual arts festival by artists protesting against a 
sponsor, the Transfield Foundation, attracted wide media attention. The 
communications minister, Malcolm Turnbull, publicly attacked the boycotters and 
a furious Brandiswrote to the Australia Council’s board, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/13/george-brandis-threatens-sydney-biennale-transfield-blackballing>
 instructing it to develop a policy to deny public funding to anyone involved 
in a sponsor boycott.

Some speculate that the ill-feeling generated by the Biennale imbroglio fed 
the growing rift between the arts minister and the Australia Council. If the 
Biennale was a contributing factor, Brandis kept his plans to himself.By his 
own admission in Senate Estimates 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22committees%2Festimate%2F1691f703-a181-45c6-b912-4e571972691e%2F0000%22>
, Brandis consulted no one about the decision to set up the new excellence fund 
by raiding the Australia Council’s budget. The Australia Council itself only 
heard about it hours before Joe Hockey’s speech on budget night.

Labor’s arts spokesperson, Mark Dreyfus, calls the excellence program a “slush 
fund.” Thedraft guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jul/02/george-brandis-> for the 
programgive final say to the arts minister himself 
<http://www.artshub.com.au/news-article/news/grants-and-funding/ben-eltham/why-nobody-knew-budget-2015-revelation-248207>
, and peer review is rudimentary at best. The guidelines also appear to allow 
the arts minister to give out grants in secret.

A pattern is emerging: increasing secrecy and personal ministerial control 
over cultural funding. No wonder artists and arts leaders are worried about the 
federal cultural policy direction.


But the minister shows no sign of abandoning his cultural crusade. When 
representatives of the small-to-medium sector travelled to Canberra to express 
concern about the changes,Brandis declined to meet with them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/19/arts-funding-changes-artists-meet-labor-and-greens-mps-in-canberra>
. He met with lobbyists from the major performing arts sector instead.
 