
The families of two British-Iranian dual-nationals jailed in Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2016/jul/20/foreign-office-warns-british-iranian-nationals-of-detention-risk-in-iran>
 are calling on the UK government to do more to secure their release.

Husband of woman held in Iran urges Cameron to help secure her release
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/nazanin-zaghari-ratcliffe-iran-husband-urges-cameron-help>
Richard Ratcliffe and Kamran Foroughi will hand in petitions to Downing Street 
and the Foreign Office on Monday on behalf of Ratcliffe’s wife, Nazanin 
Zaghari-Ratcliffe, and Foroughi’s father, Kamal Foroughi.


Zaghari-Ratcliffe, a charity worker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/12/nazanin-zaghari-ratcliffe-iran-husband-urges-cameron-help>
, was sentenced to five years in prison last month after a conviction on 
unspecified “national security-related” offences following a trial before a 
revolutionary court in the capital Tehran.

The 37-year-old from Hampstead, north-west London, was originally arrested at 
Tehran airport on 3 April along with her then 22-month-old daughter Gabriella.

On Monday Ratcliffe and Kamran Foroughi will take a 72,000-signature Amnesty 
petition to the Foreign Office asking the foreign secretary,Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, to prioritise Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s 
case as well as that of fellow UK-Iranian dual-national Kamal Foroughi.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fget-our-loved-ones-released-from-jail-iran-uk-families-demand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ddfaad657ee7e219cd70a6ddfa0b194de8ca2bc%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20our%20loved%20ones%20released%20from%20jail%20in%20Iran%2C%20UK%20families%20demand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fget-our-loved-ones-released-from-jail-iran-uk-families-demand%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20our%20loved%20ones%20released%20from%20jail%20in%20Iran%2C%20UK%20families%20demand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F23%2Fget-our-loved-ones-released-from-jail-iran-uk-families-demand%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ddfaad657ee7e219cd70a6ddfa0b194de8ca2bc%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Richard Ratcliffe, left, and Kamran Foroughi. Photograph: The Guardian 
Kamal Foroughi, a 77-year-old oil and gas company consultant, is serving the 
sixth year of an eight-year jail sentence after being convicted of espionage 
and possessing alcohol. He was originally detained in May 2011 and under 
Iranian law has long been eligible for conditional release after serving more 
than a third of his sentence.

Kamal Foroughi will have spent exactly 2,000 days behind bars on Monday and 
his son and supporters will also be handing in a Change.org petition to Downing 
Street calling on Theresa May to act on the case.

Amnesty International <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>
 UK’s Individuals At Risk campaign manager, Kathy Voss, said: “There’s been a 
lot of talk recently about ‘thawing relations’ between the UK and Iran, but 
these two cases lend the lie to that. It looks very much like Nazanin and Kamal 
are being treated like pawns by the Iranian authorities and we’d like to see 
the UK seriously raising its game over securing proper justice for these 
British nationals. Boris Johnson needs to make sure these two cases are right 
near the top of his in-tray. We can’t let this drop.”
 