
A nationwide campaign has been launched to get the people of the UK to do 
something creative, whether that is bring out your inner poet, dance a little 
or, in the case of the BBC’s director general, Tony Hall, improve his 
photography and learn the ukelele.

The Get Creative campaign was launched by the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/arts/sections/get-creative> but will be a collaboration 
with arts organisations and artists around the UK. Hall described it as a “big 
moment” for the BBC to work as partners with more organisations and individuals 
than ever before.

“The reason I love art and spend time going to galleries and museums is 
because of watching Civilisation and Kenneth Clark in the 1960s,” he said. “At 
its best, theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> is an inspirer, and 
this is an extension of that in that we are encouraging arts organisations, 
artists and others to inspire the nation.”

There will be a blizzard of TV and radio programmes linked to the campaign as 
well as public debates and local activities.

More than 100 organisations, including the Royal Shakespeare Company 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rsc>, National Theatre Wales and Voluntary 
Arts, are already on board and it has celebrity endorsements from Dame Judi 
Dench, Frank Skinner, Kate Moss, Michael Palin and Nick Grimshaw.

A free day of activities was held across the UK on Thursday, with everything 
from a big painting by numbers project in Cumbria to circus sessions in Walsall.

The launch comes in the same week that the Warwick commission 
<http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/research/warwickcommission/futureculture/> published 
a report into the state of the cultural and creative industries. It showedhow 
creativity is being squeezed out of education with fewer opportunities and a 
decline in the number of school pupils taking creative GSCEs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/17/arts-and-culture-systematically-removed-from-uk-education-system>
.

The report also revealed how white and middle class arts audiences are. The 
wealthiest, better educated, and least ethnically diverse 8% of the population 
make up 44% of live music audiences and nearly a third for theatre and visual 
arts.

At the Get Creative launch, the actor Timothy Spall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/timothy-spall> spoke of the liberation that 
creativity brings and remembered teachers who spotted something more in him 
than he realised. Even his bizarre school art project – he stuck pubic hair to 
apples and nailed them around his school – helped set him on the road to become 
the actor he is today. “That set the germ in my head that art is a massively 
broad church,” he said.

The comedian Johnny Vegas <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/johnny-vegas> 
also recalled teachers who did not give up on him and encouraged him to be 
creative – pottery “literally saved me”, he said. “It gave me a real belief in 
my ideas.”

Vegas added: “In education now we are so focused with Sats and telling kids 
their limitations … let’s get back to telling them what they are good at, 
reminding them of the positives.”

The campaign stems from the What Next? arts movement 
<http://www.whatnextculture.co.uk/>, which began life in 2011 at the Young Vic 
theatre in London as a group of arts leaders trying to work out a path forward 
for the arts in the face of coalition austerity. The idea of the campaign was 
put to Hall last year by David Lan, the theatre’s artistic director; Marcus 
Davey, in charge of London’s Roundhouse; and Deborah Bull, the director of 
cultural partnerships at King’s College London.

Bull said: “Creativity is crucial to our survival as a society. We need 
creativity to imagine a future and prepare us for it … it was creativity that 
invented the wheel, discovered penicillin, invented the world wide web.

“It will be creativity that unlocks the solution to our global challenges of 
climate change, affordable housing and so on.”
 