
Voters more concerned with hip replacements than the hip pocket might want to 
look ata new map launched by GetUp 
<https://www.getup.org.au/campaigns/medicare/save-our-hospitals--2/interactive-map-health-cuts-by-hospital>
 that offers a projection of what $57bn of health cuts would do to hospitals in 
their local area.

According to the progressive campaign group, the Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> government’s policies 
amount to a $57bn cut over 10 years, equivalent to 37,000 hospital beds that 
can’t be funded, or 68,000 nurses or 33,000 doctors that can’t be paid.

Government refuses to table $650m cut to diagnostic imaging services
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/04/government-refuses-to-table-650m-cut-to-diagnostic-imaging-services>
GetUp campaign director Natalie O’Brien said: “voters deserve to know how 
these cuts may impact on their local hospital service so that they can make an 
informed decision come election day”.

“Our campaign builds on warnings from doctors and nurses groups that patient 
care is already being compromised and many hospitals are reaching breaking 
point,” she said.

“Many hospitals are located in key marginal seat battlegrounds – like 
Launceston hospital inthe electorate of Bass 
<http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/tas/bass.htm> could lose up to $329.4m, or 
Bowen Hospital inthe electorate of Dawson 
<http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/qld/dawson.htm>, up to $25.7m.” 

The map is based on work by GetUp and unions using parliamentary budget office 
figures to estimate each state’s share of cuts based on their health funding 
and activity, then estimating each hospital’s share of the cuts by the number 
of their beds.

The map says people in health minister Sussan Ley’s electorate of Farrer 
<http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/nsw/farrer.htm> can expect $77.4m to be cut 
from Griffith hospital and $58.7m from Leeton hospital.

Ballarat health services in Labor’s health spokeswoman Catherine King’s seat 
of Ballarat <http://www.aec.gov.au/profiles/vic/ballarat.htm> would lose 
$454.8m over 10 years.

In Sydney, the Prince of Wales hospital would lose $449m, Royal Prince Alfred 
hospital $660m, and Royal North Shore hospital $576m.

In Brisbane, the biggest cuts were to Princess Alexandra hospital ($898m) and 
the Prince Charles hospital ($593.7m).

In Melbourne, the Alfred would lose $1.39bn and the Royal Melbourne hospital 
$1.32bn.

The former Labor government had promised the states $57bn in long-term 
hospital funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/feb/24/malcolm-turnbull-promises-states-hospital-funding-in-budget-after-abbott-cuts>
. The Abbott governmentcut this agreement in its 2014 budget 
<http://www.skynews.com.au/news/top-stories/2016/03/29/turnbull-backs-away-from-health-funding-cuts.html>
, meaning that promised 9% per year funding increases would, after July 2017, 
fall to 4.5%.

However, the Turnbull government has restored $2.9bn in health funding over 
the next three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/01/premiers-welcome-turnbulls-29bn-for-hospitals-but-reject-income-tax-plan>
.

States could be short-changed in $2.9bn health funding carve-up, Senate told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/27/states-could-be-short-changed-in-29bn-health-funding-carve-up-senate-told>
After Bill Shorten’s budget reply on Thursday, Ley noted Labor had stopped 
short of promising to restore the full $57bn. She said the Turnbull government 
had invested nearly $18bn into hospitals in 2016-17.

Shorten said Labor would unveil its health and hospital policy “in coming 
weeks”.

O’Brien said: “The Coalition’s attack on public health is already ringing 
alarm bells for voters, with protecting our universal health system polling as 
the key vote-changing issue this election time.”

“When you show up at the emergency room the last thing you want to worry about 
is whether your local hospital even has enough staff or beds to deliver the 
care you or your loved one needs.”
 