
Activist group GetUp says Australia’s donations and disclosure system needs to 
be radically overhauled to ensure all political donations above $500 are posted 
in real time, on the internet.

GetUp will use a submission to a parliamentary inquiry on the conduct of the 
last federal election and the donations system to lobby for the establishment 
of a new federal anti-corruption body, and for caps on donations and campaign 
expenditure.

In the submission, seen by Guardian Australia, the organisation proposes a 
six-point plan to impose more transparency on the donations and disclosure 
system,which has been declared broken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/australias-political-donations-must-be-capped-to-fix-broken-system-expert-urges>
 by a number of experts.

Australia's political donations must be capped to fix 'broken' system, expert 
urges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/27/australias-political-donations-must-be-capped-to-fix-broken-system-expert-urges>
But ahead of the committee’s deliberations the special minister of state, 
Scott Ryan, has warned thatany overhaul of the rules regulating donations and 
disclosure for political parties must also consider the role of activist 
groups, such as GetUp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/22/onations-reform-must-consider-rising-power-of-activist-groups-says-scott-ryan>
, otherwise reforms would create an uneven playing field, and not serve the 
public interest.

In an interview with Guardian Australia in September, Ryan argued the big 
change in the past decade inAustralian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics> had been the 
rise of pressure groups capable of influencing election outcomes, and he argued 
it would be unreasonable to look at political parties in isolation from 
third-party activist groups.

Ryan’s concerns have been backed by the prime minister, a number of government 
ministers, and by the Tasmanian senator Eric Abetz, who has expressed anger 
about GetUp’s campaigning in Tasmania, a state where the government suffered a 
substantial negative swing.

Abetz has declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/turnbull-government-launches-sweeping-inquiry-into-donations>
 the parliamentary inquiry needs to examine what he terms “GetUp’s grubby 
tactics in the 2016 election”.

Some countries, like Canada, restrict third-party activism during elections.

Under electoral law in Canada, third-party activist groups are permitted to 
spend what they like on advertising before the start of an election campaign 
but, once the writs are issued, spending is capped, which works to limit the 
influence of these groups.

On political donations, Canberra is sleepwalking into its own integrity crisis 
| Katharine Murphy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/01/on-political-donations-canberra-is-sleepwalking-into-its-own-integrity-crisis>
Canadian activist groups have to register once they have run up election 
advertising expenses over $500 and the campaigns have to clearly identify the 
activist group and the state that has authorised the expenditure.

The Coalition was spooked in the 2016 federal election campaign by the 
extensive field operations mounted by the progressive side of politics, 
including trade union campaigns and the GetUp activity in marginal seats.

GetUp in its submission to the parliamentary inquiry says it is a 
people-powered organisation, and Natalie O’Brien, the group’s economic fairness 
campaigns director, told Guardian Australia that “everyday people chipping in 
what they can, through organisations like GetUp, is an important act of 
democratic participation”.

“We’re confident the committee will recognise that,” she said.

She said the problem in the Australian political system was not third-party 
activism, but institutional influence.

“It’s plain to everyone that something needs to be done about the enormous 
level of political influence that billionaires and big corporations have in 
this country,” O’Brien said.

Andrew Robb did not tell prime minister about role with Chinese company
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-robb-did-not-tell-prime-minister-about-role-with-chinese-company>
“Time after time we see politicians giving corporations special treatment and 
making policy decisions that favour vested interests. We want to see a 
transparent system of political finance that amplifies the small contributions 
of everyday Australians. We hope the committee will look seriously at our 
six-point plan to get there.”

The GetUp submission argues for an anti-corruption watchdog; expenditure caps 
on election campaigns; capping the amount any individual or corporation can 
donate at $1,000 per financial year; and requiring all donations above $500 to 
be publicly disclosed on the internet in real-time – including donations to and 
from affiliated entities.

Additionally the group says corporation and entities not registered in 
Australia, or any individual who doesn’t have citizenship or residency, should 
be banned from making political donations; and it argues parliamentarians 
should be expressly prohibited from engaging in lobbying work for a period of 
three years after they leave office.
 