
The Africa Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup> semi-final between 
Equatorial Guinea and Ghana was suspended for almost 40 minutes on Thursday 
night after crowd disturbances that led to police evacuating part of the 
stadium with smoke bombs and a helicopter.

In scenes that will colour what remains of the tournament, home supporters 
aimed bottles atGhana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> players and 
supporters, and the visiting team were forced to leave and re-enter the pitch 
under cover of riot police shields either side of half-time. The crowd was 
largely dispersed, with reports that trouble continued outside the stadium 
after the match. Eventually the game was restarted in front of near-empty 
stands before the Gabonese referee, Eric Otogo, blew for full-time five minutes 
early.

It confirmed a 3-0 win for Avram Grant’s Ghana team, ensuring they will 
compete in Sunday’s final against Ivory Coast. But football had become a 
secondary concern long before Grant and his players shuffled, dazed, from the 
pitch – celebrations were muted and nobody quite able to compute what they had 
just experienced.

The atmosphere, curiously tense from the beginning, was ignited shortly before 
half-time. Ghana had imposed themselves on the game and were awarded a penalty 
after 41 minutes, Jordan Ayew scoring after the Crystal Palace striker Kwesi 
Appiah had been fouled.

Equatorial Guinea <https://www.theguardian.com/football/equitorial-guinea> 
contested Otogo’s decision and were angered further when their attempts to 
restart the game while Ghana celebrated were pulled back. Bottles were hurled 
towards the visiting players and dugout, forcing the Ghana substitutes to seek 
refuge on the pitch beyond the crowd’s range.

The home side had lost their cool and were caught on the counterattack shortly 
before half-time when Christian Atsu set up Wakaso Mubarak to double the lead. 
None of this four-minute sequence had contained anything objectively 
controversial but the area around the tunnel was peppered again and Ghana’s 
players were made to wait for police to assemble before departing the pitch.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fpolice-contain-crowd-trouble-at-africa-cup-of-nations-semi-final-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423225307381%2Fcrop_KP_88062_640x360.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20contain%20crowd%20trouble%20at%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations%20semi-final%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fpolice-contain-crowd-trouble-at-africa-cup-of-nations-semi-final-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20contain%20crowd%20trouble%20at%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations%20semi-final%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fpolice-contain-crowd-trouble-at-africa-cup-of-nations-semi-final-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F2%2F6%2F1423225307381%2Fcrop_KP_88062_640x360.jpeg>
 Police contain crowd trouble at the Africa Cup of Nations semi-final. 
Tannoy announcements attempted to calm the crowd when the players re-emerged 
for the second half, with Equatorial Guinea’s players joining to plead for 
calm. It made some impact but the situation was palpably on a knife-edge and 
descended into lawlessness 15 minutes from full-time.

The prompt was a third Ghana goal, tapped in by André Ayew from Appiah’s pass. 
It led their segregated pocket of supporters, situated in the north-western 
corner of the stadium, to be attacked by adjacent home fans. The Ghana fans, 
having corralled themselves as far away from danger as possible, made a break 
for safety via a gate at the front of the stand and police attempted to lead 
them around the pitch. The scheme failed as they were trapped behind the goal, 
effectively flanked by uncontrollable crowds on three sides as the situation 
threatened to take a turn for the considerably worse.

Equatorial Guinea’s security forces have not been averse to heavy-handed 
treatment of fans during this tournament and the methods they employed to quell 
the trouble inside Nuevo Estadío de Malabo were as brutal as they were 
effective. In a disturbing and downright dangerous manoeuvre, a police 
helicopter swooped within 30 feet of the crowd in the west stand, forcing the 
majority to scatter because of the noise and power of its rotors.

It returned three more times, making its point firmly while smoke bombs were 
deployed in other areas of the stadium. A South African photographer was grazed 
by a rock thrown from the east end of the stadium. Ghana’s official Twitter 
feed described the scene as “like a war zone”.

By 10.20pm local time the situation was judged calm enough for play to 
recommence. Grant had been on the pitch twice during the tumult and could be 
seen deep in discussions with Otogo and CAF representatives; his players, who 
remained calm if evidently confused, behaved with enormous credit, effectively 
facing down the most volatile of situations you will see inside a football 
ground – and they saw out the game without fuss.

Emilio Nsue, the Equatorial Guinea captain and Middlesbrough player, said: 
“I’ve never played in front of anything like that and I’d like to say sorry on 
behalf of my team. It was an odd experience, one I’ve never felt before.”

It was neither the fault of Nsue nor his team-mates but a number of questions 
linger. Other disturbances, albeit of a lower profile, had accompanied 
Equatorial Guinea’s games in this competition, notably some clashes between 
supporters and police before the group stage game against Burkina Faso in Bata. 
Nobody had been left in doubt about the authorities’ low tolerance levels then, 
yet the air in Malabo had felt combustible from the beginning and the lack of 
response to those public address entreaties was revealing.

“Verguenza” (“Shame”) repeated the announcer while the police helicopter was 
causing everyone to cower. “Think of the country, the embarrassment.” Nobody 
appeared to, and police found themselves subjected to barrages of their own. 
The violence was watched by Obiang Nguema, the country’s president, whose reign 
has been notorious for repression and apparent human rights abuses; displays of 
mass civil unrest are virtually unknown in this country but at this tournament, 
in the fermenting pots that football stadiums conveniently provide, you wonder 
whether a crescendo had slowly been building.

The volumes in Estadío de Bata, where Equatorial Guinea played their first 
three games, were as loud as anything you will hear but you now wonder exactly 
what you were listening to.

And you wonder what CAF will be thinking. A hastily cobbled-together 
tournament had by and large gone swimmingly – to the eye at least – but fingers 
will be pointed now. Can sufficient security for such a large-scale competition 
really be mustered at eight weeks’ notice? Should someone have suspected that 
this outwardly docile population might be a tinderbox?

Those questions will be asked and, you hope, answered. For now there is the 
clean-up operation to undertake and the question of Saturday’s third-place 
play-off to ponder. That match is scheduled to take place here between 
Equatorial Guinea and DR Congo; in this climate, the risk of staging it at all 
– and casting an even greater shadow over a hitherto enjoyable month – may be 
too great.
 