
Atlanta’s zoo says a 19-year-old giant panda has given birth to a set of twins.

Zoo Atlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta> said in a news 
release on Saturday that giant panda named Lun Lun delivered the blind and 
almost hairless twin cubs at 7.20am and 8.07am Saturday morning. It’s Lun Lun’s 
second pair of twins.

Officials say Lun Lun was artificially inseminated in March. The 
round-the-clock birth watch started late last month.

Giant panda gives birth to twins at Austrian zoo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/16/giant-panda-gives-birth-to-twins-at-austrian-zoo>
Lun Lun and 18-year-old male panda Yang Yang have seven offspring together, 
all resulting from artificial insemination.

The pair’s first three cubs live at China’s Chengdu Research Base of Giant 
Panda Breeding. Twins Mei Lun and Mei Huan were born in 2013 and live at Zoo 
Atlanta.

Officials expect zoo members and guests to meet the cubs in December or early 
next year.

“We’re thrilled and relieved that the second of Lun Lun’s twins has arrived,” 
Hayley Murphy, vice-president of animal divisions, said in a statement. “Our 
focus now will be the care and monitoring of the cubs and Lun Lun to ensure 
that both cubs have the best opportunity to succeed.”

Twins are not uncommon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/16/giant-panda-gives-birth-to-twins-at-austrian-zoo>
 for giant pandas, though they are at greater risk of illness and death than 
cubs born alone. The cubs are the sixth and seventh pandas born at Zoo Atlanta 
since 2006.
Zoo Atlanta (@ZooATL) 
Say hello to #panda <https://twitter.com/hashtag/panda?src=hash> "Cub A!" This 
little one was born at 7:20a, followed by its twin at 8:07a!#ZAPandas 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ZAPandas?src=hash> #OnlyZooATL 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/OnlyZooATL?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/oVU4x2mMRK 
<https://t.co/oVU4x2mMRK>
 <https://twitter.com/ZooATL/status/772090025353814016> September 3, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/ZooATL/status/772090025353814016>  