
The footpath outside the Orana Cinema in Busselton, Western Australia, is 
inscribed with names of Australian cinematic royalty: Jack Thompson. Hugo 
Weaving. David Wenham. Steve Bisley. Bryan Brown. Koko, the dog from Red Dog.


It is somewhat striking that of the nine names that have been featured on 
CinefestOz’s walk of fame 
<http://cinefestoz.com/about-cinefestoz/festival-screen-legends/>, kelpies are 
better represented than women – but this year’s festival brought with it a new 
addition: the acclaimed director Gillian Armstrong.

Armstrong, the director of My Brilliant Career and Little Women, received 
CinefestOz’s Screen Legend awardat the festival’s gala event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/28/girl-asleep-australia-richest-film-prize-cinefestoz-rosemary-myers>
 on Saturday night, making her the first woman to feature on the Busselton 
footpath. Speaking to Guardian Australia at one of the many boozy lunches that 
mark the festival, which is spread across the Margaret River wine region in 
Western Australia, the director expresses delight in the award: “Now people can 
walk all over me!”

The film industry is not full of misogynists
Gillian Armstrong 
Armstrong knows well the hard-fought battle of gender diversity in the 
Australian film industry. A key supporter of Screen Australia’s Gender Matters 
initiative, she now sits on a panel, formed by the Australian Directors Guild, 
which oversees the program’sBrilliant Careers 
<http://www.screenaustralia.gov.au/sa/newsroom/news/2016/mr-160712-gender-matters-brilliant-stories-brillia>
 branch, to create industry support for female directors.

Armstrong was instrumental in getting the panel off the ground. When she saw 
an alarming report 
<http://if.com.au/2015/05/26/article/Women-step-up-the-fight-for-gender-equality/XXYBSJPDRI.html>
 in the Australian Film Television and Radio School’s Lumina magazine, which 
indicated that only 16% of Australian directors working between 1970 and 2014 
were women (though she herself would have estimated the figure closer to 40%), 
she lobbied Kingston Anderson, the chief executive of the Australian Directors 
Guild, to pay greater attention to gender diversity.

Swedish cinemas take aim at gender bias with Bechdel test rating
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/06/swedish-cinemas-bechdel-test-films-gender-bias>
“I said to Kingston, the ADG should get together and talk about this, because 
it’s 50-50 going to film school, and in every short film award there’s women 
nominated. So what’s going wrong? It’s obvious that it’s not a level playing 
field.”

“The film industry is not full of misogynists,” Armstrong says. “It’s 
investors and producers risking money on a project, and underneath, no matter 
what they think, there’s a greater trust in the visual image of a guy with a 
baseball hat on.”

She speculates also that the “boys’ club” of the advertising industry in 
Australia is inhibiting the progress of female directors, with many ad agencies 
offering commercial opportunities to young guys headhunted out of film school, 
giving men the additional training and skills that lay the foundation for 
feature work.

Armstrong credits an encounter 
<http://www.ctvnews.ca/entertainment/change-has-been-so-slow-director-laments-female-advancement-in-hollywood-1.2579302>
 with the Swedish Film Institute chief executive, Anna Serner, at a Toronto 
film festival event last year with informing her thinking on affirmative action 
in screen funding. In 2011 only 26% of Swedish government film funding went to 
female directors. Serner set out to achieve gender parity by the end of four 
years andreached her goal 
<http://www.smh.com.au/entertainment/movies/how-sweden-hit-its-5050-gender-target-for-film-production-in-record-time-20150518-gh489a.html>
 in two and a half.

The heading was ‘Woman’s Weepy’. We were so upset
Gillian Armstrong 
Armstrong has spent her career resisting being characterised as a “feminist 
director”, a term that has dogged her since her acclaimed feature debut, My 
Brilliant Career, in 1979. 

“I got branded as a feminist director because it was a feminist story, but 
then that’s all I was offered: women achievers – first woman to fly a plane, 
climb a mountain, ride a camel. I really fought against that labelling. I like 
to say my characters, male and female, are complicated, and not formulaic, and 
have depth and layers.”

Searching out a change of subject, Armstrong fought to direct the 1982 musical 
Starstruck – only to have it branded in the press as another Armstrong film 
about a “redhead who wants to be an achiever”.

My Brilliant Career: rewatching classic Australian films
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/28/my-brilliant-career-rewatching-classic-australian-films>
One dismissal that particularly stung was an Australian notice given to her 
underrated 1987 heartbreaker High Tide, which stars Judy Davis as an itinerant 
showgirl alcoholic who re-encounters the daughter she gave up as an infant. “It 
wasn’t particularly the review,” Armstrong says, “it was a subeditor. I’ll 
remember this forever. The heading was ‘Woman’s Weepy’. We were so upset.”

One of Armstrong earliest works, the film she remembers as her first paid 
director’s job, was the short documentary Smoke and Lollies (1976): a portrait 
of three 14-year-old Adelaide schoolgirls, which was funded through the South 
Australian Film Corporation. Armstrong later extended this project, revisiting 
the three women across four subsequent documentaries, most recently Love, Lust 
and Lies in 2009.

 Though money for the film was allocated from a one-off program targeting 
female directors, Armstrong says she never felt that her career was made on the 
back of this diversity initiative – after all, she characterises her early 
documentary work as a sidebar to her work in drama. But she acknowledges that 
her support for gender diversity-targeted funding is the result of an ongoing 
attitude shift.

The women … have worked 10 times as hard as the men. They’re 10 times as good
Gillian Armstrong 
“I used to think, ‘I did it, why can’t all the other women?’ There were 
women’s initiatives and film groups, and I was actually a bit snobby about all 
that. I was like, well, you’ve just to make a good film. It’s about your 
individual talent. That’s why this has been a big change for me to speak out 
about it.”

Armstrong says she’s heard the resentments of male directors who feel shut out 
from funding opportunities, but insists the industry is tough for anyone.

“The women that have got through over the years — Jane Campion and Jocelyn 
Moorhouse and so on — have worked 10 times as hard as the men. They’re 10 times 
as good as the men. There won’t be equality until there are as many mediocre 
women directors as there are mediocre men.”
 