
Italian fashion house Giorgio Armani experienced a slowdown in revenues and 
profits in 2015, after suffering a drop in business from Chinese consumers.

Big luxury brands such as Burberry and Hugo Boss have also been hit by the 
economic slowdown in China and emerging markets, while terrorist attacks in 
Paris and Brussels have deterred overseas tourists from visitingEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Hugo Boss is cutting its 
prices in Asia in response to waning demand for luxury goods.

Armani said revenues grew 4.5% in 2015, down sharply from 16% the year before. 
Revenues totalled €2.65bn (£2.05bn). Prada, Italy’s biggest fashion house, had 
sales of €3.55bn.

The Milan-based group, whose products include accessories, cosmetics and 
furniture, and the more affordable Armani Exchange range, said earnings before 
interest, tax, depreciation and amortisation edged up 1% to €513m last year, 
from €507m in 2014.

Despite the slowdown, the firm said its cash reserves of €640m allowed it to 
step up investments in its brands to “further strengthen its competitive market 
position”.

The company’s president, Giorgio Armani, founded the company that bears his 
name in Milan in 1975, and has toyed with the idea of a stock market flotation 
in the past two decades.The 81-year-old designer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/fashion-blog/2014/jul/10/giorgio-armani-80-eight-facts-fashion-designer>
 is still actively involved in the business and has not revealed any succession 
plans.

/He said: “These results are the outcome of an attentive diversification 
policy for the group’s lines, paired with the coordination of distribution 
channels and enhancement of the role that our trade partners play.”

Burberry is cutting jobs as well as its product range 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/18/burberry-cut-jobs-product-range-save-100m-a-year-profit-fall>
 after a 10% fall in profit, which was partly caused by a sharp slowdown in 
China, the British brand’s biggest market. Fewer Chinese tourists have been 
visiting its stores in Europe, while Hong Kong, long a shopping paradise for 
mainland tourists, has experienced a spending slump after a change to visa 
rules.
 