
Global wine production is expected to fall by 5% in 2016 because of “climatic 
events” causing steep drops in production in most of the southern hemisphere, 
particularly Chile andArgentina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina>.

The International Organisation of Vine and Wine 
<http://www.oiv.int/en/oiv-life/2016-world-wine-production-estimated-at-259-mhl>
 (OIV) has estimated that output will reach 259.5m hectolitres (mhl) this year, 
making 2016 one of the lowest production years in the past two decades.

While the amount of wine produced should meet consumer demand, the figures are 
a reminder of how global warming and natural climate variability are having a
profound effect on wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/21/wine-lovers-raise-their-glasses-to-climate-change-but-there-may-be-a-hangover>
, and perhaps where it will be grown in future.

Italy is expected to produce the most wine in 2016, followed by France, Spain, 
the US, Australia and China. France is likely toremain in the top three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/26/french-wine-production-to-fall-10-this-year-after-fierce-spring-weather>
, despite a predicted 12% drop in production to 41.9mhl.

The most precipitous declines are set to be in South America, a potential 
source of concern for fans of the malbec and carménère varieties. Production is 
estimated to have plummeted by 35% in Argentina and 21% inChile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/chile>, the seventh-biggest producer.

South Africa is set to report a 19% fall, but the news is better for Australia 
and New Zealand, which are expected to increase production by 5% and 35% 
respectively. The New Zealand figures would put it near a record it set in 2014.

The OIV said the predicted overall decline was strongly affected by climatic 
events. “The El Niño climate phenomenon seems to be back in Latin America, 
where production was affected by fairly exceptional weather, with lots of 
rain,” said OIV’s chief executive, Jean-Marie Aurand.

El Niño, which occurs every four to five years, affects rainfall patterns and 
causes both drought and flooding.

A report released earlier this year 
<http://www.earthinstitute.columbia.edu/articles/view/3276> by the Earth 
Institute at Columbia University said warming temperatures, the main driver of 
grape harvest timing, havesignificantly pushed these periods forward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/17/australian-wine-under-threat-from-climate-change-as-grapes-ripen-early>
 globally.

“Across the world, scientists have found that each degree centigrade of 
warming pushes grape harvests forward roughly six or seven days,” the report 
said. This phenomenon could eventually make pinot noir grapes unsuitable for 
many parts of Burgundy, according to a 2011 study by the climate scientist Yves 
Tourre.

A 2014 paper in journal Wine <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wine> 
Economics and Policy concluded that rising temperatures would have an 
“extraordinary effect” on agriculture and there were few crops more susceptible 
than grapes to minor changes in climate.

In Europe, the paper pointed to a potential chilling of the Bordeaux region 
and parts of Spain, due to the loss of the Gulf Stream, while other regions, 
including Alsace, are expected to get warmer and experience shorter growth 
seasons. In the Italian region of Chianti, grapes have begun ripening too 
early, leading to possible future changes in wine varieties.
 