
Capital and Classic FM owner Global Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/globalradio> has sold its majority stake in 
national digital radio platform Digital One to transmission company Arqiva.

Arqiva, previously a 37% shareholder in Digital One, is understood to have 
paid a nominal sum for Global Radio's 63% stake. In return,Arqiva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva> is expected to cut the rent Global 
Radio pays to broadcast on digital.

The sole national commercial digital audio broadcasting (DAB) platform, 
Digital One will have a key role to play if DAB radio becomes a"primary 
distribution network" 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/jan/29/digital-radio-lord-carter-report> 
for radio, the ambition outlined in communications minister Stephen Carter's 
interim Digital Britain report.

But the platform, which has capacity for around a dozen stations, currently 
carries just four, only one of which – Planet Rock – is not already available 
on analogue radio.

It is hoped that Arqiva's sole ownership will kickstart the platform, which 
broadcasters have previously complained charged too much for carriage. Digital 
Oneindicated earlier this year 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2009/jan/19/digital-one-cuts-costs-for-radio-stations>
 that it would cut prices to attract customers.

The Arqiva director of radio, Paul Eaton, said: "As an independent operator, 
Arqiva is in a good position to realise the full potential of the multiplex and 
encourage new services to launch on the DAB digital radio platform.

"We believe in the long term future of DAB, and this deal with Global extends 
both of our companies' commitments to digital radio well into the future."

Awarded the UK's first – and so far only – UK national multiplex licence for 
DAB radio in 1998, Digital One beat the BBC to launch two nationwide national 
digital stations in 1999, Core and Planet Rock.

But Core has closed and other digital stations have come and gone 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2008/feb/11/gcapmedia.commercialradio>, to 
leave Planet Rock, now owned byentrepreneur Malcolm Bluemel 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2008/jun/04/commercialradio.gcapmedia>, as the 
sole digital-only station on the platform. The second national multiplex was 
handed to 4 Digital, but was handed back after Channel 4 pulled out.

Carter's Digital Britain report called on commercial radio to offer new and 
innovative services to encourage further takeup of DAB among consumers.

The sale, confirmed last night, brings to an end a process begun 14 months ago 
when Fru Hazlitt, the chief executive of GCap Media – since bought by Global 
Radio –announced her intention to offload the Digital One stake 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2008/feb/11/gcapmedia.digitaltvradio>.

Also included in the deal is Arqiva's local digital radio complexes, operated 
by Now Digital, on which Global Radio's stations will also continue to 
broadcast.

Separately, Global has entered into exclusive talks with Bauer Media over the 
sale of its five Midlands stations,a condition of its £375m purchase of GCap 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/global/2008/aug/08/gcapmedia.commercialradio>.

Bauer is now understood to be the preferred bidder for Heart 106 in the east 
Midlands, and BRMB, Beacon, Mercia and Wyvern in the West Midlands.Other 
interested parties 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2008/nov/26/globalradio-commercialradio> had 
included a consortium led by former Chrysalis Radio chief executive Phil Riley. 
However, it is understood a deal has not been agreed.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediaguardian.co.uk or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 