
The winner

Lucy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lucy>’s impressive global run was 
halted in its tracks this week by the latest off the young-adult adaptation 
conveyor belt,The Maze Runner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-maze-runner>
. Running a touch ahead of expectations, its No 1 US opening weekend ($32.5m; 
£19.8m) still looks pretty modest besideother recent YA debutants 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/genres/chart/?id=yaadaptations.htm>: the first 
Twilight kicked off with $69.6m, The Hunger Games earned $152.5m and, earlier 
this year, Divergent and The Fault in Our Stars managed $54.6m and $48m apiece. 
What should buoy Fox are The Maze Runner’s perky international figures, 
starting last week in central America and south-east Asia. It added more than 
40 territories this frame, outperforming both The Hunger Games and Divergent’s 
debuts in the key territories of South Korea ($5.5m) and Russia ($5.5m), and 
winding up No 1 in 50 countries. Maybe what did the trick was switching things 
up by using a mostly male cast in the so far predominantly female YA arena; the
striking labyrinth imagery of the trailer 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=64-iSYVmMVY>, and canny timing in the 
post-summer window, will also have helped. Fox were feeling sufficiently 
confident after this weekend’s resultsto pencil in 18 September next year for 
the sequel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/22/the-maze-runner-liam-neeson-us-box-office>
.


The runner-up
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO6Ttj9tXzCA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO6Ttj9tXzCA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DO6Ttj9tXzCA&media=>
Before the McConaissance <http:> was the ReNeesonce. But now it looks as 
though Liam Neeson’s late-afternoon career rebirth as a man of action could be 
waning – despite adecent crop of reviews 
<http://www.rottentomatoes.com/m/a_walk_among_the_tombstones/> for the 
1990s-set NYC crime thrillerA Walk Among the Tombstones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-walk-among-the-tombstones>. An $18.1m US 
debut was enough, with $5m additional overseas gross, to lodge it in second 
place on the global chart in a week without a true juggernaut release. But in 
actuality it’s a disappointment, easily the weakest in Neeson’s run as the 
baby-boomers’ own blarney-spritzed Charles Bronson, which began withTaken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/taken> (a $24.7m US opening in 2009) and was 
still looking hale enough in this year’s US air-marshall jauntNon-Stop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/non-stop> ($28.1m US opening, and hovering 
just outside this week’s global top 10 thanks to a belated Chinese opening). 
The Irish actor has been building his global-star credentials, but Tombstones – 
directed by the Out of Sight scripterScott Frank 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0291082/> – is in danger of failing to capitalise 
by falling between two stools: too far from marketable genre-film hooks and not 
quite close enough to Neeson’s character-actor home turf for that kind of cred. 
But let’s see how the global rollout progresses in October.


The summer victor
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Fglobal-box-office-the-maze-runner-races-ahead-trailed-by-tombstones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411563368193%2Fb00f7f49-7fd8-4cfd-a9c7-e8e53b1c95e6-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Global%20box%20office%3A%20The%20Maze%20Runner%20races%20ahead%2C%20trailed%20by%20Tombstones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Fglobal-box-office-the-maze-runner-races-ahead-trailed-by-tombstones%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Global%20box%20office%3A%20The%20Maze%20Runner%20races%20ahead%2C%20trailed%20by%20Tombstones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Fglobal-box-office-the-maze-runner-races-ahead-trailed-by-tombstones%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411563368193%2Fb00f7f49-7fd8-4cfd-a9c7-e8e53b1c95e6-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Billion-dollar blockbuster … Nicola Peltz in Transformers: Age of Extinction. 
Photograph: Andrew Cooper 
With a few weeks before the next big-hitters, Interstellar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/interstellar> (US release: 7 November) and 
The Hunger Games: Mockinjay – Part 1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/hunger-games-mockingjay-part-1> (21 
November), now’s the time to mull the 2014 blockbuster season. Thefourth 
Transformers <https://www.theguardian.com/film/transformers-age-of-extinction> 
is the numerical winner worldwide. This year’s sole $1bn release, the film is 
perched on top of theworldwide chart 
<http://www.boxofficemojo.com/yearly/chart/?view2=worldwide&yr=2014> and has a 
fair chance of being there come 31 December. But the first question marks, box 
office-wise, now hover over Michael Bay’s franchise: it has the lowest US gross 
of the four films ($245m – a 31% falloff from 2011’s Dark of the Moon), and 
consequently it’s the first time Transformers hasn’t increased its kitty.


Maleficent <https://www.theguardian.com/film/maleficent>, which is at No 2 
globally ($754.6m), has surely outperformed expectations; box-office conqueror 
in Brazil, Venezuela and Mexico, it is also No 2 in Russia and Japan. There’s 
no natural reason for a sequel (not that that usually stops Hollywood), so it’s 
the US championGuardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy>, standing 7th 
globally, that we must look to for future prospects. With a sturdy 
international showing to match its feat of being the only $300m US release of 
the year to date, its US/overseas split is almost 50/50. This is one measure of 
unusually early international acceptance, since new franchises normally perform 
more strongly in North America.


There’s been some debate about whether the 14.7% dropoff in US summer box 
office from last year represented another stage in long-term decline, ora 
period of retrenchment as the cycle of franchises begun in 2013 beds in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/03/summer-box-office-turning-point-success-failure-blockbusters>
. Both are valid viewpoints, but the US is the canary in the mine of the global 
mainstream. Yes, plenty of incipient franchises have consolidated, but 
virtually all had some form of pre-existing recognition factor, whether from 
toys, books, TV or older films. It’s a cause for concern that the one major 
attempt to launch a totally new property – Warner Brothers’Edge of Tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-edge-of-tomorrow> – bombed in the most 
receptive place.


The rest of the world
 One Step Away … a wartime spy romance from China 
The only competition for Hollywood’s offerings this week was a quiet $6m 
Chinese opening (putting it 12th globally) for the wartime spy romanceOne Step 
Away <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=na73KaiBQgE>, a first feature for the 
popular local-TV director Zhao Baogang. In Japan, samurai threequelRurouni 
Kenshin: The Legend Ends <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4rx4mmN_JpE> (18th 
globally) added another $4m to brings its running gross to $21.2m, already 
close to half of what the previous instalment, released just six weeks ago, has 
scooped. Adapted from the Watsuki Nobuhiro comics (better known in the 
Anglophone world as Samurai X), the live-action series has garnered praise for 
keeping CGI to a minimum. Co-produced by Warner Brothers, it’s not pure-bred 
Japanese, but it’s definitely another sharp-looking offering that should make 
us all break out in big, teary manga eyes at the terrible state of Asian-film 
distribution in the west.


The future
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjAI7rF0eQyQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjAI7rF0eQyQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjAI7rF0eQyQ&media=>
Heaving into view next week is a 65-country release for Antoine Fuqua’s The 
Equalizer <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-equalizer>, in which Denzel 
Washington, taking theEdward Woodward role 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uB1NiNKwueE>, tries his hand at launching a 
new franchise for Sony. The actor hits 60 this year and, putting a fatherly arm 
around Chloë Grace Moretz in the film, could he be looking to bust in on Liam 
Neeson’s family-values-avenger racket?The Boxtrolls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-boxtrolls>, Universal’s scratty 
stop-motion animation, opens in the US – after an encouraging start to its run 
in the UK, where it’s just topped our chart for the second week running. And 
while the Hollywood majors continue to dither in China, the US-Australian 
outfit Arclight is releasing English-language, 12th-century period actioner
Outcast <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OnRuRFbpnCM> there next week, teaming 
up Nicolas Cage and Hayden Christensen with local stars Yifei Lu and Andy On. 
On a $25m budget, things are on a surer footing than with costly Christian Bale 
bombFlowers of War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/148531/flowers-of-war> in 2011, the 
last serious China-focused joint venture.


Top 10 films, 19-21 September

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Fluc-besson-lucy-scarlett-johansson-video-interview&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F19%2F1408442142641%2FLuc-Besson-director-of-th-014.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Luc%20Besson%20on%20Lucy%3A%20'If%20you%20find%20yourself%20asking%20what's%20real%20and%20what%20isn't%2C%20I've%20won'%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Fluc-besson-lucy-scarlett-johansson-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Luc%20Besson%20on%20Lucy%3A%20%27If%20you%20find%20yourself%20asking%20what%27s%20real%20and%20what%20isn%27t%2C%20I%27ve%20won%27%20-%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Faug%2F20%2Fluc-besson-lucy-scarlett-johansson-video-interview&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F8%2F19%2F1408442142641%2FLuc-Besson-director-of-th-014.jpg>
Luc Besson on Lucy: ‘If you find yourself asking what’s real and what isn’t, 
I’ve won’ 
1. The Maze Runner <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-maze-runner>, $70.1m 
from 51 territories. $81.5m cumulative – 60.1% international; 39.9% US
2. (New) A Walk Among the Tombstones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-walk-among-the-tombstones>, $18.1m from 10 
territories – 27.6% int; 72.4% US
3. Lucy <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lucy>, $13.7m from 36 territories. 
$377.8m cum – 67% int; 33% US
4. (New) This Is Where I Leave You 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/this-is-where-i-leave-you>, $11.8m from 1 
territory – 100% US
5. Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/guardians-of-the-galaxy>, $10.3m from 39 
territories. $632m cum – 50.3% int; 49.7% US
6. Dolphin Tale 2, $10.2m from 13 territories. $30.1m cum – 10.2% int; 89.8% US
7. No Good Deed, $10.2m from 1 territory. $40.1m cum – 100% US
8. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles>, $9.95m from 50 
territories. $333.3m cum – 44.4% int; 55.6% US
9. Dawn of the Planet of the Apes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/dawn-of-the-planet-of-the-apes-film>, $8.4m 
from 17 territories. $683.7m cum – 69.7% int; 30.3% US
10. Sex Tape <https://www.theguardian.com/film/sex-tape>, $7.6m from 52 
territories. $108.9m cum – 64.7% int; 35.3% US

• Thanks to Rentrak. All this week’s figures are based on estimates; all 
historical figures unadjusted, unless otherwise stated.

• How do you like our new global box-office column? What should we be covering 
in it? Let us know in the comments below
 