
The mayor of the Gold Coast, Tom Tate, is very hands-on when it comes to 
dealing with the media, in particular the Gold Coast Bulletin which is the
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> city’s News 
Corp masthead.

Last week he took aim at columnist Alice Gorman who had criticised the 
council’s decision to approve a cruise ship terminal at The Spit.Posting her 
column on his Facebook page 
<https://www.facebook.com/MayorTomTate/photos/a.456183117759851.108305.450911531620343/1325136410864513/?type=3&theater>
, Tate questioned the Walkley award-winning journalist’s credentials and said 
she couldn’t write about the city because she didn’t live there any more.

“Moved out of the city and still gets to write a lifestyle / gonzo style 
column every week … things that make you go hmmmmmmm?” was just one comment 
made by the mayor.

Tate wrote: “Print media need to understand that the other communications 
mediums are out there and competing – social media is being a great leveler 
[sic] with its direct communication approach – no filtering, no bias, no agenda 
pushing by a privileged few editors.”

When he doesn’t like a story he takes to Facebook to encourage readers and 
advertisers to boycott the paper. But now Tate has stepped things up. He has 
claimed responsibility for the departure ofGold Coast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/gold-coast> Bulletin editor, Cath 
Webber, last week. Sources told Weekly Beast that Webber, who has been editing 
the paper since July 2013, was removed suddenly on Thursday after being 
summoned to Sydney’s Holt Street headquarters earlier in the week. On Friday 
the Bully announced it had appointed a new editor, Scott Thompson, and Webber 
had “been offered a senior editorial role in Sydney”.

Later that morning Tate appeared to claim responsibility for Webber’s 
departure: “I’ve been pretty consistent in my bagging of the GCB … seems the 
higher ups of News Limited have heard loud and clear and made some big changes 
yesterday.”

Tate went on to say the paper had been full of “hateful” and “unattributed 
personal vile” and he welcomed the “new era on the Gold Coast starting 
yesterday” with the new team in charge. “Time the reporters and especially the 
columnists get used to that. It’s not a case any more of bowing to those who 
buy their ink by the barrel.”

Tate declined to speak to Weekly Beast about his role in the change of editors 
but said in a statement looking forward to the city’s controversial hosting of 
the 2018 Commonwelath Games: “That is all behind us now and we look forward to 
a fresh approach as we head towards 2018.’’

A spokeswoman for News Corp said: “Our editorial changes are an internal 
management issue and we have no comment on those decisions. Nor can we or will 
we comment on the mayor’s opinions or social media statements. The opinion of 
mayor Tom Tate had no influence whatsoever in our recent leadership changes at 
the Gold Coast Bulletin.”

Kate Fischer takes the media on at their own game

We felt sorry for former model Kate Fischer who was targeted by Woman’s Day  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/14/ripping-into-kim-kardashian-and-kate-fischer-plain-old-bullying-or-public-interest>
recently for daring to put on weight, embrace Orthodox Judaism and shun the 
spotlight. But perhaps we shouldn’t have worried because the former model now 
known as T’Ziporah Malka has taken the media on at their own game. The former 
fiancee of billionaire James Packer shocked everyone when she popped up in 
rival magazine New Idea – in an exclusive lingerie spread for which the 
magazine made a donation to a charity of her choice.

Ripping into Kim Kardashian and Kate Fischer – plain old bullying or 'public 
interest'? | Amanda Meade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/14/ripping-into-kim-kardashian-and-kate-fischer-plain-old-bullying-or-public-interest>
In between posing in a black corset perched on the edge of a bed, Malka talked 
about Packer’s impact on her life. “I had to put up with false rumours that I 
got multimillions out of splitting from him,” she told New Idea.
New Idea magazine (@NewIdeamagazine) 
Brand new issue out now! pic.twitter.com/MEqpfO26Ns <https://t.co/MEqpfO26Ns>
 <https://twitter.com/NewIdeamagazine/status/790286125424259072> October 23, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/NewIdeamagazine/status/790286125424259072> 
“Once, I was at the supermarket when someone yelled out: ‘Nice job, getting 10 
million bucks for lying on your back, Kate!’ I’d hear those types of awful 
remarks for years.”

News Corp journos cry foul as ABC nabs Walkley nomination 

The ABC’s 7.30 scooped all three nominations in the category of daily current 
affairs television in the Walkley nominations 
<http://www.walkleys.com/finalists-announced-for-the-2016-walkley-awards-for-excellence-in-journalism/>
last week. But it was Louise Milligan and Andy Burns’s entry“George Pell 
Investigation” <http://www.abc.net.au/7.30/content/2016/s4508646.htm> that has 
been receiving some unwanted attention since.

Herald Sun journos have been muttering about how unfair it is that reporter 
Lucie Morris-Marr’s scoop about the Pell investigation was overlooked for a 
Walkley but 7.30’s TV investigation was not. WhileMorris-Marr’s story 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/news/victoria-police-investigating-cardinal-pell/news-story/09609ca949fdb490842fd72d73faf779>
 broke the news of the Victorian police investigation into Pell, there were no 
alleged victims quoted in the piece and the paper did not follow up to build on 
the original story. In fact the Herald Sun ran from the allegations afterAndrew 
Bolt said the Pell report was worse than “vicious and shameful” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/22/andrew-bolt-lashes-out-at-herald-sun-reporter-over-george-pell-story>
 and the leak to the paper “stinks”.

The Milligan-Burns investigation was not just a follow-up to the Hun piece, it 
was painstaking and detailed and is more than worthy of a Walkley nomination on 
its own. And to be fair to 7.30, the program took the story so much further, 
tracking down and interviewing on camera two of the alleged victims, no mean 
feat.

Student editors bow out with elaborate spoof

The editors of Honi Soit, the University of Sydney’s student newspaper, have 
excelled themselves. At first glance the 27 October edition looks like a copy 
of Rupert Murdoch’s the Australian.
tom joyner (@tomrjoyner) 
Immensely proud to go out on this note as an @honi_soit 
<https://twitter.com/honi_soit> editor this year. This is our final edition for 
2016, on stands across campuspic.twitter.com/6ujIC64P6A 
<https://t.co/6ujIC64P6A>
 <https://twitter.com/tomrjoyner/status/791450076262440960> October 27, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/tomrjoyner/status/791450076262440960> 
The cheeky stories included: Turnbull and Abbott to settle differences in 
Maccas carpark, Human Rights Commission accused of “outrageous bias against 
rights abuses” and Pauline Hanson tells Muslim Australians “to love it or build 
new nation underground”.

In a statement the editors denied the paper was a prank. “This is untrue: we 
still do not know who put the papers there. It is possible News Corp has taken 
over our contract for the campus newspaper stands, to complement the free 
digital subscriptions to the Australian provided by the university, but the 
matter is currently under investigation.

“Regardless, as a team, we have always admired the Australian for its balanced 
reporting and insightful commentary, and are pleased that its respectable, 
broadsheet pages are appearing in the stands we spent the year filling with 
left-wing smut. You should pick one up! It’s the last broadsheet in this great 
country – that means it’s inherently and unquestionably Australia’s best 
journalistic institution!

“We would also like to personally thank Paul Whittaker for finally publishing 
our letters.”

The publisher of the Australian, Nicholas Gray, got in on the fun, saying on 
Twitter: “Room for improvement in story selection but the layout and design get 
an HD.”
 