
American Hustle steals the show
 The con is on … Amy Adams and David O Russell. Photograph: Startraks/Rex 

If you believe the pundits, this year's Oscar race is already over bar the 
shouting. 12 Years a Slave is a big, important motion picture; a movie to bet 
your house on, guaranteed to win the best film, director and actor awards at a 
canter. The evidence, however, suggests that the race remains wide open. Gravity
bagged the most nominations at the Baftas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/08/baftas-2014-nominations-list>, 
whileAmerican Hustle dominated the Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/13/golden-globes-2014-film-american-hustle-12-years-a-slave>
, picking up three awards to Slave's one. The voters, so far, prefer the 
playful, nimble film about nothing to the sober, heavy film about something. 
The Oscar nominations are still three days away. Until then, can we please 
refer to American Hustle as this year's Oscar favourite?

God is dead
 Harvey Weinstein and Julia Roberts in December 2013. Photograph: Robyn 
Beck/AFP/Getty Images 

Madonna calls him "the punisher", Meryl Streep refers to him as "God" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/feb/23/harvey-weinstein-oscars-as-god> 
and Steve Coogan likens to experience of working with him with"riding on a lion"
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/08/steve-coogan-philomena-bafta-nominations>
. And yet (whisper it) Harvey Weinstein, hitherto the biggest beast of Oscar 
season, is currently suffering his worst strike rate in years. The veteran 
producer comes staggering out of the Golden Globes with just one win (best song 
for Mandela) out of eight nominations. His hopes are now pinned on the likes of 
August: Osage County or The Butler upending predictions to clean up at the 
Oscars. Somehow, I suspect, this isn't his year.

Megan Ellison is the new Harvey Weinstein
 American Hustle stars and producer Megan Ellison Photograph: Lucy 
Nicholson/REUTERS 

On taking the stage to collect the screenplay prize for his romantic drama 
Her, Spike Jonze peered into the audience and spotted the woman of the moment. 
"Hi Megan!" he shouted, thereby introducing the world to 27-year-old Megan 
Ellison, the wonderkid producer of both Her (one Globe) and American Hustle 
(three Globes), the quiet revolutionary who's challenging the status quo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/feb/18/megan-ellison-producer-the-master>
. And yet Ellison, it should be noted, is not quite the young barbarian at the 
Hollywood gates. Her father - Oracle CEO Larry - is America's third richest man 
with an estimated personal fortune of $40bn.

TV is no longer the second-class citizen
 Matt Damon and Michael Douglas. Photograph: Jeff Kravitz/FilmMagic 

At this year's Globes, the Hollywood actor Matt Damon found himself nominated 
for his supporting role in a TV drama, Behind the Candelabra. "On any other 
night, in any other room, you'd be a big deal," co-host Amy Poehler told him 
from the stage. "But tonight you're basically a garbage person." Poehler could 
make this joke without fear of offence for the simply reason that it was 
self-evidently a joke. TheGolden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-globes> is no longer a two-tiered 
awards ceremony. The lines between film and TV have blurred and broken down, to 
the extent that the biggest cheer of the night came for Breaking Bad's victory, 
film stars Jon Voight and Michael Douglas won for small-screen roles, and 
British actors Chiwetel Ejiofor and Idris Elba were nominated in both 
categories and had to shuttle back and forth between the tables.

Emma Thompson recast as Hollywood's hellraiser of the year


Happy news for those still mourning the death of Peter O'Toole. His spirit 
lives on, bizarrely, in the blue-stocking form of Emma Thompson, otherwise best 
known as starchy PL Travers in that idiotic film about the making of Mary 
Poppins. Called up to present the screenwriting award, Thompson swaggered on 
stage with her shoes in her right hand and a Martini in her left, slurring her 
words as she asked for the envelope. Seconds later the shoes were history, 
tossed forcibly over her shoulder where they quite possibly put out a stained 
glass window or hit Meryl Streep in the face. I don't know how Thompson plans 
to top this at the Baftas next month, but I'm looking forward to finding out.

What qualifies as fun
 Golden Globes 2014: a Robert Redford fun fact 
The E! channel's coverage of the 71st annual Golden Globe awards was enlivened 
by a series of "fun facts" that appeared on the screen at regular intervals. 
"Fun fact: Michael J Fox was diagnosed with Parkinson's disease in 1991," read 
one. "Fun fact: Robert Redford was stricken with polio as a child," chirruped 
another. If this is E!'s idea of fun, one wonders how bad things would have to 
get before the merry laughter began to feel inappropriate.


• Video reaction: What the hell?  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2014/jan/13/golden-globes-2014-video-reaction>
• Peter Bradshaw's reaction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/13/golden-globes-2014-american-hustle-12-years-a-slave>
• Hadley Freeman: 10 things we learned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/13/golden-globes-best-moments-2014>
 