
Politicians seeking to make capital out of sporting successes is no new thing 
– but one failing to take the opportunity is perhaps more remarkable. The day 
afterEngland's Ashes triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/aug/23/england-win-ashes-oval-test-australia>
, Gordon Brown has failed to offer his congratulations to the side. Worse 
still, Conservative leader, David Cameron, has beaten him to the punch.

Brown's reticence is in marked contrast to 2005, when Tony Blair praised 
England's cricketers for "lighting up the summer" within hours of their 
securing a draw at The Oval. Sarah Brown, the prime minister's wife, did 
applaud the team last night via Twitter, and Brown is reportedly in the process 
of writing to the team.

Cameron swiftly jumped aboard the bandwagon, however. "Congratulations to 
Andrew Strauss and all the England team on their Ashes triumph," he said. "It 
has been an incredible series and a fitting end to Andrew Flintoff's Test 
career. The team and backroom staff should know just how proud the entire 
country is of their inspirational performance."

Sarah Brown, a prolific user of Twitter, offered her thoughts to retiring 
all-rounder Andrew Flintoff,who will undergo surgery on a knee injury tomorrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/aug/24/andrew-flintoff-england-return-surgery>
. "Wishes Freddie Flintoff a successful knee op – one of the heroes of 
England's conquest to regain the Ashes today,"she tweeted 
<http://twitter.com/SarahBrown10/status/3497415279>.

There has, thus far, been no announcement on the Number10 website, but a 
government spokesman said: "Of course the prime minister was delighted by the 
win … and will be writing to the team."

The Queen, who described the 2005 series as "truly memorable", also 
acknowledged the achievement this time around. "The Queen congratulates the 
England team on their victory in the Ashes, and extends her good wishes to both 
teams on their excellent performances over the course of the series," said a 
Buckingham Palace spokesman.
 