
“You’re looking especially lovely today, sweetheart,” shouts James Corden’s 
importunate costermonger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/feb/27/lady-in-the-van-trailer-maggie-smith-alan-bennett-video>
 from his market stall duringThe Lady in the Van 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/12/lady-in-the-van-review-maggie-smith-makes-pitstop-at-oscars-drive-thru>
. “Don’t sweetheart me,” snaps back Maggie Smith with the chilly eyed hauteur 
she has brought to a thousand scenes inDownton Abbey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/downton-abbey>. “I’m dying – 
possibly.”

It’s part of Dame Maggie’s genius that she can take a role in which she falls 
so low and yet play substantially the same character as when she was performing 
someone lah-di-dah. Indeed, one of the film’s pleasures is to imagine it as 
tracking Downton’s dowager countess fallen on hard times. One minute, you’re 
Lady Violet in silks, yucking it up with Penelope Wilton and Hugh Bonneville 
over feudal healthcare provisions in 1920s Yorkshire. Next minute, you’re 
living in a van inAlan Bennett <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/alanbennett>
’s north London front garden, wearing a lamentable mac, smelling of wee, with 
only your sub-Lady Bracknell put downs and self-pitying imperiousness to remind 
you of your former dignity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7698eeeb013626212a032b3d91563462d4767fd%2F0_147_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7698eeeb013626212a032b3d91563462d4767fd%2F0_147_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Maggie Smith in The Lady in the Van. Photograph: BBC Films 
In this unacceptably inverted new social order, it’s Camden Town proles who 
get the best lines. “Chin up love – we’ve all got to go sometime,” retorts 
Corden, pausing for a beat before adding maliciously: “Smells like you already 
have.”

One thing that’s significant about the new spate of films about homelessness 
and social exclusion is that they come at a moment when, thanks to several 
factors includingGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> and the heartless 
functioning of late capitalism, any one of us could be on the fuzzy end of 
life’s lollipop. One false move and any one of us could be dependent on Alan 
Bennett’s largesse. In Paul Bettany’s directorial debutShelter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/10/shelter-paul-bettany-review-toronto-film-festival-2014>
, for instance, heroin-addicted Hannah (played by Bettany’s wife, Jennifer 
Connelly) sets up to beg on a New York street, with a coffee cup for change and 
a worn cardboard sign that reads: “I used to be someone.” At the outset of the 
new filmTime Out of Mind <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dxk8pgNByv0>, we see 
Richard Gere squatting in an apartment when the building manager played by 
Steve Buscemi tells him he can’t stay there any more. Gere replies that he is 
waiting on “her” – meaning, we come to realise, his daughter, who threw him 
out, possibly because he has become an alcoholic and has mental health problems.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F434f5668bed2c5cf031c6442eeb5f0f2a92c2112%2F0_291_6048_3629%2F6048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F434f5668bed2c5cf031c6442eeb5f0f2a92c2112%2F0_291_6048_3629%2F6048.jpg>
 Hannah, played by Jennifer Connolly, in Shelter. Photograph: Clay Enos/Arrow 
Films 
Each film upsettingly dramatises the crossing of a thin line. Once, in The 
Simpsons, a drunk threw away a bottle only for it to be caught by a passing 
businessman. The latter chucked away his briefcase and lies in the gutter 
drinking from it. Each of us is that close to the abyss.

If they hand out goodie bags at screenings of Maggie Smith’s latest film (and 
they really shouldn’t), they should include badges that say: “Lady in the Van, 
c’est moi.” Her fate speaks to our current austerity-generated terrors: when 
cinema deals with homelessness, it invites us to enter empathetically into the 
shoes of the other in their misfortune, but it annuls that invitation in one 
and the same gesture by making the other a projection of our fears.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthe-lady-in-the-van-watch-maggie-smith-in-an-exclusive-clip-from-the-alan-bennett-comedy-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446726458722%2FKP_590552_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van%3A%20watch%20Maggie%20Smith%20in%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20from%20the%20Alan%20Bennett%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthe-lady-in-the-van-watch-maggie-smith-in-an-exclusive-clip-from-the-alan-bennett-comedy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Lady%20in%20the%20Van%3A%20watch%20Maggie%20Smith%20in%20an%20exclusive%20clip%20from%20the%20Alan%20Bennett%20comedy%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fthe-lady-in-the-van-watch-maggie-smith-in-an-exclusive-clip-from-the-alan-bennett-comedy-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F5%2F1446726458722%2FKP_590552_crop_640x480.jpg>
 The Lady in the Van trailer. 
Homelessness <https://www.theguardian.com/society/homelessness> films are 
additionally topical because they invite us fortunate ones to ask how 
compassionate we would be confronted with those who have fallen on hard times, 
be they refugees or dotty ladies clinging deludedly to vestiges of 
self-importance (“Shut the door!” she shouts incontrovertibly after some nice 
locals present her with Christmas presents at her van. “I’m a busy woman.”). In 
this respect, Bennett’s real-life charitable gesture in allowing an unfortunate 
lady off-street-parking privileges in her camper van on his drive (which, given 
Camden council’s residents parking charges, is probably worth several grand a 
year), makes us wonder what we would do in similar circumstances. One might 
suspect that the driveways of the streets near Bennett’s home are so chock full 
with Range Rovers bankrolled from venal bankers’ undeserved bonuses that they 
couldn’t accommodate a picaresque mad bat in her stationary rust bucket.

That kind of person is evoked in the film by the eyes of the most heartless 
north London denizens whose swivel eyes, decoded, read: “That’ll take a million 
plus off our resale values, damn your dogoodery Mr Bennett.” If you live in 
Gloucester Avenue, NW1, and you’re reading this, let me add the following: I 
don’t mean to suggest you’re a swivel-eyed monster. Why, you’ve probably got 
oodles of Syrian refugees sleeping in your 4x4 in the drive right now. Mind 
you, have you thought of how long they’re going to stay? “She came for three 
weeks,” says the film’s tagline. “She stayed for 15 years.” Are you ready to 
accommodate them until 2030? The problematic nature of the charitable gesture 
has long been a staple of cinema. In Jean Renoir’s 1932 filmBoudu Saved from 
Drowning <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0022718/reference>, Michel Simon’s 
eponymous tramp is saved from a plunge into the Seine by the bookseller Edouard 
Lestingois, who takes the bearded roughneck home. There, Boudu shows his 
gratitude by seducing the housemaid and Madame Lestingois. This, indeed, is 
where films about rescued unfortunates are most subversive: their protagonists 
are like grenades rolled into hidebound middle-class households, threatening to 
detonate all that they hold dear – money, sexual propriety, the ruthless 
hypocrisy masked as civilisation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52feec2e79a7d2dd5b5b5c6bc2d6675a457b8e57%2F0_51_4711_2827%2F4711.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52feec2e79a7d2dd5b5b5c6bc2d6675a457b8e57%2F0_51_4711_2827%2F4711.jpg>
 Jean Renoir’s 1932 film Boudu Saved From Drowning, a subversive film about a 
rescued unfortunate. Photograph: Moviestore/REX Shutterstock 
What’s more, such films dramatise the impossibility of gratuitous, 
no-strings-attached giving that so concerned philosophers such as Theodor 
Adorno (inMinima Moralia <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Minima_Moralia>) and 
Jacques Derrida (inGiven Time 
<http://monoskop.org/images/4/4d/Derrida_Jacques_Given_Time_I_Counterfeit_Money_1992.pdf>
): both thinkers concluded that to give, to be charitable, can only reflect the 
giver’s dreary tastes and impose unwonted obligations of gratitude on the 
recipient. That’s to say, the gift giver, unless they are a saint, always wants 
something back. And so it is in cinema. How very dare Boudu put the moves on 
the staff of that nice Monsieur Lestingois! When is the Lady in the Van going 
to show proper appreciation to that kind Mr Bennett!

Strikingly, at the end of Boudu Saved from Drowning, our hero wins the lottery 
and so has riches enough to marry the seduced maid. But instead of joining the 
straight and narrow, during the wedding party he capsizes a rowing boat and 
floats off. He thereby returns, as my late Guardian colleague Richard Boston 
put it in his BFI book about the film, “to his old vagrancy, a free spirit once 
more.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c9f733d56dad62388b8905221e83b058914b00d%2F2_167_1442_865%2F1442.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c9f733d56dad62388b8905221e83b058914b00d%2F2_167_1442_865%2F1442.jpg>
 For Charlie Chaplin in The Tramp (1915), the open road is the path to freedom. 
Photograph: Everett/Rex 
Does something similar happen at the end of Lady in the Van? I won’t spoil the 
ending, but let me say this: it seems unlikely that the van is fit for the open 
road.The battery is probably flat, apart from anything else.What Boudu (and its 
Hollywood remake, Down and Out in Beverly Hills) tell us, then, is not that us 
fortunates risk falling into hell, but rather that we are there already, mired 
among possessions and responsibilities. Boudu’s existential choice to float off 
is a rejection of the social and economic constraints that curtail the free 
spirit. It’s a romantically picaresque theme that has repeatedly seduced French 
film-makers. For instance, in Agnes Varda’s 1985 film Vagabond (released with 
the much more politically freighted French title – Sans Toit ni Loi, “Without 
Roof or Law”), Sandrine Bonnaire plays Mona, a former Parisian office worker 
who chooses to wander France’s wine regions free from responsibility. In this 
she was following the philosophy of Charlie Chaplin: at the end of the 1915 film
The Tramp <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=p2BjmNEzWQ0>, he duffs up some hobos 
who were molesting a farmer’s daughter. The grateful farmer’s daughter promptly 
falls for him and puts him to work as a farm hand. But he not only fails at 
that job but realises he has to biff off when her fiancé shows up. Chaplin thus 
resumes his old life, unencumbered by all life’s usual entanglements. The open 
road for Chaplin, as later for Kerouac, is the path, not to oblivion, but to 
freedom.

Varda’s film, though, turns any such eulogy to vagabondage on its head. The 
film begins with the discovery of Mona frozen to death in a ditch and how she 
got there is told in flashback.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F977c7e13e539b0df738fc4f158c0de0bb49c00ec%2F0_198_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F977c7e13e539b0df738fc4f158c0de0bb49c00ec%2F0_198_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 Lady And The Tramp, featuring a jaunty freedom-loving mutt. Photograph: 
Moviestore/REX Shutterstock 
But the allure of the life of vagabondage remains. One reason why the cocker 
spaniel fancies the bit of canine rough in Disney’s Lady and the Tramp (1955) 
is because Tramp is a jaunty freedom-loving mutt with a heart of gold, rather 
than, say, a pampered pooch transported from dog grooming salon in its owner’s 
ludicrous handbag. Here, the tramp is truly the other: rather than a projection 
of our fears, he’s a realisation of our romantically antinomian fantasies. 
Albeit in the form of a cartoon dog.

A similar narrative arc is described in the forthcoming film Hampstead, in 
which Diane Keaton falls for Brendan Gleeson. Based, like The Lady in the Van, 
on a true north London story of social exclusion and kind middle-class 
exceptions to the Broken Britain rule,Hampstead features Gleeson as an Irish 
squatter who has been living in a ramshackle shack on Hampstead Heath for 17 
years 
<http://www.hamhigh.co.uk/news/brendan_gleeson_and_diane_keaton_to_star_in_hampstead_film_about_heath_squatter_1_4279997>
. But now, evil property developers seek to bulldoze in favour of a grotesque 
development of luxury flats. What heterosexual woman wouldn’t fall for a 
stirringly soulful, countercultural bit of rough who stands up to the Man, His 
boring real estate projects and His loathsome attempt to commodify nature’s 
bounty? Not Diane Keaton, is my guess.

Disney, unexpectedly, has more to teach us about poverty and social exclusion 
than Lady and the Tramp. At the end of Preston Sturges’ 1941 filmSullivan’s 
Travels <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sullivan%27s_Travels>, in which Joel 
McCrea plays a dissatisfied director of comic movies who decides to become a 
hobo to research his planned serious new film about marginality and social 
exclusion, our hero finds himself in a cinema. There, he notes the joy on the 
faces of an audience watching Disney’s Playful Pluto cartoon and realises that 
comedy can do more good for the poor than his proposed social drama, O Brother, 
Where Art Thou? Which, you have to admit, is some journey of self-justification 
for Sturges. And, indeed, Hollywood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe424368255bbaee650fbc2e2f48cf6446f17aabe%2F0_97_3337_2002%2F3337.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Got%20any%20change%3F%20Why%20cinema%20struggles%20with%20homelessness&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Fnov%2F05%2Fportrayal-homelessness-film-lady-in-the-van%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe424368255bbaee650fbc2e2f48cf6446f17aabe%2F0_97_3337_2002%2F3337.jpg>
 Preston Sturges’ 1941 film Sullivan’s Travels. Photograph: SNAP/Rex 
Just maybe, though, the moral of Sullivan’s Travels is right: humankind 
cannot, as TS Eliot wrote, stand very much reality. Particularly if the 
humankind in question is sitting in the cinema. And especially if that 
unbearable reality of human degradation is performed by leading thespians. One 
of the few films I’ve ever walked out of was Ironweed, starring Meryl Streep 
and Jack Nicholson. What got on my wick was, in part, the ceaseless unfolding 
of unremitting misery on my dollar, but also the performance of that misery 
that self-regardingly draws attention to itself rather than the object of the 
performances, the improper wallowing in and appropriation of someone else’s 
suffering. Perhaps I was wrong to walk out. Perhaps I should have taken my 
medicine.

But sometimes it’s hard, for me at least, to suspend disbelief. Even when 
Sandrine Bonnaire is frozen to death in the ditch or Jennifer Connelly is 
begging for drug money, I can’t but help be distracted by the actor’s beauty, 
by the sense that they will, any minute now, dust themselves down and head off 
for a photoshoot or film role more befitting their glamour. Would I empathise 
more if the downtrodden were played by ugly, ideally unknown actors, you might 
well ask? Well, and I say this hanging my head in shame, probably.

This is the problem, or rather my shortcoming: when cinema portrays the 
marginal and the excluded, often it does so with actors so lovely or so 
associated with other roles that it’s hard to suspend one’s disbelief to really 
enter into their predicament. Right now, I’m trying to believe Richard Gere is 
a homeless, mentally ill alcoholic, but I still see him as a serene Buddhist 
meditating with Lisa Simpson or as the Officer and the Gentleman in impeccable 
dress whites carrying off Debra Winger for a bit of slap and tickle.

Maybe a better alternative is to approach human adversity obliquely, through 
comedy like the Lady in the Van or the heartwarming romance of Hampstead. But 
both risk allowing audiences to treat suffering as entertainment, or worse, a 
means to delude ourselves into thinking that others’ adversity need not bother 
us unduly.

That’s the problem of cinema when it tries to depict human suffering such as 
homelessness or poverty – we might try to think about the gutter but we end up 
just looking at the stars.

• The Lady in the Van <https://www.theguardian.com/film/lady-in-the-van> is 
released in the UK on 13 November
 