
If you have made it this far into the story, the chances are the city in your 
mind is New York. Or at least some version of it. Surely no streets have been 
portrayed on the pages of comics as often as Manhattan’s, most famously as 
Metropolis by day and Gotham by night. Not to be outdone,Spider-Man 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Spider-Man> once even said “I am New York.” 
Batman, the Ninja Turtles, the Fantastic Four, Superman and a host of other 
do-gooders in stretch pants may have thoughts on that. As might Mitchell 
Hundred, who, despite possessing superpowers unsuited to desk work, hangs up 
his cape and becomes mayor of the city inEx Machina 
<http://www.comicvine.com/ex-machina/4050-11050/>. “Stopping bullets ain’t in 
your job description anymore, boss,” says his aide when the guns come out.

 There may not be a birth certificate for comics (especially if you embrace 
the broader definition of “sequential art”), but the strip was certainly raised 
in New York, and well fed by the competition between newspapers and their 
publishers in the early 1900s. Well nourished, too, by the meat and drink of 
urban life. The countryside is a fine habitat for spiders, but how is 
Spider-Man meant to get around with nothing but branches to swing from? 
Superboy grew up in farmland, sure, but the call for caped crusades came from 
the city – because cities have people, possibilities … and crime.

 Of course there are exceptions. Good ol’ Charlie Brown, safe in the 
midwestern bliss of his strip, doesn’t have to get involved with that 
delinquent nonsense – but if we’re in the city, crime is on the menu. Gotham 
has had many makeovers in Batman’s time, but, as Batman Unmasked author Will 
Brooker says: “The defining characteristic of Gotham must be thatthere is 
always crime. Because Batman is, on one key level, the man who fights crime.” 
(Exactly where in New York, however, is hard to nail down. Over the years, 
Gotham has had to be to be a very adaptable place, perhaps because definitions 
of its locale, such as that of the journalist William Safire – “New York below 
14th Street, from SoHo to Greenwich Village, the Bowery, Little Italy, 
Chinatown and the sinister areas around the base of the Manhattan and Brooklyn 
Bridges” – passed their sell-by date as Manhattan cleaned up under mayors 
Rudolph Giuliani and Michael Bloomberg. The recent Christopher Nolan films owe 
a much greater debt, in appearance, to Chicago.)

 Yet while villainy may be prevalent on comic-book streets, those streets come 
in myriad forms. Whatever you imagine a city can be, you’ll find it out there 
on those waffled pages. The debated differences between Marvel’s landmark 
realism v DC Comics’ fantasy town-planning seem fairly niche when you visit 
Philippe Druillet’sDelirius 
<http://www.hoodedutilitarian.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/12/Lone-Sloane-Delirius-Page-4.jpg>
, a city that covers an entire planet (not unlike the sprawling carbuncles of 
Judge Dredd’s precinct, Mega-City One). Delirius is a planet dedicated to 
enjoyment: “Four million square miles of untold pleasures for everyone … 
Sumptuous casinos and low dives! Wild night-clubs! Temples of debauchery! 
Blood-soaked arenas!” For protagonist Loan Sloane, where there’s pleasure, 
there is also plenty of pain.
 Is Chicago now a better model? ... Gotham City as New York 
 Frank Miller’s Basin City – a place that only began representing itself 
honestly when it dropped those first two letters to becomeSin City 
<http://sincity2.co.uk/> – is a town where even the priests say things like: 
“Ask yourself if that corpse of a slut is worth dying for.” It’s so hopeless 
and mean that the grime can’t be contained in classic urban cauldrons such as 
“projects” and docks: even the forests and farms surrounding it crawl with 
menace. Everywhere is black and white and red all over. The New York of Alan 
Moore’s Promethea is initially also portrayed as a kind of Babylon, but there 
is at least some redemption here as it is transformed, straight along biblical 
lines, into an ectopian paradise – “a heavenly radiant city”. The pages glow 
with electric blues, golden sunsets and sex.

 Want to see Paris in 2023? There’s the Nikopol Trilogy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Nikopol_Trilogy>. Berlin 1928-1933? Jason 
Lute’sBerlin (City of Stones) <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Berlin_%28comic%29>
. Hiroshima just after the bomb? Barefoot Gen by Keiji Nakazawa. How a Belgian 
architect imagines the future?Les Cités Obscures 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Les_Cit%C3%A9s_obscures>, from François Schuiten 
– beautifully constructed cityscapes that twist and knot as they reach for the 
sky. Cleveland? Page Harvey Pekar. The life of a man who lives on top of a 
building between two hoardings? See Owen D Pomery’s Between the Billboards – a 
contemporary “self-published comic series following the main character James 
Ebner and his detached existence”.

As this list makes clear, cities – as places that ferment action and 
opportunity – are obviously a great source of narrative for comics. But perhaps 
the connection is even deeper. There’s as much action to be found in the 
private world of urban living as there is spilling out on to the streets. As 
the Riddler once asked: “When is a man a city?”

 Or, as Sophie Yanow puts it in War of Streets and Houses 
<http://www.uncivilizedbooks.com/comics/war_of_streets_and_houses.html>, 
published just this year: “Where else can a queer kid go to find people like 
them to experiment with the possibilities only made real by city life?” The 
strip’s spare panels, often just lines drawn on a white background, aren’t 
focused on buildings but on the mental and physical struggle cities can create. 
Yanow grew up in the woods, moved to Montreal and felt the kettling pressure of 
urban control while taking part in the 2012 student strikes. How people are 
moulded by cities and their authorities is also captured in Will Eisner’s Life 
on Dropsie Avenue and The Building, both of which unpick New York’s historical 
fabric; and the interests of Chris Ware’sBuilding Stories 
<http://www.fantagraphics.com/artist-bios/artist-bio-chris-ware.html> and 
Karrie Fransman’sThe House that Groaned <http://www.thehousethatgroaned.com/> 
take that to a very local level.

 Steven Walsh, the man at the helm of London’s treasured Gosh comics 
<http://www.goshlondon.com/>, picks out Eisner’s work. “He may well be the 
greatest chronicler of urban space in the history of comics – his gritty, grimy 
streets streaked with steam rising up and shadows carved across the looming 
buildings,” Walsh says. “Much of Eisner’s work was concerned with people 
feeling overwhelmed or powerless, themes that are well suited to the populous 
anonymity of the city.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Fgotham-new-york-what-do-comics-tell-us-about-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F8%2F1410186755155%2F22bb248d-4adf-48d5-bb7a-edae6e956639-2060x1411.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gotham%20state%20of%20mind%3A%20what%20do%20comics%20tell%20us%20about%20cities%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Fgotham-new-york-what-do-comics-tell-us-about-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gotham%20state%20of%20mind%3A%20what%20do%20comics%20tell%20us%20about%20cities%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2014%2Fsep%2F09%2Fgotham-new-york-what-do-comics-tell-us-about-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F8%2F1410186755155%2F22bb248d-4adf-48d5-bb7a-edae6e956639-2060x1411.jpeg>
 The disconnect between buildings and people ... Julius Knipl, Real Estate 
Photographer. Image: Ben Katchor 
 A more gentle impression is made by the Ben Katchor strip that maps the 
movements ofJulius Knipl, Real Estate Photographer 
<http://www.katchor.com/Kniplpage.html>. Knipl is a genial creation: a rotund, 
wide-trousered chap in a hat, who accepts commissions to take photographs of 
buildings in an unnamed city. The objects and buildings trigger old memories 
for Knipl, so while his photographic eye is cooly detached, surveying the 
present, his emotions about the past emerge through a witty, drip-fed 
commentary. In one episode from Cheap Novelties: The Pleasure of Urban Decay, 
Knipl picks up a playing card from the pavement. “What’s this?” Then, in barely 
50 words and eight panels of pen-and-ink, he gives a meditation on the social 
bonding that cards represent. “I hate to see a deck of cards ruined,” he 
concludes, as the train doors close. In an interview with Katchor for his weekly
Panel Borders podcast <http://panelborders.com/>, Alex Fitch touches on the 
feeling of loss in Knipl; but Katchor explains he isn’t criticising modern 
architecture so much as the absurdity of the built world – the disconnect 
between the people that construct it and the people that use it.

 I asked Katchor about the fictional cities he likes to hang out in. “I love 
to visit the imaginary midwestern city of Chester Gould’s Dick Tracy comic 
strip and the ‘New York’ of Harry Hershfield’s Abie the Agent,” he says. “The 
object description, the line quality and the language used by these 
artist-writers produces these unique and palpable environments. Gould’s city 
has a cool, brutual angularity. Hershfield’s New York is a early 20th-century 
city of Yiddish-tinged English, cosy interiors and wild business schemes.”

 Knipl’s city is designed to be as old as New York, but not New York. It’s a 
city for everyone. “It shares many of the social and economic systems of a city 
like New York City,” says Katchor, “but they are completely different in the 
particularity of their details. I try to avoid generalities or universals. The 
approach is one in which the assemblage of the city (buildings, objects, etc) 
has an impact upon the thoughts of the people – it colours their dreams.”

 No one’s dreams were more coloured by the city than Winsor McCay’s Little 
Nemo in Slumberland <http://www.comicstriplibrary.org/display/111>, one of the 
earliest US strips, which ran in the New York Herald from 1905-1911. As he 
falls into a fantastic sleep, Nemo’s cot grows legs like a giraffe and he 
strides, almost Godzilla-like, through fantastic, sky-scraping scenery inspired 
by McCay’s memories of city expos and theme-park rollercoasters – a kind of 
fantasy architecture. It’s the architecture of the page, though, that McCay was 
most radical with. Nemo didn’t just reach across the page, but down it, in 
dizzying vertical panels that knocked out the supporting walls of the old 
calendar-like “waffle” of the comic.
 Radical comic architecture ... Little Nemo in Slumberland. Image: Winsor McCay
There’s a wormhole you can travel through, straight from Nemo’s dreams, back 
in the early 20th century, to Dean Motter’s 2001-2 Electropolis 
<http://deanmotter.com/electopolis.htm> (“Yesterday’s City of Tomorrow”), a 
retrofuturistic mash of mile-high skyscrapers, Zeppelins and Van Der Graaf 
generators that imagines 1999 as it was predicted to turn out back in 1939. 
Here is a curdling of past and future. As Motter’s own site says: “From the air 
the city resembles nothing so much as the interior of an old radio or 
television set. Machinery as architecture … Electricity as commerce … 
Electropolis is a vintage murder mystery involving Menlo Park, the electric 
detective.” (And while we are in the precinct of detectives and floating cars, 
mention must be made of The Long Tomorrow, written by Dan O’Bannon in 1975, 
illustrated by Moebius – a cyberpunk story whose visuals unmistakeably 
influenced Ridley Scott’sBlade Runner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/aug/20/my-favourite-city-film-is-blade-runner>
.) That corridor between past and future is arrestingly revealed in one of the 
most famous graphic novels to be set in London,From Hell 
<http://www.tor.com/blogs/2012/04/the-great-alan-moore-reread-from-hell-part-1>
, Alan Moore and Eddie Campbell’s speculation on the motivations of Jack the 
Ripper. In one arresting panel we see the Ripper (William Gull), bloodied knife 
held high, beholding a vision of the Nat West tower.


 More often, though, it is the past that haunts. FreakAngels, written by 
Warren Ellis and drawn by Paul Duffield between 2005 and 2011, involves, as 
Ellis puts it, characters with a range of special abilities such as telepathy 
“living in a post-flood London that they might possibly have had something to 
do with”. For Duffield, London is a character – a kind of ghost. “Seeing so 
many recognisable landmarks and streets confronts any reader who is familiar 
with the city with a constant sense of what has been lost and what used to be,” 
he says. “I think there’s also an interesting twist on this ‘ghostly” element 
of the city – while certain landmarks remind us of what was, they are also 
repurposed in a more immediately human way. Spires become watchtowers, the top 
of pubs become gardens, churches become secular gathering places. We interact 
with them through the comic in a much more intimate way than we ever interact 
with them as residents or tourists. In this respect, the city can be seen as a 
space in which the environmental changes of the story can be instantly 
understood – a sort of visual narrator.”

The city literally becomes the protagonist in Stuart Bannocks’s City Strips 
<http://citystrips.co.uk/>, which take stories from well-known comics, such as 
Spider-Man and Batman, and remove all the characters and the dialogue. The 
result (which echo the Garfield Minus Garfield strips, which erased Garfield 
from his own world) are what Bannocks calls “all action architecture from some 
of the most read cities of fiction earth”.

Some works are more concerned with reality. Although Joe Sacco’s early comics 
are fictional, he eventually fused journalism, illustration and travel to 
produce celebrated reportage such as Palestine, The Fixer and Safe Area Gorazde 
– books that seem to smuggle you into a city as much as simply reporting on it. 
Similarly, Guy Delisle has sought out conflicted places such as Pyongyang, 
Shenzhen and Jerusalem, relating his experiences as graphic novels. Equally, at 
the other extreme, there are comics that stretch beyond any practical 
possibility, where you find yourself dropped into Escher-like mazes, places in 
which the comic itself becomes the city. Norwegian artist Terje Brofoss, AKA
Pushwagner <http://www.pushwagner.no/>, conjures a dystopian suffocation in his 
graphic novel Soft City, with its large pages packed with repetitions of 
windows, people and vehicles stretching to infinity. These expansive A3 pages, 
filled with spidery lines, make me think of the Total Perspective Vortex in The 
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy: a vertiginous reminder of how insignificant 
we are in a colossal repetitive universe.
 City as protagonist ... City Strips removes all the characters and dialogue 
from well-known comics. Image: Stuart Bannocks 
 Everywhere you look, being trapped is a theme. Greg M Smith, a scholar at 
Georgia State University, says that for Will Eisner “comics form a catalog of 
how architecture can become a frame and how these frames can become prisons”, 
so it is fitting that in Marc Antoine Mathieu’s Acquefacques, the protagonist 
Julius Corentin escapes his “prison”, and can be seen reading the comic that he 
is in (that is, the same one you are reading) or walking along the dividers 
between the panels, looking down into the boxes on either side of him as if 
they were office cubicles. As Mathieu plays with the grid of the comic book 
page, he reveals one of the reasons this art relates so well to the city, 
itself a multimedia grid of hoardings, billboards and shop windows that 
squabble for our attention – and turn our gaze into that of the wandering 
“flaneur”. Eisner was all too aware of this, and a warning he makes in his book 
Comics and Sequential Art, written in 1985, has only snowballed in relevance: 
“The most important obstacle to surmount is the tendency of the reader’s eye to 
wander.”

 Is that wandering eye how we take in cities? Duffield agrees that the grid of 
a comic page is very well suited to portraying built-up cities, but warns of 
thinking photographically. “Creating the sense of a place is often about more 
than just picking a camera angle and pressing the virtual shutter button,” he 
says. “Such an image can’t be the entirety of place, only ever the place as 
seen from one vantage point. It’s interesting to think about ancient 
illustrations of cities, before literally represented perspective was the norm 
in the visual arts. Such illustrations aren’t ‘realistic’, but perhaps they 
better represent the internalised impressions we have of the places we live, 
which are jumbles of memories instead of a series of images recalled with 
photographic fidelity.”

Grids of images, stacked floor by floor … comics are miniature apartment 
blocks that we peer in to, like the chair-bound Jimmy Stewart in Rear Window. 
It’s not just what happens in those windows that’s of interest, either. 
Buildings hide as much as they show, and as Scott McCloud suggests in his 
Understanding Comics books (themselves in comic-book form), lots of mischief 
takes place in those spaces between the windows. This, he says, is where the 
reader becomes implicated, no longer an innocent bystander. In McCloud’s mind, 
if a comic book shows an axe raised above a head in one panel, and a 
decapitated corpse in the next, there’s only one person who joined the dots – 
one person who committed the crime: you.

Well, that’s probably the most benign place to indulge your inner 
super-villain. Comics reflect the cities we live in and the effect those cities 
have on us – as well as the cities we build inside ourselves. Just be prepared 
to face the men in tights, or else move to the country, where Spider-Man can’t 
get a grip.

• From Hell to Electropolis: how comics depict cities – in pictures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2014/sep/09/-sp-how-comics-depict-cities-in-pictures>

• Why ‘video games will reshape our cities’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/10/watch-dogs-gtav-video-games-reshape-cities-sim-city-will-wright>
 