
Last week Michael Gove’s Vote Leave campaign ended the career of David Cameron 
– a man that Gove has counted as a close friend for more than a decade.

On Thursday the Gove career-destroying machine has turned on Boris Johnson, 
who until about 9am was the favourite to win the Conservative leadership. Gove, 
who is respected by colleagues, Tory members and the media, published adamning 
character reference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/goves-leadership-bid-statement-in-full>
 about the man with whom he jointly ran the victorious Vote Leave campaign. 
Here’s the key section:

I respect and admire all the candidates running for the leadership. In 
particular, I wanted to help build a team behindBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> so that a politician who argued 
for leaving the European Union could lead us to a better future.

But I have come, reluctantly, to the conclusion that Boris cannot provide the 
leadership or build the team for the task ahead.

Within three hours Boris Johnson shocked everyone by ruling himself out of the 
race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/boris-johnson-rules-himself-out-of-tory-leadership-race-brexit-eu-referendum>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fboris-johnson-rules-himself-out-of-tory-leadership-race-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Johnson%20rules%20himself%20out%20of%20Tory%20leadership%20race%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fboris-johnson-rules-himself-out-of-tory-leadership-race-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20Johnson%20rules%20himself%20out%20of%20Tory%20leadership%20race%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F30%2Fboris-johnson-rules-himself-out-of-tory-leadership-race-video&media=>
Boris Johnson rules himself out of Tory leadership race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/30/boris-johnson-rules-himself-out-of-tory-leadership-race-video>
Gove did not explain why he has come to this conclusion, but presumably we 
will learn more in the hours and days ahead, or perhaps the next events in this 
extraordinary story will take over.

Gove was never particularly close to Johnson and it was reported that at a 
dinner with Rupert Murdoch two years ago he told the media tycoon Johnson was 
not fit to be prime minister. “A ‘tipsy’ Gove has launched an extraordinary 
wine-fuelled attack on Boris Johnson, saying he ‘has no gravitas and is unfit 
to lead the nation’,”is how the Mail on Sunday reported it. 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2581925/Tipsy-Michael-Gove-launches-Exocet-against-Boris-100-bottle-wine-flows-Mayor-no-gravitas-Theresa-May-no-friends-Osborne-fit-lead.html>
 But Gove and Johnson appeared to get on during the EU referendum campaign and 
afterwards Gove’s supporters briefed journalists that Gove had developed new 
respect for Johnson. This is what the well-informed James Forsyth wroteat the 
weekend in the Sun. 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/opinion/1338889/top-tories-did-not-see-brexit-coming-even-leave-backer-gove-conceded-defeat-and-went-to-bed/>

But I understand that Gove is not planning to put himself forward.

One influential figure in the Leave campaign says: “Michael has acquired a new 
respect for Boris in this process.”

Those on the Vote Leave team have bonded during this campaign: “They have 
become a band of brothers and sisters. There is a logic to them taking on the 
challenge they have created,” I am told.

So something changed dramatically. On Wednesday we learned, from a leaked 
email written by Gove’s wife Sarah Vine, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/michael-goves-wife-doubts-boris-johnson-email-sarah-vine-dacre-murdoch>
 that she feared Johnson might fail to honour promises made to her husband. 
Gove has now decided his wife was right.

Gove’s intervention was, at one level, a “stop Johnson” operation, and it 
worked.

But it would be a mistake to think this is just about sabotaging Johnson. In 
the past Gove has repeatedly said that he does not want to be prime minster, 
with an apparent sincerity that led journalists and colleagues to think he 
meant it. He hinted that he accepted that his own personal limitations (he is 
famously impractical, he’s not good with numbers, he does not like flying, and 
some of his intellectual interests border on the eccentric) meant he was not 
suitable for the job. But it is a rare politician who turns down the chance to 
be prime minister.  
<http://www.conservativehome.com/thetorydiary/2016/06/our-next-tory-leader-survey-finds-may-leading-johnson-by-just-ten-votes-in-well-over-a-thousand.html>

On Thursday a ConservativeHome survey of party members had Theresa May and 
Boris Johnson as joint favourites. 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/thetorydiary/2016/06/our-next-tory-leader-survey-finds-may-leading-johnson-by-just-ten-votes-in-well-over-a-thousand.html>
But that may be because they did not ask about Gove, because ConservativeHome 
thought Gove was not running. When ConservativeHome asked the same question in 
a survey in May,Gove came top.  
<http://www.conservativehome.com/thetorydiary/2016/05/gove-tops-our-next-party-leader-survey-for-the-second-month-running.html>

There is a real chance he could win.
 