
The identity of officials on one of the most powerful government boards in 
Australia – which has the effective power to strip Australians of citizenship – 
has been revealed for the first time.

A freedom of information request 
<https://www.border.gov.au/AccessandAccountability/Documents/FOI/20160520_FA160401379_Documents_Released.pdf>
 by Guardian Australia for minutes of the Citizenship Loss Board’s first 
meeting in February shows the panel is made up of senior departmental 
secretaries from across government. The secretariat of the committee is Hamish 
Hansford, an assistant secretary of the immigration department. He previously 
served as the national manager of the intelligence branch of the Australian 
Crime Commission.

The department of the prime minister’s counter-terrorism co-ordinator, Greg 
Moriarty, is also on the board, as are Gary Quinlan, from the Department of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade, Katherine Jones, from the Attorney-General’s 
Department, and Christopher Dawson from the Australian Crime Commission.

The immigration department has by far has the largest number of 
representatives with five officers: Rachel Noble, Michael Manthorpe, Maria 
Fernandez, Michael Outram and Pip De Veau.

The Australian federal police and defence department’s members are unknown. 
Both declined to participate in the February meeting for undisclosed reasons.

Innocent Australians risk getting caught up in laws to strip citizenship – 
expert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/04/innocent-australians-risk-getting-caught-up-in-laws-to-strip-citizenship-expert>
The Australian Security Intelligence Service (Asis) and Australian Security 
Intelligence Organisation (Asio) each have a member. Neither officer is named, 
listed only as a “representative”.

The Citizenship Loss Board has the de facto power to strip dual nationals of 
their citizenship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/nov/10/law-to-strip-dual-nationals-of-australian-citizenship-set-to-pass-parliament>
 under the federal government’s legislation introduced last year.

Although the law was touted as an anti-terrorism tool, it left open the 
possibility that people whodamaged commonwealth property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/24/new-laws-dual-nationals-lose-citizenship-for-damaging-commonwealth-property>
 or evennational security whistleblowers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jun/25/whistleblowers-could-have-citizenship-revoked-under-proposed-laws>
 could have their citizenship revoked. Legal experts have argued it could 
create a tier of second-class citizenship.

Although the Citizenship Loss Board appears to be the effective arbiter of 
this exceptional power, there is no reference to it in the legislation. None of 
its members are parliamentarians or members of the judiciary. It operates in a 
legal vacuum. Its recommendations go to the immigration minister with no clear 
legal mandate.

In theory the board does not have the express power to revoke citizenship. The 
laws were built to withstand judicial scrutiny, describing the key mechanism to 
remove citizenship as one of “revocation by conduct” – the argument is that if 
the law is “self-executing” this could head off judicial review.

The board’s official role is to consider cases where an individual’s behaviour 
meets the criteria to have citizenship revoked under the law.

This mechanism has been described by University of New South Wales dean of law 
George Williams as a “legal fiction”. He haspreviously outlined 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/stripping-of-citizenship-a-loss-in-more-ways-than-one-20160417-go87as.html>
 concerns about the board and the basis for its power.

He told Guardian Australia that although it was welcome that the membership of 
the board had been disclosed, the role of the board continued to raise concerns.

“This body may not in law be the decision maker but in practice its influence 
is likely to be decisive,” he said. “It really undermines any conception that 
this law is self-executing.”

The board seems confident of its legal position. The meeting’s minutes noted 
it received “advice on potential legal exposure”. It said there “was none as 
each member is participating in the board in their professional capacity and 
that the board is an interdepartmental committee providing advice, not a 
decision-making body”.

Williams said that position was far from settled, and it was likely the high 
court would have to rule on it.

The citizenship laws were rushed through by the former prime minister, Tony 
Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-abbott>, and touted as 
an urgent response to the threat of terrorism.

But it appears the board’s movements have been slow. It meets only at the 
discretion of the secretariat. The next meeting after February was set to 
discuss individual cases but the immigration department has not responded to 
questions about how many meetings have occurred since February, or how many 
cases had been considered.
 