
Australians who move overseas before paying off their student loans will be 
forced to continue paying off their debts while living abroad, under new laws 
that come into effect on Friday.

How do we get graduates who move abroad to pay back their student loan?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jul/28/graduates-move-abroad-pay-back-student-loan>
The new law means graduates will have to register with the Australian tax 
office (ATO) before moving overseas, if they plan to be away for six months or 
more.

Before the new law kicked in, residents living abroad were not required to 
lodge tax returns, so the ATO had no way of knowing if they were earning over 
the $54,126 minimum repayment threshold.

No penalties are currently in place for failing to register, but Australia has 
debt recovery agreements with other countries that allow for the sharing of tax 
information. Australians who fail to lodge their returns from 1 January could 
get audited.

“Data sharing between countries is critical to ensuring the future 
sustainability of the higher education loan program and trade support loan 
schemes,” federal education minister Simon Birmingham said.

Graduates earning less than the $54,000 threshold, such as backpackers on 
working holiday visas, will not have to pay off their student loans, but will 
be required to register with the ATO.

 “As well as making the scheme fairer and more equitable, the government’s 
changes will improve the sustainability of the scheme with taxpayers to benefit 
by $150m over the next decade,” Birmingham said.

It is estimated that the government loses between $20m and $3om annually due 
to missing student loan repayments from graduates who have moved overseas.

Birmingham said the non-repayment of student debt had cost the economy $800m 
since the loan scheme was introduced in 1989.

The law was flagged ahead of the May 2015 federal budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/may/02/christopher-pyne-lays-claim-to-hecs-payments-from-australians-overseas>
.

Women who have a child 'face paying 30% more interest on student loans'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/20/women-who-have-a-child-face-paying-30-more-interest-on-student-loans>
“There is no good reason why someone working as a banker in London or New York 
and earning over the threshold shouldn’t pay back what they owe Australia,” the 
then education minister Christopher Pyne said. “No government has ever tackled 
this obviously unfair situation – it’s been in the too-hard basket. Our plan 
will enforce the same Hecs [higher education contribution scheme] repayment 
obligations on Australians living overseas that apply to those who remain on 
our shores.”

The top three destinations for graduates – Britain the US and Singapore – 
account for almost 40% of all Australian residents working abroad,according to 
a 2012 report 
<http://grattan.edu.au/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/809-doubtful-debt1.pdf> by 
the Grattan Institute.
 