
A Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> 
businessman has challenged claims his former quarry made the deadly Grantham 
floods worse, and hit out at the “terribly vindictive” media.

Grantham flood finding that quarry had no impact 'not rational', inquiry told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/20/grantham-flood-finding-that-quarry-had-no-impact-not-rational-inquiry-told>
Denis Wagner told the Grantham floods commission of inquiry on Thursday he had 
changed his mind in some respects about an embankment wall on the western side 
of a quarry he owned in 2011, when 12 people died in floodwaters in the 
southeast Queensland town.

Wagner said he originally thought the embankment wall was a natural feature of 
the landscape, but when he studied aerial photographs for the inquiry, he 
conceded parts of it were man-made.

Commissioner Walter Sofronoff QC then asked whether Wagner’s original beliefs, 
which differed from locals’ views, had fostered “opprobrium”, or harsh 
criticism, towards his family or family-run business.

“I don’t believe so,” Wagner said. “I do believe, however, there are some 
terribly vindictive people in media, particularly radio media that have very 
little regard for the truth.”

Grantham flood survivor recalls 'bang' that may have been quarry wall breach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/jul/21/grantham-flood-survivor-recalls-bang-that-may-have-been-quarry-wall-breach>
Sydney radio host Alan Jones <https://www.theguardian.com/media/alan-jones> 
has been highly critical of Wagner, while The Australian newspaper helped spark 
the current inquiry by commissioning a study that showed inconsistencies 
between the evidence and a broader investigation in 2012 that found the quarry 
had no impact on the devastation caused by the flood.

Wagner said his original view still stood, which was that the part of the 
quarry embankment the flood breached was a natural part of the landscape.

“The allegation that had been made is that a quarry wall collapsed and caused 
the flood at Grantham, so I don’t believe that to be the case,” he said.

Wagner acknowledged the flood and the aftermath had been damaging towards his 
family and business. But he conceded the ramifications had been nothing 
compared with the impact on residents who lived through the disaster.

“I’ve probably sort of heard some stories that don’t ring true as well in the 
last week,” Wagner said. “But there are some inspirational stories from the 
people of this region and I and our family have sympathy for those people who 
were affected – particularly those who lost relatives and friends.”

The inquiry continues.
 