
So, where?
If you come from Geneva, Valmorel is the first ski resort you reach in the 
Tarentaise valley in France’s Savoie region. But this intimate little village 
is often overlooked by British skiers in their rush towards the bigger Trois 
Vallées and Paradiski resorts. It’s the main village of the Grand Domaine ski 
area, which includes beginner slopes in the hamlet of Doucy-Combelouvière. Ski 
to the Col de la Madeleine – one of the Tour de France’s toughest climbs – and 
you end up in the linked resort of Saint-François-Longchamp in the Maurienne 
valley.

Your guide to new ski holidays for the 2014-15 season
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/oct/25/guide-to-new-ski-holidays-2014-15-season>
Why try it?
Created in 1976 at 1,400m, Valmorel is one of the few purpose-built resorts in 
France that’s not a concrete eyesore. Learning from earlier mistakes, planners 
stuck to classic Savoyard design: low-rise wooden buildings and sloping slate 
roofs. Most accommodation is close to the lifts, and free eco-shuttle buses 
connect outlying hamlets. Le Bourg, the pedestrianised high street, is full of 
shops, restaurants and bars. It’s friendly, relaxed, predominantly French and 
very family-focused.Club Piou-Piou 
<http://www.valmorel.com/en/winter-hollidays/activities/childrens-clubs--sitraact131529--club-enfants-les-piou-piou.html>
 in the centre takes children from 18 months to six years, and there’s a family 
snowzone with snow park, picnic areas and pedestrian access.




Mountain lowdown
It’s blue and green heaven for beginners and low intermediates, with mainly 
wide motorway runs from 2,030m in Valmorel (and up to 2,300m in 
Saint-François-Longchamp). Novices have six areas, including two just for 
children. There are snow parks graded from green to black, including the very 
tricky black Combe du Riondet snowcross. Off-piste skiers wanting a challenge 
can hire a guide to tackle the Massif de la Lauzière, which is gaining a 
reputation among expert skiers who want a mountainside pretty much to 
themselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fvalmorel-family-ski-resort-alps-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422019479211%2Fbea668db-82e4-489f-ab61-8b360869af07-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Great%20little%20ski%20resorts%3A%20Valmorel%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fvalmorel-family-ski-resort-alps-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Great%20little%20ski%20resorts%3A%20Valmorel%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fjan%2F24%2Fvalmorel-family-ski-resort-alps-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F23%2F1422019479211%2Fbea668db-82e4-489f-ab61-8b360869af07-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Family affair … the nursery slopes at Valmorel. Photograph: Pierre 
Jacques/Alamy/Hemis 
And apart from skiing?
There’s no shortage of other activities. Hurtle down the slopes on an airboard 
(head first on short fat lilo), a snowskate (skateboard on snow) or in a snake 
gliss (train of toboggans). Go for a snowshoe trek through the forest near 
L’Aigle Blanc, or try paragliding on skis on a tandem flight withHere We Go 
Parapente 
<http://www.valmorel.com/en/summer/activities/other-leisure-activities--sitra2_act_502908--here-we-go-parapente-ete.html>
. If that all sounds too energetic, enjoy a massage, sauna or hammam (from €14) 
at theValmoforme <http://www.valmoforme.com/> spa.

Après any good?
For a small village, Valmorel has a decent choice of bars in Le Bourg. 
NeighboursLa Source <https://www.facebook.com/LaSourceValmorel>, Le Petit 
Savoyard andLe Petit Prince <http://www.restaurant-lepetitprince.com/> all have 
terraces for the 4pm crowd, many of whom return in the evening. Le Perce-Neige 
has snuggly seats outside huddled around heaters. The buzziest isJimbo Lolo 
<http://www.jimbololo.fr/>, which serves a mix of Tex-Mex and tapas, with a 
jungle theme and wooden swings round the bar. And the Sound Pub & Club, which 
is open till 5am, is a favourite with off-duty bar staff.

Great little ski resorts: Morillon, France
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/nov/20/great-ski-resorts-morillon-haute-savoie-france>
Where to eat
Ski Roc <http://skiroc.com/skiroc/> in Le Bourg is one of the best and busiest 
restaurants in the village. It serves the usual Savoyard dishes, but with some 
innovative touches – a tartiflette ravioli, for one. It has sister restaurant 
at the top of the Altispace chairlift,Les Voiles du Nant 
<http://skiroc.com/voiles-du-nant/>, which does excellent burgers. And 
L’Altipiano, at the top of the Pierrafort cable car, does a greatreblochonnade 
– a version of tartiflette with melted reblochon cheese and ham.

Where to stay
La Grange aux Fées 
<http://www.cgh-residences.co.uk/winter/residence/residence-la-grange-aux-fees.html>
 is a stylish new self-catering residence beside the Lanchettes chairlift, with 
warm wood and exposed stone interiors, plus an indoor pool and hot tubs (seven 
nights from £224pp including Eurotunnel crossing withpeakretreats.co.uk 
<http://www.peakretreats.co.uk/ski/valmorel/mgm-apartments/la-grange-aux-fees.htm>
). Valmorel’s only hotel is the cosyHotel du Bourg 
<http://www.hoteldubourg.com/uk/hotel-du-bourg-valmorel-site-officiel.php> 
(seven nights from £393pp including Eurotunnel crossing), whose new owner is 
updating its 1970s decor.

The nitty gritty
Valmorel has 165km of pistes; 50 lifts; highest altitude 2,550m.
Good for families, authentic French charm, value, tranquillity
Lift pass adult £164 a week; child £107
Beer €5.70
Runs 14 green, 25 blue, 11 red, 5 black
Limitations Although Valmorel’s naturally cold climate keeps the snow cannons 
busy, there are quite a few icy and patchy pistes, unless there’s been a huge 
snowfall.
Getting there Fly or take the Eurostar to Geneva, two hours away; the nearest 
railway station to Valmorel is Moûtiers.

• Further information at valmorel.com 
<http://www.valmorel.com/en/winter-hollidays/winter-holidays.html> and 
savoie-mont-blanc.com <http://www.savoie-mont-blanc.com/en>
 