
Er, where?

Morillon, just 50 minutes’ drive from Geneva, lies in the Haut-Giffre valley 
in France’s Haute Savoie region. It’s one of five interconnected resorts within 
theGrand Massif 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/jul/10/best-places-to-stay-in-alps> 
ski area. Flaine, the most well-known, is purpose-built up the mountain, with 
1960s Bauhaus architecture by Marcel Breuer. Sixt-Fer-a-Cheval is quiet and 
pretty, Samoëns has unusual cafes and shops, Les Carroz is small and handy for 
some steep off-piste tree runs, and Morillon is central to it all. It’s a 
traditional village, with good nursery slopes and links to a huge ski area. 
It’s the cheap, family-friendly option of the five.

Why try it?




Though the Grand Massif is France’s fourth-largest ski area, the Giffre is 
something of a forgotten valley, overlooked in favour of nearby Chamonix. It’s 
quiet but stunning, with dramatic limestone cliffs and the Fer à Cheval 
(horseshoe), a 700m semicircular wall of rock at the valley’s end, giving it a 
more dramatic appearance than other pretty Alpine resorts. The villages date 
back to at least 1144, when an abbey was built in Sixt, and retain their 
historic character, with lovely stone buildings.

Families will love it: it’s quiet, with lots of activities and beginners’ 
runs. Morillon has a children’s village for six-month to 10-year-olds, 
featuring sledge runs, an ice rink and free activities; and there’s good choice 
of bargain apartments and chalets.

Mountain lowdown

From Morillon a fast cable car whisks skiers up to where easy runs and lifts 
connect to the other resorts of the Grand Massif. It’s quite a distance back 
from Flaine though. Don’t miss the lovely, long, 14km blue, the Piste des 
Cascades, which passes waterfalls and ends in Sixt, where you can have avin 
chaudbefore catching the free shuttle bus back to Morillon, which runs between 
the resorts until 6pm.

Challenging skiing is limited, but on powder days Flaine’s bowls and the Ger 
bowl are the places to head for, and I found steep off-piste tree runs above 
Les Carroz and Les Molliets, and was one of the only ones looping it for hours. 
There’s a JamPark in Flaine, and a boardercross. You could hire a guide and 
attempt the Pas de Sales, a 13km run with a 50m abseil section in the middle, 
or head over to do the classic Vallée Blanche.

Off the hill?
 La Remise Enchantée 
It’s easy to reach Sixt and Samoëns by bus or car from Morillon, and you’ll 
probably split your evenings between the three. Samoëns has charming shops, 
such asLa Remise Enchantée <http://www.laremiseenchantee.com/>, which sells 
beautiful handmade puppets, and Montagne et Chocolat, a gorgeous old-fashioned 
sweet shop and cafe. You can book a tour of historic Samoëns, to see the 
12th-century church, old woodengreniers, and creeper-covered stone buildings 
built by the town’s once globally renowned stonemasons. There are many other 
snowy activities, including skijoring (being pulled along on skis by a horse), 
long cross-country ski tracks, dog-sledding and torch-lit snowshoe treks 
followed by fondue. Atmospheric Sixt, a historic mountaineering hotspot where 
Everest climbers trained, has around 60 ice-climbing itineraries.

Apres any good?

La Puzze opposite the Morillon lift is a basic bar that’s OK for a beer at the 
end of the day. It’s usually sleepy, though I did see drunk people falling off 
their chairs, if that’s what you’re after. Morillon is at its liveliest on 
Wednesday evenings, with a street market selling wine, cheese, charcuterie and 
gifts. Otherwise, no!

What do I eat?

Try the huge variety of savoury and sweet crepes, accompanied by a bowl of 
delicious Breton cider, at La Fandioleuse in Samoëns. Le 27 in Sixt has modern 
European cuisine, such as fish with mushroom and parmesan polenta.

The nitty gritty

Morillon has: 265km of pistes, 69 lifts, highest altitude 2,500m, 20 green 
runs, 65 blue runs, 50 red runs and 14 black runs

It’s good for: peace, scenery, value, families, quick transfers

Costs: Lift pass adult £185 a week, child £139. Beer €5.80

Limitations: Morillon’s beginners’ runs are low-altitude so can fall victim to 
rain and mist. It’s really quiet, no lively bars or clubs
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fgreat-ski-resorts-morillon-haute-savoie-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F19%2F1416412071418%2F8fe4a8f9-0b9f-4060-9c9d-ef861c5c2776-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Great%20little%20ski%20resorts%3A%20Morillon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fgreat-ski-resorts-morillon-haute-savoie-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Great%20little%20ski%20resorts%3A%20Morillon%2C%20France&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fnov%2F20%2Fgreat-ski-resorts-morillon-haute-savoie-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F19%2F1416412071418%2F8fe4a8f9-0b9f-4060-9c9d-ef861c5c2776-1020x612.jpeg>
 Cosy comforts: Hotel Morillon 
Find apartments and chalets at ownersdirect.co.uk/morillon 
<http://www.ownersdirect.co.uk/morillon.htm>. Or Hotel Morillon (from £583pp a 
week or £95 a night, half-board, +33 4 50 90 10 32,hotellemorillon.com 
<http://www.hotellemorillon.com/>) is a proper Alpine hotel with cute 
pine-panelled rooms, a cosy bar with giant fireplace, and a small spa and pool. 
Fly or take the new Eurostar to Geneva, the nearest TGV is Cluses.
• More information from ot-morillon.co.uk <http://www.ot-morillon.co.uk/>, 
savoie-mont-blanc.com <http://www.savoie-mont-blanc.com/>
 