
Voters are not buying the Abbott government’s argument that environmental laws 
must be changed to stop green “sabotage” of job-creating projects, with 62% 
believing the Coalition is simply trying to silence conservationists to promote 
mining interests.

The new poll, by Lonergan Research, came as the government was fighting to 
convince Senate crossbenchers to pass the proposed changes to the federal 
government’s main conservation laws, the Environment Protection and 
Biodiversity Conservation Act, which went through the House of Representatives 
on Thursday.

Coalition MPs on 'green lawfare': mung bean soup to treasonous sabotage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/sep/10/coalition-mps-on-green-lawfare-mung-bean-soup-to-treasonous-sabotage>
Tony Abbott announced the changes after a federal court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/05/approval-for-adanis-carmichael-coalmine-overturned-by-federal-court>
 in August overturned approval for Adani’s proposed $16bn Carmichael coal mine 
in Queensland because the environment minister, Greg Hunt, had not properly 
considered itsimpact on two endangered species 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/16/greg-hunt-ignoring-advice-on-danger-to-wildlife-from-carmichael-coalmine>
 – delaying the project for a few weeks. The government said the changes were 
necessary to stop green “vigilantists” from undertaking “economic sabotage”.

But a poll of 1,104 voters taken in late August by Lonergan Research found a 
majority of voters apparently sceptical about that argument.

 * 72% said they thought environment groups should be able to use the courts 
to make sure existing laws are upheld (42% strongly agreed with that statement 
and 30% slightly agreed) 
 * 53% said they opposed the changes, including 36% of Liberal and National 
party voters. 
 * 59% thought the Abbott government was undermining the independent role of 
the courts (45% strongly agree with the statement and 24% slightly agree) 
 * 62% believe the Abbott government is attempting to silence conservation 
groups to promote the interests of the mining industry (39% strongly agree and 
23% slightly agree) 
 *  62% also agree that the proposed environmental law change is the Abbott 
government’s way of backing the big mining companies (34% strongly agree and 
28% slightly agree) 
 * 60% think the mining industry has too much influence over the Abbott 
government (36% strongly agree and 24% slightly agree) 
Under the amendments any person wanting to mount a challenge would have to 
prove they had been directly and personally adversely affected. The government 
insists this means it will not apply to farm groups or individual farmers 
directly impacted by a project.

Coalition to restrict green groups' right to challenge after Carmichael setback
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/18/coalition-to-remove-green-groups-right-to-challenge-after-carmichael-setback>
But farming organisations believe they could also be denied standing, or be 
forced to prove their standing in lengthy and costly proceedings and this could 
stymie several planned challenges to federal approval of the controversial 
$1.2bnShenhua Watermark coal mine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/21/uncertainty-over-shenhua-mines-effect-on-groundwater-a-huge-risk>
 on the fertile Liverpool plains of New South Wales.

The National Farmers Federal has said it cannot support the changes without 
more assurances that local farmers would continue to have access to judicial 
review.

Radio broadcaster Alan Jones, a fervent opponent of that mine, is fronting a 
new advertising campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/07/alan-jones-the-voice-of-ad-campaign-fighting-environment-law-change>
 against the changes, saying the laws “put at risk not just our environmentbut 
our very democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2015/sep/07/alan-jones-fronts-ad-slamming-governments-environmental-lawfare-changes-video>
”.

“I may live nowhere near the Liverpool plains or the Great Barrier Reef, but I 
sure as hell am concerned that they are protected,” Jones says. “The latest 
move by the Abbott government puts at risk not just our environment but our 
very democracy. It is quite simply unbelievable.

“This legislative restriction is divisive, it isolates us. It means we are not 
allowed to care.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Falan-jones-fronts-ad-slamming-governments-environmental-lawfare-changes-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Jones%20fronts%20ad%20slamming%20government's%20environmental%20'lawfare'%20changes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Falan-jones-fronts-ad-slamming-governments-environmental-lawfare-changes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Jones%20fronts%20ad%20slamming%20government%27s%20environmental%20%27lawfare%27%20changes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F07%2Falan-jones-fronts-ad-slamming-governments-environmental-lawfare-changes-video&media=>
 Alan Jones fronts ad slamming government’s environmental ‘lawfare’ changes.
Link to video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2015/sep/07/alan-jones-fronts-ad-slamming-governments-environmental-lawfare-changes-video>
The poll was commissioned by the Australian Conservation Foundation. Its 
president, Geoff Cousins said “communities have the right to legitimate legal 
action to protect nature in this country when a law hasn’t been followed. When 
the government wrongly approves projects, like environment ministerGreg Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/greg-hunt> did for Adani’s proposed 
Carmichael coal mine, people have democratic right to challenge that approval 
in the court.”
 