The Oresteia 
 Translated by Ted Hughes 
 Faber & Faber £7.99, pp194 
The English language, its literatures, have known two stellar periods of 
poetic translation: the Tudor-Elizabethan age and our century. The 
constellation of modern English and American poets who have translated is of 
the first magnitude. Ezra Pound's Cathay, Roy Campbell's Lorca and St John of 
the Cross, the Ibsen of Geoffrey Hill tell of the range of languages.

But it is the ancients, the Greeks in particular, who have set alight the 
interpretive, the metamorphic blaze of twentieth-century masters. Near to a 
dozen Homers since the Forties; as diverse, as immediate to our experiences of 
pitiless warfare and wanderings as any contemporary writing. The death-haunted 
music of Robert Fitzgerald's Odyssey, Robert Graves's prose-poetic force of 
narrative, Robert Fagles's focus on what is oral in the two epics, the fitful 
miracles of Christopher Logue's Iliad fragments, the sovereignty, like a 
heralding chord, of Pound's first Canto, the Cantos themselves being a long 
voyage to Ithaca.

Our theatres, radio drama and television have turned time and again to Greek 
tragedy, after Freud's 'Oedipus' and the laying waste of cities in the 
firelight of Troy (the Berlin stage reopened with a performance ofAeschylus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aeschylus> ). A throng of Antigones, 
Elektras, Clytemnestras, Agamemnons, Orestes, Hecubas, Hercules, Oedipus, 
obsess modern sensibility from T.S. Eliot's Family Reunion and O'Neill's 
Mourning Becomes Electra to Gide's Theseus, Anouilh's Antigone and Robert 
Lowell's Phaedra.

The most fertile ground has been the flexible via media between line-to-line 
fidelity and idiosyncratic appropriation. The true translator is he or she who, 
via the paradox of mastery in obeisance, plunges us into the strangeness of the 
archaic world, into its distance and darkness, and who almost blinds us with 
the contemporaneity, with the actuality of a 'light that screams across three 
thousand years' (Logue's talismanic image).

Translation played a prodigal role in the writings of Ted Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/tedhughes>. His choices are a sharp-edged 
mirror of himself. He felt drawn to the sexual violence of Wedekind's Spring 
Awakening, and to that violence where it is made mute as in Lorca's Blood 
Wedding.

Hughes is grimly at home in the rhetorical agonies of Seneca's Oedipus. Though 
Ovid's sensuous intricacy eludes him and though, characteristically, he 
overloads the cruelties in the original, Ted Hughes's Tales from Ovid are a 
masterpiece, much beyond the hyped, prosaic trudge of his domestic confessions.

Towards the close, Hughes grappled with Aeschylus. 'Grappled' is permissible, 
because Aeschylus towers, even amid the peaks of Greek tragic drama.

Moreover, the belief that the three panels of the Oresteia - the Agamemnon, 
the Choephori or Libation-Bearers and the Eumenides - are the unmatched, the 
most necessary plays of all time, is wholly plausible. Any thoroughgoing 
response to Hughes's 'new version' of the Oresteia will demand a reading in 
tandem with both the original and other recent translations. It will also 
require the direct experience of the stagings at the National Theatre.

In the Agamemnon, the acid test for the translator is Cassandra's 
hallucinatory, mantic monody, in which the captive seer envisions not only the 
butchery of Agamemnon inside the house but also her own hideous death at the 
blood-drenched hands of Clytemnestra. Ted Hughes does not attempt to re-enact 
the eerily complex metrics and syntax of Aeschylus:

I've finished with tears.
 Finished with prophecy 
 And the pitiless designs of fate.
 Finished with Troy And the will of the gods. 
 Death is my new life. 
 Let me welcome it. 
 No struggle or clinging to breath and tears - 
 A single numbing blow to liberate me.
 Then let me drop and relax and melt 
 Into the huge ease - of death. 


 Her direct turn to 'the Gates of Death', present in both Aeschylus and 
Fagles, is omitted. But how superbly inventive is Hughes's rendition of 
Cassandra's account of Apollo's vengeance upon her:

And now Apollo, 
 Who gave me this one painful sparkle 
 Of his own huge blaze of foreknowledge,
 Trips me up, in a twist of history, 
 Into this abattoir, pushes me sprawling
 To vomit his gift
 Here on these bloody floors -
 My last gasp of the incredible. 


 Where the last line is magical with concision, for it has, precisely, been 
Cassandra's curse not to be believed.

There is, in the Choephori, a scene and dialogue which even Shakespeare might 
have flinched from. Avenging Orestes prepares to kill his guilty mother. Only 
thus can the House of Atreus be purged and restored to legitimacy. Aeschylus 
conveys the naked, characteristically Greek, mixture of logic and horror, of 
almost sophistic debate and madness. Clytemnestra pleads for her life; Orestes 
counters like a man in whom words have turned cold as death. Richmond Lattimore 
translates closely even those dialectical twists somewhat alien to us: 'I 
think, child, that you mean to kill your mother./ No,/ It will be you who kill 
yourself. It will not be I.' Followed by the unbearably ironic insight: 'I feel 
like one who wastes live tears upon a tomb.' (She never did on that of 
Agamemnon.)

Not only does Hughes omit this crucial touch, but he roughens Aeschylus's 
tone: 'A woman without her man learns desperation' - where andros is, indeed, 
'man', but where 'husband', as in other versions, matches Aeschylus's register. 
Often, touches of kitsch interweave with absolute virtuosity.

In Aeschylus, at the moment of sacrifice, Iphigenia's eyes do not 'swivel in 
their tears'. Nor does the wind 'waltz' with the silk robes torn from the 
girl's body. Yet this time, the mutation is perfect: 'waltz' suggests the 
homicidal frivolity which impels the Greek generals, and these are the winds 
whose veering will allow the armada to set sail for Troy. And if Cassandra's 
prophecies look to be out of Kipling - 'piling/ Towers of thunder into the 
sunrise' - what could be more apt than Athene's injunction to the Furies to 
become 'patient with eloquence', a phrase which Hughes has distilled from 
several Aeschylean passages on the powers of persuasion?

Of these powers, Hughes was eminently possessed. The cries of blood in the 
Oresteia inspired him more than did the light of forgiveness at the close. Only 
Goethe, in his own Iphigenia, has come close to rivalling that cadence, to 
'translating' Aeschylus in the fullest sense. Hughes's trilogy makes of echo a 
life-giving reply. Which is the aim, rarely achieved, of translation.

 To order The Oresteia for £5.99 plus 99p p&p, call Observer CultureShop on 
0800 3168 171
 