
One of Queensland’s leading exponents of what miners and conservative 
politicians brand environmental “lawfare” has been thrust into the role of 
trying to win what the Greens consider their most winnable seat at the next 
state election.

Michael Berkman – a lawyer at the Environmental Defenders Office Queensland 
who has played a key role in a slew of court battles againstAdani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/15/queensland-court-dismisses-green-groups-challenge-to-adani-coalmine>
,Gina Rinehart’s Alpha Coal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/27/climate-change-challenge-to-gina-rineharts-alpha-mine-dismissed-by-court>
 andNew Acland Coal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/05/acland-coalmine-expansion-activists-lawyers-stress-groundwater-risk-in-closing-arguments>
 – will be the Greens candidate for the inner Brisbane seat of Mount Coot-tha.

Berkman will go head to head with the Palaszczuk government environment 
minister, Steven Miles, also the first to hold the title of minister for the 
Great Barrier Reef, who was swept to office in 2015 on the back of strong Green 
preferences.

Berkman said it was “an exciting opportunity” to be standing in the state seat 
the Greens considered most likely to swing their way in the near future.

Coal is still king in their world
Michael Berkman on the ALP and their candidate Steven Miles 
His credentials as an environmental scientist, as well as through his 
extensive work challenging some of Australia’s most contentious mining 
projects, will be held up as a direct challenge to Miles in an increasingly 
green-conscious electorate.

The Queensland Greens convener and former federal senator Andrew Bartlett said 
Berkman, who had worked on eight high-profile cases against big miners since 
2014, was “an absolute star of the environment movement”.

“As a scientist and environmental lawyer he’s dedicated his working life to 
protect Queensland ecosystems and communities from the excesses of the fossil 
fuel industry,” Bartlett said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fgreens-mt-coot-tha-candidate-no-stranger-to-battling-big-miners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8dfdbfd3ee0a46841bbd1ee34e6e5001d522d68%2F0_81_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Greens'%20Mt%20Coot-tha%20candidate%20goes%20from%20courtroom%20to%20political%20arena&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fgreens-mt-coot-tha-candidate-no-stranger-to-battling-big-miners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Greens%27%20Mt%20Coot-tha%20candidate%20goes%20from%20courtroom%20to%20political%20arena&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fgreens-mt-coot-tha-candidate-no-stranger-to-battling-big-miners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8dfdbfd3ee0a46841bbd1ee34e6e5001d522d68%2F0_81_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Michael Berkman meets some residents of Mount Coot-tha. Photograph: Supplied 
“His scientific knowledge and experience with complex legislation make him an 
ideal Green voice in the next state parliament.”

Berkman said that despite Miles’s advocacy and some wins for environmental 
reform, Labor’s public support for Adani would “not play well in Mount Coot-tha 
because he ran so strongly on his credentials in terms of the reef and he 
personally, ostensibly is opposed to the expansion into the Galilee”.


“But he appears to just not have the weight within cabinet to achieve any of 
those outcomes that his electors in Mt Coot-tha seem to be very concerned about.

“I don’t think Mt Coot-tha voters will be very pleased by the extreme support 
the ALP has shown for Adani and Carmichael in particular.”

The recent trajectory of Green voters in parts of inner Brisbane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/brisbane> has sounded alarm bells 
for Labor strategists who warn that the party, while facing a fight in the 
regions from a resurgent One Nation, also risks being outflanked to the left in 
the leafy suburbs of the state capital.


Carmichael mine to be given 'essential' status in sign of Palaszczuk support
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/09/carmichael-mine-to-be-given-essential-status-in-sign-of-palaszczuksupport>
The victory of Queensland’s first Greens councillor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/23/queensland-elects-its-first-greens-councillor-jonathan-sri>
, Jonathan Sri, to inner south Brisbane ward the Gabba in this year’s local 
government election raised questions about what kind of challenge Labor’s left 
faction deputy premier, Jackie Trad, might face in her overlapping South 
Brisbane seat.

This week, the Greens announced social scientist and community worker Amy 
MacMahon as the candidate to take on Trad, who has overseen the approval of a 
controversial West Village development that represents the kind of local 
concerns MacMahon will tap into.

“Following the Greens victory in the Gabba ward I think people now realise 
it’s possible for the Greens to win seats in Queensland,” MacMahon said.

The party’s only state representative to date, Indooroopilly MP Ronan Lee, 
defected from Labor mid-term in 2008 but did not win re-election as a Green.

The Greens believe MacMahon, who plans to campaign on “sustainable 
development, corporate donations, housing affordability, and growing wealth 
inequality”, could win South Brisbane by swinging 1500 votes her way.

But nowhere does a Green ascendancy appear more possible than in Mount 
Coot-tha.

In 2015, Miles with 32.6% of the primary vote trumped his Liberal National 
rival on 42.9% thanks to preferences from the Greens on 22.1%.

Queensland elects its first Greens councillor, Jonathan Sri
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/mar/23/queensland-elects-its-first-greens-councillor-jonathan-sri>
In the local government election this year, 27.9% of voters in Mt Coot-tha 
booths put the Greens first, compared with 24% for Labor (with the LNP on 
48.1%).

In the federal election, the Greens took 27% of primary votes in the booths 
where Labor took 24.9%.

It’s numbers like these that would exercise the mind of former state Labor 
secretary, now federal senator, Anthony Chisholm, who said in March that Sri’s 
election was “something I had always feared happening but always hoped would be 
avoided [as] the long term repercussions for [Labor] based on the Greens 
gaining a representative toe hold are dire”.

Chisholm, who performed reviews of the New South Wales and Tasmanian election 
campaigns for Labor,wrote in the Courier-Mail 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/news/queensland/labor-senate-candidate-anthony-chisholm-identifies-dire-threat-to-his-partys-future-growth/news-story/1cc47ac8f9a7d2976f30def295cdcc79>
 that Sri’s election heralded the arrival of the Greens as serious challengers 
in urban Queensland.

“The evidence out of NSW and Victoria is once the Greens win lower house seats 
in the inner city, they are incredibly hard to dislodge and they also are able 
to expand out to neighbouring seats over time,” Chisholm said.

Berkman said he was unsurprised by Chisholm’s comments about the threat to 
Labor posed by Greens in inner-city Brisbane.


“I think they reflect the reality that Labor doesn’t actually provide a real 
progressive voice for Queenslanders anymore,” he said.

“Those voters on the left who are genuinely concerned about these key 
progressive issues like a sustainable future, women’s reproductive rights, 
LGBTI rights, sustainable development more broadly – those voters no longer 
have a voice in the ALP.”

The state election is due by January 2018 but is widely expected to take place 
some time in 2017.

Berkman said his campaign would hinge in large part on his own background at 
the front line of environmental legal battles.

“I think the immediate experience I have with these major resource projects 
provides a stark contrast to the alternative in Miles and the ALP where coal is 
still king in their world,” he said.

Berkman agreed his work may also provoke a response from conservatives who 
have waged a prolonged public relations battle against those who take big 
miners to court.

“I’ve always viewed the ‘lawfare’ response as fairly shrill and ill-conceived. 
It’s a sensationalist response to what is a perfectly legitimate exercise of 
legal rights by concerned community groups and individuals,” he says.

“I think the voters in Mt Coot-tha have a clear enough understanding of these 
fundamental tenets of democracy and rule of law to recognise that ‘lawfare’ is 
something of a political scapegoat in circumstances where governments don’t 
like the choice of particular groups to exercise their rights.

“It frustrates me immensely hearing politicians and lobbyists describing 
‘vexatious litigation’ when none of it’s vexatious. If any one piece of 
litigation were vexatious, it would be thrown out of court immediately. It 
wouldn’t be heard and decided the way all these cases have been.”

The chair of EDO Queensland’s management committee, Michelle Maloney, said 
while it respected the right of anyone to run for office, it “does not support, 
promote or oppose any particular political party or candidate”.

“EDO Queensland promotes changes to law and policy which protect the 
environment and advance sustainable development,” she said.

 