
The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian>'s articles about 
mass surveillance conducted byGCHQ <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/gchq> and 
the USNSA <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nsa> have been honoured by the 
civil rights groupLiberty <https://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/index.php>. 
The newspaper was named Independent Voice of the Year at Liberty's annual 
awards ceremony in central London on Monday 25 November.

The Guardian revelations about interception of online communications, 
eavesdropping on international politicians and tapping of fibre-optic cables 
were based on documents leaked by former NSA contractor Edward Snowden. The 
award "recognises the courage it requires to speak out against injustice when 
others will not, to make a stand when no one else will and to put the truth 
before all else, even at great cost."

Shami Chakrabarti, director of Liberty, said: "Whatever your position on 
blanket surveillance, the people and their parliament have a right to debate it 
and there can be no debate about what we do not know. In a time of deceit, 
telling the truth seems revolutionary. Spy chiefs should reflect on whether 
their occasional inconvenience isn't essential to the democracy they serve."

The Guardian's editor, Alan Rusbridger, accepted the award. He said: "What was 
worrying Edward Snowden was that we were, unknowingly, sleep-walking into a 
society where the infrastructure of total surveillance was being built behind 
our backs, without any discussion or wide public knowledge. This does need to 
be discussed, as calmer heads in security agencies now recognise. I am very 
proud to pick up this award in recognition of the Guardian's role in 
stimulating that necessary debate."

For more information about Liberty and the awards, click here 
<https://www.liberty-human-rights.org.uk/media/press/2013/Liberty-honours-human-rights-heroes-in-annual-awards-ceremony.php>
.
 