
This summer's North American box office trails last year's by 15%. An insipid 
selection of movies punctuated by blockbusters likeTransformers: Age of 
Extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/10/transformers-age-of-extinction-review-michael-bay>
,Dawn of the Planet of the Apes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/17/dawn-of-the-planet-of-the-apes-review-andy-serkis>
,Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/aug/25/guardians-of-the-galaxy-sin-city-2-us-box-office>
 and breakoutThe Fault in Our Stars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jun/19/fault-in-our-stars-review-john-green>
 has made the past few months the lowest-grossing summer since 2006. Last year 
was a $4.85bn (Â£2.92bn) record breaker so comparisons were always going to be 
harsh, but film's second-weekend drops in box office have been severe, and the 
World Cup didn't help matters. Summer 2015 is expected to be a vast 
improvement, but there's no denying the overall downward trend in real terms of 
ticket sales and inflation.

Guardians becomes biggest release of the year so far


Last weekend, Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/guardians-of-the-galaxy-review-marvel-superheroes>
 added $16.3m to reach $274.6m and in so doing overtook Captain America: the 
Winter Soldier on $259.8m and The Lego Movie on $257.8m to climb to the top of 
the pile. Guardians of the Galaxy's box office performance has been above what 
Disney executives anticipated, but despite what was perceived to be the movie's 
left-field appeal, the studio knew that they were on to a good thing. Its 
quality has turned into a rewarding run and the sequel in 2017 should be at 
least 50% bigger without factoring in inflation.

Legendary Entertainment kicks off new relationship

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F83PpryYHHeY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F83PpryYHHeY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fembed%2F83PpryYHHeY%3Fwmode%3Dopaque%26feature%3Doembed&media=>
Reading on a mobile? Click here to watch video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=83PpryYHHeY>

The studio behind Christopher Nolan's Dark Knight trilogy and the Hangover 
franchisesevered its co-production ties 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/warner-bros-legendary-end-talks-574236> 
with Warner Bros recently and is now in cahoots with Universal Pictures. The 
new partners unleashed their first collaboration at the weekend in the form of 
horror movieAs Above, So Below 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/as-above-so-below>, a found footage tale set 
in the catacombs beneath Paris. Let's hope their upcoming venture delivers more 
punch, because this film arrived in fourth place on a lowly $8.3m from 2,640 
theatres. Future releases include Jurassic World, Guillermo del Toro's Crimson 
Peak and Duncan Jones' Warcraft. For the record Warner Bros released 
Legendary's Godzilla this summer under an ongoing agreement.

Chef crosses $30m


When a studio announces it's re-releasing a movie, it's a sure sign of awards 
aspirations or a transparent bid to cross a marketable box-office milestone. In
Chef <https://www.theguardian.com/film/chef>'s case, production company Open 
Road Films was in pursuit of the former (which is still a work in progress) but 
achieved the latter. The Jon Favreau tale of a high-class chef who gets back to 
his roots when he starts a food truck has now crossed $30m. The distributor 
will be hoping the popular movie can get some attention during the Golden 
Globes.

Starred Up hits US theatres



David Mackenzie's prison drama stars Jack O'Connell, who may not be 
particularly well known in the US for his work inSkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/skins> but seems poised to explode 
before long. He caused a stir among US buyers and festival-goers forStarred Up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/20/starred-up-jonathan-asser-peter-bradshaw>
, which premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival in 2013, and in 
this year's Berlinale entry'71 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/feb/07/71-review-berlin-2014> that will 
screen in Toronto next week. Starred Up arrived in the US on a modest $11,000 
distributed by Tribeca Film in two cinemas and may stick around a while. There 
will very likely be a step up in US profile later this year when O'Connell will 
play Olympic runner and Japanese PoW Louis Zamperini in Angelina Jolie's awards 
hopefulUnbroken <https://www.theguardian.com/film/unbroken>.

North American top 10, August 29-31 2014


1. Guardians of the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/31/guardians-of-the-galaxy-review-marvel-superheroes>
, $16.3m. Total: $274.6m

2. Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/teenage-mutant-ninja-turtles>, $11.8m. Total: 
$162.4m

3. If I Stay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/31/if-i-stay-review-mark-kermode-chloe-grace-moretz>
, $9.3m. Total: $29.8m

4. As Above, So Below <https://www.theguardian.com/film/as-above-so-below>, 
$8.3m, new release

5. Let's Be Cops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/31/lets-be-cops-comedy-review-luke-greenfield-damon-wayans-jr>
, $8.2m. Total: $57.3m, new release

6. The November Man 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/28/the-november-man-pierce-brosnan-first-review>
, $7.7m. Total: $9.4m

7. When the Game Stands Tall <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2247476/>, $5.7m. 
Total: $16.3m

8. The Giver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/15/the-giver-first-look-review>, 
$5.3m. Total: $31.5m

9. The Hundred-Foot Journey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/08/the-hundred-foot-journey-first-look-review>
, $4.6m. Total: $39.4m

10. The Expendables 3 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-expendables-3>, 
$3.5m. Total: $33.1m
 