
The Guardian won four awards at Press Gazette's 2013 British Journalism Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/awards>, held at Stationers' Hall 
in London last night.

The New Journalist of the Year prize was awarded to the Guardian's Egypt 
Correspondent,Patrick Kingsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/patrick-kingsley>. According to the 
judges: "He wrote the dissection of a massacre in a model way â€“ it's a great 
piece of reconstruction that leads to revelation."

The Innovation of the Year prize went to GuardianWitness 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/>, which launched earlier this year in 
partnership with EE to enable people from around the world to submit their 
content directly to Guardian journalists. Dominic Ponsford, editor of Press 
Gazette, said: "One of the judges said they had downloaded the app and they 
were using it every day. They felt it brought citizen journalism and 
user-generated content to a new level by improving engagement, sourcing great 
content and doing so in a way that made money for the paper through 
sponsorship."

GuardianWitness was created using n0tice <http://n0tice.org/>, a UGC 
publishing platform developed by Guardian Media Group. The n0tice platform 
offers publishers solutions for inviting audience participation, easily 
managing it, and turning these interactions into new revenue.

Guardian sports writer David Conn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/davidconn> was named Sports Journalist of 
the Year, with judges commenting: "All his stories were about some form of 
corruption in sport. He delves beyond the glitzy veneer of modern football to 
hold the game's gilded elite to account."

The Science and Technology Journalist of the Year award was given to The 
Observer's science and technology editorRobin McKie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/robinmckie>, with judges praising his 
ability to make "technical issues compelling with his approachable style of 
writing." Judges were particularly impressed by his piece on the controversial 
GM crop Golden Rice.

The Guardian was also highly commended in the Investigation of the Year 
category for theSnowden Files <https://www.theguardian.com/world/the-nsa-files>.

The Press Gazette British Journalism Awards are open to all journalists and 
has a focus on recognising journalism which is in the public interest. Clickhere
 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/michael-gillard-scoops-journalist-year-award-second-annual-british-journalism-awards>
 to read more about the awards and to see the full list of winners.
 