
A stark white box. A shower of blood. Arthur Miller plays do not 
conventionally look like Ivo Van Hove’s version ofA View From the Bridge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/17/view-from-the-bridge-review-ivo-van-hove-arthur-miller>
, but the non-naturalistic production triumphed at London’s Young Vic, winning 
three Olivier awards. Now it opens both on Broadway (whereRussell Tovey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/mar/01/russell-tovey-looking-banished-interview>
 joins the cast) and in Paris. Spare and unsparing, this is Miller for the 21st 
century.

It’s a sensation that almost didn’t happen, as the guardians of Arthur 
Miller’s estate were initially reluctant to let the innovative Belgian director 
meddle with a canonical text. “I confess, I was very apprehensive,” says the 
estate’s representative Patrick Herold ofICM <http://www.icmpartners.com/> in 
New York. “I had seen Van Hove’s productions of A Streetcar Named Desire and 
Hedda Gabler, and my personal belief was that he bent the plays to the point of 
breaking them.” Eventually he decided “as long as they don’t change any of the 
words, let them do it.”


This encapsulates the dilemma for theatre’s keepers of the flame. Plays exist 
on stage, in the present moment – so should the heirs of major dramatists 
promote timewarp productions or embrace experiment? What would Arthur do? At 
the centenary of Miller’s birth (he died in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/feb/12/guardianobituaries.artsobituaries>
), it seems timely to explore how literary estates meet the challenge of saving 
plays from history.


The way Miller's plays were originally staged on Broadway was incredibly 
exciting – but now is a comfortable cliche
David Lan, Young Vic 
According to David Lan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/feb/13/david-lan-world-trade-centre-arts>
, artistic director of the Young Vic, the writers “who hang about in our 
consciousness – Ibsen, Strindberg, Miller – are writing deliberately against 
the current, and hope to put in front of the public ideas about the world which 
they have not previously had. They expect a frisson. The way Miller’s plays 
were originally staged on Broadway was incredibly exciting – but now is a 
comfortable cliche. I don’t think that is more true to the writer than what Ivo 
did.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Farthur-miller-writers-estates-theatre-directors-literary-executors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444835697578%2F95bded8f-1aff-49e8-a4cb-dea6059acd28-2060x1396.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guarding%20Arthur%20Miller%3A%20when%20writers'%20estates%20say%20no&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Farthur-miller-writers-estates-theatre-directors-literary-executors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guarding%20Arthur%20Miller%3A%20when%20writers%27%20estates%20say%20no&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Farthur-miller-writers-estates-theatre-directors-literary-executors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444835697578%2F95bded8f-1aff-49e8-a4cb-dea6059acd28-2060x1396.jpeg>
 Mark Strong, centre, starred in Ivo Van Hove’s spare production of A View From 
The Bridge at the Young Vic. Photograph: Tristram Kenton/the Guardian 
Herold admits he was still “very suspicious” when he arrived at the Young Vic 
last April, but was bowled over by this uncompromising View. “All the lines 
were spoken, but stripping everything out revealed elements of the play that 
were really quite extraordinary.” Lan confirms that “Rebecca Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/16/rebecca-miller-maggies-plan-greta-gerwig-comedy-toronto-tiff-interview>
 [the playwright’s daughter and heir] has been extremely supportive, and has 
been quoted to me as saying, ‘my father didn’t like naturalism.’ So we’ve had a 
very good experience.”


Miller certainly isn’t going out of fashion, and his estate gently nudges the 
boundaries of how to stage him. “Miller is widely perceived, incorrectly, as a 
naturalist,” Herold remarks, “but Death of a Salesman is wildly experimental, 
as is All My Sons.” Last year, the estate approved Yaël Farber’s“fully 
populated” The Crucible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/jul/04/the-crucible-review-old-vic-london>
 at the Old Vic; by contrast, “there was, shall we say, a spirited discussion 
about reducing the cast – both for artistic and financial reasons – for a 
Crucible coming up on Broadway”. Another Van Hove production, this witch-hunt 
tragedy will star Ben Whishaw and Sophie Okonedo.


Tangles with an estate rarely make headlines, but one notorious instance was 
Deborah Warner’s staging of Beckett’s short play Footfalls in 1994. 
Site-specific before its time, it loosedFiona Shaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/fiona-shaw> in the Garrick theatre. “It was 
a very serious engagement with the text,” Warner recalls, “and an experiment in 
breaking the laws of West End theatre-going. But the row it sparked was 
tremendous.” Michael Billington compared flouting Beckett’s stage directions to 
“doodling on a Rembrandt”, and the estate imposed a life ban upon Warner.

What went wrong? “We walked into a young, grieving estate,” Warner considers. 
“It was not long after Beckett’s death [in 1989]. Edward Beckett was a musician 
– suddenly he’s carrying his uncle’s estate, it’s a huge responsibility.” She 
adds that “it has changed massively” – the ban was lifted (she and Shaw 
produced a widely-praisedHappy Days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2007/jan/23/features11.g21> in 2007), 
and Edward has reconsidered his uncle’s prohibition on filming the work. Change 
is possible.

In Germany, a new generation is about to inherit responsibility for Bertolt 
Brecht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/quiz/2013/feb/13/theatre-quiz-bertolt-brecht>
’s legacy, after the death of his daughter Barbara this summer. The Footfalls 
fracas is a reminder that an estate is often a family affair, and can be 
emotionally charged. “Many executors are family members,” Herold remarks. “Some 
are a pleasure, some more of a trial. To the extent that I choose my clients, 
that includes the dead ones! Ultimately I want the work to get out there, and I 
have to work with someone who allows that.”

Unusually, Miller’s daughter Rebecca is herself a writer and film-maker. 
“Because she is an artist herself,” Herold says, “I hope it gives her a deeper 
understanding of the work, rather than a lawyer who was given stewardship.” He 
is also involved withTennessee Williams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tennesseewilliams> and Eugene O’Neill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/eugene-o-neill>, whose plays are owned by 
American universities, and seems to regret that there is no one with skin in 
the game to take their reputations personally.

[Kneehigh's Brief Encounter] brought in a whole new audience for Noël Coward. 
We're still reaping the benefit
Alan Brodie, agent for Coward 
For even well-established writers need advocacy. From his London agency, Alan 
Brodie tries to keepNoël Coward 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/may/07/noel-coward-playwright-michael-blakemore-blanche-mcintyre-interview>
 andTerence Rattigan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/rattigan> in view: 
working the anniversaries, inviting directors to explore archive material, 
promoting rarities like Rattigan’sHarlequinade 
<http://www.branaghtheatre.com/harlequinade/index.php> and All On Her Own, now 
adorning Kenneth Branagh’s London season. For Coward, he brokered an unlikely 
romance between the exquisitely unrequitedBrief Encounter and the rambunctious 
company Kneehigh <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2008/feb/18/theatre1>. 
Kneehigh’s director Emma Rice spotted the DVD on the desk of producer David 
Pugh, who was planning a stage version, and mentioned it was her favourite 
film. A delirious evening was born. “I had some concerns,” Brodie admits, “but 
Emma’s enthusiasm and love of the material was great. She worked under quite a 
lot of restraints – she wasn’t allowed to write anything herself, but she took 
the film, the original stage play, and a selection of songs. It worked a 
treat.” Not only a commercial hit, he enthuses, “it also brought in a whole new 
audience for Coward. We’re still reaping the benefit.”

Himself a playwright, Lan argues that great plays are contradictory affairs, 
performing a tussle between revelation and concealment. So what are the 
sticking points when trying to second-guess the departed? What issues are 
non-negotiable? Brodie says that “textual integrity” is key, but questions 
remain over production choices that align a play with current practice. Young 
director Caroline Steinbeis wrangled with the Miller estate overThe Crucible at 
the Royal Exchange, Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/sep/24/the-crucible-review-nsa-paranoia-miller-puritan-snowden>
. Scanning the gender breakdown of his characters, she says, “I caught myself 
thinking how absurd it is to categorise and box them in when the play is so 
much bigger. Manchester has a diverse casting policy, so I read the play again 
and asked if Danforth [who oversees the witch trials], could be a woman?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Farthur-miller-writers-estates-theatre-directors-literary-executors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444835494209%2F4aac135d-8404-4f8b-a049-655b5d51ffdb-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guarding%20Arthur%20Miller%3A%20when%20writers'%20estates%20say%20no&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Farthur-miller-writers-estates-theatre-directors-literary-executors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guarding%20Arthur%20Miller%3A%20when%20writers%27%20estates%20say%20no&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Foct%2F15%2Farthur-miller-writers-estates-theatre-directors-literary-executors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F14%2F1444835494209%2F4aac135d-8404-4f8b-a049-655b5d51ffdb-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The Crucible at Manchester’s Royal Exchange: a request to change the sex of a 
character was turned down. 
Refusal was unequivocal: Herold argues that “changing gender seemed to alter 
something fundamental in the world of the play”. Other estates balk at gender 
shifts. Brodie confirms that “this comes up a lot with Rattigan’sThe Deep Blue 
Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/dec/02/deep-blue-sea-terence-rattigan> 
and Coward’s Private Lives, where we get asked if Hester or Amanda could be a 
man. We get told that had they been writing today, the main relationships would 
have been all-male. We don’t believe that to be true; both writers write so 
well for women it seems perverse to allow the change.”

Similarly, Deborah Warner couldn’t realise a tantalising Waiting for Godot 
starring Fiona Shaw and Maggie Smith. “Edward Beckett said Sam was adamant 
about this,” she says, regretfully. But she also suggests that the playwright’s 
original strictures were prompted by avant-garde excesses in the 1960s; so 
should the rule remain in perpetuity?

You don't get to repaint a picture or rewrite a novel, but theatre is 
different. It's a living, collaborative process
Patrick Herold, agent for Miller 
Ethnicity seems less of a stumbling block. The Miller estate has sanctioned 
all-black casts in All My Sons and Death of a Salesman; whilecasting Chiwetel 
Ejiofor <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2002/dec/11/theatre.artsfeatures2> 
as the febrile lead in Coward’s The Vortex (2002) was, Brodie says, “a 
no-brainer. He is the most amazing actor, and you have to trust the people you 
entrust the rights to.” If audiences are now relaxed about colour-blind 
casting, Herold speculates, gender-blind casting may follow. “You don’t get to 
repaint a picture or rewrite a novel,” Herold says, “but theatre is different. 
It is a living, collaborative process.”

The Beckett estate reveres the author’s stage directions, which although 
fiercely inventive when first seen may now embalm the work. Warner finds them 
problematic. “They are sometimes part of the fabulously rich tapestry of the 
work – Happy Days has ‘pause’ written 120 times into the text, and it takes a 
great artist to find 120 ways to make each pause work. Beckett’s own 
productions of his plays were works of a great, great genius – but not of a 
great director. Plays exist as they are recreated by future generations. 
Otherwise, you run the risk of a death sentence for great works.”
 