
The Guardian won five awards and was highly commended for three at this year’s 
Press Awards (March 2016), hosted by the Society of Editors.

The Press Awards bring together over 400 editors, writers and columnists to 
celebrate the diversity and excellence of national newspaper journalism in 
Britain.


The website of the year award went to the Guardian for theguardian.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/international>.


The supplement of the year award went to the Guardian’s Weekend magazine for 
its cover pieces onCate Blanchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/07/cate-blanchett-carol-film-interview>
, theRugby World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2015/aug/29/rugby-world-cup-player-photographs-interactive-gallery>
 and theLauren Laverne’s conversation special with JK Rowling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/28/conversation-lauren-laverne-jk-rowling-interview>
.


The Guardian’s health editor Sarah Boseley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sarahboseley> was awarded science and 
health journalist of the year for her reporting on theEbola crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/17/ebola-race-find-cure>, the 
scourge of endometriosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/28/endometriosis-hidden-suffering-millions-women>
 and concerns over the handling of acampaign dealing with the menopause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/07/scientists-fear-pr-campaign-underplays-hrt-cancer-risks>
.Marina O’Loughlin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/marina-oloughlin> was 
named critic of the year for her reviews ofAndrew Edmunds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/09/andrew-edmunds-london-w1-restaurant-review-marina-oloughlin>
,Sexy Fish  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/26/sexy-fish-london-restaurant-review-marina-o-loughlin>
andInver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/15/inver-strathlachlan-restaurant-review-marina-oloughlin>
.Tom Jenkins <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/tomjenkins> was named the 
winner in the sports photographer of the year category for his images of the 
former Chelsea managerJosé Mourinho 
<http://pressawards.org.uk/modules/entries/images/entries-30150815-02275-l.jpg>
, which appeared in the Observer, of the tennis playerRafael Nadal 
<http://pressawards.org.uk/modules/entries/images/entries-30150815-01847-l.jpg>
, and of Japanese players tackling a South African opponent during the Asian 
nation’s shock 32-34 win at last year’s Rugby World Cup.


Three further Guardian journalists were commended during the ceremony. Jay 
Rayner <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jayrayner> was highly commended as 
critic of the year. Migration correspondentPatrick Kingsley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/patrick-kingsley> and the sports desk were 
also highly commended in the foreign reporter and sports team of the year 
categories, respectively.

 