
In Britain, it was a year of ceremonial – births, deaths, and the first 
Wimbledon men's champion for 77 years.We lost Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/17/margaret-thatcher-funeral-report>
, who proved as divisive in death as she ever was in life. Among Tories her 
passing was greeted as if we had lost a national saint. In the north she was 
burned in effigy. Even as her funeral procession wound through London streets 
some faced the cortege and bowed their heads in respect; others turned their 
backs. What few people seemed able to do was face the fact that she got some 
things right, and others horribly wrong; that she wasn't evil so much as 
ludicrously overconfident in her judgments. The new pope may have renounced his 
own infallibility, but she never did.

And we got another heir to the throne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/jul/24/prince-george-alexander-louis-royal-baby>
. Prince George, son of Prince William and the former Kate Middleton, became 
third in line the moment he popped out of the womb. The event was greeted – in 
the UK anyway – with roughly as much excitement asAndy Murray's victory in the 
men's singles at Wimbledon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/07/andy-murray-wimbledon-win-djokovic>
. Murray had won the Olympic gold medal the previous year, so this was not 
unexpected, but it did help ease the pain that nags at the back of every 
British sports fan's mind – that in the end, with occasional exceptions, we are 
a nation of losers.

And losers we were in February when the UK lost its AAA status from the credit 
rating agencies. These agencies lost their credibility back in the 2008 crash, 
so the downgrading would not have mattered if the chancellor,George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>, had not promised to make 
its preservation a centrepiece of his economic policy.

Meanwhile, revised figures suggested that the UK had not only avoided a 
triple-dip recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/apr/25/uk-avoid-triple-dip-recession-gdp-growth>
 but had probably never suffered a double-dip either. By the end of the year, 
growth figures were looking fairly healthy: Osborne was able to claim that our 
rate of growth (admittedly from a disastrously low level) was the fastest of 
any advanced nation.

But it was a very patchy recovery, far stronger in the south than the north, 
and seemed to be based more on consumer borrowing and spending than on any real 
increase in output, which remained sluggish as the banks continued to hoard 
their money like constipated misers.

Cardinal Keith O'Brien 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/03/cardinal-keith-obrien-admits-sexual-misconduct>
, archbishop of St Andrews, the most senior Roman Catholic clergyman in the 
country, resigned over "inappropriate" behaviour in the past. "Inappropriate" 
was one of the words of the year (along with "selfie", a self-portrait taken 
with a mobile phone) and was used more and more frequently as the police 
Operation Yewtree hauled in more and more popular entertainers of the past who 
appear to have treated the BBC in particular as a sort of sexual adventure 
playground.

In March, both ex-Liberal Democrat MP Chris Huhne and his former wife Vicky 
Price were jailed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/mar/07/vicky-pryce-convicted-chris-huhne>
for eight months for perverting the course of justice; he had persuaded her to 
accept his penalty points for speeding. The nation was gripped with the story 
of a miserable, crumbling marriage. The Office of Fair Trading gave payday loan 
companies 12 weeks to improve their practices. Payday loan companies lent money 
at sometimes extortionate rates, occasionally rising to over 5,000% pa.

London property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/jun/20/prime-central-london-property-bubble>
 became a form of reserve currency for the world, as wealthy foreigners paid 
unimaginable sums for houses in which they had no intention of living. In April 
one house wasput on sale for £250m 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/the-250m-home-next-to-the-queen-london-property-smashes-uk-house-price-record-as-it-goes-on-sale-8582837.html>
 ($410m). The bubble pushed house prices up into less salubrious areas and into 
the commuter belt.

In May, Labour did well in local elections, as did Ukip – the party that wants 
to pull Britain out of the EU. This created near panic among Tories, who feared 
that Ukip would leach votes from them and letEd Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband>, the Labour leader, into 
Downing Street.

Though Ukip did appear to be a one-pony trick; apart from some unreconstructed 
nutcases, they had little to offer by way of leadership apart fromNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, an alarmingly candid 
populist boozer. A bill was published for a referendum that could take the UK 
out of the EU in 2017.

Also in May, Private Lee Rigby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/nov/29/lee-rigby-woolwich-attack-court>
 was murdered in a south London street, an event caught in hideous detail on 
video and mobile phones, which have been replayed in court as the trial is 
ongoing.

In June, Abu Qatada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada>, the 
fundamentalist Muslim preacher, was finally deported to Jordan, where he faced 
trial. The same-sex marriage bill became law, greeted with delight by the gay 
community and suspicious resentment by many Tories. For once Britain had a good 
summer; 1 August was, at 34C, the hottest day in London for 10 years. Later 
that month, parliament was recalled to debate reaction to the use of chemical 
weapons against civilians in Syria; to general surprise MPs voted against UK 
intervention.

A constant theme of the year was the two main parties blaming each other for 
various failing NHS hospitals. In autumn, the country was obsessed by energy 
prices. Ed Miliband seized the initiative by promising to freeze them. This was 
denounced by the coalition government as a "con", but it sent them scampering 
round looking for ways to reduce prices anyway, which they did by cutting 
so-called "green taxes". Prime ministerDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> had put a lot of store by 
his eco-credentials, but he ended the year denouncing, in private, "green crap".
 