
The Guardian Australia has picked up a prestigious award at the 2013 Walkley 
Awards for Excellence in Journalism <http://www.walkleys.com/walkley-awards>, 
in Brisbane, Australia.

Katharine Viner, Lee Glendinning, Madhvi Pankhania and Jonathan Richards, from 
the Guardian Australia, won the award for the category All Media Multimedia 
Storytelling with their pieceFirestorm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/may/26/firestorm-bushfire-dunalley-holmes-family>
, about the Australian bush fires in January 2013.

The category recognises journalism that pushes the boundaries of the craft and 
platform in innovative and creative ways. Judges placed importance on works 
that deliver a story imaginatively and effectively â€“ exhibiting richness of 
content using a range of media and technology.

Judges said "Katharine Viner and the team from Guardian Australia have brought 
to life the dramatic story of the bushfire that tore through the Tasmanian town 
of Dunalley in January 2013. Combining text with vivid imagery and high-quality 
video, they have woven their narrative into a compelling and immersive 
multimedia reconstruction."

This year marked the 58th annual Walkley Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-press-office/awards>. Journalists around the 
nation submitted 1335 entries, judged by more than 100 senior industry 
representatives.

Audiences around the nation were able to join the excitement as the winners 
were announced on the Walkleys official broadcast partner ABC's "pop-up" 
channel ABC3 (accessible through Channel 23 on Freeview or Channel 723 on 
Foxtel).

The broadcast will also be streamed on the ABC website and a one-hour 
highlights program will screen on Sunday 1 December on ABC1 and be available on 
ABC iView.

For more information about the awards and for the full list of finalists and 
winners, clickhere <http://www.walkleys.com/2013finalists>.
 