
The footballers of Guinea say they were exiled and made to feel like they had 
“the plague” because of the presence of Ebola in their country when they played 
their qualifying matches for theAfrica Cup of Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/africannationscup>. Members of the squad 
have told how they were stigmatised and abused.

“We don’t want you here, you have the virus,” airport workers told them as 
they landed – even though most had flown in from Europe where they play club 
football. “Ebola! Ebola!” rival fans shouted at them.

“I could understand them being cautious, but it was too much,” said Kamil 
Zayatte, the captain. “Uganda was the worst. Usually we travel with 50 people – 
players, managers, medical staff, coaches and so on – but they told us we could 
have only 18 players and four coaches, and we had to make an official protest.

“Then they locked us away in a private compound with a military guard. We 
couldn’t even go on to the street. The supporters screamed at us ‘Ebola! 
Ebola!’ It was terrible.” The team’s French coach, Michel Dussuyer, said some 
treated the players “as if they were like the plague”.

Against the odds, however – and despite not being allowed to play a single 
qualifying game on their own territory – Guinea earned a place in the finals, 
which are now taking place 2,000 miles away from their homeland, in Equatorial
Guinea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/guinea>.

Sunday’s quarter-final against Ghana in Malabo will bring Guinea to a 
standstill as the nation follows its team, known as the Syli Nationale 
(National Elephant), on television and radio. Special screens have been put up 
around the capital Conakry.

“Everybody will be watching,” said Zayatte, who plays in England for Sheffield 
Wednesday. “Not just football fans, but grandparents, children – the whole 
country. We have to win for them. We must give the people something to cheer 
after all that has happened.”

Nearly 2,000 Guineans have been killed by the Ebola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ebola> virus, in the border regions with 
Liberia and Sierra Leone. Schools have been closed for months, and people have 
been warned to avoid large gatherings – but there is no chance of that 
happening at present.

The economic impact has been devastating too. Unicef sent a director there 
nine days ago and Sherif Mohamed Abdallah, who represents a group of 
businessmen in the country, said: “If we are not careful, we may proclaim the 
end of the economic sector in Guinea before the end of Ebola.”

There have already been outpourings of joy on the streets of Conakry because 
of the football – and a tragedy. After the Syli’s first group game, a 1-1 draw 
against Ivory Coast, the players were downhearted because they had led, and 
felt they should have won. “We were despondent, but the people at home were 
celebrating and partying because for them it was a very good result,” said 
Zayatte. “My phone didn’t stop ringing with people wanting to congratulate us.”

News came through later, however, that three people had died when a grenade 
went off in a packed bar. It was thought to have been a crazy prank that went 
wrong, or the result of an argument between an ex-military man and a friend.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fguinea-ebola-fears-africa-cup-nations-dream-quarter-final%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F30%2F1422652415975%2F1686f711-6e9e-42a3-9029-8a2e94812b1d-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Guinea%E2%80%99s%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations%20dream%20survives%20against%20all%20odds%20and%20Ebola%20taunts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fguinea-ebola-fears-africa-cup-nations-dream-quarter-final%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Guinea%E2%80%99s%20Africa%20Cup%20of%20Nations%20dream%20survives%20against%20all%20odds%20and%20Ebola%20taunts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2015%2Fjan%2F31%2Fguinea-ebola-fears-africa-cup-nations-dream-quarter-final%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F30%2F1422652415975%2F1686f711-6e9e-42a3-9029-8a2e94812b1d-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Guineans celebrate in Conakry after Guinea qualified for the Africa Cup of 
Nations quarter-finals. Photograph: BINANI/AFP/Getty Images 
The Syli then also drew their other two group games 1-1, which left them level 
with Mali. Under tournament regulations, officials had to draw lots to decide 
who went through. Guinea’s minister of youth, Moustapha Naite, was dancing and 
screaming in the conference room when Guinea “won” the draw, pitting them 
against Ghana in the quarter-finals. “No one expected us to be here,” he said. 
“We had to qualify outside of Guinea. We are so happy.” The news led to more 
wild celebrations on the streets of Conakry.

Because they could not play their home qualifying games in Guinea, the Syli 
relocated to Casablanca. There is a close relationship between Guinea and 
Morocco, but it was a strange gesture by the Moroccans to invite them – they 
withdrew as hosts for the Cup of Nations, at two months’ notice, because of 
fears about Ebola. “I wish I was a Moroccan official, then maybe I could 
explain it,” said Junior Binyam, media director of the Confederation of African 
Football. “It makes no sense.”

Equatorial Guinea stepped in to save the tournament – a personal decision by 
Africa’s longest-serving ruler, Teodoro Obiang, who has ruled the tiny, 
Spanish-speaking nation since 1979.

But there are further obstacles to Guinea’s progress. Defender Zayatte has 
been injured, as has the man who usually partners him, Florentin Pogba. That 
has left a local league player from Conakry and a youngster who plays in the 
French fifth division (if he is fit) to take on Ghana’s star forward, Asamoah 
Gyan – the highest-earning African sportsman ever.

Gyan used to play in the Premier League for Sunderland, but moved to al-Ain in 
the United Arab Emirates for a pay rise. He earns about £150,000 a week and his 
private fleet of cars includes a Rolls-Royce, a Bentley, a Hummer, a BMW and 
two Porsches. He earns in a few days as much as Guinea defenders, Fode Camara 
and Abdoulaye Cissé, earn in a year. Cissé had a swollen knee last Friday, so 
Guinea could yet lose another defender.

No matter the adversity, the Syli say they are up for the challenge. Their 
star player, midfielder Ibrahima Traoré, is known locally as “the Messi of 
Guinea”. Traoré, who plays in Germany for Borussia Mönchengladbach, said: “We 
have amazing team spirit. We must win. We owe it to our people.”
 