
Saturday marked one year since the death of the internet activist Aaron 
Swartz. The 26-year-old, who was one of the builders of Reddit,killed himself 
in New York City on Friday 11 January 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/12/aaron-swartz-hacking-reddit-dies>
. 

At the time of his death, Swartz was facing trial over charges 
of hacking arising from the downloading of millions of documents from the 
online research group JSTOR. He faced up to 50 years in prison.

On Saturday, the home page of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology was 
hacked, reportedly by the Anonymous group 
<http://thehackernews.com/2014/01/mit-university-website-defaced-by.html>. Last 
year Swartz's familyaccused MIT and government prosecutors of being complicit 
in his death. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/13/aaron-swartz-family-mit-government?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>

The hackers left a message on the site which read: “The day we fight back.” 
The website was later unavailable. MIT's website was attacked by Anonymous last 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/14/anonymous-attack-mit-aaron-swartz>
.

The author and blogger Cory Doctorow, who a year ago published a lengthy 
tribute to Swartz <http://boingboing.net/2013/01/12/rip-aaron-swartz.html>, was 
one of a number of writers to mark Saturday's anniversary.Writing on his 
boingboing.net website 
<http://boingboing.net/2014/01/11/remembering-aaron-swartz.html>, Doctorow 
said: “I've been feeling pretty hopeless about the future lately, and I think a 
lot of it has been driven by the impending anniversary of Aaron's death. The 
last couple years were hard ones.

“Aaron had a gift for identifying the problems that mattered, mapping a theory 
of change, and then taking it on, step by step. That approach allowed him to 
undertake challenges that many people, most people, would dismiss as 
impossible.”

The academic and author Lawrence Lessig is leading a protest march in memory 
of Swartz <http://www.nhrebellionwalk.org/?source=nhr>. The marchers set off on 
Saturday, aiming to walk across New Hampshire, the state which will host the 
first primary of the 2016 presidential election, to promote a campaign against 
“the system of corruption in Washington” 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2014/01/why-were-marching-across-new-hampshire-to-honor-aaron-swartz/282962/>
. 

In an article for the Atlantic, Lessig wrote: “A year ago tomorrow, Aaron 
Swartz left. He had wound us all up, pointed us in a million directions, we 
were all working as hard as we could, moving things forward. And then he was 
gone.”

Swartz died five months before Edward Snowden, a former National Security 
Agency contractor,released details of the agency's domestic and foreign 
surveillance activities to the Guardian and other media outlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/05/nsa-whistleblower-edward-snowden-clemency>
. On Saturday,the Huffington Post published a clip from a forthcoming 
documentary about Swartz 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/01/11/aaron-swartz-documentary_n_4578257.html?utm_hp_ref=politics>
,The Internet's Own Boy <http://aaronswartzthedocumentary.com/>, in which he 
discusses his view of the NSA and its practices.

The Huffington Post quoted Swartz as saying: "It is shocking to think that the 
accountability is so lax that they don't even have sort of basic statistics 
about how big the spying programme is. If the answer is, 'Oh, we're spying on 
so many people we can't possibly even count them,' then that's an awful lot of 
people."

Documents leaked by Snowden disclosed the NSA's collection of the telephone 
records of millions of Americans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/nsa-phone-records-verizon-court-order>
.

On boingboing.net, Doctorow added: “It takes a tremendous human spirit to look 
at the failures of the institutions around us – from the breakdown of 
governmental checks and balances to its war on whistleblowers to the tremendous 
corporate influence on crafting anti-user policies – and not despair. Aaron 
taught us that we must not.

“He's inspired people to take up big challenges not out of reckless optimism, 
but because he believed that if we can see the change we want in the world, we 
are powerful enough to make it happen. From Lawrence Lessig marching across New 
Hampshire to address corruption in politics, to public interest groups banding 
together for a day of action against NSA spying, that legacy lives on.”
 