
Andrew "Weev" Auernheimer is a hacktivist from the same internet community 
that has lionisedAaron Swartz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/aaron-swartz> as a free information 
hero. They are polar opposites: Swartz, who became a martyr to the cause after 
his suicide on January 11, was a highly-regarded, Ivy League-educated liberal 
from Illinois. Auernheimer is a self-confessed internet troll and a 
"mean-mouthed southern libertarian" from a trailer park in Arkansas.

But before Swartz's death, the young men shared a similar plight: the threat 
of a long prison sentence under a system which lawyers, academics and other 
supporters believe leads to prosecution that are out of all proportion to the 
alleged cyber crimes.

Neither Swartz, 26, nor Auernheimer, 27, hacked into any computer, yet were 
charged with offences aimed at hackers. Neither were motivated by profit, but 
by different brands of political activism.

Yet they each faced multiple charges and prosecutions of such magnitude that 
they contributed to Swartz's death, according to his family. Auernheimer said 
he has shared the same "suffering and miseries" as Swartz after being "hounded 
by the FBI".

"I've never broke into anyone's computer," Auernheimer told the Guardian. "We 
were accessing public resources. It's like they printed a book and I flipped 
open the pages and we criticised what they put in the book."

"Like Aaron Swartz, I've no faith in the justice system," he added.

His case is proof that while Swartz attracted worldwide attention, his 
prosecution was by no means unique. A number of internet activists, computer 
security experts and whistleblowers who have taken action online to highlight a 
flaw in the established order or as a form of political protest, have found 
themselves charged with multiple counts of cyber-crime, carrying draconian 
prison terms.

Critics of the prosecutions say they are being bought by over-zealous 
prosecutors using outdated and flawed laws.

Both men were being prosecuted under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, a 
statute written in the 1980s which has come under fire for being too broad. 
Last week, a congresswoman from Silicon Valleyproposed an amendment 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2013/jan/16/zoe-lofgren-proposes-aarons-law?intcmp=239>
 called "Aaron's law" to try to stop such prosecutions.

Auernheimer was convicted in November of conspiracy to access a protected 
computer without authorisation, as well as identity fraud.He faces 10 years in 
jail 
<http://www.technewsdaily.com/15581-hacker-found-guilty-despite-not-hacking-ipad.html.>
 for collecting 114,000 email addresses of iPad users stored by AT&T, and 
passing some of this information to Gawker. The actual harvesting of the emails 
was carried out by a friend, Daniel Spitler.

Auernheimer passed the information to Gawker to expose AT&T's security flaws 
and embarrass them, he said.

"When you publish something, you don't have the right to whine and moan and 
cry: 'He's breaking and entering,'" said Auernheimer, who plans to appeal his 
conviction after his sentencing hearing on 25 February. "That's what AT&T and 
the federal government are claiming. It's a dishonest and seditious claim."

He said the idea that what he and Swartz did amounted to a felony was 
"ludicrous".

"When the FBI came for Aaron, he lost everything. The difference between my 
case and Aaron's is: I'm a broke kid from a trailer park in Arkansas. I'm 
disaffected, poor and clever. If you put me in prison, at least my food will be 
paid for."

Jay Liederman, an attorney who has represented a number of high-profile 
hackers, accused the government of employing the act to stifle dissent.

"It's as if with the explosion of hacktivists and activism, this is the 
government's new toy. It seems like they took a new look at the CFAA and 
realised they can chill this type of activism that they don't like," he said.

Liederman has represented Commander X, a hacker who is on the run from the FBI 
for an attack on a website in Santa Cruz, California, and Raynaldo Rivera, a 
suspected hacker from LulzSec, accused of stealing information from Sony last 
year. He has described illegal hacker activities such as Distributed Denial of 
Service attacks (DDoS) as "digital sit-ins" or " the equivalent of occupying 
the Woolworth's lunch counter during the civil rights movement" and has called 
for the law to be changed.

He sees a common thread running through prosecutions of activists for DDoS 
attacks and those of Swatrz, Auernheimer and Barrett Brown, a former affiliate 
of hacktivist collective Anonymous currently in prison facing charges under the 
CFAA, whose prosecution has also attracted criticism.

"They are very closely related," said Liederman. "It is one rich tapestry of 
prosecutorial overreach and government oppression."

Brown faces 45 years in prison and $3m in fines for charges relating to a 
Christmas Day attack in 2011 against Stratfor, a US intelligence-gathering 
firm, in which Anonymous hackers stole 5.5m emails,some of which were later 
published on WikiLeaks 
<http://blogs.dallasobserver.com/unfairpark/2012/12/anonymous_barrett_brown_faces.php.>
.

Brown was not involved in the hack, but allegedly facilitated it by posting a 
link in a chatroom, thereby providing others with credit card information and 
identities of thousands of individuals in the Stratfor database.

He has also been charged 
<http://blogs.dallasobserver.com/unfairpark/2012/10/three_weeks_after_fbi_raid_fed.phpT>
 with internet threats to FBI agents, relating to his Twitter and YouTube feed. 
All three were "popular, free-thinking information activists" facing 
"stunningly abusive" prosecutions, according to Liederman.
 Internet activist Aaron Swartz was found dead on January 11. Photograph: 
Zuma/Rex Features 
"With Swartz, with Weev with Barrett, there was no hacking, yet they are being 
prosecuted by statutes that were made for hackers."

Each took a "contrarian notion" against established principles, he said.

"Aaron Swartz had the outrageous notion that information should be free, and 
that future generations should be allowed to enjoy and learn from academic 
articles. Weev had the outrageous notion that companies like AT&T, because they 
are sloppy with your information, should be called out on it. Barrett had the 
outrageous notion that governments and those private security companies that 
act like the black hand of the government should be transparent and the public 
should have the right to know.

"These were virtues extolled by our forefathers in this country and all of a 
sudden they are lost to us."

Gabriella Coleman, an anthropologist who spent three years living among 
hackers in San Francisco for her book, Coding Freedom: The Ethics and 
Aesthetics ofHacking <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/hacking>, said 
that the US has historically been tougher on hackers than other countries.

"Hackers have been given stiff sentences in the US compared to most of Europe 
and Australia," she said, citing the case of Gary McKinnon, a British hacker 
the US sought to extradite. McKinnon faced US charges of causing thousands of 
dollars' worth of damage to military computers, which carried a prison sentence 
of up to 60 years if convicted.

However, his extradition to the US was blocked in October on human rights 
grounds after reports showed he would have been a suicide risk. The case 
against him in the UKwas dropped in December 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-20730627.>.

Asked whether the hardline prosecutions were a result of the CFAA itself or 
its interpretation by overzealous prosecutors, Coleman, who works at McGill 
University in Montreal, said: "It's a deadly mix. The way the CFAA is worded is 
extremely vague, and when you put that into a legal context, with the way 
hackers are dealt with in the US, it comes down hard. The two together becomes 
a problem."

Jennifer Granick, an attorney and the director for civil liberties at the 
Center forInternet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/internet> and 
Society at Stanford law school, writing after Swartz's death, said that 
ordinary prosecutorial tactics, such as the "horse-trading" that is 
plea-bargaining, become "extraordinary mistakes when the case is bogus or 
overcharged".

In her blog, she identified many problems 
<http://cyberlaw.stanford.edu/blog/2013/01/towards-learning-losing-aaron-swartz-part-2>
 with sentencing in computer crime cases, including the low burden of proof for 
loss calculations. She wrote that the CFAA should be amended and that 
prosecutors must be "extremely careful and measured when bringing these cases".

"When so many thoughtful people, including former prosecutors, disagree with 
US attorney's conduct in these cases, we need to stop," she wrote.

Auernheimer believes the CFAA should be "completely repealed". He said: "The 
CFAA is a broken law, but it is the seditious lies of prosecutors [that] were 
put out to make sure I didn't get a fair trial."

He said what he did was a "a big deal to the Feds because I embarrassed rich 
people. What we are doing is magic they don't approve of, so burn the witches â€“ 
kill them and throw them in prison."

In a "statement of responsibility", published on Monday 
<http://techcrunch.com/2013/01/21/ipad-hack-statement-of-responsibility/> in a 
response to a request from the government that he accept responsibility before 
sentencing, Auernheimer wrote: "Ivy-League educated and wealthy, Aaron dealt 
with his indictment so badly because he thought he was part of a special class 
of people that this didn't happen to. I am from a rundown shack in Arkansas. I 
spent many years thinking people from families like his got better treatment 
than me. Now I realize the truth: The beast is so monstrous it will devour us 
all. None will be spared."
 