
The title of Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie’s award-winning novel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2009/oct/12/book-club-half-yellow-sun>
 comes from the flag of Biafra, embodying the breakaway state’s hopes during 
the brief three years of its existence in the Nigerian civil war of 1967-70. As 
one of her central characters, Olanna, explains to a group of schoolchildren: 
“Red was the blood of the siblings massacred in the north, black was for 
mourning them, green was for the prosperity Biafra would have, and, finally, 
the half of a yellow sun stood for the glorious future.”

For me, growing up in the north of Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, the symbolism seemed very 
different: it showed one half of a wilfully bisected country, and I was living 
in the half that the insurrection had rendered invisible. The shocking 
revelation of this extraordinary novel was the extent to which invisibility was 
indeed the issue, but not in the way that I had believed.

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie: 'Fear of causing offence becomes a fetish'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/11/chimamanda-ngozi-adichie-fear-causing-offence-a-fetish>
I was born just as Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> became 
independent, and have always found it hard to explain my relationship with it. 
My primary school, in the northern (predominantly Muslim) city of Kaduna, had 
posters of PresidentYakubu Gowon 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Yakubu-Gowon> on the wall. We drove to 
school along Tafawa Balewa Way, named after Nigeria’s first and only prime 
minister, whose assassination in 1966 was one of the triggers for the war.The 
country was postcolonial, in that expatriates (at least the ones I knew) didn’t 
own land but were part of an international business, academic and diplomatic 
community.

In so far as one can talk of belonging, in a society where people blew in for 
three or four years and then blew out again, we belonged to a global middle 
class. For the first 14 years of my life we were the stayers, with Nigerian 
friends who had servants, as we did, some of whom had to be smuggled south when 
the war began.

I had looked in vain for my story in fiction. But most Nigerian novels, 
understandably, have no time for the expatriate experience, while the 
literature of white writers from other parts ofAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> describes entirely different social 
and economic set-ups. I had also devoured histories of Nigeria, which spelled 
out the facts of the civil war. But it took Adichie’s 2006 novel to shock me 
into a truer and profoundly different understanding of the conflict – and, by 
extension, my own identity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fhalf-of-a-yellow-sun-identity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438941837227%2Fa7ba3db7-d501-4502-892e-48b2f19d3b3c-658x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Half%20of%20a%20Yellow%20Sun%20shocked%20me%20into%20a%20sense%20of%20my%20own%20expatriate%20identity%20%7C%20Claire%20Armitstead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fhalf-of-a-yellow-sun-identity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Half%20of%20a%20Yellow%20Sun%20shocked%20me%20into%20a%20sense%20of%20my%20own%20expatriate%20identity%20%7C%20Claire%20Armitstead&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Faug%2F19%2Fhalf-of-a-yellow-sun-identity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F8%2F7%2F1438941837227%2Fa7ba3db7-d501-4502-892e-48b2f19d3b3c-658x1020.jpeg>
 Half of a Yellow Sun by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie. Photograph: HarperCollins UK 
Half of a Yellow Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2006/aug/19/fiction.shopping2> opens in a 
bungalow full of academics who sit around drinking beer, listening to music on 
a gleaming new radiogram and arguing about politics. Twin sisters Olanna and 
Kainene are from a wealthy family, and it’s not long before their mother is 
scuttling off to England with a bra stuffed full of jewellery.Kainene’s lover 
Richard is an English academic who, in the language of the day, has “gone 
native”: he’s writing a book about “roped pots”, which made me smile, because I 
knew lots of Richards, and the north at the time was crawling with 
ethnographers and bargain hunters who were obsessed with thedistinctive grey 
earthenware produced by a small town called Abuja 
<http://www.ceramicstoday.com/articles/cardew.htm>.

This intimate portrayal of a particular society at a particular time both 
matched my experience and challenged every presumption I had ever held. Words I 
grew up with – “assassination”, “coup” and “reprisal killings” – are 
scrupulously dismantled and exposed as the nuts and bolts of a well-oiled 
propaganda machine. In the alternative propaganda of the Biafrans, federal 
soldiers are “vandals”; what we regarded as “tribal killings” are reframed as a 
“pogrom”.

Finally, someone had articulated my situation

The idea that I could have been living a normal life in a country where 
children were dying in their millions of the malnutrition diseasekwashiorkor 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/kwashiorkor/Pages/Introduction.aspx> is both 
unsurprising, because the images were plastered around the world as part of a 
huge publicity offensive, and shocking, because in some deeply programmed part 
of myself I still believed them to be simply advertising (pot-bellied, 
skinny-limbed children were all around us in a provincial capital that was a 
magnet for the rural poor).

The reason I could so closely identify with Adichie’s Igbo 
<http://www.everyculture.com/wc/Mauritania-to-Nigeria/Igbo.html> Nigeria is 
that she observes it through the eyes of insider-outsiders. The first is Ugwu, 
a bright young village boy brought in as a servant, whose inquisitive eyes pick 
over every nuance of class and place, and whose education from his “master” 
Odenigbo gives the novel its political underpinning: “They will teach you thata 
white man called Mungo Park 
<http://africanhistory.about.com/cs/biography/p/bio_Park.htm> discovered River 
Niger. That is rubbish. Our people fished in the Niger long before Mungo Park’s 
grandfather was born. But in your exam, write that it was Mungo Park,” says 
Odenigbo.

In the pantheon of my own early education, Park stood alongside Lord Lugard, 
who established British control in northern Nigeria in the early years of the 
20th century. The house of assembly for Kaduna state still, extraordinarily, 
bears his name.

Half of a Yellow Sun review – 'Well-intentioned and heartfelt'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/10/half-of-a-yellow-sun-chimamanda-ngozi-adichie-film-review>
In later chapters, Richard’s awkward perspective – as a white man in a 
relationship with a black woman, who forsakes his academic work to become 
Biafra’s director of propaganda – illuminates the colonial fantasy that 
underpins the whole mess.

“I want to see the real Biafrans,” says a sweaty American journalist, faced 
with the reality of starving children in a refugee camp. “Richard knew his 
type,” writes Adichie. “He was like president Nixon’s fact-finders from 
Washington or prime minister Wilson’s commission members from London who 
arrived with their firm protein tablets and their firmer conclusions: that 
Nigeria was not bombing civilians, that the starvation was overflogged, that 
all was as well as it should be in the war.”

These were the stories that we believed in Kaduna, along with the radio 
bulletins that belted out of our shiny new radiogram. Richard himself is not 
innocent of twisting facts into fictions to serve an ideology – there are no 
saints in this novel – but the final pages see him passing the storytelling 
baton over to Ugwu. “The war isn’t my story to tell, really,” he says. “Ugwu 
nodded. He had never thought that it was.”

Finally, someone had articulated my situation. By challenging my understanding 
of my history, and explaining why I felt so blocked, this book changed me more 
than any other I have read. It gave me the other half of a yellow sun.

• This article was amended on 5 May 2016. An earlier version said one of the 
character’s in Half of a Yellow Sun, Richard, was a white man married to a 
black woman. The couple are not married.
 