
The house where Bruce Springsteen wrote Born to Run

The property in Long Branch, New Jersey – which is new on the market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/oct/20/house-where-bruce-springsteen-wrote-born-to-run-goes-on-sale>
 – is a Boss-sized bargain. For just $299,000 (£193,000) – slightly more than 
surrounding properties – you can own the two-bedroom abode in which the great 
American rocker wrote the entire Born to Run album. The asking price does not 
includesuicide machines <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IxuThNgl3YA>, but 
gives prospective buyers a rare opportunity to sweat it out on the actual 
street of a runaway American dream.

The house where Ian Curtis hanged himself

“This is the way, step inside,” sang the Joy Division singer on 1980’s The 
Atrocity Exhibition, providing a useful intro for estate agents in years to 
come. The terraced house in Barton Street, Macclesfield, in which Curtis lived 
with his wife Debbie – and hanged himself in the kitchen –fetched £200,000 this 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/shortcuts/2015/oct/04/ian-curtis-house-joy-division-museum>
. Buyer Hadar Goldman intends to turn it into a museum.


The house where Kurt Cobain grew up

If you’re short on ultimate Nirvana collectibles, never mind – you could 
always put in a bid for the singer’s childhood home. The four-bedroom house in 
Aberdeen, Washington – complete with a wall punched by young Kurt and “shag 
carpeting” – is surprisingly not hot property: earlier this yearthe sale price 
was dropped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/mar/06/kurt-cobains-childhood-home-has-sale-price-cut-by-100000>
 by $100,000 to just $400,000.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfi3nssatHv0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfi3nssatHv0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dfi3nssatHv0&media=>
The ranch Michael Jackson built – complete with llama

For those seeking a higher-end property, they don’t come much pricier than 
Neverland, Michael Jackson’s infamous ranch-cum-children’s-fantasy-land, which
went on the market in May 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/trulia/2015/06/03/michael-jacksons-neverland-ranch-listed-for-sale/>
. Prospective buyers will need $100m, and it’s even less of a thriller without 
the late star’s long-gone fairground, personal fire station, zoo or Bubbles the 
chimp. What you do get, however, is 2,700 acres, with a six-bedroom main house, 
a four-bedroom guest house, a tennis court, a basketball court, a 50-seat 
cinema, a swimming pool and a magic stage. Oh, and a llama.

The house Noel Gallagher lived in at the height of Britpop

From 1995 to 1999, Noel Gallagher lived in a handsome townhouse in north 
London – strictly speaking, closer to Chalk Farm or Belsize Park than the 
usually mentioned Primrose Hill – named Supernova Heights, after the song 
Champagne Supernova. This house became a byword for 90s excess and partying. 
“You could hear them in there until all hours; people getting drunk and 
shouting. This is not normally an area associated with that kind of behaviour,”
a neighbour told the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/nov/28/burhanwazir.theobserver> after 
Gallagher sold it for £2m in 1999. The price reached a supersonic £3.25m when 
Little Britain’s David Walliams bought it in 2005, the price of having to live 
forever with a Footballers Wives-style interior.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_VMUIgBbrAQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_VMUIgBbrAQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_VMUIgBbrAQ&media=>
The house where Amy Winehouse died

The three-bedroomed “villa” (actually quite a sizeable house) in Camden Town 
in which Amy Winehouse lived and died was originally put in the market for 
£2.7m. But a series of buyers – perhaps put off by its status as a shrine for 
fans – dropped out before it was snapped up for £2m late in 2012 by Leslie 
Balfour-Lynn. Her husband, vineyard owner Richard, said he quite liked 
Winehouse, but “no more than anyone else”, but was fond of properties with 
“interesting histories”, which the house in Camden Square certainly has. 
Winehouse property aficionados might also considerher previous property 
<https://www.amywinehouseforum.co.uk/forum/topic/18269-prowse-place-house-for-sale/>
, a few minutes’ walk away in Prowse Place, which was on the rental market for 
£3,030pcm earlier this year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxQtIDk-u09I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxQtIDk-u09I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DxQtIDk-u09I&media=>
The house where Jimmy Page was rumoured to practice the dark arts

Ozzy Osbourne insisted he preferred Milk Tray to Black Magic, but Jimmy Page’s 
interest in the occult led him to purchase Boleskine House, formerlyhome to the 
notorious occultist Aleister Crowley 
<http://weekinweird.com/2011/04/11/the-boleskine-house-loch-ness-other-stranger-monster/>
, in 1970. Despite owning it until 1992, he spent just six weeks in the 
property on the shores of Loch Ness. Crowley used the house to perform “the 
Sacred Magic of Abramelin the Mage” and other rituals, but while its reputation 
attracted Page, other buyers have been less keen: it was back on the market in 
2009 for just £176,000, complete with sinister history of rituals and death.

The house and pool where Brian Jones died

In the macabre rock-property stakes, they don’t come much darker than the 
Grade II -listed farm in Cotchford Lane, Hartfield, where Brian Jones was found 
dead in the swimming pool in 1969. The farmhouse, formerly home to AA Milne, 
the author of the Winnie the Pooh stories – was recently offered for sale at 
£2m, estate agents Savills highlighting the pool, though more for it being 
heated than having hosted a death that spawned a thousand conspiracy theories.

The house where John Lennon lived as a child

Fancy a fab Beatle bargain? Lennon’s first home on Newcastle Road, Liverpool – 
he lived there from 1940 to 1942, and then again from 1943 to 1946 – sold at 
auction in October 2013 for £480,000, three times the expected price, but still 
a snip for a house in an area that inspired numerous Beatles songs. The lucky 
American buyer received a “modest family home” in Wavertree, near Penny Lane, 
complete with blue suburban skies and not far from the old Strawberry Field 
Salvation Army children’s home. Imagine!

The houses the Beatles lived in after they were fab

Any houses associated with the post-superstardom Beatles that come on the 
market tend to fetch high sums. Kenwood, the mock-Tudor Surrey mansion in which 
Lennon wrote much of Sergeant Pepper’s, was on the market in 2013 for around 
£13m. Ringo Starr’s 200-acre 17th-century Surrey bolthole, Rydinghurst, fetched 
the same sum (several times the asking price 
<http://www.rightmove.co.uk/property-for-sale/property-23892676.html>) earlier 
this year. The cheapest Beatled property of all, sadly, is unlikely to be sold. 
Starr’s birthplace at 9 Madryn Street, Liverpool, is subject to a demolition 
order, and the city council (whichreprieved the boarded-up house 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-merseyside-18441277> after a campaign by 
fans) are unlikely to sell it, not even for its recently reported value: just 
£600.
 