
January 2014 sees the Public Leaders Network continue its prestigious series 
of interviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/global-public-leaders-series>
 with major figures from the world of global public services.

This month, we'll be at Activate Singapore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/oct/15/what-is-activate-singapore>
, the Guardian's platform for digital innovators, to launch the first of this 
year's talks on global leadership and policy with Haoliang Xu, assistant 
secretary-general of the United Nations.

Xu, one of the speakers at Activate  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/2013/oct/15/activate-singapore-speakers-lead>
, was an engineer and technologist before entering the world of public policy, 
so he is ideally placed to consider our big idea questions about how 
governments can consider long-term answers to societal issues, within 
short-term political cycles.

Xu was appointed UN assistant administrator and director for the regional 
bureau for Asia and the Pacific in September 2013, a post to which he moved 
from his post as deputy regional director in New York of the UN's regional 
bureau for Europe and the Commonwealth.

Prior to joining the UN, Xu was a computer-aided design engineer with Louis 
Berger International Inc in New Jersey and an assistant lecturer at Tongji 
University in Shanghai, China. A Chinese national, Xu's first degree was in 
engineering and he has two masters' degrees, in science in management and 
international affairs in economic development and policy analysis.

In his global public leaders talk, Xu will consider the ways in which 
digitally-driven public services and public governance are improving the 
effectiveness of governments and citizen engagement around the world. He will 
also share his views on the main challenges for governments as they implement 
digitally based strategies.

â€¢ Want your say? Email us at public.leaders@theguardian.com. 

Join the Public Leaders Network 
<https://register.guardian.co.uk/public-leaders/> for more comment, analysis and
job opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/government-and-politics/senior-executive/>, 
direct to your inbox. Follow us on twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>.
 