
There’s a big birthday bash this autumn when the United Nations turns 70 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/what-has-the-un-achieved-united-nations?CMP=share_btn_tw>
, but as yet it’s unclear who’ll be buying the cake. If recent history is 
anything to go by, the Russians and Chinese will veto the baker, or at least 
try to sell him some weapons, the Americans will balk at the cost and invade 
the bakery, an overpaid bureaucrat will put the thing on expenses, and 
peacekeepers will burn themselves on the candles. As for the flavour, it’s 
bound to be a fudge.

Alas, the UN system, born in a spirit of Never Again in 1945, is not ageing 
well: a security council that seems to deal only inmagnifying insecurity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/24/angelina-jolie-un-security-council-syria-refugees>
; peacekeepers who can’t keep the peace; a health body thatfailed in the face 
of an epidemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/17/world-health-organisation-botched-ebola-outbreak>
; staffers either paralysed by power and internal politics, or else growing 
nicely prosperous on six-figure salaries and some of the most grotesque per 
diems in the world; daft directorates like the UN Office for Outer Space 
Affairs; a publishing arm that spends millions each year printing thousands of 
reports on subjects such as State of the World’s Midwifery 2014 and Broadband 
in Latin America – Beyond Connectivity. And above it all, a byzantine, 
unaccountable, inscrutable, alphabet soupocracy of 85,000 people that has spent 
half a trillion dollars over the past 70 years, a significant portion of it on 
its own bureaucratic needs.

70 years and half a trillion dollars later: what has the UN achieved?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/what-has-the-un-achieved-united-nations>
This is not a personal rant – it’s an aggregation of the frustrations of 
scores of UN staff, past and present, who spoke to the Guardian as part of anew 
series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/un-at-70-does-united-nations-have-a-future>
 on the utility of the world body.

The organisation is feeble at probing its own failings. Investigators are 
toothless patsies; whistleblowers are ostracised, even fired. The UN refuses to 
submit to freedom of information requests, drawing a veil of unaccountability 
over its inertia and inadequacies. And even where it delivers services that 
save lives, it does so expensively; independent aid agencies often argue that 
they could do it cheaper.

But perhaps the saddest thing about the UN is the way that its tarnished brand 
undermines the heroic work done by so many people in its name. People like Rezk 
Rezk, a refugee resettlement officer and a volunteer who is only paid living 
expenses, to the great shame of the obscenely salaried suits in New York and 
Geneva. People likeZabulon Yoti 
<http://reliefweb.int/report/sierra-leone/how-kailahun-district-kicked-ebola-out>
, an Ebola expert who moved to Sierra Leone last summer to try and stop the 
disease in its tracks. People likeGeorgette Gagnon 
<http://unama.unmissions.org/default.aspx?ctl=Details&tabid=12254&mid=15756&ItemID=37547>
, who is trying to hold coalition troops and Taliban forces to account for the 
deaths of people they claim to be fighting for.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-did-the-un-get-so-big-rachel-weisz-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20the%20UN%20get%20so%20big%2C%20asks%20Rachel%20Weisz%20%E2%80%93%20video%20animation&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-did-the-un-get-so-big-rachel-weisz-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20the%20UN%20get%20so%20big%2C%20asks%20Rachel%20Weisz%20%E2%80%93%20video%20animation&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F08%2Fhow-did-the-un-get-so-big-rachel-weisz-video&media=>
 How did the UN get so big, asks Rachel Weisz – video animation 
People like the Unicef team in Yemen, trying to vaccinate children; the UNHCR 
staffers helping the unprecedented numbers of human beings trying to enter 
Europe this year; the World Food Programme relief teams who saved lives after 
the Nepal earthquake.

The UN’s agonising indecision over Syria is just one of a succession of 
stalemates that show up its irrelevance

It would be unfair not to cite examples of the UN’s remarkable achievements 
over the past 70 years: the defeat of smallpox and guinea worm; the millions of 
lives saved by vaccinations, refugee workers and food aid; the vast improvement 
in maternal and neonatal health encouraged by themillennium development goals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/millennium-development-goals>; 
the brave attempt to do something about climate, ozone, oceans and forests 
before it is too late.

The UN says it has negotiated more than 170 peace deals, kept the peace in 60 
countries, and fostered democracy in 40. Less obviously, it has kept hideous 
military tech from the hands of brutes, scouring battlefields for landmines and 
burying ideas like “sight-blinding lasers” and robotic warfare before they can 
become a deeply troubling reality. But these achievements come in spite of, not 
because of, the institution itself.

And it’s not as if we don’t know what needs fixing. The security council, 
constructed in the 1940s, is no longer fit for purpose. Its agonising 
indecision over Syria is just one of a succession of stalemates that show up 
its irrelevance. The vetoes enjoyed by the permanent five – Britain (Britain!) 
France, China, Russia and the US – must be replaced by a majority voting system 
that empowers smaller nations. Peacekeepers must be rolled into a standing 
force of professionals, not an ad hoc assemblage of underpaid uniforms taking a 
breather from their own killing fields back at home.

The entire system of agencies must be streamlined, so we no longer have up to 
six different units – with six different bureaucracies – dealing with a single 
issue. The selection of the secretary general, which comes around again next 
year, must become transparent and democratic, not a secretive coronation by the 
permanent five.

The budget must be addressed – and not by the hundreds of tax-free diplomats 
who spend all year in New York negotiating it. UN spending has doubled over the 
past decade, quadrupled since the mid-1990s. In 1945 the organisation spent 
$20m. In 2015 the UN and all its countless arms and affiliates will spend 2,000 
times as much. A former secretary general, Dag Hammarskjöld, once said that the 
UN was not about taking us to heaven but about saving us from hell. And it’s 
true – if we didn’t have the UN, we’d have to invent it. But if we invented it, 
surely we wouldn’t invent it like this.
 