
India's spinner Harbhajan Singh was last night banned for three Test matches 
for racially abusing the Australian all-rounderAndrew Symonds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/andrew-symonds> during the second Test in 
Sydney, which finished with a resounding Australian victory yesterday.

"I am satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that Harbhajan Singh directed that 
word [monkey] at Andrew Symonds and also that he meant it to offend on the 
basis of Symonds's race or ethnic origin," the match referee Mike Procter said.

The charge was laid by the match umpires Mark Benson and Steve Bucknor 
following a complaint by the home captain Ricky Ponting on Friday, when 
Harbhajan was alleged to have made the "monkey" comment directed at Symonds.

The hearing took place after a match in which the hosts fought back to win by 
122 runs, in the process equalling the record 16-Test winning streak of Steve 
Waugh's team, and take a 2-0 lead in the four-match series. There were just 
eight minutes left to play when the occasional spin of Michael Clarke claimed 
three wickets in five balls as India were bundled out for 210.

Harbhajan and Symonds, the only black player in the Australian team, had 
exchanged words shortly after the Indian reached his half-century on Friday. 
Play was held up for several minutes while the umpires spoke to Harbhajan on 
the pitch, although Procter said the umpires were not close enough to hear the 
exchange.

The ban starts with immediate effect but Harbhajan, who denies he racially 
abused Symonds, could be available for the third Test in Perth next week as the 
Indians plan to lodge an appeal.

"We'll appeal against the match referee's decision once we receive a 
communication from the ICC," the Indian board's vice-president Rajiv Shukla 
said. "Till the decision of the appeals commissioner is known, the ban on 
Harbhajan will obviously be stayed."

Shukla also dismissed talk that the team was considering pulling out of the 
rest of the tour. The incident has further fractured the relationship between 
the two teams, which had soured during an acrimonious one-day series in India 
in October when players from both teams were involved in heated exchanges and 
Symonds was racially abused by the spectators.

On completion of the match India control board officials had called on the ICC 
to ban the umpires Benson and Bucknor from officiating in the rest of the 
series for their handling of the Sydney Test. Chetan Chauhan, the team manager, 
said: "I have been informed by the BCCI that they are lodging a strong protest 
with the ICC, so that some of the incompetent umpires do not umpire in the rest 
of the series."

The match was dogged by a series of umpiring blunders that reignited the 
debate about whether match officials should be allowed to make greater use of 
technology. Both teams were adversely affected by wrong calls but the most 
significant occurred on the first day when Symonds was given not out by the 
West Indian Bucknor after edging a catch behind. Symonds, who later admitted he 
had nicked the ball, was on 30 at the time but went on to finish unbeaten on 
162.

India's players would not comment on decisions for fear of breaching the code 
of conduct but Chauhan said the team felt robbed. "I would like to express the 
sentiment of the team. The way the umpiring was, the team is agitated and 
upset. A lot of decisions have gone against us - of course a few went against 
the Australians also, but it really affected us.

"Had some of the decisions, I would say 50% of the decisions, been in our 
favour, the result would have been different."
 