
When the Atlanta Hawks played the Oklahoma City Thunder on 30 November a 
Philips Arena, the first press conference that night wasn’t with a basketball 
player. Instead Atlanta rapper Jeezy weighed in onKobe Bryant’s retirement 
announcement <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cVN7kUXJL28>, while reminiscing 
over Hawks superstar Dominique Wilkins performances during the late 80s and 
early 90s. He argued that his 2008 song Put On would make a great Hawks theme 
and sported a T-shirt with his face on it alongside a Hawks logo on the sleeve.

Inside Philips Arena, the rapper’s own logo – an angry snowman – was projected 
on to the court, in 3-D and at nearly 30 feet tall 
<https://twitter.com/MinaAnnLee/status/671513119672373248>, as Jeezy performed 
at halftime and after the game. The former was broadcast live, at the Philips 
Arena gift shops sold Jeezy’s T-shirt and new album Church in the Streets by 
the bundle. But the NBA franchise wasn’t always so keen to make rap stars part 
of the furniture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32847a3fa5127433e593584ee19a8cc48c5fe2c9%2F0_134_4105_2463%2F4105.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hard%20in%20the%20Paint%3A%20how%20the%20Atlanta%20Hawks%20learned%20to%20love%20hip-hop%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hard%20in%20the%20Paint%3A%20how%20the%20Atlanta%20Hawks%20learned%20to%20love%20hip-hop%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32847a3fa5127433e593584ee19a8cc48c5fe2c9%2F0_134_4105_2463%2F4105.jpg>
 Atlanta Hawks forward Kent Bazemore (24) shoots against the Toronto Raptors. 
Photograph: Dale Zanine/USA Today Sports 
In September 2014, the Hawks published a 2012 email by then-owner Bruce 
Levenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/08/bruce-levenson-atlanta-hawks-email-sterling>
. He wondered if home game attendance was low because the team couldn’t attract 
white males ages 33 to 55. “My theory is that the black crowd scared away the 
whites,” he said, singling out the hip-hop played at the arena as a factor. The 
email arrived a few months after Clippers ownerDonald Sterling was ousted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/28/donald-sterling-racism-la-clippers-owner>
, because he was caught on tape telling his girlfriend “In your lousy fucking 
Instagrams, you don’t have to have yourself with, walking with black people”. 
People such as Magic Johnson.

The email was just the latest instance of “hip-hop culture” clashing with the 
NBA. In the 90s Michigan’s Fab Five stormed the NCAA with long shorts, black 
Nike sneakers, trash talk and a flashier playing style influenced by street 
ball and rap. In the 90s, former commissioner David Stern implemented a 
league-wide dress code that banned XXXL T-shirts, baggy jeans and Timbalands 
from being worn courtside (it was dubbed “the AI rule 
<http://onlyagame.wbur.org/2015/10/24/nba-dress-code-anniversary-carmelo-anthony>
” for its rumored target – 76ers franchise star Allen Iverson). While some 
league higher-ups and sportswriters have historically feared a“hip-hop 
mentality” 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=gkt_DYq1b7kC&pg=PA114&lpg=PA114&dq=dave+zirin,+hip+hop+mentality&source=bl&ots=FxOGKcjpYq&sig=CD9qmK1nzwkkRg7SxHptLxLV_T8&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwizxcOMgsDJAhUE1CYKHRLQBlsQ6AEIHTAA#v=onepage&q=dave%20zirin%2C%20hip%20hop%20mentality&f=false>
 taking over the sport.

Rather than repeat NBA <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nba> history, 
though, the Hawks chose to embrace hip-hop instead.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d2a7351809fbda34ec8e8cfbe97f5c0c75421d9%2F152_55_1598_2396%2F1598.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hard%20in%20the%20Paint%3A%20how%20the%20Atlanta%20Hawks%20learned%20to%20love%20hip-hop%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hard%20in%20the%20Paint%3A%20how%20the%20Atlanta%20Hawks%20learned%20to%20love%20hip-hop%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4d2a7351809fbda34ec8e8cfbe97f5c0c75421d9%2F152_55_1598_2396%2F1598.jpg>
 Steve Koonin: ‘I don’t look at the world through my prism.’ Photograph: Picasa 
The week before the Oklahoma game, Steve Koonin is wearing sunglasses inside 
his downtown office. This isn’t to copy the rappers who come through, he 
insists: “I’m a wuss who got his eyes dilated and can’t see.” But his vision is 
clear when it comes to how the Hawks needed to embrace rather than reject their 
city’s connection to rap. When he talks the NBA’s relationship with hip-hop he 
speaks from firsthand experience.

Before he became CEO and part-owner of the Hawks last April, he was 
Coca-Cola’s vice-president of consumer marketing. From the late 90s to early 
00s he saw Sprite become the official drink of the NBA, its ads featuring the 
likes of Mos Def. This was as OutKast and Jermaine Dupri informed the city’s 
cultural identity, paving the way for artists who have sat courtside at 
Philips: TI, Jeezy, 2 Chainz.

“What they’ve lacked here is local accountability, and that’s where I’m going 
to come in,” Koonin said toGrantland 
<http://grantland.com/the-triangle/the-atlanta-hawks-stand-on-the-verge-of-getting-it-on/>
 of the Hawks. “To be more accountable, and to be part of the community.”

“I don’t look at the world through my prism,” Koonin says. “I look at it 
through my audience – that’s one of the things TV taught me.”

As a lifelong Atlanta <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/atlanta> resident, 
Koonin gets how local rappers have inspired hometown pride. In order to book 
them for Hawks games, however, he relies on Peter Sorckoff. When he was a 
director of games starting in 2003, Sorckoff worked alongside Ryan Cameron, 
radio veteran and Hawks PA announcer of the past decade. Through Cameron, who 
had interns like Ludacris at Atlanta’s first rap station Hot 97.5, Sorckoff met 
local hip-hop figures like Chaka Zulu, co-founder of Luda’s label Disturbing 
Tha Peace, and Hannah Kang, general manager at TI’s label Grand Hustle. He also 
helped hire Sir Foster, the organist who fields Twitter requests to play songs 
like Future’s March Madness at games.

Trap kings: how the hip-hop sub-genre dominated the decade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/13/trap-kings-how-hip-hop-sub-genre-dominated-decade>
“The more I started to learn about who some of the artists were and what their 
inspirations were and what their backgrounds were, it became really 
fascinating,” Sorckoff says. “These people feel really passionate about these 
guys, but people don’t feel really passionate about us.”

 No one argued with Levenson’s point about home game attendance; the Hawks 
have struggled to cultivate a loyal fan base since before he owned the team. 
“Atlanta has galvanized itself around big events, big conventions, big 
concerts,” says Brad Rowland, writer for Peachtree Hoops. “The Hawks have never 
felt like an event – a big deal. They play 41 home games, and that’s it.”

 But the rest of Levenson’s remarks didn’t make sense to those who work 
closest with the team now. This included Cameron, who was a season ticket 
holder before he became the PA announcer. “Everyone in that email, I had a 
great relationship with,” he said. “Imagine having a great relationship with 
somebody, then finding out that they’re not a fan of you or what you do.”

 During his first season in 2009 with the Hawks, Sir Foster’s favorite songs 
to play were OJ da Juiceman’s Make the Trap Say Aye, Waka Flocka Flame’s Hard 
in Da Paint and Gucci Mane’s Wasted. “My hip-hop based setlists have never 
really been an issue that I’ve known of,” he says. “I’ve always gotten a great 
fan response, whether it was with older people or five-year-olds. It was one of 
the reasons why that email surprised me.”

 Going into the 2014-15 season, Koonin and Sorckoff agreed that the team’s 
priority wasn’t business, and certainly not as Levenson envisioned. It was to 
re-establish trust with the city. What they did next responded directly to that 
email.

 Sorckoff called the Hawks broadcasting partner Fox Sports Southeast. Jeff 
Genthner, senior vice president and general manager, agreed to move commercial 
breaks around so that they could broadcast the pregame and halftime shows live.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f046bb56463c51e231801e010ecf9b2c1062d0c%2F0_132_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hard%20in%20the%20Paint%3A%20how%20the%20Atlanta%20Hawks%20learned%20to%20love%20hip-hop%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hard%20in%20the%20Paint%3A%20how%20the%20Atlanta%20Hawks%20learned%20to%20love%20hip-hop%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f046bb56463c51e231801e010ecf9b2c1062d0c%2F0_132_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Jeezy at the Atlanta Hawks. Photograph: Zach Wolfe/Atlanta Hawks 
 Sorckoff then called TI’s label Grand Hustle. Years ago, Grand Hustle general 
manager Kang had pitched former owners the Atlanta Spirit a campaign that would 
align the Hawks with its homegrown hip-hop: “I Am the A.” (“Why aren’t we 
utilizing the TIs, the Jeezys, the Jermaine Dupris?” she remembers thinking.) 
That never got off the ground, though TI did end up performing at two Hawks 
games, in 2007 and 2009. This time the team wanted TI to perform pregame, 
halftime and postgame shows during the 2014 season opener; he would bring out 
Young Thug for radio hit About the Money.

 Koonin filmed a promo for that game with TI. The Hawks CEO had envisioned the 
two of them as furniture salesmen, though the part where “Stevie K” says “Fo 
shizzle” wasn’t scripted. It made the cut, went on YouTube and embarrassed his 
adult children.

 That game sold out. Months later 2 Chainz – who had a fledgling basketball 
career – performed and played Wilkins in a game of Horse, while Ludacris 
brought out Jermaine Dupri for Welcome to Atlanta. Rich Homie Quan did the 
following season’s opener, while Big Boi and Phantogram’s Big Grams made its 
live Atlanta debut. Koonin almost did the Nae Nae on camera to promote upcoming 
guest Silento, but his children – stung by his previous outing – protested. 
Meanwhile, he has seen $18 tickets quadruple in price on resale sites, the day 
that the Hawks hosts such concerts.

“The day we had Big Boi, the walk-in price was $75 on StubHub and there were 
literally 3,000 tickets sold that day,” he says.

No one would argue that these concerts worked alone to help Hawks sell out its 
fourth consecutive season opener and 20 consecutive gamesas of 27 October 
<http://www.bizjournals.com/atlanta/news/2015/10/27/atlanta-hawks-sell-out-season-opener.html>
, to draw bigger ratings from millennials than in previous years. Wins draw 
crowds most reliably, and last season the Hawks were Eastern Conference 
finalists for the first time in franchise history. New uniforms and those court 
projections were also part of the face lift.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBSL4mm7P4ak&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBSL4mm7P4ak>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBSL4mm7P4ak&media=>
 Sir Foster plays Wiz Khalifa’s Black and Yellow. 
“This is almost a case study on how a local team and a local team’s rights 
holder can collaborate, not just on music but on creating a bigger, fuller 
entertainment package in an arena that then gets transferred on to the 
telecast,” says Jeff Genthner, senior vice-president and general manager at Fox 
Sports Southeast. “I’ve been doing this for a long time, and it’s very exciting 
to work with the Hawks on these types of things.”

 But as Rowland wrote for Peachtree Hoops 
<http://www.peachtreehoops.com/2014/11/2/7144659/al-horford-atlanta-hawks-nba-spectacle>
, to witness these changes has been to see Atlanta reflected inside Philips 
Arena: “Now, we had a Grammy award winner appearing on three different 
occasions in the same night, a jam-packed building despite a mediocre opponent 
with no ‘star’ appeal and the best player in recent franchise history back in 
his natural habitat. To drive the point home, this was a confluence of 
everything that makes the franchise, and the city, unique and fantastic.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb372ba2e5163fa2f7be718a251cd11c1628cefc6%2F0_353_3248_1948%2F3248.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hard%20in%20the%20Paint%3A%20how%20the%20Atlanta%20Hawks%20learned%20to%20love%20hip-hop%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hard%20in%20the%20Paint%3A%20how%20the%20Atlanta%20Hawks%20learned%20to%20love%20hip-hop%20again&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fdec%2F07%2Fatlanta-hawks-hip-hop-basketball%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb372ba2e5163fa2f7be718a251cd11c1628cefc6%2F0_353_3248_1948%2F3248.jpg>
 The organ grinder: Sir Foster. Photograph: Scott Cunningham/NBAE/Getty Images 
An hour prior to Monday’s game, where Kang and 2 Chainz sat courtside 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/-u6_tuvc9f/?taken-by=mshannahkang>, that 
confluence was starting to form inside Philips Arena. Big Tigger, of BET’s Rap 
City and now at V-103, was at the turntables. Sir Foster rehearsed Ciara’s Body 
Party on the organ, while Ryan Cameron sat at the scorer’s table.

Meanwhile, I asked Jeezy at the press conference whether he thinks Hawks 
rebounded from last year’s controversy. “I’m not very familiar from the 
situation. But I can just tell you that as a representative of the city and as 
a resident, life goes on. We continue to play ball and make music. It didn’t 
really stop them.”

You could hear him try to find his words. But he didn’t have to understand 
what happened. The Hawks made sure of it.
 