
British sitcoms have a history of resorting to crude stereotypes when it comes 
to portraying foreign characters – 70s sitcoms such as It Ain’t Half Hot, Mum 
and Mind Your Language are considered too racist to rebroadcast, even in these 
times of numerous re-run channels. Some would argue that these stereotypes have 
now simply relocated from sitcoms to Top Gear, so it’s perhaps surprising to 
find this week’s schedules book-ended by comedies that feature foreign 
characters.

 On Monday night BBC4 broadcast the first part of Asylum, a three-part farce 
inspired by Julian Assange’s predicament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/10/asylum-sitcom-julian-assange-ben-miller-review>
, with Ben Miller as Dan Hern, a GCHQ analyst who, after leaking CIA secrets, 
takes refuge in the London embassy of a Latin American nation. His protectors 
include Castillo, a suave diplomat, and Rosa, an attractive young woman. And 
Friday sees the last part of the seventh series of Benidorm (ITV, 9pm), the 
Spanish holiday comedy which (along with its generic ancestor Duty Free) is 
among the small number of British sit-coms set abroad.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fhas-british-comedy-learned-how-to-portray-foreigners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423574000018%2Fced8bef5-9b57-4484-9bff-6222b8a5cb9a-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20British%20comedy%20learned%20how%20to%20portray%20foreigners%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fhas-british-comedy-learned-how-to-portray-foreigners%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20British%20comedy%20learned%20how%20to%20portray%20foreigners%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F10%2Fhas-british-comedy-learned-how-to-portray-foreigners%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F10%2F1423574000018%2Fced8bef5-9b57-4484-9bff-6222b8a5cb9a-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Ruth Madoc in Benidorm. Photograph: ITV 
 Asylum uses two tricks to claim diplomatic immunity against suggestions of 
international insensitivity. The Latin American territory that grants sanctuary 
to Miller’s character is fictional, which means that any offence would have to 
be taken by – or protests would have to come from – a very large geographical 
region. And, in a common contemporary solution to accusations of racism, the 
Latin Americans – acted by Kayvan Novak and Yasmine Akram - are smarter and 
classier than the English characters: the targets of most of the gags are the 
egotism and cowardice of Hern and Ludo Backslash, an inane hacker also seeking 
asylum (played by Dustin Demri-Burns).

It’s typical of the international dynamics that, while Hern is desperate to 
seduce Rosa, she rejects his approaches with contempt in a reverse of the power 
relationship between, say, Basil Fawlty and his non-anglophone waiter, Manuel, 
played byAndrew Sachs <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/andrew-sachs>.

 It seems unimaginable now that a Spanish character as hapless as Manuel would 
be permitted in a new BBC comedy – and certainly not if played by a British 
actor. In ITV peak-time, however, the descendants of Manuel still exist and – 
possibly rather depressingly for the Spanish ambassador to the UK – are still 
occupying much the same line of work. Benidorm has a Spanish bartender, Mateo 
(Jake Canuso), just as Duty Free had a Spanish waiter called Carlos and the 
students in Mind Your Language included Juan, a bartender from Spain.

 It’s unfair, though, to suggest that there has not been some progress in the 
depiction of the delivery of drinks by Spaniards on British television. Mateo 
in Benidorm speaks much better English than Andrew Sachs was ever allowed to 
and, in an exchange at the start of Friday’s episode, gets the better of his 
English boss in a conversation that turns on the correct useage of the word 
“what” – which feels like a knowing use of the translation of Manuel’s famous 
catch-phrase.

 In both Benidorm and Asylum, the more careful writing of dialogue is 
complemented by the casting of actors who have at least some non-English 
heritage (although not necessarily Spanish or Latin American) and this should 
help the series avoid joining those 1970s xenophobia shows on the never-repeat 
shelf. Asylum in particular, by showing foreigners becoming exasperated with 
the idiotic English, marks a significant entry in the embassy book of 
condolence for the sort of shows we used to make.
 