
You wouldn't really expect people to get het up about Roger & Val Have Just 
Got In. It's not a show that trumpets its brilliance, or demands that viewers 
take notice of it. Quite the opposite: it's the tale of an average married 
couple, doing average married couple things in a 30s semi. But it's either one 
of the most captivating shows on television or a complete pile of unfunny tosh, 
depending on which side of the great Roger & Val divide one sits.

For me, it's the former. I love the show for all the reasons that other people 
can't get on with it: the lack of proper gags, a focus on the minutiae of 
relationships, the faceless spectre ofPam Bagnall. It might not be comedy as we 
know it, but Roger & Val manages to mix beautifully written dialogue with a 
quiet observational humour that can nevertheless leave the viewer gasping for 
air like Roger, on the stairs with a paper bag, shouting "Panic Attack!"

Much of this is down to the script. Writers Beth and Emma Kilcoyne (they are 
twins) manage to capture the essence of a relationship with astonishing 
affection, joy and empathy. There are elements that are universally 
recognisable – the gentle squabbles over dinner preparations, the bolstering of 
self worth, the instinct to protect your partner from hurt – but instead of 
slipping over into sitcom cliche, the conversations are so real, so unforced, 
that at times it feels like you're eavesdropping. Small things like Val's lamp 
obsession are done so beautifully, with such subtlety, that they underline the 
big moments as utterly, heartbreakingly perfect.

This darkness that lies beneath the couple's everyday chatter is the great 
strength of Roger & Val. (Or Val's everyday chatter, at any rate – Rog needs no 
excuse to embark on self-analysis). The second series has built on that 
terrible moment from the first, when we learnt that the couple's baby had died. 
Roger has a grownup son he's never known, and Val's faith in her husband is 
understandably shaken. The end of Wednesday night's episode – Val standing 
silently before the window, wrenched apart by her loss once more – was a 
brilliant piece of television.

I have never seen Dawn French perform better than she does here, in what is 
effectively, from an acting point of view, a straight role – Mrs Danvers 
costume aside. And she is more than matched byAlfred Molina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alfred-molina> as Roger, the complicated, 
leftwing botanist who adores her more than anything in the world. Watching them 
potter about their comfortable, cluttered house, ostensibly not doing much 
while really tackling enormous questions, I do sometimes have to remind myself 
that they are not actually a real couple, so in tune do they seem.

For some, Roger & Val is too stagey. And admittedly, it could be transplanted 
to stage with very few changes. The format, with events unfolding in real time 
and the pair never stepping outside; the dialogue; the conceit of a great 
supporting cast that we never see – these are all things that shouldn't really 
work on television, but somehow look fresh and new in these capable hands.

I wouldn't hesitate to call Roger & Val one of the best British dramas on 
screen – and French and Molina's performances as good as anything you'll see on 
TV this week. Whether or how funny the show is to me seems besides the point – 
it is absolutely essential TV. And I'm glad to report that next week's final 
instalment is an absolute cracker.
 