
As demonstrated by both Bernard Wood's official evaluation 
<http://www.odi.org.uk/events/presentations/907.pdf> (pdf) and an excellent 
Save the Children UK 
<http://www.savethechildren.org.uk/resources/online-library/healthier-returns-making-aid-healthcare-more-effective>
 report, some of the best evidence on what has and hasn't worked in relation to 
aid over the past five years is on health.

But if you want a really interesting view of the reality of aid in a 
particular context, ask people who aren't directly involved in the aid 
industry. In a side meeting at theBusan forum on aid effectiveness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/fourth-high-level-forum-on-aid-effectiveness>
, I found doctors and parliamentarians sharing their views on how to make aid 
work better for health.

The picture they painted was of health professionals, parliamentarians and 
civil society trying to get a hold on the vast flows of cash arriving in the 
country for health services, but over which they felt they had little or no 
control. Crucially, it became clear that the choice sometimes offered between 
achieving greater inclusivity by bringingChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> on board, or deepening aid 
effectiveness commitments for traditional donors, is a false one. Both are 
important in making aid work better.

It was felt that the course set by the Paris declaration on aid effectiveness 
<http://www.oecd.org/document/18/0,2340,en_2649_3236398_35401554_1_1_1_1,00.html#Paris>
, with its focus on using country strategies and systems, had been broadly 
right. If money really had been put through systems for some years, it was felt 
that outcomes (not just short-term results, but sustainable capacity 
development) would have been far better.

But while some things improved under Paris, with a number of countries 
developing national-level strategies for health, the incentives for donors to 
seek attribution rather than contribution were still great. In other words, 
supporting progress by backing systems does not sell as much as building a new 
health centre yourself and sticking your banner on it.

Busan's stronger language – on transparency, on using systems as a "default", 
and seeking an end to aid dependence – therefore struck a chord.

The health professionals strongly favoured a "whole of society" approach, with 
parliamentarians in particular at the centre of the accountability mix. Vast 
amounts of aid money still come into many countries with no parliamentary 
oversight. Not long ago, the role of parliament was considered an optional 
extra by donors eager to push through policies regardless of process; now, that 
is changing. Parliamentarians spoke at the final plenary of the Busan 
conference, and links between parliaments in north and south are being 
emphasised.

Civil society also needs to be more engaged at country level. While there are 
some tendencies in the academic literature to de-prioritise the "demand" side – 
that is, citizens claiming their rights – the experience of the International 
Health Partnership is that a participatory approach, focusing on information 
sharing and involving citizens in decision-making, leads to better outcomes.

But what about China? The notion that we can continue a sensible debate about 
aid effectiveness at country level without including Chinese aid and investment 
flows has become untenable.

According to Dr Lola Dare, of the African Council for Sustainable Health 
Development, substantially more than $800m worth of aid is spent on health in 
Nigeria every year, about 58% of total aid and more than Nigeria itself spends. 
She told a story of one $52m health programme in 2005. None of the money came 
through the state or local government, and the results of which were not clear 
to her or her colleagues. Then, to their surprise, the programme was extended 
with a further $115m. Who was being held accountable for these interventions? 
No one inNigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, as far as they 
knew.

China, in some ways, is just one more unaccountable donor. The country's 
contribution to global aid may still be in single digits, but that masks its 
crucial involvement in particular target countries where it is a major donor, 
such as Cambodia, Nepal, Zambia, Sudan and the Democratic Republic of the 
Congo. In a$9bn aid and investment deal with Congo in 2008 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/newsnight/7343060.stm>, for example, 
China set out to construct 32 hospitals and 145 health centres, as well as the 
roads and railways for which it is better known.

What sense would it make for donors to Congo to sit down and plan health 
strategies without China being at the table? Just as with any aid money, this 
spending needs to be held accountable. And China has a very particular attitude 
to accountability. At a seminar organised by the Korea International 
Co-operation Agency, a Chinese professor explained his country's aid 
philosophy: "When we have built the roads, it is over to you … we have done our 
part."

Without suggesting the Chinese attitude is better than the west's obsession 
with monitoring and evaluation, it is not necessarily worse. Decomplexifying 
accountability – in other words, knowing who to blame for what – is crucial in 
development. The pigeon-step forward taken at Busan to further engage the 
Chinese and others in development discussions is surely a good thing.

But, after five years of trying to implement the aid effectiveness agenda, 
perhaps the most important lesson for the health sector is that waiting for 
international donors to get their house in order could require considerable 
patience. Things are getting more complicated, not less. Incentives are 
changing, and not necessarily for the better, as economies fail and competition 
among donors rears its head. Even multilateral donors such as theGlobal Fund to 
fight Aids, TB and Malaria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/global-fund-to-fight-aids-tuberculosis-and-malaria>
, the World Health Organisation and Unicef still use different and ineffective 
systems.

The only sensible course of action for a poor country is to take the lead 
itself, trying to make sense of a complex range of ineffective actors, and not 
wasting too much time hoping for radical changes at a global level. They could 
start by saying no to foreign money that doesn't fit best practice guidelines.
 