
Pool One

A tough old group, which is hard on the young Scarlets team that probably does 
not have enough up front. Perhaps in another year, but it's hard to look beyond 
Northampton, who came within 40 minutes of winning theHeineken Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/heineken-cup> last time, and Munster, the 
two-times winners who have bags of pedigree. They know each other well and this 
time it's Northampton's turn to go away from home first up and Thomond still 
has that aura about it, even if Harlequins did dent Munster's pride last 
season. That said, this is the group where anyone can beat anyone on their day 
and while Castres don't often get out of the pool stages themselves, they 
frequently have a say in who does and, despite going off the boil a bit in the 
past couple of weeks, are still third in the Top 14.

Prediction Northampton <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/northamptonsaints>, 
Munster, Castres, Scarlets

Pool Two

The underachievers and the new boys. London Irish have flattered and Cardiff 
Blues <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/cardiffblues> frequently haven't 
punched their weight in the Heineken, while Edinburgh have only got out of the 
pool stages once and Racing had a poor first season, considering the talent 
available to them. This time, however, I think Blues will get off to a decent 
start in Paris where the Stade Yves-du-Manoir in Colombes is a good patch to 
play on. They have Sam Warburton, Gethin Jenkins, Bradley Davies, Lloyd 
Williams, Jamie Roberts and Leigh Halfpenny back from the World Cup whereas 
Racing are without Frans Steyn, Mirco Bergamasco and Benjamin Sa, while 
Sébastien Chabal is currently off song. I like what I've seen of Dan Bowden 
running the Irish attack, but there are questions about the pack and strength 
in depth.

Prediction Blues, London Irish <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/londonirish>
, Racing, Edinburgh

Pool Three


Leinster, ranked first in Europe and currently second in the Pro12, have more 
Heineken pedigree than the other three put together – and that's counting 
Bath's win back in 1998. Losing Brian O'Driscoll would hurt any side, but I 
can't see the Irish struggling, although I would back Bath to go through to the 
knockout stages with them. Montpellier, a team of many, many nationalities, 
seem to be struggling near the bottom of the Top 14. Their World Cup men lost 
valuable game-time together when last week's match was cancelled by an outbreak 
of mumps in Lyon. Bath aren't anywhere near their fluid best yet, but Leinster 
seemed to have timed things really well with a good win over Munster last 
weekend ahead of the French opener whichMontpellier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/montpellier> have moved to the 33,000 Stade 
de la Mosson.

Prediction Leinster <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leinster>, Bath (qual), 
Montpellier, Glasgow

Pool Four


Look at Clermont's squad sheet and you wonder why they've never gone further 
than the quarter-finals. Look at their form guide – eight wins from their last 
eight at home in the Heineken, but only two from nine on the road – and you get 
a clue and I still fancy Leicester to know enough to squeeze through. But it 
will be tight, especially as Clermont have been buying again with Sitiveni 
Sivivatu probably the biggest signing in Europe this summer while theLeicester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/leicestertigers> back division might be a 
little on the light side. It could even go down to the odd bonus point here and 
there. The Leicester-Clermont double-header just before Christmas will 
obviously be key, although no one in their right mind will be thinking that a 
visit to Ravenhill, with the wind and rain blowing in off the Belfast Lough, is 
easy pickings.

Prediction Leicester, Clermont, Ulster, Aironi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/aironi>

Pool Five


I know French sides are written off too easily, but Biarritz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/biarritz> – twice runners-up and twice 
semi-finalists, real Heineken heavyweights, – are in the Top 14 basement, just 
one win from nine and their last result a 41-0 defeat to Clermont. Dimitri 
Yachvili and Imanol Harinordoquy, who worked wonders for France in New Zealand, 
have their hands full if they are to get a decent start at Ospreys on Saturday. 
Conversely, Ospreys sit on top of the Pro12 and from what I saw at the World 
Cup, have bought wisely in signing the Samoan scrum-half, Kahn Fotuali'i. 
However, it's the English champions, Saracens, who have been behaving like a 
side bent on a serious European campaign. They are winning their league matches 
without overtiring key players and have a nicely balanced squad. And I fancy 
Ospreys to go through with them.

Prediction Saracens <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/saracens>, Ospreys 
(qual), Biarritz, Treviso

Pool Six


Now for a gamble. Conventional wisdom says you win a Premiership title before 
a Heineken Cup – although Wasps did it other way round – and I have a sneaking 
feeling that, with games against Connacht first and thenGloucester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gloucesterrugby>, Harlequins will have 
gained the momentum for the pre-Christmas double-header against Toulouse and 
that this is one of those rare years when the four-times winners don't get to 
the quarter-finals. I know they sit on top of their French league, but guys 
like Byron Kelleher and Cédric Heymans, who know how to win big European games, 
have gone. Mind you, with the Harlequins forwards, I do have a bit of trouble 
with another slice of conventional wisdom: that your pack gets you out of the 
pool stage and your backs win the knockouts.

Prediction Quins, Toulouse, Gloucester, Connacht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/connacht>
 