
Heinrich Schiff, who has died aged 65, was recognised as one of the finest 
cellists of the last quarter of the 20th century, and latterly established a 
parallel career as a distinguished conductor. After suffering a serious stroke 
in 2008, which left him partly paralysed for a time, he was obliged to abandon 
his career as a soloist but continued to conduct.

His repertoire as an instrumentalist ran from Bach, whose solo cello suites he 
played with particular distinction, throughShostakovich 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2621Fw6_UCI> – his recordings of the two cello 
concertos remain benchmarks – to contemporary music, with which he also had an 
affinity. He was known as a versatile but focused artist whose musicianship was 
enriched by his historically informed approach to style. Having played the 
baroque cello as a student, he developed a personal style that successfully 
combined historicist principles with modern techniques. He insisted, for 
example, on using the urtext scores, drawn from original versions, forHaydn’s 
two cello concertos <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JiHiOSAbITg>, and his lean 
and lithe playing of Bach <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-K7_u37QfP4>, with 
its stylistically aware phrasing and articulation, won him many plaudits.

In 1986 he made his conducting debut, which was followed by appointments with 
the Northern Sinfonia (1990-96, before its Royal title), and Vienna Chamber 
Orchestra (2005-08), among others. In addition to accomplished interpretations 
of the classical repertory, includinghigh-octane readings of Beethoven 
symphonies <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GZxN57CC_AA>, he was known for his 
encouragement of contemporary music, giving the premieres of works by John 
Casken, Friedrich Cerha, Luciano Berio, Hans Werner Henze and Krzysztof 
Penderecki. His chamber partners included the violinist Frank Peter Zimmermann 
and pianist Leif Ove Andsnes, and he recorded Beethoven’s complete works for 
cello and piano with Till Fellner (1998). The cellists Gautier Capuçon, Truls 
Mørk and Natalie Clein were among his notable pupils.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLqeOw5UBPDI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLqeOw5UBPDI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DLqeOw5UBPDI&media=>
 Heinrich Schiff performing Schumann’s Cello Concerto 
Born in Gmunden, Austria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria>, to Helga 
(nee Riemann) and Helmut Schiff, both composers, Heinrich studied the cello 
with Tobias Kühne and André Navarra, making his solo debuts in Vienna and 
London in 1971. He subsequently studied conducting with Hans Swarovsky and made 
his podium debut in 1986.

His playing of the Bach suites was distinctive. The preludes would be sculpted 
with sweeping gestures, while the following movements unfolded lines in which 
semiquavers might be given short shrift but which straddled the barline and 
pulsated with life. Above all they danced and sang.

In the big concertos of the Romantic repertory he deployed a more generously 
upholstered tone, but one that was always centred. If it was the energy and 
dynamism of his readings of the Shostakovich concertos that struck the listener 
most forcefully, they were often tellingly poignant, too. His 1985 recordings 
of those works won him the Grand Prix du Disque. His accounts of the Schumann 
and Dvořák concertos were alert to their demonstrative and introverted 
qualities alike.In the Elgar, too <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ef02yQbuVAE>
, he tapped the vein of wistfulness to memorable effect, and for his recording 
of the Brahms Double Concerto he was joined by Zimmermann, with Wolfgang 
Sawallisch conducting.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2621Fw6_UCI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2621Fw6_UCI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2621Fw6_UCI&media=>
 Heinrich Schiff in Shostakovich’s Cello Concerto No 1 
He played with many leading orchestras and conductors including Claudio 
Abbado, Riccardo Chailly, Bernard Haitink and Simon Rattle, as well asNikolaus 
Harnoncourt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/06/nikolaus-harnoncourt-obituary> 
andCharles Mackerras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/jul/15/sir-charles-mackerras-obituary>, 
whose historically informed approach he shared.

Speaking about the technical aspect of performance, Schiff emphasised the 
importance of practising scales and exercises to develop and maintain finger 
velocity and bowing mastery alike. In such exercises, he believed, 
craftsmanship could be separated from emotional expression, the better to 
perfect one’s technical control. They also helped to develop physical fitness: 
“‘You have to be fitter than required andyou have to have more skill than needed
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YuAzpXPpmmo>,” he maintained.

Of the works written for him, Casken’s concerto of 1991 opens with the cello 
“singing” a five-line haiku of the composer’s own by expressing it in a lyrical 
way while observing the syllabic structure. According to Casken, Schiff was 
able in performance to make that introduction, and indeed the whole work, “sing 
and dance in ways I had not thought possible”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-K7_u37QfP4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-K7_u37QfP4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-K7_u37QfP4&media=>
 Heinrich Schiff in Bach’s Suite No 3 for Cello 
Schiff similarly exploited the long, singing lines of the concerto by Cerha, 
which he premiered in 1998, bringing it to the BBC Proms the following year. He 
also performed works with orchestra by less well known composers, including 
Johannes Maria Staud and Otto M Zykan.

As a conductor, Schiff transformed the sound of the Northern Sinfonia during 
his time as its artistic director. The string sections of other orchestras with 
which he worked, including the Copenhagen Philharmonic (1996-2000) and the 
Orchester Musikkollegium Winterthur, also benefited greatly from his experience.

His manner could be brusque and some found him difficult, but the twinkle in 
his eye, his sense of humour and a somewhat roguish manner made him very 
characterful. He could be generous, but did not like to have his wishes 
ignored, and woe betide the photographer who decided to snap him, having been 
asked not to. In 2003 he began a concert with the Munich Chamber Orchestra with 
a declaration against the decision to invade Iraq.

Schiff is survived by his older brother, Christian, also a musician.

• Heinrich Schiff, cellist, born 18 November 1951; died 23 December 2016
 