
It is entirely apt given the government used the budget as its de facto 
election campaign launch that we now find after the election result that the 
budget is completely trashed.

Launching the campaign so closely after the budget meant none of the key 
measures contained in it have been presented before parliament. That budget 
included a large number of spending cuts which failed to get through the old 
parliament; they have even less of a chance now. In the old parliament, the 
issue was the merely the Senate, now there is a strong possibility the cuts 
wouldn’t even pass the lower house.

The Coalition might be able to get the numbers to stay in government, but not 
to keep its budget.

And as a result, all those nice shiny figures in the May budget showing a path 
back to surplus are now just figments of Scott Morrison’s imagination.

In fairness they always were – the ALP was right to compare their budget 
figures with those of the LNP minus the zombie measures – measures that had 
first been in the 2014-15 budget but which were still included in the budget 
figures because they made the deficit look smaller.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fwhat-happens-if-we-end-up-with-a-hung-parliament-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happens%20if%20we%20end%20up%20with%20a%20hung%20parliament%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fwhat-happens-if-we-end-up-with-a-hung-parliament-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happens%20if%20we%20end%20up%20with%20a%20hung%20parliament%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fwhat-happens-if-we-end-up-with-a-hung-parliament-video&media=>
What happens if we end up with a hung parliament? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jul/03/what-happens-if-we-end-up-with-a-hung-parliament-video>
Australian budget 2016: the graphs you need to see
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/04/australian-budget-2016-the-graphs-you-need-to-see>
While the old Senate was tough enough, the likelihood is that the Coalition 
will need nine extra votes to get legislation passed in the new Senate. On the 
current numbers, that looks like being every non-ALP or Greens senator.

Hello, Pauline, Derryn, Nick, Jacqui and others, sit down, let’s negotiate.

Cripes.

And it probably means the government’s centrepiece of company tax cuts is also 
dead – although on this score the budget damage shouldn’t be too great because 
the big impacts were only to arrive once the big businesses were to get a tax 
cut in 2023-24:

Derryn Hinch has previously suggested he will support the small business cuts, 
so there will be deals to be done there, but the big bold 10-year plan looks to 
be in tatters.

And it comes at a point when the economy is clearly faltering – and certainly 
has a worse outlook that it did at the start of the campaign (without factoring 
in the impact of a hung parliament).

When the election campaign began nearly two months ago, the world economy was 
marked by a sense of fragility and slow growth. The IMF’sworld economic outlook 
<http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2016/01/pdf/text.pdf> suggested that 
Britain leaving the EU could do severe regional and global damage by disrupting 
established trading relationships. The OECD in itsJune outlook 
<http://www.oecd.org/eco/outlook/OECD-Economic-Outlook-June-2016-handout.pdf> 
suggested a Brexit would cause GDP across the OECD to be 0.6 percentage points 
lower in 2020 than it otherwise would have been.

And so that slow, fragile growth has been given a fairly large bump – right at 
a time we didn’t need it to happen.

Last Thursday, the latest figures 
<http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/6354.0?OpenDocument> showed that in 
the May quarter there were 169,400 job vacancies (seasonally adjusted), a fall 
of 1.8% from the 172,600 in the February quarter. This was worst fall in job 
vacancies since 2013:

 Because of a decline in the participation rate, this hasn’t flowed through to 
a situation where the fight for work is harder – the number of unemployed per 
vacancy across Australia is at the lowest level since 2012:

 The 4.2 unemployed per vacancy is down on the rate for November and February, 
but if the participation rate had stayed where it was in November, there would 
be now 4.5 unemployed per vacancy. So if the fight to get a job has improved it 
is not so much because there are more jobs on offer, but because some of those 
looking for work have given up.

One other measure of the weaker outlook for our economy is that since the 
start of the campaign the bond yield curve for Australian government bonds has 
significantly flattened. While the interest rate (or yield) for two-year bonds 
has not changed, the yield for 10-year bonds has fallen from 2.32% to a record 
low 1.98%:

 The flattening of the yield curve suggests that the outlook is one of slowing 
growth (the flatter the curve is, the worse the outlook, and when the curve 
slopes downwards, that is a sign of a recession to come).

 This is due to a number of things, but mostly the fact that after the Brexit 
vote, Australian bonds are viewed as being safe, but with an overall lower 
growth outlook.

The falling yield is also a sign that despite the talk of Australia’s AAA 
credit rating being under threat, investors had few fears before Saturday’s 
vote about the Australian government’s ability to pay its bills.

Last week – despite an election result still being a 50-50 toss up – the 
Australian government 10-year bond yield for the first time ever averaged less 
than 2%:

 It means the Australian government has access to very cheap debt.

Last Monday, the government borrowed $600m for five years at a rate of 1.66% 
<http://aofm.gov.au/outright-tender/tender-883/#results> – lower even than the 
cash rate.

With a cash rate at 1.75%, there is little room for the RBA to cut rates 
should it need to stimulate the economy.

 And yet of course we’ve just undergone an election campaign in which the 
horrors of the ALP having a cumulative deficit over four years of $16.5bn more 
was taken as some sort of risk.

If the budget was the government's tax white paper, they flubbed it | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/may/05/if-the-budget-was-the-governments-tax-white-paper-they-flubbed-it>
But the reality is the slavish adherence to a budget surplus has utterly 
outgrown the benefits such a move might produce even in terms of keeping our 
AAA credit rating.

 The Liberal party was so keen to appear “stronger economic managers” in the 
eyes of those who only judge this attribute by the budget balance, that it 
produced in the last week of the campaign $2.3bn worth of savings via data 
matching of welfare recipients (now also likely not to be passed).

If the way to keep our AAA credit rating is to make scapegoats out of the 
poorest in society, you really have to question the screwed up sensibilities 
that underpin much of economic policy.

No doubt the make-up of the parliament will have the credit agencies casting 
another eye over their ratings, but perhaps one change to come from this result 
is being more worried about the credit agencies than the state of the economy.

And if you are pursuing a surplus just to keep your credit rating, then it is 
just as well your budget won’t pass the parliament.
 