
In his acting heyday, Clint Eastwood was a taciturn maestro of understatement. 
In his Man With No Name or Dirty Harry periods, one eyebrow raised was usually 
enough to pitch even the most arrogant antagonist into throes of panic and 
self-doubt, while a simple curl of the lip usually signified that the nearest 
dude was a dead man walking. So it comes as no surprise to learn that 
Eastwood’s unusual directing stylemade Tom Hanks extremely nervous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/25/tom-hanks-clint-eastwood-treats-actors-like-horses>
 on the set of the true-life disaster movie Sully.

Tom Hanks: Clint Eastwood 'treats actors like horses'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/25/tom-hanks-clint-eastwood-treats-actors-like-horses>
“You certainly don’t want one of those Eastwood looks,” Hanks told Graham 
Norton, in an episode of the chat show to be screened on BBC 1 on 25 November. 
“He treats his actors like horses, because when he did the 60s series Rawhide, 
the director would shout ‘Action!’ and all the horses bolted. So when he’s in 
charge, he says in a really quiet, soft voice: ‘All right, go ahead,’ and 
instead of shouting ‘Cut!’ he says: ‘That’s enough of that.’ It’s intimidating 
as hell!”

And yet Eastwood’s mildly unorthodox methods surely pale into insignificance 
compared with the behaviour of some of his Hollywood peers. Here are the true 
titans of on-set tyranny – Hollywood’s most difficult directors to work for:

Alejandro González Iñárritu
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffilm-maker-directors-clint-eastwood-tom-hanks-intimidating-as-hell-sully%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda66434e1cfa1a5370b6369ca504fa2b542abef%2F0_0_3508_2335%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hell%20of%20a%20film-maker%3A%20the%20directors%20who%20make%20Clint%20Eastwood%20look%20soft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffilm-maker-directors-clint-eastwood-tom-hanks-intimidating-as-hell-sully%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hell%20of%20a%20film-maker%3A%20the%20directors%20who%20make%20Clint%20Eastwood%20look%20soft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffilm-maker-directors-clint-eastwood-tom-hanks-intimidating-as-hell-sully%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcda66434e1cfa1a5370b6369ca504fa2b542abef%2F0_0_3508_2335%2F3508.jpg>
 Alejandro González Iñárritu and Leonardo DiCaprio during the shoot for The 
Revenant. Photograph: Allstar/20th Century Fox 
The Mexican director was accused of putting cast and crew of his Oscar-winning 
frontiersman epicThe Revenant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant> 
through a “living hell” to indulge his desire to film only in natural light, 
and with minimal use of CGI, in remote parts of Canada in 2015. Whistleblowers 
complained they were forced to work in sub-zero conditions, with temperatures 
unexpectedly dropping to -25C (-13F) during the shoot, and multiple crew 
members quitting under the brutal conditions.

Iñárritu later admitted to making “bad” and “irresponsible” decisions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/18/alejandro-gonzalez-inarritu-the-revenant-shoot-irresponsible-decision>
 during filming, but insisted The Revenant’s critical acclaim during the 
2015-16 awards season made all that individual suffering worthwhile. “I’m glad 
that I made that irresponsible decision, but it could have been really bad,” he 
told Rolling Stone. “Like when you climb Mount Everest and nobody dies, but we 
were so close! It’s that feeling of relief.”

The crew may have been upset, some telling the Hollywood Reporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/24/director-defends-leonardo-dicaprios-the-revenant-as-crew-call-shoot-a-living-hell>
 that the experience of making the western had been the worst of their careers. 
But starLeonardo DiCaprio <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio> 
appears to have been fully on board with the tortuous film-making process, 
cheerfully munching his way through raw bison liver in freezing conditions and 
even climbing into a horse’s carcass on his way to a debut Oscar.

Director defends The Revenant after shoot branded a 'living hell'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/24/director-defends-leonardo-dicaprios-the-revenant-as-crew-call-shoot-a-living-hell>
James Cameron

The six-month shoot for Cameron’s 1993 science fiction epic The Abyss is 
sometimes described as the toughest in Hollywood history, because of persistent 
delays, six-day, 70-hour weeks and the difficulties faced in shooting 
underwater scenes. The film was shot almost entirely in a huge concrete 
containment tank at an abandoned nuclear power station, with Cameron refusing 
to allow stunt doubles to stand in for his actors. Ed Harris, who at one point 
believed he was about to die after running out of air during one submerged 
scene, reputedly found himself in tears while driving home at the end of a 
week’s shoot, while Mary Elizabeth Mastrantonio suffered a physical and 
emotional meltdown on set.

Cameron, for his part, asked his stars to pee in their wetsuits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/mar/04/features.vanessathorpe> in order 
to avoid wasting time by going to the toilet. But the Canadian film-maker was 
unapologetic about the film’s delays, which Michael Biehn estimated meant he 
was on set for five months in order to shoot for only 3-4 weeks. “For every 
hour they spent trying to figure out what magazine to read, we spent an hour at 
the bottom of the tank breathing compressed air,”he told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1989/08/06/movies/film-the-abyss-a-foray-into-deep-waters.html?sec=&spon=&pagewanted=all>
.

Stanley Kubrick
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffilm-maker-directors-clint-eastwood-tom-hanks-intimidating-as-hell-sully%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86fdbe88905eebd87369010beb728b243b7c82f9%2F0_0_2944_1969%2F2944.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hell%20of%20a%20film-maker%3A%20the%20directors%20who%20make%20Clint%20Eastwood%20look%20soft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffilm-maker-directors-clint-eastwood-tom-hanks-intimidating-as-hell-sully%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hell%20of%20a%20film-maker%3A%20the%20directors%20who%20make%20Clint%20Eastwood%20look%20soft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffilm-maker-directors-clint-eastwood-tom-hanks-intimidating-as-hell-sully%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86fdbe88905eebd87369010beb728b243b7c82f9%2F0_0_2944_1969%2F2944.jpg>
 Jack Nicholson and Danny Lloyd in The Shining. Photograph: Sportsphoto 
Ltd/Allstar/Warner Bros 
The US director was famed for his rigid attention to detail and refusal to 
compromise. Kubrick’s unnerving horror classic The Shiningmade the Guinness 
Book of Records 
<http://www.indiewire.com/2013/03/23-7-facts-about-stanley-kubricks-the-shining-100294/>
 for a scene featuring Shelley Duvall walking backwards up some stairs, crying 
and swinging her baseball bat at Jack Nicholson, that required 127 takes to get 
right. And Nicholson reputedly refused ever to work with the director of2001: A 
Space Odyssey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/27/2001-a-space-odyssey-review-rerelease>
 andEyes Wide Shut <https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/sep/10/3/> again 
after a separate segue in which the camera slowly zooms in on actor Scatman 
Crothers, as the Overlook Hotel’s chef, took more than 60 takes to get right – 
causing the 70-year-old to break down in tears.


David Fincher

Another film-maker known for his precise approach, Fincher left Jake Gyllenhaal
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/24/jake-gyllenhaal-interview-pushing-myself-is-part-of-my-life-film-demolition>
 in a state of extreme frustration during the shoot for austere 2007 serial 
killer thrillerZodiac 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/may/18/thriller.robertdowneyjr> owing to 
his habit of asking a technician to “delete the last 10 takes” while his actors 
were still on set doing their best to complete a scene. Meanwhile, theSe7en 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_review/0,,558621,00.html>
 director’s penchant for long working hours caused co-star Robert Downey – 
before the actor’s post-Iron Man transformation into the world’s most highly 
paid star – to mount his own private protest involving the placement of 
discreet jars of urine around the shoot.


“I just decided, aside from several times I wanted to garrotte him, that I was 
going to give him what he wanted,”Downey Jr told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2007/02/18/movies/18halb.html>. “I think I’m a perfect 
person to work for him, because I understand gulags.”

Werner Herzog
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffilm-maker-directors-clint-eastwood-tom-hanks-intimidating-as-hell-sully%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38c85aeb604cebb7762537ee1c8d49ec8a4ab52c%2F0_121_2309_1385%2F2309.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hell%20of%20a%20film-maker%3A%20the%20directors%20who%20make%20Clint%20Eastwood%20look%20soft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffilm-maker-directors-clint-eastwood-tom-hanks-intimidating-as-hell-sully%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hell%20of%20a%20film-maker%3A%20the%20directors%20who%20make%20Clint%20Eastwood%20look%20soft&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffilm-maker-directors-clint-eastwood-tom-hanks-intimidating-as-hell-sully%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38c85aeb604cebb7762537ee1c8d49ec8a4ab52c%2F0_121_2309_1385%2F2309.jpg>
 Werner Herzog and Klaus Kinski in a shot from the documentary My Best Fiend. 
Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/BBC 
The veteran German film-maker is well known for threatening his muse Klaus 
Kinski with a gun when the latter briefly refused to complete filming of 1972’s 
sprawling jungle epicAguirre, the Wrath of God 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/06/aguirre-the-wrath-of-god-review>. 
And there is also the time he
filmed 1982’s Fitzcarraldo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jun/24/dvdreviews> deep in the Amazon, 
fending off raids by the local Amahuaca tribespeople that resulted in one crew 
member being shot through the throat with an arrow – he narrowly survived – and 
his wife requiring eight hours of surgery after being hit in the stomach.

But Herzog’s finest hour as a film-maker from hell may well have come during 
the shoot for the 1976 documentary La Soufrière. Production saw the director 
put the lives of his entire film crew at risk by taking them to the small town 
of Basse-Terre on the Caribbean island of Guadeloupe, which had only recently 
been evacuated because of a nearby active volcano.

Lars von Trier

Von Trier is often accused of misogyny for the manner in which he routinely 
puts his leading ladies, from Emily Watson in Breaking the Waves to Charlotte 
Gainsbourg inAntichrist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/16/antichrist-lars-von-trier-feminism>
, through varying forms of on-screen torture. After completing her turn as a 
poor Czech immigrant who guards terrible secrets in the Palme d’Or-winning drama
Dancer in the Dark <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/sep/15/1>, Björk 
described Denmark’s enfant terrible of indie cinema as an “emotional 
pornographer” and vowed never to act again.

“You can take quite sexist film directors like Woody Allen or Stanley Kubrick 
and still they are the ones that provide the soul to their movies,”she wrote in 
an essay 
<http://www.gq.com/story/lars-von-trier-gq-interview-bjork-john-c-reilly-kirsten-dunst-nicole-kidman-extras>
. “In Lars von Trier’s case it is not so and he knows it. He needs a female to 
provide his work soul. And he envies them and hates them for it. So he has to 
destroy them during the filming. And hide the evidence.”

The singer subsequently wrote to Nicole Kidman warning her not to take the 
leading role in 2003’sDogville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2003/may/20/artsfeatures.londonfilmfestival2003>
. The Australian actor failed to take heed, and later said she would never work 
with Von Trier again after the pair staged regular shouting matches during a 
shoot that required her to spend hours at a timewearing a dog collar attached 
to a chain <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UBLUcqbK4Bo>. 
 