

'It's not good cop bad cop, this is fag and New Yorker' ... Robert Downey Jr 
and Val Kilmer in Kiss Kiss Bang Bang

At its UK screening on Friday, Sandra Hebron, the London film festival 
<http://www.lff.org.uk/films_details.php?FilmID=737>'s director, introduced 
Kiss Kiss Bang Bang <http://film.theguardian.com/Film_Page/0,,1591539,00.html> 
as the "smartest and funniest film of the festival", while a rather 
nervous-looking Shane Black apologised for not making his directorial debut a 
"more serious and helpful film".

Even though he's responsible for the slick scripts of Lethal Weapon 1 and 2 
and the pacey storytelling of A Long Kiss Goodnight, I hadn't expected this 
detective movie - a gloriously ludicrous cross betweenAirplane! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/airplane> and LA Confidential - to make me 
actually laugh out loud.

From its good natured send up of film noir's narrative voice ("What are these 
fucking extras doing in front of this fucking lens, get out of the way, scoot") 
and trigger-happy cop movies ("It's not good cop bad cop, this is fag and New 
Yorker"), to Robert Downey Jr's brilliantly hapless thief-turned-actor Harry 
Lockhart, the film combines snappy one-liners with plenty of black humour from 
its darker themes of incest, suicide and of course murder.

Asked why it had taken him almost a decade to return to film-making, Black 
told the audience: "I wish I could tell you it was really hard to make the 
movie, but it was a snap. Actually I was sitting around watching movies with my 
dog and I just didn't think I could do it. The dog could probably do it, but I 
couldn't. Then once I got out of the cycle and wrote it, no one wanted to touch 
the script. Finally we got the actors on board [Robert Downey Jr and Val 
Kilmer] and then my ability to deal with these two famously obstreperous 
personalities was put into question but I still just wanted to direct.

"Writing and not directing is like having the main course and missing the 
dessert. I was greatly influenced byRaymond Chandler 
<http://www.thrillingdetective.com/trivia/chandler.html> mysteries [the chapter 
headings in the film are all from Chandler] and wanted to sum up all that I 
love about thrillers. But really a lot of this movie is about great detective 
movies, fun and believing in nonsense."

And enjoyable nonsense it is too.

Kiss Kiss Bang Bang is at cinemas nationwide from November 11
 