
"Whichever way one looks at it, privatisation is a giant asset-stripping 
process. It is a very efficient way of taking money out of taxpayers' pockets".
Gwyneth Dunwoody 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/apr/18/gwynethdunwoody.labour>, the 
Labour MP who uttered those words during a debate in parliament on rail 
privatisationin February 1995 
<http://www.parliament.the-stationery-office.co.uk/pa/cm199495/cmhansrd/1995-02-07/Debate-12.html>
, deserves some sort of posthumous New Year honour for calling it exactly right.

While Tory ministers claimed that selling-off the railways would bring 
"benefits to passengers and taxpayers", and scoffed at opposition concerns, the 
latestabove-inflation price increases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2012/jan/02/rail-fare-rises> in Britain's rail 
fares – already by far and away the highest in Europe – shows once more that 
the serial privatisers of John Major's Conservative government got it very, 
very wrong.

Selling off the railways was a bad idea in principle, as it transformed them 
from being a public service to a business, where the overriding aim was profit 
maximisation. But, having set their minds on privatisation, the least damaging 
thing the government could have done back in the mid 90s would have been to 
simply float shares in British Rail or, failing that, create four regional 
franchises in charge of both trains and track – the system that existed before 
nationalisation in 1948.

Instead the Major government, taking its cue from the ideas of the Adam Smith 
Institute, hit upon an incredibly complex and costly system, which destroyed 
the integrity of the rail network and created the ridiculously fragmented and 
passenger-unfriendly system we have today. Ownership of Britain's railway 
tracks was handed over to a new company, Railtrack,which was privatised in 
March 1996 <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/1584587.stm> with disastrous 
repercussions for rail safety. Twenty five new railway franchises were created, 
with the new railway operators having to hire their rolling stock from three 
newly created Rolling Stock Leasing Companies (ROSCOs), largely owned by banks.

With privately owned train companies, eager to pay sizeable dividends to their 
shareholders, also having to pay the leasing companies to hire rolling stock, 
and to use rail lines, it's not hard to work out why our train fares are so 
much higher than in the countries in continental Europe where there is one 
state-owned railway company and where neoliberal ideologues and thinktanks 
don't dominate the political scene.

Privatisation was supposed to reduce government support for the railways and 
bring the benefits of "competition" to passengers: the reality is that it has 
done the very opposite. Taxpayer subsidies to the railways are around five 
times higher than in the days of British Rail, while ticket prices have 
rocketed since 1996.Privatisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/privatisation> has indeed brought 
"benefits", but it's been to shareholders and the banks, certainly not to 
ordinary people.

The drive to privatise the railways came from the Conservative's opposition to 
all forms of public ownership. How ironic, then, that a decade and a half on 
from privatisation, a sizeable chunk of our railways is back in public 
ownership – but the public ownership of other countries. Arriva Trains,which is 
cutting four-and-a-half hours off its off-peak travel period 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2081136/Rail-passengers-pay-double-Britains-biggest-firms-cuts-peak-hours.html?ito=feeds-newsxml>
, is owned byDeutsche Bahn <http://www.deutschebahn.com/site/bahn/en/start.html>
, which also owns Britain's largest rail freight company, DB Schenker Rail. NS, 
the Netherlands state railway, is, through its subsidiary, a joint owner of 
Northern Rail and Merseyrail and from February will run the Greater Anglia 
franchise. Our political elite, still wedded to 1990s thinking, tell us that 
bringing back British Rail is out of the question, yet they seem quite happy 
for state-owned railway companies from other countries to run services in the 
UK – and for British passengers to effectively subsidise lower fares in other 
countries. What a crazy state of affairs.

As fares are hiked once again, its time for rail passengers and taxpayers to 
use their collective might to pressurise our politicians to rethink their 
support for privatisation. Join theprotests <http://www.farefail.org/> due to 
take place at Britain's railway stations from tomorrow and help get 
renationalisation back on the political agenda.
 