
The Malala award

Nominees: Malala Yousafzai, Mindy Kaling (who was briefly mistaken for her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/quiz/2014/oct/27/is-that-malala-or-mindy-kaling-quiz>
 at a New York party).

Winner: Malala, by a landslide – for being awarded the Nobel peace prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/10/malala-yousafzia-nobel-peace-prize-attack>
 at the age of 17 (the youngest ever recipient) but also crucially for the fact 
that she had to wait to give her“first statement after school” 
<https://twitter.com/MalalaFund/status/520535570947514368>. Bless!
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D66tIRTm91F8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D66tIRTm91F8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D66tIRTm91F8&media=>
The #BringBackOurGirls campaign

The horrific abduction of 300 girls from their school in Chibok by terrorist 
group Boko Haram triggered an international outcry. On the ground in Nigeria,
activists have not gone quiet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/17/campaigners-boko-haram-schoolgirls-kidnapped-nigeria>
: every day since 30 April, they have gathered in the capital to protest 
against the kidnap of the girls. 2015 is an election year for Nigeria, and the 
state of security in the northeastern regions will be an ongoing issue.

Activism’s female face

From Ferguson 
<http://thefeministwire.com/2014/10/fergusonfridays-black-freedom-fighters-men-interview-black-women-front-line-ferguson/>
 to New York and across the US, thousands marched for justice following the 
killings of unarmed black men and women by police. And they were largely
organised and led by young women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/15/ferguson-new-york-women-protests-all-black-lives-matter>
: the Millions March NYC was set up by Umaara Elliott and Synead Nichols. 
Harriet Wistrich won Liberty’s Human Rights Lawyer of the Year award for her 
work showing police failures concerning the women attacked by a London taxi 
driver. More young feminists with amazing 2014 success can be foundhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2014/dec/18/year-of-brave-youg-inspirational-feminist-role-models>
.

The many battles of the feminist PR war

Beyoncé stood in front of a giant FEMINIST sign at the VMAs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/25/beyonce-flawless-feminist-vmas>
, inspiring miles of tenuous think-piece and column inches; Emma Watson
gave a speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2014/oct/03/emma-watsons-un-gender-equality-campaign-is-an-invitation-to-men-too>
 as part of the He For She campaign at the UN in New York; Harriet Harmanwore 
her Fawcett Society “This is what a feminist looks like” T-shirt to prime 
minster’s questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/oct/29/harriet-harman-wears-feminism-t-shirt-to-pmqs>
 (a not-at-all subtle dig at David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/27/david-cameron-this-is-not-what-a-feminist-looks-like>
); and the media managed to ask every semi-famous woman about her thoughts on 
feminism. On balance, the feminist PR war was largely won, and with 
only minimal bloodletting.

Heroines of science and health

Iranian mathematician Maryam Mirzakhani  became the first woman to win the 
Fields Medal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/aug/13/interview-maryam-mirzakhani-fields-medal-winner-mathematician>
 in Mathematics; space scientistProfessor Monica Grady 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-30022765> celebrated with the 
rest of the Rosetta mission whenPhilae landed on a comet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/nov/13/philae-landing-rosetta-mission-good-bad-news>
, 10 years after launch. In Nigeria,hero doctor Stella Ameyo Adadevoh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2014/oct/20/dr-stella-ameyo-adadevoh-ebola-doctor-nigeria-hero>
 led a team that shut down the spread of Ebola in the most populous country in 
Africa, and died from the virus after exposure.

Most excellent image of women in the workplace

In September, India sent up the Mangalyaan satellite 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-india-29357472> to orbit Mars, making it 
only the fourth nation to do so. The photo that marked the accomplishment was 
striking: a command control room showing six women in saris smiling and 
excitedly embracing one another in the foreground. Whether in purple or red or 
pink or blue, this is what a scientist (can) look(s) like.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Findia-successfully-sends-satellite-into-mars-orbit-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411550810370%2FIndian-Space-Research-Org-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=India%20successfully%20sends%20satellite%20into%20Mars%20orbit%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Findia-successfully-sends-satellite-into-mars-orbit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=India%20successfully%20sends%20satellite%20into%20Mars%20orbit%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F24%2Findia-successfully-sends-satellite-into-mars-orbit-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F24%2F1411550810370%2FIndian-Space-Research-Org-017.jpg>
Small-screen queens

Yes, there was Dapper Laughs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/nov/17/dapper-laughs-itv-turn-off-vine-vlogger>
 and his patently ridiculous brand of “entertainment”, but generally, women did 
better than all right in television this year. British telly was particularly 
strong, full of complex and nuanced female narratives and roles:Maggie 
Gyllenhaal in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/aug/15/the-honourable-woman-hugo-blick-spy-thriller-middle-east-maggie-gyllenhaal>
 The Honourable Woman; Sarah Lancashire inHappy Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/30/happy-valley-british-crime-drama-large-audience>
 and Keeley Hawes inLine of Duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/dec/22/best-tv-of-2014-no-2-line-of-duty>
 were highlights. Between Olivia Pope and Annalise Keating,Shonda Rhimes 
dominated US television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2014/may/14/shonda-rhimes-scandal-tv-diversity-showrunner-davis>
. Orange is the New Black actor Laverne Cox became thefirst transgender woman 
to be nominated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/10/laverne-cox-best-actress-emmy-nod-transgender-people>
 for an Emmy (andcover of Time magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/may/29/laverne-cox-transgernder-time-magazine>
). Amy Schumer’s A Very Realistic Military Game sketch highlighted the issue of 
sexual assault in the US military, using a console game in which her avatar, a 
private in the army, is raped in the barracks. On reporting the crime, the 
character is asked: “Did you know he has a family? Does that change your mind 
about reporting?” And ends with her attacker found guilty in a military court – 
right before his commanding officer decides to reject the court’s decision, and 
put him back on active duty.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBXGJGuH59qw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBXGJGuH59qw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBXGJGuH59qw&media=>
Queens of the silver screen

In film, Amma Asante 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/may/18/amma-asante-belle-bicultural-ghanaian-british-director-grange-hill>
 directed historical drama Belle andDestiny Ekaragha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/28/destiny-ekaragha-ive-got-to-break-two-glass-ceilings-gone-too-far>
 helmed the comedy of manners Gone Too Far, making them members of a very elite 
club of black British female directors. Nicole Perlman, co-screenwriter on one 
of the highest grossing movies of the year, Guardians of the Galaxy, made 
history: she is thefirst woman with a writing credit 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/dorothypomerantz/2014/07/29/the-woman-behind-guardians-of-the-galaxy-nicole-perlman/>
 on a Marvel movie.

Ladies of letters

British novelist Jessie Burton’s book The Miniaturist became the best-selling 
literary debut <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-30251905> hardback 
of the decade. Elsewhere writer (and GuardianUS columnist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/roxane-gay>) Roxane Gay wrote 
thought-provoking essays on subjects as varied as Bill Cosby and the Oscar 
Pistorius trial.

Political animals

A Women’s Aid petition to save women’s refuges garnered 38,000 signatures – 
and secureda £10m injection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/26/domestic-violence-refuges-women-10-million-pounds-cash-injection>
 from the government to protect the network of safe havens. Earlier in the 
year, several centres, including those helping black, Asian, minority ethnic 
and refugee (BAMER) women had beenparticularly hard hit by cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/aug/25/womens-refuges-risk-shutting-ashiana-sheffield>
. Elsewhere, Ukip leader Nigel Farage suggested breastfeeding mothers should 
sit in the corner and not be“openly ostentatious” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/05/nigel-farage-ukip-claridges-breastfeeding-mothers>
. The jokes wrote themselves.

She shoots, she scores!

Republic of Ireland striker Stephanie Roche was nominated for the Fifa Puskás 
Award for goal of the year, alongside James Rodríguez and Robin van Persie. 
Claudia Fragapane became England’s most successful female Commonwealth Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jul/30/glasgow-2014-max-whitlock-gold-gb-gymnastics-commonwealth-games>
 competitor in more than 80 years.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnQOuMWiGMrU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnQOuMWiGMrU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnQOuMWiGMrU&media=>
Tech woes

Anita Sarkeesian and Zoe Quinn were two of the targets (and loudest critics) of
Gamergate <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamergate>. Ostensibly about 
ethics in games journalism, the movement becamesomething 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/03/zoe-quinn-gamergate-interview>
else 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/21/gamergate-angry-men-harassing-women>
entirely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/16/gamergate-abuse-feminist-new-york-times-anita-sarkeesian>
, with overt misogyny and rape threats on Twitter. Elsewhere the ructions 
between women and the tech industry trundled along as anUber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/uber> executive Emil Michael was 
overheardsuggesting digging up dirt on critics 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/bensmith/uber-executive-suggests-digging-up-dirt-on-journalists#.kqlvxQq9V>
 in the media. One suggested target was PandoDaily editor Sarah Lacy, avocal 
critic 
<http://pando.com/2014/10/22/the-horrific-trickle-down-of-asshole-culture-at-a-company-like-uber/>
of the taxi app. In December a female customerin New Delhi accused a driver of 
rape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/dec/08/uber-banned-delhi-taxi-driver-accused-rape>
.
 