
Last year, Tim Kring, the creator of Heroes, teamed up with Nokia to launch 
Conspiracy For Good, an ambitious alternative reality game with web, mobile and 
live action elements, in which players got the chance to shape the storyand 
donate money to third-world literacy charities in the process.

Now, the production company that helped produce Kring's project, Tea4Two 
<http://www.yourcupoftea.se/> has got together with Heroes writer Jim Martin 
and visual arts companyFurnace Fighter Media 
<http://www.furnacefightermedia.com> to create a new transmedia series, The 
Karada <http://thekarada.com>. It's billed as, 'a supernatural thriller about a 
young woman, Emma Gossett, who struggles to save the multiverse as realities 
collapse around her'. Which sounds quite stressful. "We like to say that the 
story feels a bit like Inception meets Sliding Doors with a dash of demonic 
possession," explains producer Tom Liljeholm. "We take with us the good parts 
from Truth about Marika and Conspiracy For Good, but try to work hard at making 
it accessible and comprehensive."

As well as web episodes, the story will be viewable on mobile devices, and 
there will be digital comics and live events. As in Conspiracy For Good, 
participants will have an impact on the narrative. "Community contributions 
will be taken seriously and matter," assures Liljeholm. "For example, 
participants will be called upon to write in the details of Emma's alternate 
realities, the basis of which will be produced into a digital comic series. 
Further, as our heroine in the dramatic series crosses paths with these 
alternative lives, participants will feel the true impact of their 
contributions on the storyline."

It all sounds really bizarre, but I'm fascinated by these pioneering attempts 
to redefine the concept of the alternative reality game, augmenting the idea 
with mobile integration and 'participatory drama' elements. Liljeholm says that 
the web series will start off in late winter, depending on some last-minute 
license deals. "We will however start rolling out snippets of content – be it 
audio recordings or short videos – as teasers, starting in a few weeks," he 
says.

Naturally, there's a Twitter feed <https://twitter.com/#!/TheKarada> and a 
Facebook page <https://www.facebook.com/TheKarada>. But you'll need to head 
over tothe official website <http://thekarada.com> to find out more and to get 
involved. If you have experience of preventing women from slipping between the 
reality gaps in a collapsing metaverse, you'll surely come in handy.
 