
As the excitement of the Labour leadership contest grew over the summer, an 
old friend ofHilary Benn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hilarybenn> 
asked him why he was not standing for the leadership. “Nobody asked me,” Benn 
told Jim Fitzpatrick, who had served as his deputy during his time as 
environment secretary in Labour’s last years in office.

It was a self-effacing remark typical of Benn, a man admired in the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> ranks as one of the party’s most 
sincere figures.

“Hilary never swore, he never shouted and, to boot, he just did the job 
thoroughly and with great commitment,”David Blunkett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidblunkett> said of Benn, who served 
as his special adviser in the 1990s.

On Wednesday evening, Benn finally emerged from the shadow of his late father, 
Tony, as he delivered a spellbinding speech towards the end of a day-long 
debate on launching airstrikes againstIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> targets in Syria.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hilary%20Benn%20speech%20in%20full%3A%20'We%20must%20now%20confront%20this%20evil'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hilary%20Benn%20speech%20in%20full%3A%20%27We%20must%20now%20confront%20this%20evil%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F03%2Fhilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video&media=>
Hilary Benn speech in full: ‘We must now confront this evil’.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/dec/03/hilary-benn-airstrikes-vote-speech-full-must-confront-isis-evil-video>
The shadow foreign secretary opened his remarks by paying a warm tribute to 
Labour’s leader,Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, and then challenged, 
point-by-point, the Labour leader’s arguments against extending RAF bombing 
against Isis, from Iraq to Syria.

In a final flourish Benn said that supporting the airstrikes was wholly in 
keeping with Labour’s internationalist tradition of supporting allies, such as 
France, and of standing up to fascism.

“The speech was the best of Labour,” says Pat McFadden, the shadow Europe 
minister, who works in Benn’s foreign affairs team. “Hilary rooted his 
arguments firmly in our history and in our values.”

Yet Benn was surprised to find that after his speech his phone was clogged 
with 47 text messages congratulating him. He told aides that he thought the 
speech had been OK. As he went home, among the late-night revellers and 
theatregoers, Benn’s speech tore across social media.

Labour MPs on both sides of the debate acknowledged that the speech had 
altered the dynamics within the party as it grappled with its biggest split in 
a generation. Opponents of Corbyn said the speech had wrestled back the idea 
that the the Labour leader, a veteran left-winger, represented the true 
traditions of Labour. Some of Corbyn’s supporters feared that Benn’s speech 
weakened him by making it impossible for him to move, in the short term at 
least, against any of the shadow cabinet ministers who voted in favour of the 
airstrikes.

John McDonnell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell>, the 
shadow chancellor, praised Benn’s speech in barbed terms. “His oratory was 
great,” he told the Today programme. “He reminded me of Tony Blair’s speech 
taking us into the Iraq war and I am always anxious that the greatest oratory 
can lead us to the greatest mistakes as well.”

Alex Salmond, the former first minister of Scotland, said that Benn’s late 
father would have been “burling <http://www.dsl.ac.uk/entry/snd/burl> in his 
grave” had he heard the speech. Emily Benn, his niece, called on the SNP member 
to retract his “deeply offensive and simply untrue” remarks.

The family were hurt by Salmond’s remarks because father and son were devoted 
to each other and were completely open about their deep disagreement when the 
young Benn voted in favour of the Iraq war in 2003. “People don’t understand 
about rows in the Labour party. They’re family rows; passionate,”Benn senior 
told the Observer in 2007 in a joint interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/jun/03/labourdeputy.labour> with his son 
as he publicly endorsed his bid to become Labour deputy leader ( he finished in 
disappointing fourth place).

Hilary Benn, now 62, will be a pivotal figure in that Labour family row as he 
emerges from the second tier of steady, if slightly pedestrian, politicians to 
join the front ranks of influential big beasts. Friends say that leadership is 
the last thing on his mind, not least because Corbyn’s overwhelming mandate 
from the membership makes his position unassailable, for the moment at least.

Benn presents a curious dilemma for Corbyn in that ongoing battle for the soul 
of Labour. The shadow foreign secretary represents so much of what Corbyn has 
opposed on foreign policy for 30 years. But if Corbyn shuts his eyes, or opens 
them wide enough to see Benn gesticulate with his arms as he speaks, he might 
be forgiven for thinking that he is listening to his political hero.

Tony Benn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tony-benn> overshadowed his 
son’s entire political career, from Hilary’s time as a trade union official in 
the 1970s, his stint as special adviser to Blunkett as education secretary 
after Labour’s victory in 1997, and his entry to parliament as MP for Leeds 
Central in a 1999 byelection. Benn snr had what he described as a “Railway 
Children moment” – family code for tears streaming down his face – when he 
listened to his son deliver his maiden speech as he became the fourth 
generation of parliamentarians in the family.

Sensible, moderate, plodding Hilary was thought to be the worthy figure who 
would never match his father. Friends say, however, that Benn’s understated 
manner has mistakenly led people to overlook his fiercely independent streak 
which led him to never think twice about disagreeing with his father. In a sign 
of that independence he once said that he was “a Benn but not a Bennite”, 
drawing strength in a party where its leading figures have been burdened by 
associations with one tribe or another. Labour’s new star has a name but not a 
label.

Blunkett sa id the MP’s parents – Tony, the political firebrand, and Caroline, 
the educationist – taught the Benn siblings from childhood to be independent. 
“Hilary Benn learnt from his mother and father’s knee to be his own person. He 
had to learn that rapidly and has applied it since. That is why he was able to 
stand out so clearly over the last few days. Not dictated to, not owned, not 
ordered about by anybody but his own man.”

In a sign that he influenced his father, a young Hilary persuaded him to 
become a vegetarian. “If we gave all the grain in the world that we feed to 
livestock to people nobody would be hungry,” he reportedly said. Benn Sr 
reportedly replied: “That is it. I am never eating meat again.”

Tony Benn bequeathed his son two further gifts which have stood him in good 
stead. Hilary admits that the Benn genes have done him no harm in the oratory 
department. But he also learned, as he watched his father beaver away at his 
political diaries in the basement of his Holland Park home with its famous red 
front door, the importance of hard work and preparation.

Benn put these skills to good use on Wednesday when he worked his speech on 
his iPad in the Commons chamber during theSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> debate after deciding the night 
before that he would address the final part of his speech to the Labour party.

Shortly after 5.30pm he walked out of the chamber to his office under Big Ben 
above the shadow cabinet meeting room for a final run through of the speech 
with aides, some of whom took a different view on the vote. In a 30-minute 
break from the Commons he printed out the speechand delivered it to aides; it 
was timed at eleven minutes long. Benn then grabbed his black felt-tip pen to 
make the final changes to the speech when he returned to the chamber.

“When Hilary left the office he had a good speech,” one aide recalled, saying 
that Benn underlined the final version of his speech for cadence and pauses. 
“By the time he stood up in the chamber he had a brilliant speech.”
 