
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, the US 
secretary of state, has given a strong boost to aid campaigners when she 
announced US backing for a transparency initiative to better track aid flows.

The International Aid Transparency Initiative <http://www.aidtransparency.net/>
 (IATI) will consist of a registry that assembles all relevant aid information 
from governments, NGOs and foundations that will make it easier to track the 
movement of aid money around the globe and monitor its impact.

Clinton declared American backing for IATI on Wednesday at the fourth 
high-level forum on aid effectiveness 
<http://www.aideffectiveness.org/busanhlf4/#>, where over 3,000 delegates are 
meeting to discuss ways of harmonising aid activity among a growing number of 
donors, including China and Brazil.

"This is a huge step forward for aid transparency and for the US as a 
responsible and effective aid donor. Increased transparency is vital for 
improving the impact of aid overall and this move by the US sends a strong 
signal to other donors who have not yet signed up," said Karin Christiansen, 
managing director of the campaign group Publish What You Fund.

In her speech at an elaborate Oscar-like ceremony complete with fanfare and 
slick videos, Clinton warned developing countries that China may be more 
interested in exploiting natural resources than promoting real development.

"Be wary of donors who are more interested in extracting your resources than 
in building your capacity. Some funding might help fill short-term budget gaps, 
but we've seen time and again that these quick fixes won't produce 
self-sustaining results," she said.

But Clinton left out of her speech remarks that would irritated China even 
more. The remarks were contained in a version of the speech seen by the 
Guardian.

"We need every provider of assistance at the table - emerging and traditional. 
When an emerging economy declines to join meetings at the OECD, nothing is 
gained. Not a single family's income is improved; not a single child is fed. 
Let's get past these old divisions so we can deliver results for everyone."

The comments referred to China dragging its feet in endorsing efforts to 
establish a global partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/nov/29/china-pulls-out-aid-partnership-busan?INTCMP=SRCH>
 for development with common principles led by the OECD, the club of 
traditional donors that account for $122bn in aid, or 80% of total aid.

Despite Clinton's endorsement of more rigorous transparency mechanisms, some 
have criticised the US for tying its aid too closely to its strategic interests.

"Aid from the US goes primarily to countries that serve its geopolitical 
interests rather than countries most in need of assistance," said Antonio 
Tujan, international director of Ibon, an international NGO.

"The top four recipients of total US foreign assistance in 2010 include 
Afghanistan, Pakistan, Haiti and Israel. And we must not forget that Egypt was 
the second biggest recipient of US aid in the Middle East up to the dying days 
of the Mubarak regime."

Earlier Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary-general, praised the prime minister, 
David Cameron, for sticking to his government's target of spending0.7% of gross 
national income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/nov/29/britain-cut-foreign-budget?INTCMP=SRCH>
 on foreign aid and urged others to followhis example.

"Cutting aid will not be balance your budget but will hurt the poor," said Ban.
 