
American politicians have long sought to identify with the working class, but 
it's rare that they've claimed actual bankruptcy. When Hillary Clintontold 
Diane Sawyer this month 
<http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2014/06/hillary-clinton-stumbles-from-dead-broke-to-not-truly-well-off/>
 that her family – the Clinton family – was "dead broke" upon leaving the White 
House, that giant sucking sound you heard was the Democratic party holding its 
breath.

The gaffe probably comes too early in the cycle to truly damn Clinton's 
presidential aspirations, but her stiff recovery –she amended the assessment to 
"not truly well off" in an interview with the Guardian published over the 
weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/22/-sp-hillary-clinton-interview-will-she-run-for-president-2016>
 – is a stark reminder that Hillary, whatever her qualifications and 
accomplishments, is not the campaigner her husband was. She is hobbled by a 
tendency to think that her own crystalline analysis should overwhelm criticism. 
Hillary's a lot like Mitt Romney in her lack of self-awareness – except she 
pays her taxes. (Though even that distinction is shrinking; last week brought
the news that the Clintons have used trusts 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-06-17/wealthy-clintons-use-trusts-to-limit-estate-tax-they-back.html>
 to shimmy out of hundreds of thousands of dollars in estate taxes, andChelsea 
isn't helping anything 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/media/2014/06/chelsea-clintons-money-quote-isnt-new-190935.html>
.)

By refusing to acknowledge her wealth, Clinton continues in an American 
tradition of defining "middle class" as whatever one's family is worth, 
regardless of the country's actual average or median income. But whereas that 
misidentification has usually been aspirational – 40% of Americans making under 
$20,000 a yearstill say 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2014/01/27/despite-recovery-fewer-americans-identify-as-middle-class/>
 they're middle class – Hillary's denial only reminds the less well-off of 
their delusion. She has always been willing to use her resumé as a reason to 
vote for her, so why won't she brandish the family bank account as yet more 
proof of the Clintons' intelligence and hard work?

You've got to wonder what Bill makes of all this. As the sole member of the 
Clinton triumvirate who has actually experienced poverty, his own testimony 
about personal wealth has always taken the I'm-rich-and-I-know-I'm-lucky 
approach. And historically, that's the right political answer. The GOP often 
accuses the Democrats of trying to stir up class warfare, but successful 
wealthy politicians know that artful rhetoric can keep the dividing line from 
being exactly between the haves and have-notes and, rather, between the 
care-about-you's and the don't-care-about-you's.

That division allows both Democrats and Republicans to leverage class anxiety, 
at varying levels of sincerity and policy relevance. The Republican argument 
has long relied on social issues as a proxy for economic ones: the 
care-about-you line meant "cares about your religion and values". But as income 
inequality grows between now and an election that's still 868 days from now, 
even the GOP will have to reckon with anxieties far more tangible than the gay 
agenda and feminazis. Between 2008 and today, the number of conservatives
identifying 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2012/09/10/a-third-of-americans-now-say-they-are-in-the-lower-classes/>
 as lower class has grown from 19% to 32% – a sharper increase than either 
among independents (24% to 30%) or liberals (29% to 33%).

Class insecurity among conservatives could finally trump those already tired 
social issues and make income inequality the wedge issue the Obama White House 
has half-hoped – and half-warned – that it could be. But the mantle of class 
warrior has always fit poorly on Hillary's shoulders. When she said in 2007 
that lobbyists"represent real Americans" 
<http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0807/5251.html>, it gave Obama an early 
opportunity to turn her experience in Washington into a synonym for entrenched 
interests. (As David Axelrod said at the time: "I can't say I've ever heard a 
more fulsome defense of lobbyists before.") The missteps on the$225,000-a-speech
 
<http://www.reviewjournal.com/news/hillary-clinton-collect-225000-keynote-unlv-fundraiser>
 Hard Choices campaign echo that fundamental problem with Hillary's first run 
at the presidency: she is an insider who claims to be an outsider.

The real mystery of her present disingenuousness is that there's really 
nothing shameful, in and of itself, about the kind of wealth the Clintons have 
accumulated. As Bill himself said just the other day,"Americans don't resent 
other people's successes." 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2014/06/bill-clinton-income-inequality-108078.html>
 And polls show thatAmericans still love rich people! 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2012/08/27/yes-the-rich-are-different/> In 
2012, 92% of people describing themselves as middle-class and 84% of 
self-described lower-income people said they admired the wealthy. Whenever 
Hillary denies she one of them, she just proves the point of the 34% of 
Americans who say the wealthy are less honest than the rest of us.

Simply being rich isn't insulting; pretending you aren't is.

Clinton's ongoing misrepresentations – an unwillingness to accept and 
acknowledge that her life in politics has been not just educational butlucrative
 – reflects the central conundrum of Hillary Clinton, campaigner: she thinks 
she's earned your vote because she's worked hard and studied and has a 4.0 GPA, 
but she doesn't quite believe that votes always go to those who've earned them. 
Indeed, that was, for the Hillary camp, the lesson of 2008.

And so she undercuts her legitimately impressive career with false modesty 
about the very quality that one can quantify: wealth. The thing about running 
for president and not head of the class is that she can't show us her grades or 
awards of merit. Her boasts of competency – 3am phone calls and navigating 
world diplomacy – require a certain amount of faith in her word; when she tells 
us she's broke, we know she's lying.

 