
Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> are defined in American 
society by the men who are or aren't in their lives. From the time we're little 
girls into young adults, we're encouraged to find our prince charming and never 
let him go. People quietly frown upon single women, wondering what's wrong with 
women like me who haven't married yet or may never marry.

Single women are excluded from social circles because married women fear they 
will "steal their men" and they certainly don't have equal access to the 
political and business power structures as married women. How many unmarried 
women are governors or CEOs of Fortune 500 companies? Sure, there are 
exceptions such as single Supreme Court justices and Condoleezza Rice, the 
first black female Secretary of State, but the path to power is much harder for 
single women.

As Time magazine pointed out in a recent cover story The childfree life 
<http://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,2148636,00.html>, society 
scolds married women who choose not to have children, asking, what's wrong with 
them? According toPew Research 
<http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2011/12/14/barely-half-of-u-s-adults-are-married-a-record-low/>
, only 51% of US adults age 18 and older are married today compared 72% in 
1960. So, we have a rise in "single ladies". As we witness this rise in 
unmarried and married childless women, society seems to be refusing to give 
these non-conformist women full access to the same social, business and 
political opportunities as their married counterparts with children.

Perhaps this is why Hillary Clinton has "stood by her man" Bill Clinton 
through his manyembarrassing transgressions 
<http://radaronline.com/exclusives/2013/07/bill-clinton-sex-tape-monica-lewinsky/>
. And why Huma Abedin is standing to the point of public humiliation  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/23/anthony-weiner-huma-abedin?cmp=wp-plugin>
by Anthony Weiner. (It's interesting to note that Huma Abedin worked for 
Hillary when she was a US senator and then Secretary of State and the two 
became very close. Hillary has referred to Huma asher second daughter 
<http://politicalticker.blogs.cnn.com/2013/07/29/huma-abedin-dines-with-clinton-spokesman/>
.)

Hillary knows if she is ever to ascend to president of the United States of 
America, the highest office in the land, she will need a "first man" by her 
side because sadly, America won't elect her without one. Feminists are taught 
to support the choices of all women, but at what point is someone like Hillary 
binding to societal pressures?

In 1992, when Bill Clinton ran for president and his extramarital affairs 
began dripping out like a leaky faucet, Hillary and Bill did ajoint interview 
with 60 Minutes 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-504803_162-57565887-10391709/hillarys-first-joint-interview-next-to-bill-in-92/>
. The couple refused to admit Bill's lady problems but as Kroft asked about his 
alleged affair with Jennifer Flowers, Hillary snuggled close to Bill because 
she knew "their political life" depended upon it. When Kroft asked Bill if his 
marriage suffered problems and whether they ever separated, Hillary kept 
shaking her head. Then she angrily told Kroft:

I'm not sitting here, some little woman, standing by my man like Tammy Wynette 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DwBirf4BWew>.

Though Hillary has achieved enormous political success, it's questionable if 
that would have happened if she hadn't stood by Bill Clinton in the early 
years. Remember she ran for the New York senate seat while she was First Lady, 
a very high-profile position.

I cringed when I watched Abedin defend her husband Anthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner> in a press conference, as 
he asked New York City voters to support his campaign for mayor in spite of 
news reports of another sexting affair. Weiner admitted he continued to send 
explicit photos of himself over the Internet to a young woman after resigning 
from Congress in disgrace for sexting in 2011.

Political wives who defend their cheating husbands all in the name of grabbing 
power and the women who support them teaches young girls they are nothing 
without a man by their side. This is the real "War on Women" and latelyDemocrats
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> are owning it.

In the 2012 presidential election, single women represented 23% of the 
electorate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/09/single-women-voted-favour-obama>
, and the majority of them – 67% – broke for President Barack Obama. Women 
overall also voted for Obama 55% to Mitt Romney's 44%. Women preferred the 
Democrat message.

As Hillary gears up for a possible presidential run in 2016, women are already 
lining up to rally by her side. But it isn't a "done deal" on the women's vote. 
The Republican party has to start appealing to single female voters with a 
different message. What if the GOP leveraged female politicians to speak at 
college campuses and other events with the inclusion message: "you can succeed 
in life and run for office whether you're married or single, wife or mother, 
nurse or CEO".

People's marriages are their business and women can choose to forgive cheating 
husbands. My parents have been married for over 40 years. I know what a good 
relationship should be because I have a wonderful example. While I've wanted to 
be married since I was a little girl, even dreamed about the wedding I would 
one day have, I haven't found Mr Right; however, I also have been nurtured by a 
mother who taught me I'm worth something in life without a man as much as I am 
with one. And if a man is going to treat me with less respect than my father, 
he's not a man worth having.

Every woman should be celebrated regardless of her marital status. Both 
parties need to wake up to that fact. And I hope that women will look closely 
at Hillary's version of feminism.
 