
Unearthing the truth about what happened at Hillsborough in 1989 would have 
been impossible without theHuman Rights Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/human-rights-act>, according to one of the 
relatives who successfully fought against the original inquest ruling on the 
deaths of the 96 victims.

Introducing a campaign in defence of the legislation, Becky Shah, whose 
mother, Inger,died at Hillsborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/20/hillsborough-inquest-police-ignored-screams-pushing-fans-back-into-pens>
, said the act had been crucial in securing the second inquest into the deaths, 
whichrecorded that the victims were unlawfully killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
.

Under the Human Rights Act, a jury can be convened to assess the wider 
circumstances surrounding a death – something that had not been legislated for 
before it came into law.

Shah said: “Without the Human Rights Act we would never, ever have had the 
second inquest. Without the Human Rights Act we would never, ever have got the 
verdicts of unlawfully killed against all the parties that were culpable. It 
was an absolutely imperative piece of legislation.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_jc-st1ETls&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_jc-st1ETls>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_jc-st1ETls&media=>
 Becky Shah. 
Her remarks are at the centre of an Amnesty International 
<https://savetheact.uk/> campaign warning that if the Human Rights Act is 
repealed when the UK leaves the EU, there could be miscarriages of justice.

Replacing the act with a UK bill of rights was part of the 2015 Conservative 
manifesto, but there have been reports that the much-delayed plan could be 
ditched. In August the justice secretary, Liz Truss,said it would still happen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/aug/22/uk-bill-of-rights-will-not-be-scrapped-says-liz-truss>
 but gave no timeframe for it.

The campaign to save the act has also been backed by the widower of a woman 
killed by an IRA bomb, and a couple who used the legislation to uncover 
negligence that had led to their son’s death.

Other people involved include Gary McKinnon, who successfully fought 
extradition to the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/oct/16/gary-mckinnon-not-extradited-may>
 on hacking charges, and a woman who used the act to uncover police errors 
committed before her mother was murdered.

Shah, whose brother survived the Hillsborough crush, said she was “extremely 
worried” about what could happen if the act was repealed. She said: “My fear is 
that if the Human Rights Act were to be abolished and replaced with the British 
bill of rights, which would be very limited, miscarriages of justice would go 
back to being far more easily perpetrated by the state.”

Alan McBride, whose wife, Sharon, died in the 1993 Shankill bombing 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/northern_ireland/7851363.stm>, and who has since 
worked on community reconciliation, said the act was “extremely important” for 
the Northern Ireland peace process.

“What the Human Rights Act does is to give a safeguard. If you think you’re 
not getting anywhere through the normal course of law and order, at least you 
have this fallback,” he said.

“It’s enshrined in it that if your loved one is murdered you’re entitled to an 
investigation and be told about where that has got to. Without that, I don’t 
know where your redress would be.”


McKinnon, whose extradition was eventually blocked partly because he has 
Asperger’s syndrome, said the act played a key role in his case.

He said: “The Human Rights Act is important because it legislates for the 
protection of basic freedoms. These freedoms are unchanging, so the act itself 
should only be added to, not lessened or restricted or done away with.

“The act also gets a lot of bad press, with extreme examples of its use in 
terror cases, but we shouldn’t let a few bad interpretations get in the way of 
a necessary act.”


The parents of John Robinson, who died in 2006 from a ruptured spleen after 
doctors at Stafford hospitalsent him home even though he was vomiting and 
semi-conscious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/feb/02/mid-staffs-report-cover-ups>, 
also support the campaign. It took a second inquest into John’s death in 2014 
to uncover the scale of the errors.

“It’s fundamental to everyone, in all walks of life,” Frank Robinson said of 
the act. “It opens access to justice for the man in the street. From the onset, 
all we wanted to know was the truth, and we were denied that by an inadequate 
first inquest. Using the Human Rights Act helped us achieve our goal.”

Asked about plans for a bill of rights, a Ministry of Justice spokeswoman 
said: “We will set out our proposals for a bill of rights in due course. We 
will consult fully on our proposals.”

As well as a series of videos highlighting the variety of people helped by the 
act, Amnesty commissioned a poll showing around two-thirds of people did not 
realise it had played a role in the new Hillsborough inquest or in the Good 
Friday peace process in Northern Ireland.

Kate Allen, UK director for Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>, said the findings 
were understandable given the “misreporting and myth-making” about the act.

She said: “It’s no surprise that after they’ve been force-fed a diet of 
distortion, relatively few people know about the role the Human Rights Act has 
played in helping ordinary people up and down the country win historic legal 
battles.”

 * This article was amended on 15 November 2016 to correct the spelling of 
Shankill.
 