
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> called 
on the FBI to “immediately” explain its review of a new batch of emails the 
agency said appeared to be pertinent to the previous investigation into her use 
of a private server.

World Series trumps presidential election in two title-starved midwest cities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/29/world-series-chicago-cubs-cleveland-indians>
Addressing reporters on Friday, the Democratic presidential nominee said it 
was “imperative” for American voters to have all of the information with just 
11 days remaining before the presidential election.

“The American people deserve to get the full and complete facts immediately,” 
Clinton said during a press conference in Des Moines, Iowa. “It’s imperative 
that the bureau explain this issue in question, whatever it is, without further 
delay.”

“We are 11 days out from perhaps the most important national election of our 
lifetimes.”

The FBI director, James Comey, announced the discovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/fbi-reopens-hillary-clinton-emails-investigation>
 of the new emails in a letter to Congress, which did not offer any specifics 
other than to disclose that federal investigators would review whether they 
contained classified information.

“In connection with an unrelated case, the FBI has learned of the existence of 
emails that appear to be pertinent to the investigation,” Comey wrote. “I 
agreed that theFBI <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> should take 
appropriate investigative steps designed to allow investigators to review these 
emails to determine whether they contain classified information, as well as to 
assess their importance to our investigation.”

In July, Comey announced that the bureau had closed its investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/05/fbi-no-charges-hillary-clinton-email-investigation>
 into Clinton’s emails and recommended prosecutors not seek charges in the 
case. But Comey rebuked Clinton and her aides for the “extremely careless” 
manner in which the emails were handled.

Clinton told reporters that she and her team had been given no advance warning 
and learned of the email investigation through news reports when Comey’s letter 
was made public. But seeking to mitigate the political ramifications of the 
announcement, which was immediately seized upon by her Republican opponent, 
Clinton urged the FBI to provide a clearer picture of its findings.

“Even director Comey noted that this new information may not be significant, 
so let’s get it out,” Clinton said, adding she had not been contacted by the 
FBI in relation to the matter.

Even director Comey noted that this new information may not be significant, so 
let’s get it out
Hillary Clinton 
Federal law enforcement officials said the emails were discovered on a laptop 
shared by Anthony Weiner and hisestranged wife, Huma Abedin, a top aide to 
Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-sexting-twitter-scandal>
. Weiner, a former congressman from New York, has been the subject of an 
unrelated investigation after it was revealed hesent illicit messages and 
photos to an underage girl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/21/anthony-weiner-sexually-explicit-messages-teen-daily-mail>
.

Clinton would not confirm the link to Weiner and Abedin, who remains with her 
on the campaign trail, stating: “We’ve heard these rumors. We don’t know what 
to believe.

“That’s why it is incumbent upon the FBI to tell us what they’re talking 
about. Right now your guess is as good as mine, and I don’t think that’s good 
enough.”

“We’ve made it very clear that if they’re going to be sending this kind of 
letter that is only going originally to Republican members of the House, that 
they need to share whatever facts they claim to have with the American people,” 
she added, “and that’s what I expect to happen.” The letter was sent to both 
Republican and Democratic leaders of relevant committees in Congress.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ftrump-responds-fbi-investigation-clinton-emails-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20gleefully%20responds%20to%20new%20FBI%20investigation%20into%20Clinton%20emails%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ftrump-responds-fbi-investigation-clinton-emails-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20gleefully%20responds%20to%20new%20FBI%20investigation%20into%20Clinton%20emails%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Ftrump-responds-fbi-investigation-clinton-emails-video&media=>
Trump gleefully responds to new FBI probe into Clinton emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/28/trump-responds-fbi-investigation-clinton-emails-video>
A letter sent by Comey to his employees on Friday, and reported 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-nation/wp/2016/10/28/read-the-letter-comey-sent-to-fbi-employees-explaining-his-controversial-decision-on-the-clinton-email-investigation/>
 by the Washington Post, provided a glimpse into his thinking. The FBI director 
said he “felt an obligation” to inform Congress of the new review, based on his 
prior testimony before federal lawmakers that the investigation into Clinton’s 
emails was complete.
“At the same time, however, given that we don’t know the significance of this 
newly discovered collection of emails, I don’t want to create a misleading 
impression,” Comey wrote.

Clinton has been dogged by questions over the use of her private email server 
since it was discovered weeks before she formally launched her presidential 
bid, and polling suggests the controversy has damaged her image among voters. 
Just 34% of Americans find Clinton honest and trustworthy, according to a recent
Washington Post-ABC poll 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/page/2010-2019/WashingtonPost/2016/10/16/National-Politics/Polling/release_452.xml?tid=a_inl>
.


Sensing an opportunity to revive the email controversy despite the FBI’s 
vaguely worded statement, the Republican presidential nominee, Donald Trump 
said during a rally in New Hampshire on Friday: “Hillary Clinton’s corruption 
is on a scale we have never seen before – we must not let her take her criminal 
scheme into the Oval Office.” At a later rally in Lisbon, Maine, he called her 
use of private emails the “biggest political scandal since Watergate”.

At a later rally in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, he abandoned his weeks of accusing the 
FBI of collusion 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/10/25/politics/reality-check-hillary-clinton-fbi-investigation/>
 with the Clinton campaign. “I give them great credit for having the courage to 
right this horrible wrong,” he said. “Justice will prevail.”

I think people a long time ago made up their minds about the emails. And now 
they are choosing a president
Hillary Clinton 
Clinton, whose lead over Trump has widened in recent weeks as the real estate 
mogul’s campaign unraveled in the wake of a tape in which he bragged about 
being able to grope women, said she believed the email issue was already 
factored into how the American public thinks.

“I think people a long time ago made up their minds about the emails,” Clinton 
said. “And now they are choosing a president.”

The Clinton campaign expressed its frustration with the FBI’s handling of the 
latest development, criticizing the way in which the news was disseminated.

After maintaining silence in order to allow for Clinton to first address the 
matter, Democrats quickly went on the offensive following her press conference 
with a series of statements calling on Comey to come forward with more details.

“The deliberately ambiguous nature of the director’s most recent disclosure – 
the emails could be significant or insignificant, relevant or irrelevant – 
contributes nothing to the public’s understanding,” Adam Schiff, the top 
Democrat on the House intelligence committee, said in a statement.

Can't vote/won't vote: How turnout will decide the 2016 presidential election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2016/oct/29/voter-turnout-us-election-2016-register>
“When coupled with the acknowledgment that more information will take an 
indeterminate period of time, it is difficult to see how this latest departure 
from department policy has served the public interest.”

Stephanie Schriock, the president of Emily’s List, a group that works to elect 
pro-choice Democratic women to public office, said the developments “have sent 
Republicans into an ignorant and irresponsible frenzy”.

“That is why director Comey must release all of the facts – anything less is 
just fodder for Donald Trump’s rightwing smear machine,” she said in a 
statement.

Some top Clinton surrogates did, however, refrain from wading into the issue 
for now.

Speaking with CNN on Friday, vice-president Joe Biden simply offered: “Oh God. 
Anthony Weiner. I should not comment onAnthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner>. I’m not a big fan.”
 