
App: HMRC Tax <https://www.theguardian.com/money/tax> Calc

By: HM Revenue & Customs

Price: Free

Available on: iPhone and Android 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=uk.gov.hmrc.ptcalc&feature=search_result>

What is it?

"A new tax calculator enabling people to work out how much tax they pay and 
how the government spends it," saysHM Revenue & Customs 
<http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/>, the part of the government set up to collect our 
taxes. It says the app will make the system more transparent and easier to 
understand, and suggests it could be useful to anyone moving jobs who would 
like to know how much their new salary will translate to in take-home pay.

Is it easy to use?

Yes. The default page asks for your weekly pay, but there are tabs along the 
top so you can choose to enter your monthly pay or your annual salary. I choose 
the annual option. It asked for my gross salary, and a little "i" took me 
through to an explainer about exactly what was being asked for. I filled in the 
number and pressed the Calculate button. I was taken through to a page which 
detailed my gross pay, how much I would pay in income tax this year, and how 
much in national insurance. It then showed what my take home pay will be.

Underneath it explained how much income tax and national insurance I will pay 
for every £1 I earn, and said what my marginal tax rate would be (again 
national insurance and income tax were combined). It also showed how much I 
would be contributing to different government spending including heath, welfare 
and defence, using figures based on 2011 spending.

There are also buttons taking you through to a full breakdown of government 
spending and full details of your own tax payments and how much you are paying 
at each rate – unfortunately, once you have clicked through to these you cannot 
click back to your figures or to the menu of options and have to go right back 
to the start.

You can only use the app for employment income – there is nowhere to add 
savings interest or income from pensions – and is less accurate if you earn 
more than £100,000 a year.

Is it fun?

Fun is too strong a word, but it was quite interesting to get an idea of where 
the money that disappears from your pay packet each month is going. (And 
interesting to find that three times as much is being spent on defence than on 
the environment.)

Is it pretty?

It's very cleanly presented, using the green colour scheme familiar to anyone 
who has had any dealings with the taxman. However, the type is quite small and 
you cannot enlarge it, which causes a bit of eye strain.

Should you download it?

Yes, if you want to get a better idea of how much of your pay goes towards 
national insurance and income tax, and what is done with it after that – 
apparently, more than half of us do not know how much tax we are paying.

From 2014 we will all get letters offering the same kind of breakdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2012/mar/20/income-tax-statement-government-spending-scrutiny>
, but in the meantime this is the easiest way to get an indication of how much 
you are contributing to the nation. Of course, as we pointed out when HMRC 
announced the personalised letters, focusing on income tax does not tell the 
whole story – perhaps HMRC could consider adding some kind of VAT and other 
taxes calculator to the app.
 