
Egypt

Why go? Egypt's tourism has been hammered since the 2011 revolution and the 
instability that followed, with many tourists and tour operators abandoning 
Cairo. The main tourist sites, including the Pyramids and Luxor, are more or 
less deserted. While Cairo and parts of the Sinai peninsula, particularly the 
north, should probably be avoided, it is still possible to visit the southern 
Sinai beach resorts.

What the Foreign and Commonwealth Office says 
<https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/egypt>: Advises against all travel to 
some parts of the country, especially North Sinai, because of the significant 
increase in criminal activity and recent terrorist attacks on police and 
security forces that have resulted in deaths. In the governorate of South 
Sinai, the FCO advises against all but essential travel, with the exception of 
the Red Sea resorts. The FCO does not advise against the use of Cairo airport 
as a transit stop, provided you do not leave the airport grounds.

Who goes there? Mainstream tour operators are still selling packages to the 
Red Sea riviera. SeeThomas Cook 
<http://www.thomascook.com/lp/1x6-en6uli/holidays-egypt/>, First Choice  
<http://www.firstchoice.co.uk/holiday/location/overview/Red-Sea-&-Sinai-001689>
andKuoni <http://www.kuoni.co.uk/egypt/red-sea-resorts>. Regal Diving 
<http://www.regal-diving.co.uk/> offers trips to more than 10 resorts: 
relatively undiscovered Safaga is a good spot for novice divers, with its 
sheltered spots. A holiday costs £507pp, including flights and half-board at the
Menaville Hotel <http://www.regal-diving.co.uk/menaville-hotel>.

Read more: On a trip to Cairo, Anissa Helou learns how to make perfect koshari 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2013/sep/21/egypt-street-food-cairo-market>
;and how blind writer Ryan Knighton coped in hectic Cairo on a post-Arab spring 
visit. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/apr/01/blind-in-egypt-travel-cairo>

Afghanistan
 Blue Mosque in Mazar-i-Sharif, northern Afghanistan. Photograph: Benedict 
Jenks 
Why go? Highlights include the city of Herat and its 800-year-old Friday mosque
 <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friday_Mosque_of_Herat>; breathtaking lakes at 
Band-e Amir <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Band-e_Amir_National_Park>; and 
Bamiyan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/may/14/bamiyan-afghanistan-safe-foreign-troops>
, site of the monumental sixth-century Buddhas destroyed by the Taliban in 
2001. Today, only the recesses of the Buddhas remain, but it is still possible 
to visit the monks' caves and the passages that connect them.

What the FCO says <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/afghanistan>: High 
threat from terrorism and kidnapping. Advises against all travel to much of the 
country; and all but essential travel to Kabul, Bamiyan, Parwan, Panjshir and 
parts of Herat province.

Who goes there?  Wild Frontiers <http://wildfrontierstravel.com/gb/>, an 
adventure tour company which started in 2002 with tours to the Hindu Kush, 
offers three tours of the country, including a 14-dayAfghan Explorer 
<http://wildfrontierstravel.com/gb/world-regions/central-asia/afghanistan/holidays>
 (£4,750 land-only), which takes in Bamiyan and the lakes. The website warns: 
"Anyone wishing to travel to Afghanistan must understand that in places tourist 
infrastructure is almost non-existent. Days can be long and hard, and the 
levels of services will not match those offered in more regular tourist 
locations. However, don't let this put you off. In our opinion, Afghanistan is 
simply the most fascinating country in the world."

Read more: skiing in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/apr/27/afghanistan-new-skiing-destination>

Iraq
 Spiral Minaret of the Great Mosque in Samarra, Iraq. Photograph: 
Reuters/Corbis 
Why go? Iraq is defined by its recent troubled history, but it has a 
10,000-year cultural heritage, and offers visitors the chance to immerse 
themselves in the stories and sites of some of the oldest civilisations in the 
world. Highlights include the Unesco-recognisedHatra 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/277> ruins, believed to be the ancient lost city 
of Tayyab; the greatZiggurat of Ur <http://www.ancient.eu.com/image/197/>, a 
massive, stepped structure built in 21BC and restored in 6BC; and Babylon, once 
the capital of ancient Mesopotamia, and the site ofNebuchadnezzar's palace 
<http://www.bible-history.com/babylonia/BabyloniaNebuchadnezzars_Babylon.htm>.

What the FCO says <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/iraq>: High risk 
of terrorism and kidnapping. Advises against all but essential travel to Iraq, 
except the Kurdistan region. Those who do travel should employ a professional 
security company.

Who goes there? Adventure tour operator Hinterland Travel 
<http://www.hinterlandtravel.com> (01484 719549) has been operating in and 
around Iraq for 30 years, although not during the war. It restarted tours in 
2009 and in 2014 is running six, nine or 16-day tours, starting in Baghdad, and 
taking inSamarra mosque,  <https://www.theguardian.com/flash/0,,1717292,00.html>
minaret and palace;Nimrud <http://www.aina.org/aol/nimrud/>; the city of Hatra 
and Babylon; and, on longer tours, the marshes around Basra. Nine-day tours 
costs £2,050pp, 16 days £2,850pp, both excluding flights and visas.

Director Geoff Hann says: "We respect the FCO [and its advice against travel 
here], but we think we are knowledgeable and experienced enough. Our groups are 
looked after by the ministry of tourism, who provide security, and sometimes 
have a police escort. We haven't had any incidents since going back in 2009."

Read more: skiing in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/apr/20/iraqi-kurdistan-skis-replacing-bullets>

Iran 
 Isfahan, Iran. Photograph: Alamy 
Why go? Home to some of the world's cultural treasures, and boasting 
spectacular landscapes, Iran hasn't been on the tourist list for a long time. 
With relations with the west starting to thaw, the Iranian government is taking 
steps toopen up the country to foreigners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/18/iran-opens-doors-to-tourists>, 
overhauling immigration rules and promoting its ancient cities, mosques, 
gardens and ski resorts.

What the FCO says <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/iran>: Advises 
against all travel within 100km of the Iran/Afghanistan border, and all but 
essential travel to the rest of the country.

Who goes there? Surrey-based specialist operator Persian Voyages 
<http://www.persianvoyages.com/> runs tours to Iran, Uzbekistan and 
Turkmenistan. It has six dates in 2014 for its Highlights of Iran tour (£2,550 
staying in three and four-star hotels, including flights).

Read more: Iran's top 10 tourist destinations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2013/oct/18/iran-top-10-tourist-destinations-in-pictures>
;and on the road in rural Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2009/sep/12/iran-middleeast>

Algeria 
 Roman ruins of Timgad, Unesco World Heritage Site, Algeria. Photograph: Alamy 
Why go? From the astonishing Roman ruins of Timgad 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/194> to the natural splendours of M'zab Valley 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/188> and the Belzma national park 
<http://www.algeria.com/national-parks/belezma/>, Algeria has loads to offer 
the intrepid visitor. With a dazzling array of influences, Algiers itself is 
also a huge attraction and has some of the best cafes in the Med.

What the FCO says <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/algeria>: Advises 
against any travel into the regions around Algeria's borders, particularly 
those with Mali and Niger. They also recommend avoiding driving or moving 
around at night, but coastal areas are pretty safe.

Who goes there? The Traveller <http://www.the-traveller.co.uk/> (01285 880 
931) organises a10-day Roman Algeria tour  <>led by an archaeological expert 
and taking in Algiers, Timgad, and Djémila <http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/191> 
from £2,795pp including international flights.Explore  
<http://www.explore.co.uk/>(0844 499 0901) has a 12-night trip to Algeria 
including Timgad and the Mzab Valley for £1,599 excluding flights.

Democratic Republic of Congo
 Locals on the Congo river. Photograph: Wild Frontiers 
Why go? At the green heart of Africa lies one of its most interesting and yet 
untried countries. The Congo river is a big draw, as are the gorillas and 
volcanoes in the east. Access to these, however, comes and goes with the 
political situation. The north and north-eastern areas are plagued by warlords 
and extreme violence.

What the FCO says 
<https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/democratic-republic-of-congo>: 
Advises against all travel to the eastern and northern DCR (except Bukavu), and 
all but essential travel to the rest of the country, and also points out that 
street robbery and violence are common throughout the country.

Who goes there? Wild Frontiers  <http://wildfrontierstravel.com/gb>runs a 
28-day river journey through the Congo 
<http://wildfrontierstravel.com/gb/world-regions/sub-saharan-africa/congo-drc/holidays>
, travelling 1,000km of river and venturing into forests and to visit pygmy 
tribes. The trip costs £5,995pp excluding flights.Steppes Travel 
<http://www.steppestravel.co.uk/> has a "land of the bonobos" wildlife tour of 
the Congo, 
<http://www.steppesdiscovery.co.uk/destinations/africa/drc/holidaytypes/group+tours/the+bonobo+great+ape+expedition/>
led by primatologists Sally Coxe and Michael Huxley from £8,995pp, excluding 
international flights. Luxury camp operatorWilderness Safaris  
<http://www.wilderness-collection.com/> opened two forest camps in 
Odzala-Kokoua National Park in the remote north in 2012. Located in the Congo 
Basin, the world's second largest expanse of tropical rainforest, the area is 
home to Africa's densest population of western lowland gorillas. It's also the 
richest area in Africa for primates.

Read more: Canoeing the Congo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/jan/27/canoeing-the-congo-river>

Georgia
 Georgia, horseriding. Photograph: Kevin Rushby 
Why go? On the southern slopes of the Caucasus, Georgia has a unique and 
ancient place in human culture, with its mix of European, Middle Eastern and 
central Asian influences. There really is nowhere quite like it, from the old 
hammams ofTbilisi  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/jan/26/jessica-hynes-tbilisi-or-bust>
to the magical watchtowers of theTusheti mountains <http://www.tusheti.ge/>.

What the FCO says <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/georgia>: Advises 
against visiting South Ossetia and Abkhazia, and also mentions unexploded 
ordnance from Russia's 2008 invasion. Otherwise, the problems of Georgia are 
really those age-old traveller woes: roads that get washed away, lack of 
available horses, and the extreme danger of being inveigled into an all-night 
drinking and dancing session.

Who goes there? Wild Frontiers <http://wildfrontierstravel.com/gb> offers a 
number of excellent trips 
<http://wildfrontierstravel.com/gb/world-regions/europe-the-caucasus/georgia/holidays>
 into the country on foot and on horseback. One is the nine-day wild walk 
through Svaneti region for £1,360pp excluding flights.

Read more: Horse-riding in Georgia  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2011/jan/08/georgia-caucasus-horse-riding>

Mexico

Why go? It's a country packed with fascinating cultural highlights. The 
architecture, music, cuisine and festivals are sufficient to power several 
years of travel. Then there are the ancient sites, such asChichen Itza 
<http://www.chichenitza.com/>, Palenque <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palenque> 
andTulum <http://www.tulum.com/>, plus the vast and energetic capital city with 
its astonishing street food. But drug-related abductions and murders in 
Acapulco and along the US border have had a negative impact on tourism recently.

What the FCO says <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/mexico>: Reading 
the FCO advice can be a sobering experience for Mexico, referencing 
drug-related violence, shopping mall shoot-outs, kidnappings and car-jackings.

Who goes there? Vast numbers of travellers go to Mexico, undettered by bad 
press, and report no trouble. The Pacific coast, Baja California, the Yucatán 
and Mexico City are still aspirational destinations for many, with plenty of 
high-end hotels (seei-escape.com <http://www.i-escape.com/>). In the 
less-visited north, try anauthentic Mexican ranch experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/jan/12/mexico-ranch-horse-riding-holiday>
 from $149 a night withtierrachamahuaecoadventures.com 
<http://tierrachamahuaecoadventures.com/>.
Read more: DBC Pierre walks across Mexico City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/feb/08/walking-mexico-city-dbc-pierre>;
the best street food in Mexico City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/feb/08/best-places-eat-street-food-mexico-city>
; andone woman's journey around the country with a troupe of street performers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2013/may/10/mexico-circus-street-performers>

Haiti
 Ile a Vache, surfers, Haiti. Photograph: Alamy 
Why go? There are a lot of reasons to visit Haiti and some strong reasons not 
to. Despite the endemic poverty, Haiti has a unique and vibrant culture. Away 
from the earthquake-devastated areas of the capital, Port au Prince, the 
countryside has steeply – and still sometimes lushly wooded slopes – with 
impressive waterfalls, including theBassin-Bleu <http://www.bassin-bleu.com/> 
and virgin beaches. The country has struggled to recover from the 2010 
earthquake and even before then, finding off-the-beaten-track accommodation was 
a struggle. Haiti is not for the faint of heart. Areas of Port au Prince have a 
serious crime problem, food and water hygiene is an issue, and driving is 
hazardous. The capital's most famous hotel theOlofsson <>, a gorgeous colonial 
building, is still in business, run by Richard Morse, whosemizik rasin band RAM 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Xojqd_gf4SE> is one of the country's best-known 
cultural exports.

What the FCO says <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/haiti>: Advises 
against all travel to the Carrefour, Cité Soleil, Martissant and Bel Air 
neighbourhoods in Port-au-Prince due to the risk of crime. Great care is needed 
in face of the risk of criminal activity throughout the country. It also notes 
health risks from cholera and dengue fever.

Who goes there? Very few tourists visit Haiti and most of those who do 
disembark cruise ships for a few hours on a fenced-in beach. According to a
report in Caribbean Journal, 
<http://www.caribjournal.com/2013/08/10/haiti-set-to-break-ground-on-new-airport-in-ile-a-vache/>
 the government is looking to develop low-density and sustainable tourism. A 
new offshore airport is being built on Ile à Vache in the drive to increase 
tourism. The hope is that funds from tourism will help improve infrastructure 
and create jobs.Expedia  <http://www.expedia.co.uk> has three packages, all 
based at hotels in Port-au-Prince.Six nights <http://bit.ly/16Fr1gr> at the 
three-star La Maison hotel costs £801 per person, including flights with 
American Airlines.

Pakistan
 Market, Karimabad, Karakoram Highway. Photograph: Alamy 
Why go? Speak to those in the know and Pakistan often comes out tops. With 
stunning scenery and an incredible history, Pakistan is a little-visited gem. 
Some areas and cities are off limits, and care is always needed, but there is 
so much more. There are World Heritage sites, such asTaxila 
<http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/139> and Mohenjo-Daro 
<http://www.mohenjodaro.net/>, plus landscapes including the Fairy Meadows 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fairy_Meadows> and the epic Karakoram Highway 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karakoram_Highway> through to China.

What the FCO says <https://www.gov.uk/foreign-travel-advice/pakistan>: Vast 
areas of Pakistan are pretty much inaccessible for political reasons and the 
FCO advises against all travel to many provinces. Other areas get a guarded 
"all but essential travel" advisory, but that still leaves room for exploration.

Who goes there? Wild Frontiers <http://wildfrontierstravel.com/gb> founder 
Johnny Bealby is passionate about Pakistan, calling it his "spiritual home". He 
has runcountless trips to the region 
<http://www.wildfrontierstravel.com/gb/world-regions/indian-subcontinent/pakistan>
.Group tours  
<http://wildfrontierstravel.com/gb/world-regions/indian-subcontinent/pakistan/holidays>
start at £1,995pp for a 12-day trip, but the company can also arrange a bespoke 
tour.Steppes Travel  
<http://www.steppestravel.co.uk/destinations/indian+subcontinent/pakistan/>can 
tailor trips to Pakistan, taking in the Karakoram Highway,Chitral,  
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chitral>the Kalash valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2011/oct/17/pakistan-kalash-valley-taliban>
 and Lahore.

Read more: Howard Marks returns to the borderlands of Pakistan and Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2008/jul/27/afghanistan.pakistan>; a tour 
of Pakistan's Punjab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2012/may/04/saints-singers-punjab-pakistan>

• This article was amended on 7 November. Cox and Kings no longer runs tours 
to Iran. It was replaced by Persian Voyages.
 