
For years the Los Angeles-based artist Lars Jan was haunted by an image he 
just couldn’t shake: “A man is turning the pages of a newspaper and slowly the 
room fills with water. Rather than reacting like there’s anything out of the 
ordinary, he just keeps on turning the pages until water rises over his head, 
the paper is submerged and the pages disintegrate in his hands.”

The Anthropocene epoch: scientists declare dawn of human-influenced age
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/29/declare-anthropocene-epoch-experts-urge-geological-congress-human-impact-earth>
Jan’s performance installation, Holoscenes <http://www.holoscen.es/>, is 
remarkably faithful to this unsettling vision. Performers occupy a plastic 
chamber that fills with water while they go about everyday tasks, submitted by 
members of the public from all over the world. As each performer puts on 
makeup, drinks coffee or pretends to sell fruit, a pump pushes up to 3,500 
gallons of water into their tank in less than a minute, creating an effect 
rather like a flash-flood – if that flood were confined to an elevator.

Ever since Hurricane Katrina, Jan noticed footage of people in moving water 
started to affect him powerfully. “It really grips me and pulls me into their 
story,” he says. As a longtime fan of the California light and space movement (
and its most famous proponent James Turrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/dec/16/artist-james-turrell-retrospective-interview>
), he wondered whether, instead of using light to manipulate an environment, he 
could use water to choreograph the human form.

The result is part surrealist performance, part sculpture, part 
escapology-style spectacle. The figure inside the tank could be cleaning the 
windows one minute and totally submerged, floating upside down the next. And 
that title? It refers to the geological period that began at the end of the 
pleistocene era about 10,000 years ago.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Flars-jans-3500-gallon-warning-to-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F129efc6dca1c5739cf9dd21c923978883ef7d548%2F0_20_1878_1127%2F1878.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holoscenes%3A%20Lars%20Jan's%203%2C500-gallon%20warning%20to%20humanity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Flars-jans-3500-gallon-warning-to-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holoscenes%3A%20Lars%20Jan%27s%203%2C500-gallon%20warning%20to%20humanity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Flars-jans-3500-gallon-warning-to-humanity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F129efc6dca1c5739cf9dd21c923978883ef7d548%2F0_20_1878_1127%2F1878.jpg>
 A performer is submerged as they try to sell fruit. Photograph: Lars Jan 
Evidence suggests that with global warming the planet is now entering a new 
era,sometimes referred to as the anthropocene 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/16/-sp-scientists-gather-talks-rename-human-age-anthropocene-holocene>
: an epoch whose conditions have beenshaped by human activity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/01/generation-anthropocene-altered-planet-for-ever>
. If this is so, it will be the first time in the history of the planet that a 
living species will have impacted the environment in this way. The defining 
features of the anthropocene era would be an abnormally high level of CO2 in 
the atmosphere, and its corollary, rising sea levels. “There’s just so much 
data,” says Jan. “It occurred to me that one way I could respond to this 
complex load of information was to make a moving bar graph.”

During Art <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/art> Basel, Jan was 
approached by a young Cuban immigrant who had recently arrived in the US. She 
was an aspiring actor working three jobs, one of them cleaning windows. “She 
identified with the performer in the chamber. She wanted to know if she was 
swimming in her own tears.” He also felt compelled to intervene in a three-way 
argument between a group of children over whether the piece was about dreams, 
mermaids or death. “They were all right,” he says.

People feel this enormous anxiety about the water: that it keeps coming. Or it 
never goes away
Annie Saunders 
Jan admits to a phobia of deep water. Perhaps it’s this fear, so common and so 
ancient, that leaves audience members surprised by the intensity of their own 
reactions. “People get really worried for us,” says Annie Saunders, one of the 
performers, “They feel this enormous anxiety about the water: that it keeps 
coming. Or it never goes away.”

Spectators needn’t feel too guilty. The water is kept at skin temperature and 
Saunders insists she loves the experience. “We do a lot of very long 
exhalations, so we can sink to the bottom of the tank. And that puts your body 
in a very zen state. So we’re really blissed out in there.” Being submerged for 
an extended period flips a primordial, water-mammalian switch, she says. “For 
the first 10 minutes, we just look like people in water, and then, around 10 
minutes in, something just shifts. As a viewer, you forget that we have to 
breathe.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Flars-jans-3500-gallon-warning-to-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6875010f35d1fe0a059465313768a3c20ea2277b%2F0_494_1878_1127%2F1878.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Holoscenes%3A%20Lars%20Jan's%203%2C500-gallon%20warning%20to%20humanity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Flars-jans-3500-gallon-warning-to-humanity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Holoscenes%3A%20Lars%20Jan%27s%203%2C500-gallon%20warning%20to%20humanity&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F29%2Flars-jans-3500-gallon-warning-to-humanity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6875010f35d1fe0a059465313768a3c20ea2277b%2F0_494_1878_1127%2F1878.jpg>
 Performers dance as their tank fills with water. Photograph: Lars Jan 
Having travelled to Toronto, Miami and Sarasota, Holoscenes will be coming to 
London as part of London’s Burning, an arts festival marking the 350th 
anniversary of the Great Fire of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/aug/26/londons-burning-celebrating-the-350th-anniversary-of-the-great-fire>
. Jan suggests there is a rightness to commemorating the fire with a 
performance that not only explores our fraught relationship with its elemental 
opposite but embodies our adaptability.

“What’s the global Great Fire?” he asks. “What is the coming disaster that we 
need to organise around and adapt to?” Although the possibility of fire was 
obvious to some 17th-century observers, it took a catastrophe to change 
people’s behaviour. It makes you wonder if we’ll still be cleaning the windows 
as the waters rise.


 * Holoscenes 
<http://www.holoscen.es/news/2016/7/27/holoscenes-londons-burning-festival-london-uk-sept-1-4-2016>
 is at Exchange Square, London from 1-4 September as part ofLondon’s Burning 
<http://www.artichoke.uk.com/events/great_fire_350_londons_burning/> festival.
 