
The Home Office has come under attack over the publication of new, highly 
restrictive, eligibility criteria for child refugees hoping to be transferred 
fromFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> to Britain, which will 
stop many Eritrean, Afghan and Yemeni teenagers aged 13 or 14 getting sanctuary 
in the UK.

The Home Office minister Robert Goodwill was also under pressure to explain 
why his department had issued eligibility rules excluding 16- and 17-year-olds, 
of all nationalities, for consideration for transfer to Britain under the Dubs 
amendment of the Immigration Act.

Migrant teenagers without family in UK barred except Syrians and Sudanese
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/migrant-teenagers-without-family-in-uk-barred-except-syrians-and-sudanese>
MPs from all parties expressed concern about the criteria <>, published Monday 
in response to an urgent question from the Liberal Democrat MP Tom Brake.

Goodwill said the government’s intention had always been to prioritise the 
youngest. He added: “We remain absolutely committed to bringing all the 
eligible children over to the UK as soon as possible.”

Giving the first update since the clearance of the Calais 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> camp two weeks ago, Goodwill said 
318 minors had been brought to the UK, 60 of whom were girls, 200 of whom were 
brought in under a family re-unification programme mandated by the Dublin 
regulation in EU law, with the remainder transferred under the Dubs amendment.

The shadow Home Office minister Carolyn Harris described the new criteria as a 
disgrace and not in the spirit of the Dubs amendment. “A child is a child until 
the age of 18,” she said. “It is wrong to restrict a child’s rights to transfer 
based on their age.”


The new guidelines state that to be eligible for transfer to the UK under the 
Dubs amendment children from the now dismantled Calais camp had to meet one of 
the following criteria: being 12 or under; at high risk of sexual exploitation; 
aged 15 or under and of Sudanese or Syrian nationality. Teenagers who have 
relatives already in the UK will still be eligible to go there under European 
family reunification legislation.

'Desperate' Afghan children go on hunger strike in France in bid to rejoin 
families in UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/14/afghan-children-hunger-strike-france-in-bid-to-rejoin-families-in-uk>
Yvette Cooper, chair of the Home Affairs committee, said: “I remember the 
debates on the Dubs amendment and we did not discuss ruling out 13-year-old and 
14-year-old Eritreans on an arbitrary basis.” She asked for clarity on the 
number of children likely to be transferred from France, adding that “it sounds 
considerably lower than the numbers he and I have discussed”.

Goodwill refused to give a clear answer on the number of children who would be 
helped. He said the government expected to bring several hundred more children 
from France, in addition to more than 318 who had already come to the UK under 
the Dubs amendment and under European laws that allow entry to children with 
close family members in the UK.

Alf Dubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/03/alf-dubs-antisemitism-islamophobia-racism>
, the Labour peer who forced the government this year into a U-turn on 
accepting child refugees, successfully getting his amendment included in the 
Immigration Act, said he was alarmed by the new regulations. “It is very 
disappointing. They said they were going to enter into the letter spirit of the 
amendment. I think this is rolling back on that commitment.

“This is the first time I have heard them say they have to be Sudanese and 
Syrian. I would be very concerned aboutAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> and Eritrea, where there are 
children who have fled, and [are at] risk of war and persecution, of whom many, 
if not all, would have a right to refugee status under the Geneva convention.”

He said that many of the 1,600 children from Calais who were now in reception 
centres in France would feel desperate at the news and would return to the port 
to risk their lives trying to smuggle themselves to the UK. “Many of the 
children who were in Calais were given undertakings that their claims would be 
considered, and are now being told that their claims are not eligible. I dare 
say they will go back to Calais and try to take matters into their own hands,” 
he said.

The SNP immigration spokesman, Stuart C McDonald, said the exclusion of 
Eritreans was “utterly inappropriate”.

But Goodwill said the government had laid down nationality related 
restrictions, based on those countries which had a 75% success rate in asylum 
applications. “It is absolutely imperative that the children we bring across 
are more likely to qualify for asylum,” Goodwill said.

Calais migrants' stories speak to a wider truth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/02/calais-migrants-stories-speak-to-wider-truth-justin-forsyth-save-the-children>
A spokesperson from Save the Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> said it was important to avoid 
assessing children according to “arbitrary criteria”, adding: “The Dubs 
amendment was tabled and accepted in the spirit of helping the most vulnerable 
children caught up in this crisis across Europe.

“In order to stay true to this spirit, rather than applying arbitrary 
criteria, each child’s unique vulnerabilities should be taken into account. The 
government must ensure that a full and proper best-interests assessment is 
carried out, which respects the needs of children who have already been pushed 
from pillar to post in search of safety.”


On Wednesday a group of 25 Kindertransport survivors wrote to the home 
secretary, Amber Rudd, calling on the government to accept 1,000 of the Calais 
children by Christmas.


The letter says: “During the camp demolition you told parliament that you 
believed it would be a good outcome if Britain took in half of the total number 
of children. We agree. It is now clear that there were some 2,000 unaccompanied 
children in Calais at the time of demolition.

“We therefore urge you to fulfil the commitment you made and pledge to 
transfer 1,000 of the Calais children by Christmas. Compared to the 95,000 
unaccompanied children who arrived inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> last year in the refugee 
crisis, this is not too big an ask.”


The letter, coordinated by Sir Erich Reich, chair of the Association of Jewish 
Refugees <http://www.ajr.org.uk> Kindertransport group, and signed by, among 
others, Simon Wessely, president of the Royal College of Psychiatrists, 
expressed concern at the uncertainty experienced by the 1,600 children from the 
camp in Calais, made anxious by the delay and absence of information.

“Britain has a proud history of welcoming children fleeing conflict and 
persecution. As Kindertransport survivors and family members we are testament 
to this courage and compassion. We urge you to demonstrate these values again 
now in your response to the Calais children left behind in France,” the letter 
concludes.
 