
GPs in England could be banned from prescribing homeopathy after the threat of 
a judicial review apparently forced ministers to launch a consultation on the 
move.

The Department for Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> 
announced the consultation on Friday, with George Freeman, the minister for 
life sciences, saying that in a time of rising demand the government had a duty 
to ensure NHS funds were spent only on the most effective treatments.

“We are currently considering whether or not homeopathic products should 
continue to be available throughNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> 
prescriptions. We expect to consult on proposals in due course,” Freeman said.

'Black spider memos': Prince Charles lobbied over NHS homeopathy funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/04/black-spider-memos-prince-charles-lobbied-homeopathy-funding-nhs>
The move comes after the Good Thinking Society 
<http://goodthinkingsociety.org/> threatened to challenge the department’s 
refusal to add homeopathic products to the NHS’s “schedule 1” blacklist, which 
details the products NHS doctors cannot prescribe, effectively blocking 
taxpayer funds from being used for them. It includes more than 3,000 products, 
ranging from pharmaceutical drugs toRibena 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/28/tesco-stop-selling-childrens-high-sugar-drinks-ribena-capri-sun>
.

Simon Singh, the science writer and founder of the Good Thinking Society, said 
the decision came after almost a year of pressure on the government: “We’ve 
been arguing with the Department of Health, saying look, homeopathy by four of 
your own criteria should be on this list, and they have been going back and 
forth saying we are not updating the list.

“After many, many months of to-ing and fro-ing they have now agreed to review 
whether homeopathy should be on the blacklist. They have said it privately, but 
they have now said it officially.”

The four conditions that Singh said homeopathy failed to meet were whether it 
was effective, whether it was cost-effective, whether there were cheaper 
alternatives, and whether it was so widely available on the high street it did 
not need to be prescribed.

“By any of those criteria homeopathy should be blacklisted,” Singh said. “This 
is money that could be spent on drugs that do work. It’s not about being 
anti-homeopathy, it’s about being pro-patient and spending money on drugs that 
do work.”

Jamie Potter, the public law and human rights partner at law firm Bindmans, 
which was to represent the Good Thinking Society in a potential judicial 
review, said: “The NHS blacklist exists to ensure that NHS money is not spent 
on products that do not work, that work no better than cheaper alternatives, 
that are not cost-effective or that are widely available inexpensively.

There is no scientific case for homeopathy: the debate is over | Edzard Ernst
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/12/no-scientific-case-homeopathy-remedies-pharmacists-placebos>
“By every one of these criteria, it’s clear that homeopathic products should 
be included on the blacklist. A refusal to add homeopathic remedies to the list 
would not only represent a breach of the Department of Health’s legal 
obligations, but also a failure to ensure that NHS funds are spent on 
treatments that can genuinely help patients.”

Homeopathy is based on the idea that the body can heal itself through highly 
diluted substances. It is controversial because experts say there isno evidence 
that it works 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/12/no-scientific-case-homeopathy-remedies-pharmacists-placebos>
 beyond the impact of a placebo.

A 2010 House of Commons science and technology committee report on homeopathy 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-archive/science-technology/s-t-homeopathy-inquiry/>
 said the remedies performed no better than dummy pills and should not be 
funded on the NHS, adding that it was underpinned by principles that are 
“scientifically implausible”. England’s chief medical officer, Prof Dame Sally 
Davies, also views homeopathy as ineffective.

Dr Helen Beaumont, president of the Faculty of Homeopathy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/homeopathy> said: “It’s disappointing 
that at a time when the NHS is facing a funding crisis the Department of Health 
is embarking on a costly consultation that could prevent highly skilled 
clinicians prescribing a course of treatment that benefits thousands of 
patients each year. If the department were serious about saving money surely it 
should be looking at SSRIs (Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors) prescribed 
for mild to moderate depression in vast quantities at considerable cost to the 
NHS, but which studies have found to be ineffective for those conditions.”
 