
Henry Holland <https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/henry-holland> thinks that, 
on reflection, he did not inherit his style from his father. "He told me the 
other day he'd be wearing his new jacket to my sister's 30th birthday party. I 
said, 'Which one'?' He said, 'The pink one.'" Holland leans across the table 
with the air of someone sharing an embarrassing secret. "It's not actually 
pink," he says, dropping his voice to a whisper. "It's more a deep red. And I 
said, 'Is it new?' My dad said, 'Well, I've only had it four years.'" Holland 
shakes his head with affectionate exasperation. "He's a solicitor," he says, as 
if that explains everything.

Holland junior would never be mistaken for anything so prosaic. At 26, he is 
one of the most sought-after young designers in Britain and is styled 
accordingly. Today, he is sporting his trademark vertical quiff, a feat of 
follicular engineering that one imagines can only be achieved with a remarkable 
amounts of patience and hairspray. His grey T-shirt is artfully splattered with 
fluorescent paint and his black Prada shoes are patterned with eye-catching 
silver studs. His slender fingers are weighed down with chunky gothic rings. 
The effect is exotic cockatiel meets Sex Pistols. Bizarrely, it works.

Three years ago, Holland, then making his living as a fashion editor for teen 
magazines, started designing rhyming slogan T-shirts for his friends (sample: 
"I'll Tell You Who's Boss Kate Moss") that rapidly became a fashion crowd 
in-joke. In 2006, designer Gareth Pugh appeared at the end of his London 
Fashion Week catwalk show wearing a T-shirt tribute to fellow designer Giles 
Deacon ("Get Yer Freak On Giles Deacon"). Soon, everyone who was anyone wanted 
a Henry Holland T-shirt.

"Yeah, I started my entire business as a joke, which sounds bad, doesn't it?" 
He grins. "It's been a transition. I was a writer, I wrote on clothes and then 
I made clothes." He says the couplets came naturally. "I own a rhyming 
dictionary, which helps." What about my name? He thinks for a few seconds. 
"Elizabeth Day, Covered With Clay." Yes, well, I bet he couldn't do that if I 
were Elizabeth Orange.

The shirts became so popular that he diversified and founded his own label, 
House of Holland 
<http://www.urbanoutfitters.co.uk/bin/venda?ex=co_wizr-xapian&bsref=urbanoutfitters&searchfld=&searchpage=0&searchinvt=1&searchstry=0&searchicat=0&searchlike=1&itemsperpage=12&threshold=50&carryfields=U%2CV%2CC%2CF%2Ccatname%2Cminprice%2Cmaxprice%2Csortname%2Csortprice%2Csortrelease%3E&xptpl=wz_xapian_advanced&srchopt=U%2CV%2CC%2CF%2Cminprice%2Cmaxprice%2Csortname%2Csortprice%2Csortrelease&U=&V=&C=&F=&ARG_DEFAULTOP=AND&minprice=&maxprice=&bklist=&searchex=house+of+holland&gclid=CL6WntG09J0CFQdl4wodG1SeKA>
, now stocked in Harrods, Barneys in New York and worn by celebrities including 
Lindsay Lohan, Jaime Winstone, the singer M.I.A. and Holland's best friend, 
supermodel Agyness Deyn. He has known Deyn since childhood – she served fish 
and chips at a shop near Holland's home village of Ramsbottom in Lancashire. 
"She had braces and mousy brown hair and we hung out in town with mutual 
friends."

Later, Deyn was spotted by a model scout while the two of them were shopping 
in London and was soon being photographed by Mario Testino for the cover ofVogue
. Do they ever sit back and marvel at the fact that two kids from Ramsbottom 
are now riding the crest of a fashion wave? "We'd be complete wankers if we did 
that, wouldn't we? Pause the TV! 'Hang on, you're the hottest model and I'm one 
of the hottest young designers, let's talk about that while I make a brew.'"

He delivers this absurd scenario with the timing of a stand-up comic. "It is 
nice to have someone else in the industry," he concedes. "She can call up and 
say, 'I just shot with Steven Meisel' and I know what it means, whereas if I 
called my dad and said, 'I'm doing this', he'd be like [he puts on a strident 
Lancashire accent], 'Do they pay your travel?'"

We are sitting in a cavernous record shop basement in Soho, where Holland is 
preparing for the launch of his new collection designed exclusively for 
Debenhams, a department store more traditionally associated with middle-aged 
women seeking to buy something nice for the WI cake sale. So, Henry, I ask, how 
often do you shop at Debenhams? "I'm always in there buying aftershave and, er, 
swimwear," he answers, a bit too quickly.

To be fair, the collection is impressive – pretty, floral-printed tops, 
leather pencil skirts and neon leggings, all delivered with Holland's 
appealingly quirky touch at ridiculously competitive prices. Was he worried 
that his vision would be compromised? "Possibly when I first started, but it 
wasn't like I came into the interview and said, 'Let's do a full leather body 
sheath.' You know, I was thinking about the Debenhams customer already. There's 
something for anyone in there."

Holland knew from "a really young age" that he wanted to be in fashion. "My 
mum [a management consultant] is stylish and into clothes and I would go 
shopping with her for hours, telling her what to buy." He vividly recalls his 
favourite childhood outfit: "I had an amazing pair of bright blue cords and a 
yellow and white knitted jumper with a horizontal stripe," he says, misty-eyed 
at the though. "And a utility jump suit with zips."

It was only later that he realised he was gay, but Holland was unhappy at his 
"macho" all-boys grammar school, where the female teachers insisted on being 
called "Sir". His parents, who divorced when he was three, moved him to a 
smaller private school where he thrived. "I think it [being gay] makes you more 
experimental," he says. "There's not that whole thing of, 'I can't wear that, 
I'd look like a poof', because you are a poof."

But Ramsbottom offered few opportunities for a flamboyant teenage boy who 
yearned for a life of box pleats and pin cushions. "There, a career in fashion 
is: you work in a shop or you don't," he says drily. "It was not an option." So 
he moved to London to do a BA in journalism at the London College of Printing 
and went straight from graduation to a job as fashion editor ofBliss magazine. 
"What I loved about teen magazines is that it's fashion, but it's got that more 
fun, frivolous element. For a teenage girl, it's like, 'What will I wear down 
the bus stop? What flip-flops should I wear to pull boys on holiday?' I think 
fashion should be playful."

He has two younger siblings, Alice, 15, and Tom, 13, who keep him in touch 
with his adolescent side (there is also an older sister, Fleur, 30 and a 
27-year-old stepsister, Laura). "Alice is like my education into the young 
people today," Holland says. "She wears bits and bobs from the mainline 
collection, she loves the high-heeled shoes and the jersey dresses."

Does he worry that the use of size-zero models within his industry has a 
negative effect on his sister's self-perception? "I don't think so, but I'm not 
a woman. My little sister is aware of weight and diet and exercise but she's 
massively sporty. Occasionally she'll say, 'Oh, I need to go on a diet', but 
then she'll eat 15 Big Macs. They just say it because it's a cool thing to say. 
Ninety-five per cent of them say it and then eat biscuits. I think it's because 
women's magazines talk about it [weight] so much. All men who go to football 
matches aren't thinking they need to look like the footballers."

Holland, by contrast, is not afraid to look stupid in the name of style. 
"Looking stupid's part of the fun," he says, before recalling his greatest-ever 
fashion disaster when his mother gave him a shellsuit for Christmas in the 
mid-90s. "I was sitting in front of a gas fire and it melted on to my arm. We 
were skint so we couldn't afford a new one so I had to wear my sister's pink 
and jade green one for a year. I was devastated."

Yet the love of pink and green two-pieces obviously stayed with him. The first 
time he was invited to a Downing Street reception for the fashion industry last 
year, he wore "a pink and lime green floral suit. I walked in, everyone else 
was in black, and I was the only one dressed like Liberace." He spoke briefly 
to Gordon Brown, but remains more impressed by his wife, Sarah, and the fact 
that both she and Samantha Cameron make a point of wearing British designers. 
He returned for this year's Fashion Week reception more soberly attired. "I was 
all black and reserved and everyone was like, 'Oh we were counting on you.'"

Still, there's always next year, by which time one can only hope that Holland 
will be dressed head to toe in a bespoke, synthetic shellsuit and standing at a 
safe distance from any naked flames.
 