
For the past three years we at Fuel <http://www.fueltheatre.com/home> have 
been working with theatres, organisations and artists up and down the country 
to find ways to build meaningful and long-lasting relationships with audiences 
– and to improve the way theatre tours. Now that we’ve come to an end of the 
New Theatre in Your Neighbourhood project, we’ve launched areport 
<http://www.fueltheatre.com/news/new-theatre-in-your-neighbourhood-resources> 
detailing its key findings, accompanied by performances that have been 
developed and informed by the research and discussions with leading industry 
figures.

Here, those industry voices – Sarah Frankcom, Alan Lane, Charlotte Bennet and 
Annabel Turpin – share their views on how we can encourage thriving 
contemporary theatre communities in unlikely places.

Sarah Frankcom, artistic director, Royal Exchange Manchester 
<http://www.royalexchange.co.uk/>

At the Exchange we’re about halfway through a huge, 18-month conversation with 
our audience. This has not only been a lot of fun and genuinely inspiring, but 
it’s made us rethink our idea of “audience” – who they are, individually and 
collectively; how we engage and collaborate; and how this might be the key to 
re-imagining our theatre building. So what have we done so far?

We need to look at how we make the whole experience relevant, as well as the 
work itself
Annabel Turpin 
For one we got associate artist Chris Thorpe to ask the audience: what is this 
theatre for? Over one day and around 60 conversations, he talked, listened and 
wrote, and at the end of the day gave it back as an instant text and scratch 
performance. It made us cry, think and laugh – and it told us more than a 
million marketing surveys ever could.

Second, we slept with the audience, inviting 100 people aged 9 to 73 to a 
sleepover in the theatre. We asked them on stage to tell us their stories and 
make puppets of themselves; we read them a bedtime story and sang them a newly 
commissioned lullaby. We wanted to say: this really is your theatre, so why not 
sleep here?

What else? We got our audience members to create a blueprint for the future. 
They teamed up with a theatre designer and writer and re-imagined the Exchange: 
the building, programme, menus and vibe. We’re going to mount an exhibition of 
what they wrote, drew and made. We also meet them every month for tea and 
conversation in the theatre cafe.

I don’t know exactly how all this will change what we do (it’s early days) but 
what I do know is that it’s blown apart how we view who we are and how our 
audience feel about our work. Without a doubt we’ve begun to forge a different 
kind of partnership – one that’s about the future.

Alan Lane, artistic director, SlungLow <http://www.slunglow.org/>

The defining quality of theatre is that audience and performer share the same 
space. Many pieces have demonstrated that this shared space need not 
necessarily be limited in any way by geography, but by the basic understanding 
between the performer – that you are here and I need you – and the audience: we 
are here and you need us. It’s vital if the event is going to live rather than 
just exist.

There are many ways to do that. Stand-up comedians, for example, do it with 
their content. Chris Thorpe does it with eye contact inConfirmation 
<https://vimeo.com/103696419>. Keir Cooper and Emma Frankland’s Don Quijote 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XbBIE2RgGr4> and Greyscale’s Gods Are Fallen 
and All Safety Gone <https://vimeo.com/97250209> both do it with guest 
appearances. Personally, I’m an advocate of Sarah-Jane Rawlings’s wisdom 
contained within her tweet:
Sarah-Jane Rawlings (@sjmbrawlings) 
@UKTheatreDance <https://twitter.com/UKTheatreDance>. Support work ‘with' and 
‘by' your ‘audiences’ & they won’t need to be welcomed to the space. They will 
own it.#funpalaces <https://twitter.com/hashtag/funpalaces?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/sjmbrawlings/status/667323327875260416> November 19, 2015
 <https://twitter.com/sjmbrawlings/status/667323327875260416> 
However it’s done, it must be done. If your show can sit down in a theatre 
without touching the sides or holding the gaze of those who turned up to see 
you, then you may well be doing something and there may well be money to be 
made from it, but I can’t see how it’s theatre.

Annabel Turpin, chief executive, ARC Stockton <http://arconline.co.uk/>

Going to the theatre to see something you’ve never heard of, by an artist or 
company you don’t know, is a risk. You’re committing time and money to 
something you might not enjoy. Identifying things about the show with which 
people can connect – themes, ideas, stories, characters, settings – and 
communicating these in the right way creates a sense that this show is relevant 
to them, reducing that risk.


Relevant is one of two key words we use to describe ARC’s programme (the other 
is “contemporary”) and relevance underpins all the NewTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in Your Neighbourhood work too. It 
has emerged as a key theme in the evaluation of the project, with both 
intellectual and emotional reactions stimulated through relatable stories and 
locally commissioned work.

Audiences can’t just be an afterthought; they are why the work exists.
Charlotte Bennet 
It’s not just about making the work relevant, but everything. The way you 
communicate, the venue, the whole offer has to seem relevant. Otherwise, why 
would people come? However relevant the themes of the show are, if the leaflet 
makes it look too expensive, uses words not commonly used by your target 
audience, or talks about awards or other plaudits not known in your area, why 
would it feel relevant to local people?

As the report says, there is a sense that relevance could be used to a greater 
effect; we need to look at how we make the whole experience relevant, as well 
as the work itself.

Charlotte Bennet, producer, RashDash <http://www.rashdash.co.uk/>

It’s a big ask for audiences to take a gamble on contemporary theatre. Part of 
my role as the producer for a touring contemporary theatre company is to 
encourage audiences to take that gamble. Key to this is allowing audiences to 
put a face to the name of your (often obscurely named) show and interacting 
with potential audiences directly.


To support this I run an advocacy scheme called “Become a RashDasher” that 
involves recruiting local volunteers ahead of a tour date to work with over one 
day to distribute additional marketing. This process begins with venues 
providing a list of places they have already targeted so we can come armed with 
alternatives.

We don’t spend the day dropping flyers on tables; we split off and have 
conversations. We articulate directly why the show we have poured all our 
energy into is worth somebody else’s time. We speak with people on the street, 
sit with people in cafes and organise visits into schools, colleges and 
universities. The volunteers we attract are usually students or recent 
graduates and in return for their time they get a hot chocolate, mentorship 
with the company and a ticket to the show.

The scheme isn’t just about audience numbers. It’s about engagement, community 
and conversation.Audiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/audiences> can’t 
just be an afterthought; they are why the work exists.

Louise Blackwell is co-founder of Fuel <http://www.fueltheatre.com/home>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 