
In November 2011 during a protest on Mohamed Mahmoud 
<http://www.dailynewsegypt.com/2012/11/19/remembering-mohamed-mahmoud-the-good-the-bad-and-the-brotherhood/>
 street in downtown Cairo, a friend asked me if I would start a reading group 
for some politically engaged young people. I answered that I had read and 
dislikedReading Lolita in Tehran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/sep/13/featuresreviews.guardianreview1> 
and so had no interest in imitating its protagonist, who had set up a book club 
in her home and encouraged the members to read and discuss western literature 
as the means to emancipation. My friend had not understood what I’d meant and 
so I conceded.

Cairo citizens caught between Isis violence and Abdel Fatah al-Sisi’s 
draconian security crackdowns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/23/cairo-citizens-isis-violence-sisi-draconian-security-crackdowns>
I had expected five people but 15 arrived instead, all in their 20s and early 
30s; most of them were what the media and politicians labelled “Islamists”. My 
label? “Leftist academic and activist.”

We met weekly, reading together Vladimir Lenin, Frantz Fanon 
<http://www.iep.utm.edu/fanon/>, Ali Shariati <http://www.shariati.com/bio.html>
,Talal Asad <http://talalasad.blogspot.co.uk/>, Edward Said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2003/sep/26/guardianobituaries.highereducation>
 andLila Abu Lughod <http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674725164> 
among others. We talked about Marxism, postcolonial studies, Islam, feminism, 
resistance and revolution and discussed contemporary politics at length, but as 
the weeks passed we also cooked together, watched movies, and spoke about their 
families and love lives.

As a student of postcolonial studies and an Arab woman in western circles, I 
have often had to confront other people’s assumptions about me, and most of my 
academic work has been about deconstructing such stereotypes. So I thought 
myself above labelling, presumptuous conclusions and artificial divisions – 
until Asmaa, Awatif and Mariam, three stay-at-home mothers, asked to join the 
group and I was forced to confront my own deeply rooted assumptions.

I suggested that we have a separate group for women so that they would be more 
at ease. They declined politely

When the women came to our first meeting, thinking I was being sensitive, I 
suggested that we have a separate group for women so that they would be more at 
ease. They declined politely and I later learned that they didn’t need to be 
made to feel comfortable in order to voice their opinions. Asmaa often 
dominated discussions; Awatif always had a witty remark; all three came with 
stories of lives fully lived: volunteering with youth camps, attending courses, 
leaving the children with their husbands. I had assumed their homes and lives 
would be organised along a strict division of gender roles but they were not.

Months after we started, some of my “secular” friends (there’s another easy 
yet artificial categorisation) started asking me if the women, moved by the 
texts they were reading and the discussions we were having, had begun to take 
off their veils or if the men were becoming less religious. But they were not. 
If anything, they were becoming more comfortable straddling multifaceted 
identities.

One winter evening Nahla, who had become my guide to Cairo’s alternative music 
and comedy shows in Egypt as well as toSufism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/23/sufism-natural-antidote-fanaticism-the-sufis-idries-shah>
, walked in late to our gathering and said: “I dreamt that Marx was leading our 
prayer but he didn’t know which way theqibla [the direction of Mecca that 
Muslims use to position themselves during prayer] was.” Nahla and the others 
didn’t see a contradiction between being religious and being progressive.

Asmaa refused to take off her face veil despite her husband’s request for her 
to do so. Mohamed, the pharmacist from Badrasheen (a rural area on the 
outskirts of Cairo that like other small communities inEgypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> is conservative), believed it was his 
daughters’ choice to pray or not, even though he personally would never miss a 
prayer. Tamer, the film director, thought that the Bernardo Bertolucci movie we 
watched would have served the same purpose with less nudity; some agreed and 
others didn’t. They also shared stories about their own indoctrination, their 
personal struggle with some religious and political convictions they held for a 
long time. There was nothing to be idealised here.

Over time things have changed, just as Egypt has. Our weekly meetings are now 
much smaller and less regular. Awatif and her family had to flee for fear of 
persecution. Mohamed, Tamer and Asmaa are still here, but have had to stop 
doing many of the things they love. With theclampdown on freedoms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/17/egyptian-president-ratifies-law-to-punish-false-reporting-of-terror-attacks>
 andattacks against activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/23/cairo-citizens-isis-violence-sisi-draconian-security-crackdowns>
, many members of my reading group have become disenchanted and at risk. Nahla 
spends most of her time running from one prison to the next visiting friends 
who have been imprisoned. Many of Mariam’s family are in jail, imprisoned 
alongside others attending protests against President Sisi.

The regime and the media (both local and international) conflate religious 
Muslims, Islamists, rightwing political projects like that of the Muslim 
Brotherhood, and even terrorism. My friends are portrayed as ticking bombs that 
need to be eliminated or at least contained – not because they pose a terrorist 
threat, as many would like to believe, but because their critical minds, their 
desire for change and their love of life threatens the status quo and the false 
binaries.

Are the young people who read with me representative of all Egyptians, all 
religious people, or all young people of their generation? Of course not, but 
they are equally not an anomaly. When I look at our group, or what is left of 
it, I see how difficult alienation can be. This country is where people chose 
to belong and where they are rejected. What is constant is that they defy the 
desire of many for easy categorisation.
 