
On 5 February, Jordanian officials confirmed that the intellectual godfather 
of al-Qaida,Abu Muhammad al-Maqdisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/05/jordan-release-jihadi-cleric-al-maqdisi-isis-killing-pilot-al-kasasbeh>
, had been released from prison. Though he is little known in the west, 
Maqdisi’s importance in the canon of radical Islamic thought is unrivalled by 
anyone alive. The 56-year-old Palestinian rose to prominence in the 1980s, when 
he became the first significant radical Islamic scholar to declare the Saudi 
royal family were apostates, and therefore legitimate targets of jihad. At the 
time, Maqdisi’s writings were so radical that even Osama bin Laden thought they 
were too extreme.

How Isis crippled al-Qaida - Podcast
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2015/dec/04/isis-syria> 
Today, Maqdisi counts the leader of al‑Qaida, Ayman al-Zawahiri, as a personal 
friend, and he is held in the highest esteem by the rest of al-Qaida’s regional 
heads, from North Africa to Yemen. His numerous books and pamphlets are 
required reading for Islamic militants around the world, who eagerly follow the 
latest proclamations on Maqdisi’s website, the Pulpit of Monotheism and Jihad. 
But he may be best known for personally mentoringAbu Musab al-Zarqawi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/jun/09/guardianobituaries.alqaida>, who 
founded the organisation that would later becomeIsis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis>, while the two men were jailed 
together on terrorism charges in Jordan in the mid-1990s. Zarqawi was released 
in 1999 and, after swearing allegiance to al-Qaida, went on to become one of 
the most notorious figures in postwar Iraq, unleashing a brutal campaign of 
sectarian terror, which led Maqdisi to publicly upbraid his most famous student 
in a series of devastating public critiques.

Now the man US terrorism analysts call “the most influential living jihadi 
theorist” has turned his ire toward Isis – and emerged, in the last year, as 
one of the group’s most powerful critics. Soon after the Isis leader Abu Bakr 
al-Baghdadideclared the establishment of a caliphate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middle-east-live/2014/jun/30/isis-declares-caliphate-in-iraq-and-syria-live-updates>
 last June, Maqdisi released a long tract castigating Isis as ignorant and 
misguided, accusing them of subverting the “Islamic project” that he has long 
nurtured.

Isis onslaught has broken al-Qaida, its spiritual leaders admit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/10/isis-onslaught-has-broken-al-qaida-its-spiritual-leaders-admit>
Maqdisi’s war of words with Isis is emblematic of the new fratricidal split 
within violent Islamic radicalism – but it is also a sign that al-Qaida, once 
the world’s most feared terrorist network, knows it has been surpassed.

Isis has not simply eclipsed al-Qaida on the battlefields of Syria and Iraq, 
and in the competition for funding and new recruits. According to a series of 
exclusive interviews with senior jihadi ideologues, Isis has successfully 
launched “a coup” against al-Qaida to destroy it from within. As a consequence, 
they now admit, al-Qaida – as an idea and an organisation – is now on the verge 
of collapse.

* * *

On a sunny spring afternoon, three weeks after his release from prison, 
Maqdisi sat on a sofa at his friendAbu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada>’s house, fuming about Isis: the 
group had lied to him and betrayed him, he said, and its members were not 
worthy of calling themselves mujahideen. “They are like a mafia group,” Abu 
Qatada added, while Maqdisi nodded his assent.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fisis-leader-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415899675617%2FAbu-Bakr-al-Baghdadi-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20Isis%20leader%20Abu%20Bakr%20al-Baghdadi%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fisis-leader-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20Isis%20leader%20Abu%20Bakr%20al-Baghdadi%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fnov%2F13%2Fisis-leader-abu-bakr-al-baghdadi-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F11%2F13%2F1415899675617%2FAbu-Bakr-al-Baghdadi-017.jpg>
 Who is Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi? - video explainer 
Abu Qatada – who successive British home secretaries tried to deport to Jordan 
on terror-related charges – has joined Maqdisi as one of the most prominent 
radical clerics to publicly attack Isis, and his statements of condemnation 
have been even more scathing. Initially, their strategy seemed to be to bring 
Isis back under the authority of al-Qaida, using something like a good cop, bad 
cop approach: Maqdisi played the role of the disappointed father, admonishing 
and giving guidance in equal measure, whileAbu Qatada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abu-qatada> has poured increasing amounts of 
scorn on them.

The list of Isis’s crimes that have offended Maqdisi and Abu Qatada is long. 
They include creating division within the wider jihadi movement, publicly 
snubbing Zawahiri and establishing a caliphate to which Isis demands every 
other jihadi swear fealty or face death. For more than a year both say they 
have worked behind the scenes, negotiating with Isis – including with Baghdadi 
himself – to bring the group back into the al-Qaida fold, to no avail. “Isis 
don’t respect anyone. They are ruining the wider jihadi movement and are 
against the wholeummah [Muslim nation],” Abu Qatada said.

Isis are ruining the wider jihadi movement and are against the whole ummah
Abu Qatada 
Isis has been sufficiently worried by the increasingly vehement criticism from 
Maqdisi and Abu Qatada to embark on a social media campaign against them – said 
to have been sanctioned byAbu Muhammad al-Adnani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/23/islamic-state-followers-urged-to-launch-attacks-against-australians>
, Isis’s chief propagandist. Isis social media accounts berate the two al-Qaida 
clerics as “stooges” of the west, part of a growing conspiracy against the 
caliphate. The sixth issue of Isis’s English-language magazine, Dabiq, featured 
a full-page picture of Maqdisi and Abu Qatada, labelled as “misleading 
scholars” who should be avoided more than the devil himself. “Qatada and I have 
been critical of them,” Maqdisi said. “They hate that.”

The two ideologues make an odd pair in the fight against Isis. Qatada is 6ft 
3in tall, broad shouldered and lumbering, while Maqdisi is rake thin and full 
of hyperactive energy, bounding round the room and speaking at double speed; at 
serious moments, Maqdisi is given to making a sudden joke or bursting into 
giggles. Sometimes they will go for walks with each other in the Jordanian 
countryside. More often they travel long distances by road after being asked to 
attend funerals of fallen al-Qaida fighters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433954984279%2F1b7d66ce-79f0-4547-b570-f68f1f82bd4e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Isis%20crippled%20al-Qaida%20%7C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%2C%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Isis%20crippled%20al-Qaida%20%7C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%2C%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433954984279%2F1b7d66ce-79f0-4547-b570-f68f1f82bd4e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Abu ­Muhammad al-Maqdisi, the intellectual godfather of al-Qaida. Photograph: 
Mustafa Khalili 
Maqdisi’s notoriety has ensured that he has spent most of the past two decades 
in and out of jail. (He claims to have been subject to torture – which is 
indeed widespread in Jordanian prisons; pulling the hairs out of a radical’s 
beard, he said, is one favoured method of inflicting pain.) It is widely 
believed that the Jordanians released him again this February because they 
realised, with Isis rampaging across the region, that his stature made him a 
valuable ally in the struggle against the militant group.

But Maqdisi and Qatada have looked on as Isis’s young radicals rampage from 
victory to victory – cursing, mocking and betraying the old guard as they go, 
while al-Qaida, largely guided by veterans of the Afghan era, has been brought 
to its knees in this jihadi civil war.

As Qatada poured tea into small glass tumblers, he began reeling off images to 
better communicate the depth of his loathing for Isis. He likes speaking in 
metaphors. The group, he said, was “like a bad smell” that has polluted the 
radical Islamic environment. No, they were better described as a “cancerous 
growth” within the jihadi movement – or, he continued, like the diseased branch 
of a fig tree that needs to be pruned before it kills the entire organism.

The race to save Peter Kassig | Ali Younes, Shiv Malik, Spencer Ackerman and 
Mustafa Khalili
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2014/dec/18/-sp-the-race-to-save-peter-kassig>
Qatada, who was once described by the British Special Immigration Appeals 
Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/feb/19/abu-qatada-compensation-european-court>
 as a “truly dangerous individual … at the centre of terrorist activities 
associated with al‑Qaida”, has a strained, high-pitched voice, like an alto 
version of Marlon Brando in The Godfather; he speaks slowly, pausing for 
effect. His broad frame easily filled one of the throne-like Louis-XIV-style 
armchairs that line his reception room. Comfortably ensconced, he turned to yet 
another metaphor to describe how Isis has recruited a generation of young 
Muslims who barely remember the 9/11 attacks. “You go to a restaurant and they 
present to you this beautiful meal. It looks so delicious and tempting. But 
then you go into the kitchen and you see the dirt and the filth and you’re 
disgusted.”

Both men are particularly appalled, they said, by the way Isis has used their 
scholarship to cloak its savagery in ideological legitimacy, to gain recruits 
and justify its battle with al-Qaida and its affiliates. “Isis took all our 
religious works,” Maqdisi said. “They took it from us – it’s all our writings, 
they are all our books, our thoughts.” Now, Abu Qatada said, “they don’t 
respect anyone”.

Such impudent behaviour, the two men agreed, would never have been accepted in 
the days when Bin Laden was alive. “No one used to speak against him,” Maqdisi 
lamented. “Bin Laden was a star. He had special charisma.” But despite their 
personal affection for his successor, Zawahiri – whom they call “Dr Ayman” – 
they both admit that he does not possess the authority and control to rebuff 
the threat from Isis. From the “very beginning” of his tenure, Zawahiri lacked 
“direct military or operational control,” Qatada said. “He has become 
accustomed to operating in this decentralised way – he is isolated.”

According to Maqdisi, al-Qaida’s organisational structure has “collapsed”. 
Zawahiri, Maqdisi said, “operates solely based on allegiance. There is no 
organisational structure. There is only communication channels, and loyalty.” 
And unfortunately for Zawahiri, Isis has done its utmost to ensure that loyalty 
is in short supply.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433955366740%2F431b41f8-7b11-4207-ae6b-986dc5dae338-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Isis%20crippled%20al-Qaida%20%7C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%2C%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Isis%20crippled%20al-Qaida%20%7C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%2C%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433955366740%2F431b41f8-7b11-4207-ae6b-986dc5dae338-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The radical cleric Abu Qatada says Isis is a ‘cancerous growth’ within the 
jihadi movement. Photograph: Mustafa Khalili 
Dr Munif Samara – a veteran of the jihad in Afghanistan and a close associate 
of Maqdisi and Qatada, who sat with both men as they were interviewed – painted 
an even more gloomy picture of al-Qaida’s position. A GP who runs a free clinic 
treating injured Syrian fighters and civilians, Samara has more experience than 
Maqdisi or Qatada with the day-to-day operations of jihadi organising, and has 
often handled the affairs of the two men during their frequent jail stints. He 
said that donations, which once came in waves of “hundreds of thousands”, have 
dried up as donors directed their money to Isis, or else refused to fund 
further bloodletting between the two groups. Another former al-Qaida member,
Aimen Dean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/on-the-middle-east/2015/jun/05/former-al-qaida-spy-for-mi6-urges-effort-to-confuse-islamic-state>
 – who defected to become a spy for British intelligence – told the Guardian 
that one of his sources in Pakistan’s tribal areas said the finances of 
al-Qaida central in Waziristan were so desperate that it was reduced at one 
point last year to selling its laptops and cars to buy food and pay rent.

Samara described Isis’s fight against al-Qaida as an attempt to bring the 
older group down from within. “At this moment, we do believe there is a coup 
d’etat under way within al-Qaida itself,” he said.

* * *

In the decade after 9/11, al-Qaida attracted money, initiates and prestige 
like no other jihadi group in history. It grew to command the loyalty of a wide 
network of terrorist branches and affiliates that stretched from Europe to 
Africa and South Asia. Never before had so many geographically disparate groups 
been united under one banner. Bin Laden achieved this feat, at least in part, 
by remaining ideologically flexible. He refused to be proscriptive on small 
matters of faith, avoiding the kind of disputes that had ripped apart other 
jihadi coalitions in the past. In keeping with its formal name –Tandheem Qaidat 
al-Jihad, The Organisation for the Base of Jihad – al-Qaida acted as a hub for 
militants to make connections and receive financial and organisational support. 
Regional commanders were entrusted with a great deal of operational freedom.

The finances of al-Qaida were so desperate that it was reduced to selling its 
laptops and cars to buy food and pay rent

In return, al-Qaida’s leadership demanded one thing above all else: loyalty. 
Its commanders were strictly vetted before being appointed; only those known 
from the battlefields of Afghanistan, Bosnia or Chechnya – and deemed to have 
the requisite knowledge of Islamic scholarship – were elevated to the group’s 
upper echelons. On their appointment, these senior commanders swore a blood 
oath to Bin Laden himself.

When Zawahiri took over after Bin Laden’s death in 2011, he found himself 
geographically isolated. While he was hiding out, according to numerous 
sources, in the mountains on the Afghanistan-Pakistan border, the centre of 
jihadi activity had moved thousands of miles away, to Syria and Iraq. As 
Pakistan’s army and American drones tightened their net around al-Qaida 
central, it became harder and harder for Zawahiri to maintain contact with his 
commanders in the field. “What is leadership,” Samara asked, “if your leader is 
in Afghanistan and your soldiers are in Iraq?”

In fact, al-Qaida’s main branch in the Middle East, the Islamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> of Iraq (ISI), had long been a source 
of difficulty. Since its effective creation in 2003, under the leadership of 
Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, ISI had been happy to use al-Qaida’s brand name and its 
money, but often ignored pleas for closer communication with central command – 
even when they came from Bin Laden himself. In 2010, they crossed a line: ISI 
appointed a new leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, without prior approval from 
al-Qaida, whose senior leaders knew almost nothing about the man – where he had 
come from, his military experience, whether he could be trusted.

In a revealing communique seized during the raid on Bin Laden’s hideaway in 
Abbottabad,Adam Gadahn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/23/adam-gadahn-drone-strike-al-qaida>
 – the American al-Qaida member and frequent spokesman – voiced his disgust 
with ISI’s lack of respect. Writing to Bin Laden in January 2011, he asked why 
ISI should be permitted to sully al-Qaida’s name with its indiscriminate 
slaughter when it could not even bother to keep in touch with the group’s 
leadership. “Maybe,” he wrote, “it is better for them not to be in the ranks of 
the mujahideen, as they are just like a polluted spot that should be removed 
and sanitised and cleared from the ranks.” Less than six months after receiving 
the letter, Bin Laden was dead. Now it fell to Zawahiri, a man of lesser 
standing, to deal with the problem.

By this time, ISI had been pushed to the brink of collapse by US and Iraqi 
forces – but the Syrian civil war gave the group a chance to rebuild. As the 
conflict began to intensify, Baghdadi quietly dispatched one of his junior 
officers,Abu Muhammad al-Joulani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/16/isis-islamic-state-iraq-levant-q-and-a>
, across the border in late 2011 to take advantage of the chaos. Equipped with 
funds, weapons, and some of ISI’s best soldiers, Joulani’s group – which would 
soon be known as the Nusra Front – quickly became the most formidable fighting 
force in Syria. By 2013, Joulani was such a powerful commander in his own right 
that Baghdadi feared he was on the verge of obtaining Zawahiri’s support to 
elevate himself as the leader of an independent al-Qaida branch in Syria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433955532915%2F2d5aba52-7200-44d6-90ed-731ff75171c1-1703x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Isis%20crippled%20al-Qaida%20%7C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%2C%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Isis%20crippled%20al-Qaida%20%7C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%2C%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433955532915%2F2d5aba52-7200-44d6-90ed-731ff75171c1-1703x2040.jpeg>
 Ayman al-Zawahiri, the leader of al-Qaida, has struggled to assert his 
authority from his hideout in Waziristan. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
On 8 April 2013, Baghdadi launched a pre-emptive strike – whose consequences 
would rip apart the banner of unity that had long presided over the jihadi 
movement. In an audio recording released online, Baghdadi declared that the 
Nusra Front and ISI would officially become one organisation. Nusra’s 
battle-stained banners, which hung over their newly captured headquarters in 
Syrian cities such as Raqqa, Aleppo and Homs would be replaced. The merged 
organisation would be called the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria, or more 
simply Isis. The rebrand was effective immediately. Two days later, Joulani 
replied with his own audio message. He rejected Baghdadi’s “invitation” to 
merge – and pledged an oath of loyalty directly to Zawahiri, appealing to the 
“sheikh of jihad” to resolve the dispute.

Within 24 hours, Zawahiri dispatched a private message urging calm. He said he 
wanted both commanders to send him representations before he would rule on this 
spat, which had, thanks to the internet, become embarrassingly public. Baghdadi 
made it clear that he was not willing to compromise: in a personal message, he 
warned Zawahiri that any hint of support for the “traitor” would have “no cure 
except the spilling of more blood”.

On 23 May, Zawahiri delivered his verdict: Isis, which had been created 
without prior approval, would have to be “dissolved”; Baghdadi was ordered to 
restrict his operations to Iraq. Meanwhile, his former junior, Joulani, would 
become the leader of al-Qaida’s official branch in Syria. Both men, Zawahiri 
added, had a year to prove themselves, after which al-Qaida central would 
decide on what measures to take next. Like any suspended sentence, it was both 
an offer of redemption and a threat: Baghdadi could prosper by playing nicely 
within the new rules, or lose his position within al-Qaida entirely. Finally, 
to ensure his accord was adhered to peacefully, Zawahiri dispatched an 
emissary, Abu Khalid al-Suri, in whom he vested the power to resolve any 
further disputes.

One former senior member of ISI who did not want to be named told the Guardian 
that Baghdadi was incensed by Zawahiri’s letter: he was shocked to be treated 
as an equal to Joulani and ordered to stay out of the Syrian conflict into 
which he had invested so much. According to Maqdisi, Baghdadi contemptuously 
dismissed Zawahiri’s envoy. “Suri told Baghdadi, if you stick to these points 
and you go back to Iraq, I will not make this order public,” Maqdisi said. 
“Instead, Isis refused the orders, and then started attacking Zawahiri – 
saying, ‘Al-Qaida is gone, it’s burned out.’”

After Suri made good on the threat to go public with Zawahiri’s humiliating 
diktat – which was released to al-Jazeera in June – Baghdadi issued his own 
blunt and unbending reply: “As long as we have a pulse or an eye that blinks,” 
he said, Isis was there to stay. It was the first time a major al-Qaida figure 
had ever publicly defied the organisation’s leader. “That was an alarm bell,” 
Abu Qatada recalled.

That summer, Isis began preparing for war: swelling its ranks and readying 
itself to claim back Syrian territory from Nusra, which it believed was rightly 
its own. In an astonishing series of prison breaks, it freed hundreds of Iraq’s 
most dangerous inmates by firing mortar rounds at walls and using car bombs to 
blow apart entrances. According to secret documents recently obtained byDer 
Spiegel 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/world/islamic-state-files-show-structure-of-islamist-terror-group-a-1029274.html>
, Isis also began implementing plans to take advantage of the stream of 
thousands of men who were flooding into Syria from Tunisia, Saudi Arabia, 
Turkey, Egypt and Europe. Without ties to native Syrians, these foreign 
fighters were likely to remain loyal. And they needed to be loyal, because 
instead of fighting Assad – as they had come to Syria to do – they would be 
used to stab the homegrown anti-Assad rebel groups in the back.

* * *

One of Maqdisi’s close associates in Jordan is a man who we will call Raheem, 
a personal aide to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi who helped found the organisation that 
evolved into Isis – and who had an inside view of the group’s transformation 
after Baghdadi took power. A hulking figure, standing at more than 6ft 4in, he 
appeared suddenly one day at Maqdisi’s house, after hearing a rumour that Isis 
followers had assaulted his sheikh. In an interview a few weeks later, Raheem 
described the men running Isis as a different breed from the religiously 
inspired jihadis of al-Qaida; in fact, he said, the group had been run for 
several years by men who once served Saddam Hussein’s Ba’athist regime.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fwhere-do-isis-get-their-money-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411747113646%2FISIS-rebel-militant-soldi-017.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Where%20does%20Isis%20get%20its%20money%3F%20-%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fwhere-do-isis-get-their-money-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Where%20does%20Isis%20get%20its%20money%3F%20-%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fsep%2F26%2Fwhere-do-isis-get-their-money-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F9%2F26%2F1411747113646%2FISIS-rebel-militant-soldi-017.jpg>
 Where does Isis get its money? - video explainer 
According to Raheem, when Zarqawi was in charge, it was his unofficial policy 
to shut out anyone from the secular nationalist Ba’ath party. Zarqawi firmly 
believed that Iraqis in general, and Ba’athists in particular, lacked piety. 
Under Hussein, Iraq had been a secular state, and Islamism – the body of 
intellectual work that has turned Islam from a religion into a full-blown 
system of governance – had been brutally suppressed. “There were very few 
Iraqis who were exposed to other ideas,” Raheem said. “They were nationalists 
and were highly influenced by the Ba’ath.”

After Zarqawi’s death in 2006, ISI was almost destroyed by US forces and Sunni 
tribes revolting against its brutal violence. To save themselves, Raheem said, 
ISI’s inner circle decided that the group needed to broaden its ranks: 
revolutionary Islamist credentials were no longer essential – if you could 
recite a few lines of the Qur’an and grow a beard, you could sign up. The 
former Ba’athists, who had run Iraq for decades, were invaluable new recruits: 
Hussein’s former military officers knew the vulnerabilities of the Iraqi army; 
his former intelligence officials knew the power brokers in each town and 
village. Since the regime’s overthrow, these men had lost their incomes and 
their authority; now the Islamic State of Iraq would serve as a vehicle for 
them to regain their status. (Documents obtained byDer Spiegel 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/world/islamic-state-files-show-structure-of-islamist-terror-group-a-1029274.html>
 have revealed the major role played by a former colonel in Hussein’s air 
intelligence service, known as Haji Bakr, who is said to have been the 
architect of Isis’s takeover of northern Syria; according to Raheem, he brought 
an entire Ba’athist unit with him when he joined the group.)

Raheem alleged that it was largely these men – former Ba’athists who became 
senior members of ISI – who nominated Baghdadi as the organisation’s new leader 
in 2010. Until his appointment, Raheem said, Baghdadi was regarded as a minor 
figure, quiet and uncharismatic. He had no military experience, and his 
scholarship was of little note, though he held a PhD in Islamic studies. But he 
made the ideal front man: on paper, at least, he was a religious scholar; his 
family claimed to be descended from the prophet Muhammad; and most importantly 
of all, he was not himself a Ba’athist.

Isis: the inside story | Martin Chulov
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/11/-sp-isis-the-inside-story> 
After Baghdadi’s appointment, ISI’s inner circle closed ranks around its 
chosen leader. It discontinued all but the most cursory communication with 
al-Qaida central, and slowly, the few remaining senior figures considered loyal 
to Zawahiri were either deliberately sidelined or killed off on the 
battlefield. By the time Zawahiri’s fateful letter arrived in May 2013, Raheem 
said, there was not a single person in Isis’s senior leadership who had once 
belonged to al-Qaida.

Later that year, while the rest of the world was fixated on Assad’s chemical 
weapons, Isis planned to seize control of the 500-mile border between Turkey 
and Syria: if it could hold the border crossings, which supplied the main rebel 
groups with food, medicine, weapons and new recruits, Isis would have Nusra and 
its other rivals by the throat. By December, strategically important border 
towns began to fall, one by one, to Isis fighters. Isis fighters rode into 
towns whose freedom from Assad had been won at great cost, stripped factories 
bare, and turfed out – or killed – other fighters and their families. They 
kidnapped high-level commanders from other rebel groups, and murdered Syrian 
civilians who had been involved in the earliest mass protests against Assad, 
calculating that these were the only people brave enough to confront Isis in 
the future.

In December 2013, Hussein Suleiman, a handsome young physician who was also a 
senior officer of the Islamic Front rebel group, was sent to make peace with a 
local Isis unit after trouble broke out at a checkpoint near Lake Assad in 
eastern Syria. When Suleiman did not return to base, Islamic Front officials 
contacted Isis, which confirmed they were holding him prisoner as a spy. 
Outraged, the Islamic Front demanded his release. Surely Isis could not go 
around arresting peace brokers? At the very least, they asked that his crimes 
be tried in an independent sharia court. Isis refused.

When Isis released Suleiman as part of a prisoner exchange on 31 December, the 
Islamic Front received a mutilated corpse: his right ear had been cut off, his 
teeth were knocked out, one of his legs had been broken. The young doctor had 
been tortured, and the top of his head was blown off. The next day, the Islamic 
Front posted pictures of his mangled body online, next to those of how he used 
to look. They spread rapidly on social media and sparked protests in towns 
across Syria against Isis brutality. In Isis-controlled towns, fighters shot at 
the protesters, fuelling more outrage.

Within days, Syria’s major rebel groups – including Nusra, the country’s 
al-Qaida affiliate – banded together to declare war on Isis. Thousands of 
militants were killed over the first few months of 2014, as battles raged 
between Isis and the other rebel factions, with senior commanders on both sides 
kidnapped, tortured and murdered. As their positions were overrun, Isis was 
forced to retreat from western Syria. It began consolidating its control over 
the east, the area closest to Iraq, and the location of many of Syria’s oil 
fields. There, Nusra and Isis fought viciously, in and around the city of Raqqa 
and along the banks of the Euphrates.

On 16 January 2014, Zawahiri’s envoy, Abu Khalid al-Suri, published a message 
online. He tweeted that Isis was seeking to corrupt the jihad as it had done in 
Iraq: militants should direct their bombs at the infidels, he declared, not at 
their fellow jihadis. Seventeen days later, Zawahiri played his final card: 
Isis was expelled from al-Qaida.

For Isis, there was no turning back. To make clear that reconciliation was off 
the table, they sent their former boss a message that he would not forget. On 
21 February, five men fought their way into the compound in Aleppo where Suri 
was staying. When their target appeared, one of the attackers detonated his 
suicide vest. Zawahiri’s loyal servant, who had been sent from Afghanistan to 
make peace, now lay dead.

* * *

From their jail cells in Jordan, Abu Qatada and Maqdisi watched the vicious 
struggle between Isis and al-Qaida with growing concern. For Abu Qatada, it 
felt like history was repeating itself. In the early 1990s, he had been a 
fervent supporter of the Algerian Groupe Islamique Armé (GIA) – issuing fatwas 
that gave GIA terrorists license to kill with little discrimination. But when 
the GIA inevitably began murdering rival militants, Abu Qatada assembled a 
group of radical scholars to denounce the organisation, helping to strip it of 
intellectual credibility among fellow jihadis. Now, more than 20 years later, 
he wanted Maqdisi to join him in a similar campaign against Isis – to publicly 
shame the group as extremists acting outside the accepted rules of jihad.

Maqdisi asked Abu Qatada to hold off. He still hoped that Isis could be 
brought back within the fold. Some of Isis’s most senior members had already 
written to him in prison signalling their contrition. One letter said: “We know 
that we have made mistakes … We know that among our soldiers and clerics there 
are some who are extremists … But they are the minority.” (It was signed: “Your 
son, one of the sharia legislators for the Islamic State of Iraq and Syria 
written by request and on behalf of some of his brothers.”) With the right plan 
for reconciliation, Maqdisi believed that unity might be restored.

Using intermediaries to keep Zawahiri informed of his attempts at arbitration, 
Maqdisi reached out to Isis’s inner circle in late 2013, approaching one of his 
former students, a young Bahraini named Turki Binali. Binali had been his 
protege – a pupil of “extraordinary passion”, in Maqdisi’s words. Some 
nicknamed him “Maqdisi junior”. After joining Isis, Binali rapidly rose into 
its highest ranks: he was appointed as Baghdadi’s official biographer, and by 
spring 2014, he had been named Isis’s chief “scholar at arms”. In theory, a 
single decree from Binali’s pen could end the civil war between Isis and 
al-Qaida.

Maqdisi, who dispatched two of his own students to meet Binali in person, said 
that their initial exchanges were encouraging: he warned Binali that unless 
Isis was willing to negotiate an end to the conflict with al-Qaida, the group 
risked condemnation from the world’s most eminent jihadi sheikhs. In response, 
Binali assured his “beloved teacher” that Baghdadi wanted nothing more than to 
reach agreement with al-Qaida. But as months passed, and the fighting 
continued, Maqdisi came to believe Binali had little intention of settling the 
feud.

How, Binali asked Maqdisi, could Zawahiri have praised the Arab Spring when 
the people who had risen up in Egypt and elsewhere were calling for democracy, 
not sharia? Why, he asked, did Zawahiri refer respectfully to the US president 
as “Mr Obama”? Perhaps, Binali intimated, al-Qaida had decided to quit the 
jihad and settle into a quieter existence as a peaceful organisation? Maqdisi 
thought these questions were “absurd”, he said – “meaningless, insignificant 
points”, which Isis had “never mentioned in the past”.

By spring 2014, communications between student and teacher had seriously 
deteriorated; at one point, Binali slighted Maqdisi by suggesting that old age 
had confused him. After drafting a short online article entitled “My former 
Sheikh”, Binali stopped replying altogether. On 26 May 2014, Maqdisi deemed the 
negotiations dead and, backed by his fellow al-Qaida ideologues, issued a fatwa 
against Isis.

“It has become necessary that we tell the truth, after we exhausted all the 
possibilities of advice and all hopes of making Isis return to the path of 
truth,” Maqdisi wrote. The rebellious organisation, he declared, had no 
“Islamic pretext”. Baghdadi, his commanders, and their religious officials were 
“deviants” who had “disobeyed the orders of their leaders and head scholars”. 
He instructed Isis’s soldiers to defect to the Nusra Front, and decreed that no 
Islamic website should host Isis messages.

This was a serious threat to Isis’s legitimacy, and even its future. According 
to a series of detailed leaks from an anonymous Twitter account – much of which 
the Guardian has subsequently verified – Binali approached Baghdadi with a 
stark appraisal of Isis’s vulnerable position. The caliphate would eventually 
collapse, he said, if the jihad’s leading scholars and veterans continued to 
stand against Isis. The project could not be sustained unless Isis recruited 
influential supporters.

Binali’s solution to this problem was simple: if Isis could not win support, 
it would buy it. In the summer and autumn of 2014, messages were sent to 
Maqdisi, Abu Qatada and about a dozen other top-ranking clerics, inviting them 
to relocate to the caliphate, where they could work without fear of 
imprisonment. (Baghdadi even wrote a personal letter to Maqdisi to persuade him 
to come). To sweeten the deal, payments of up to $1m were promised. Binali also 
sent word to al-Qaida’s branch in Yemen that Isis would offer its leader and 
his men $10m to publicly pledge allegiance to Baghdadi; a similar offer, for 
$5m, was made to the al-Qaida affiliate in Libya.

Binali’s scheme had mixed results. Maqdisi, Qatada and the other prominent 
scholars rejected the offer out of hand, as did Yemen’s al-Qaida commander. But 
Binali appeared to have captured the interest of several jihadi factions across 
the globe. In November, Isis trumpeted public oaths of loyalty from jihadi 
militants in Egypt, Libya, Pakistan and even Yemen, al-Qaida’s strongest 
redoubt. Suddenly, the group’s influence was extending beyond Syria and Iraq, 
into the rest of the Islamic world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433962971601%2F55b3457c-d644-440a-abed-cc8a3e9945d7-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Isis%20crippled%20al-Qaida%20%7C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%2C%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Isis%20crippled%20al-Qaida%20%7C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%2C%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433962971601%2F55b3457c-d644-440a-abed-cc8a3e9945d7-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Dr Munif Samara, the jihadi doctor and close associate of Maqdisi and Abu 
Qatada. Photograph: Mustafa Khalili 
There would be other exchanges between Maqdisi and Binali later that year, 
including a failed attempt to secure the release of the Isis hostage Peter 
Kassig. Their final communication came not long after Kassig’s execution, when 
Maqdisi once again found himself mediating with Isis. On 24 December 2014, a 
Jordanian military aircraft was shot down over Isis territory near the northern 
Syrian city of Raqqa, and its pilot taken hostage; Maqdisi heard the news when 
the prison imam dedicated a prayer to the man. Soon after, Maqdisi sounded out 
Jordanian officials about an idea, originally suggested by his friend Dr Munif 
Samara, to secure the return of the pilot. Although Jordanian officials were 
wary, believing that the pilot could have been killed already, they authorised 
the plan.

Communicating primarily via Telegram messenger, an app that allows for 
encrypted communications, Maqdisi sent word to Isis in January of this year 
that the Jordanians would be willing to conduct a prisoner swap: in return for 
the pilot, they would release a woman named Sajida al-Rishawi. In 2005, Abu 
Musab al-Zarqawi had sent al-Rishawi and her husband on a mission to Jordan, 
where they were to explode bomb belts at the Radisson SAS hotel as part of a 
coordinated series of suicide bombings. Rishawi’s device did not detonate, and 
she was arrested, languishing on death row for the next decade. In his approach 
to Isis, Maqdisi said, he reminded the group’s senior leaders that, as the 
inheritors of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi’s legacy, they had an obligation to save her 
now.

Although Maqdisi is not certain about who he was communicating with, he has no 
doubt that his messages were being relayed to the most senior members of Isis, 
including Baghdadi himself. The initial response was positive: Maqdisi says he 
was told that Isis were “eager” to make the trade. On social media, Isis 
supporters suddenly began calling for al-Rishawi’s release.

Before any deal could be brokered, the Jordanians instructed Maqdisi to obtain 
proof that the pilot was still alive. In response, the Isis negotiators sent 
Maqdisi an electronic file that they claimed would provide proof of life – but 
the file was password protected.

On 3 February, after a few days of tense dialogue, the negotiators finally 
sent Maqdisi the password to unlock the file. When he received it, Maqdisi 
realised he had been betrayed: the password, in Arabic, was “Maqdisi the pimp, 
the sole of the tyrant’s shoe, son of the English whore.”

After he typed it in, one humiliating character at a time, a video appeared on 
Maqdisi’s screen. He watched in horror as Isis soldiers muscled the pilot into 
a cage, doused him in petrol, and burned him alive. Three hours later, Isis 
posted the video on the internet. The next day, Sajida al-Rishawi was taken 
from her cell and executed.

* * *

At his house on the outskirts of Zarqa, about 25km from Amman, Maqdisi keeps a 
large model boat on top of one of his overstuffed bookshelves. It’s a strange 
object to find there: Islamic extremists are not known for their maritime 
collectibles. The boat was a gift from a very senior member of Isis, who built 
it from pencils and matchsticks while incarcerated in Abu Ghraib. Above the 
boat’s sails hangs a banner that reads “Journey with us,” a quotation from the 
Quranic retelling of the story of the flood, when Noah reaches out to beckon 
his son aboard. For Maqdisi, it is a symbol of salvation and unity. “It’s meant 
as a message for all Muslims,” he said – one with a special significance for 
jihadis today, as the factional bloodshed rages on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433966119597%2Faa25bed4-770e-43b1-a47d-d497f67d7a28-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Isis%20crippled%20al-Qaida%20%7C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%2C%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Isis%20crippled%20al-Qaida%20%7C%20Shiv%20Malik%2C%20Ali%20Younes%2C%20Spencer%20Ackerman%2C%20Mustafa%20Khalili&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Fjun%2F10%2Fhow-isis-crippled-al-qaida%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F6%2F10%2F1433966119597%2Faa25bed4-770e-43b1-a47d-d497f67d7a28-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Abu ­Muhammad al-Maqdisi’s model boat was made for him by a very senior member 
of Isis, who built it from pencils and matchsticks while incarcerated in Abu 
Ghraib. Photograph: Mustafa Khalili 
Maqdisi and Abu Qatada continue to hope that the unity that once prevailed 
under bin Laden will return – but they admitted openly that Isis is winning the 
war on the ground and the propaganda struggle alike. “It’s a fluid state of 
affairs,” Abu Qatada suggested hopefully. “At the moment, Isis are drunk on 
power.” But at some point, he believes, they will need to negotiate with 
al-Qaida again. He pointed out that al-Qaida’s branch in Syria had achieved 
some recent successes against Assad’s forces, while Maqdisi observed that there 
were several other branches, including the one in Yemen, whose allegiance 
remains unquestioned. “Its loyalty is strong and clear,” Maqdisi said. “When 
Zawahiri sends a message to Yemen, he knows his orders will be obeyed.”

But the two men believe that the events of the past decade – and especially 
the war with Isis – are a sign that al-Qaida needs to reappraise its tactics. 
Maqdisi believes that al-Qaida should no longer aim to recruit followers in 
large numbers; it needs “people of quality”, he said, who thoroughly understand 
Islamic scholarship, and will not merely deploy it in the furtherance of their 
own personal ends.

In recent years, Maqdisi has even come to believe that al-Qaida’s conception 
of jihad – one licensed in part by his own scholarship – may have been 
incorrect, a jihad of “spite” rather than “empowering believers”. Even the 
attacks of 9/11, Maqdisi said, were part of a misguided strategy. “The actions 
in New York and Washington, no matter how great they appeared to be – the 
bottom line is they were spiteful.”

Maqdisi now wants al-Qaida to begin providing social services, as Hamas has 
done in Gaza. “That kind of enabling jihad will establish our Islamic state. It 
will enable it to become a place of refuge for the weak,” he said.Al-Qaida 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/al-qaida> branches in Tunisia and elsewhere 
have been putting this suggestion into practice – with jihadis guarding 
hospitals, building infrastructure, and even picking up litter. And yet, as one 
al-Qaida veteran who did not want to be named told the Guardian, local 
commanders have reported that their soldiers are impatient with these new 
duties; many would prefer for Zawahiri to swear allegiance to Baghdadi.

Munif Samara, the jihadi doctor and close associate of Maqdisi and Abu Qatada, 
worried that al-Qaida may be crippled by its difficulty attracting new 
recruits. Young soldiers, he said, “want action, they want blood, they want 
explosions. They are sitting in their countries, and either they will be in 
jail or something like this, and they are waiting for al-Qaida [to do 
something], and al-Qaida is doing nothing.” For these young men, the lure of 
Isis is strong.

Al-Qaida has long maintained that while the establishment of the caliphate is 
the ultimate goal, conditions are not yet right: ordinary Muslims need to be 
educated about “true Islam” for many more years before it can return. But it 
has now been a year since Baghdadi declared his own caliphate – and the longer 
that Isis can hold its territory and broadcast its military successes to the 
world, the more credibility it will steal from al-Qaida.

As ideologues steeped in almost 1,400 years of Islamic scholarship, Maqdisi 
and Abu Qatada tend to the long view – for them, the proper perspective on 
al-Qaida’s present crisis is one of decades rather than months, which may 
explain their relative optimism about its possibility for renewal. For now, 
however, their fierce attacks on Isis have done little to halt its advances. 
Given the group’s ruthlessness and disdain for criticism, it is hard not to 
imagine, as one walks away from Maqdisi’s house, that if the war continues, it 
may not be long before he and Abu Qatada find themselves in the crosshairs.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter: @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/gdnlongread>
 