
Photographs of Deyn's Brooklyn two-bedroom apartment entered the public domain 
when she put it on the market recently for $2.5million and since then there has 
been much derision about her electic style - for some, it's all fashion 
forward, for others it's an eye-bruising mess. Forests of ornate gold chairs, 
potted ferns, animal prints and statuary compete for attention, but we think 
Deyn's 2,911 sq ft apartment, in the hip suburb of Williamsburg, shows true 
creative bravery. The bathroom is a mind-boggling infinity of mirroring, the 
bedroom is like a Barbara Cartland eyrie on acid. Flounces, frills and ornament 
rule the day. And she is a master of juxtaposition: who else would team ornate 
Louis XIV chairs with 70s oversized paper lanterns?
 The bathroom of Agyness Deyn's apartment. Photograph: Prudential Douglas 
Elliman Real Estate 
The Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/femail/article-2075199/Edgy-supermodel-Agyness-Deyns-secret-gaudy-taste-revealed-2-5m-New-York-apartment-goes-sale.html>
 branded the apartment 'gaudy', saying it was "a far cry from the edgy 
aesthetic the model has become known for" - which is reason enough to love it, 
in itself. Non?

Rather like the newest hip hotels and restaurants, being a style trailblazer 
often means taking things a touch too far. Deyn has gone to an extreme - but if 
you ask us, edgy aesthetic is exactly what it is.

Cabinet reshuffle
 Agyness Deyn's cooker by La Cornue 
Let's take a look at the kitchen. Deyn's range cooker - that's top of the 
range, incidentally - is set in an alcove with folding doors, with the rest of 
the room very much for living. My guess is that not a lot of food preparation 
goes on in this room, but then, if you've filled yourelf right up on a single 
pistachio macaroon at the Mulberry show, there's not much call for popping a 
macaroni cheese in the oven.

Deyn would have spent around £3,850 on this La Cornue 
<http://www.lacornue.com/> cooker, though in all likelihood she got it free. 
It's the cooker of choice for fellow high livers Jacques Chirac, George 
Clooney, Celine Dion, Brad Pitt and Karl Lagerfeld, so she's in good gas-ring 
company. These ovens are bespoke: you specify the number of rings, whether 
you'd like ateppanyaki <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teppanyaki> (that's an 
iron griddle to you and me) and colour - Agyness's is in Paris blue with 
brushed brass edging and top.
 Agyness Deyn has used Fiori wallpaper, £85 per 10m roll, by Cole & Son 
All is not lost, however, if you can't spare four grand for a cooker. Take a 
look at that combination of dark, florid Victoriana wallpaper -Fiori 
<http://www.cole-and-son.com/collection_detail.asp?CollectionID=104> by Cole & 
Son (ref 77/6018), £85 per 10m roll - and the sky blue unit run, because black 
and mid-blue are a winning kitchen combination. Clean, but more interesting 
than the usual white/black/grey combo. And wallpaper in a kitchen perfectly 
expresses the living/cooking dual use. Deyn's line of pea green architraving 
around the kitchen alcove is interesting, too: it gives the space a retro 50s 
vibe. Above all, Deyn is rocking the mis-matched, flea market thing, with a very
fashion spot of leopard carpeting from Stark Carpets 
<http://www.starkcarpet.co.uk/carpet/?styles> (£189 per sq m).

What do you think of Agyness's style? Post your comments here
 