
It’s 2016, and yet somehow ponderous Paul Kelly has still not been put out to 
pasture. Only in the Australian – a newspaper made by and for grumpy old men – 
could he allowed to sound off at such punishing length.

Last week he was demanding that Pauline Hanson be “managed” properly 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/columnists/paul-kelly/failing-to-manage-pauline-hanson-has-dire-risks/news-story/cbc12ad363f836ec52c9007178fa2bd4>
. He accused everyone in Australian politics of having failed to learn the 
lessons of her first brush with national political influence. Everyone, that 
is, except for Paul Kelly.

When we walked out on Pauline Hanson, we were reaching out to decent 
Australians| Richard Di Natale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/16/when-we-walked-out-on-pauline-hanson-we-reached-out-to-decent-australians>
The Greens, who walked out on her maiden speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/16/when-we-walked-out-on-pauline-hanson-we-reached-out-to-decent-australians>
, were handling her in a way that is “self-interested and counter-productive”. 
“The shock of progressives” at anEssential poll showing almost half of 
Australians wanted an end to Muslim immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/21/progressives-can-attract-hanson-supporters-but-not-by-insulting-them>
 showed that they had not recently “visited a pub outside the 6km politically 
correct safe zone from the capital city CBD”. (One wonders how many suburban 
pubs Kelly has visited lately.)

More perfidy and error comes from the direction of those Kelly refers to only 
as “conservative ideologues”. (We might wonder if he doesn’t offer names 
because he shares a Holt Street lunchroom with some of them.) These people are 
accused of “pumping her up as part of their fanatical campaign to destroy 
Malcolm Turnbull”.

With more contortions than usual, Kelly attempted to nominate a position 
between these two extremes. We must realise, he wrote, that the polling 
reflects a rejection of Islamic extremist ideology, and that “mutual respect is 
vital but it needs to rest on a firm foundation that rejects both Hanson’s 
prejudice and progressive denial of reality”.

It’s the same boring routine with the same stock characters – the out-of-touch 
left and the extremist right – acting as foils to Kelly’s own, allegedly 
pragmatic, centre-right position.

In this instance, though, Kelly whitewashes the real lesson of recent 
Australian history: that conservatives – including a number of Kelly’s 
colleagues – have mainstreamed ideas, resentments and prejudices that Hanson 
first introduced from the fringes of the far right.

One artefact illuminates this point quite well. In 1997 – somewhere between 
the formation of One Nation that April andHanson’s “assassination” video 
<https://www.crikey.com.au/2014/11/21/guess-whos-back-top-10-moments-of-pauline-hanson/>
 – a book was published called Pauline Hanson: The Truth.

Issued under the authorship of one George J Merritt, its first half was a 
compilation of Hanson speeches and press releases through 1996. Its second half 
was a collection of essays by members of thePauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson> Support Movement in 
defence of Hanson.

Both halves show us the degree to which conservatives with mainstream 
credentials and prominent platforms have come to resemble the Hansonists of the 
1990s, and the extent to which mainstream conservatism as a whole has moved in 
a Hansonist direction over the past two decades.

One example is Hansonist anti-intellectualism which was fertilised during the 
Howard years, and has now ripened into an increasingly mainstream conservative 
appetite for conspiracy theory.

Pauline Hanson: The Truth reprints a speech Hanson made to the far-right, 
pro-gun Australian Reform party in 1996, where she nominates a range of people 
who exist to “denigrate Australian culture” – “some of these people are leaders 
of ethnic groups, some are what I call academic snobs, some are in parliament, 
and some come from the media”.

In the second half of the book, a more conspiratorial note is struck on 
intellectuals by one of her supporters writing on “The New Class”, described as 
a “ruling elite that controls, not only by armed force and money, but also by 
ideas”.

The New Class are “coercive utopians”, who constitute a “cognitive elite … 
primarily created by the university system”. They are the “radicals of the 
1960s who have now become the liberal-left establishment”.

They promote a “new religion of internationalism – of anti-white racism, 
multiculturalism, feminism and Asianisation”.

An increasing hostility to intellectuals 
<https://books.google.com.au/books?id=-DtPBwAAQBAJ&pg=PT9&lpg=PT9&dq=david+marr+howard+government+attacks+critics&source=bl&ots=qv4UCi391r&sig=IWh4dkwCfWxG6E7j87P6VF9n1KY&hl=en&sa=X&redir_esc=y#v=onepage&q=david%20marr%20howard%20government%20attacks%20critics&f=false>
 on the part of mainstream conservatives was borne out in Howard government 
attacks on universities, and eventually on any credentialled experts who spoke 
out against it.

Hanson’s conspiracy-tinged contempt for intellectuals is now regularly 
expressed on the pages of the national broadsheet

More strikingly, though, Hansonist attacks on intellectuals came to be voiced 
by mainstream conservative commentators in the vocabulary of the far right.

Kelly’s colleague at the Australian, Nick Cater, disparaged what he called a 
“new class” of “tertiary-educated, middle-class professionals” which “presumes 
to possess superior insights and manners to the broad mass of people” and 
“elevates its own status by devaluing that of others”.

Soon enough, Cater was putting this argument 
<http://www.luckyculture.com.au/media-library/making-friends-with-the-fright-bats/>
 in the vocabulary of “cultural Marxism”,a conspiracy theory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/22/chris-uhlmann-should-mind-his-language-on-cultural-marxism>
 which itself originated and still flourishes on the far right. Cater said Bill 
Shorten’s expressed wish to help more women to become MPs was derived from 
ideas which were a “legacy of the thuggish, subversive world of West German 
political activism” in the 1960s.

This theme has since been taken up by others on the centre right including 
Chris Uhlmann, who explained 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/inquirer/there-was-a-time-when-journalists-backed-free-speech/news-story/4704bea05341f9f674cb526470260601>
 criticism of Tony Abbott’s speaking engagements as an outcome of cultural 
Marxism.

Hanson’s conspiracy-tinged contempt for intellectuals is now regularly 
expressed on the pages of the national broadsheet by mainstream centre-right 
journalists.

A second example is offered by the Hansonist approach to Indigenous 
Australians. Pauline Hanson: The Truth reproduces a long press release 
detailing the myriad benefits she alleged that Indigenous Australians then 
received and that white Australians did not – what she called “inequalities 
between black and white Australians”.

This theme – resentment towards a dispossessed people – is not only repeated 
throughout the book. More recently, it has become an organising principle among 
mainstream conservatives.

When Andrew Bolt came a cropper after questioning the Aboriginality of some 
people with fair skin 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/media/andrew-bolt-x-racial-vilification-court-case/story-e6frg996-1226148919092>
, it was in part because of articles that referred to awards, honours and 
funding that were accessible to what the court called “fair-skinned aborigines”.

He was drawing from the same well of white Australian grievance that Hanson 
was in the 1990s.

Chris Uhlmann should mind his language on 'cultural Marxism' | Jason Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/22/chris-uhlmann-should-mind-his-language-on-cultural-marxism>
Bolt became a cause celebre on the right, with the Institue of Public Affairs 
campaigning for him, and sparking an ongoing effort to repeal section 18C of 
the Racial Discrimination Act, under which he was successfully sued.

In the Senate, Liberal party figures including Cory Bernardi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/cory-bernardi> have reached across 
the aisle to the One Nation senators in an attempt to change the act.

Countless column inches in the Australian were devoted to supporting Bolt and 
decrying the Racial Discrimination Act.

And wouldn’t you know it – just last month Kelly belched up a tl;dr attack on 
identity politics 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/columnists/paul-kelly/race-gender-the-risk-of-identity-politics/news-story/ee7e4ef3f632b6475ba215be60322908>
, the internet and 18C because some people took Bill Leak to task over a 
cartoon that caricatured Aboriginal fathers.

We can leave refugee policy – which has been entirely remade on Hansonist 
lines – to one side for now. Suffice to say that the resentments Hanson dragged 
from the far right into mainstream debate have become integrated into 
Australian conservatism. In turn, conservatives have made Hansonist positions 
part of Australia’s political furniture.

Paul Kelly shouldn’t waste any more words, or time, trying to pin that on 
progressives.
 