
It starts at home. My sister, Sheniece, plays music through the Apple TV in my 
living room and blasts it so loud it’s like a rave. I mainly go out with family 
– Sheniece, my brother David and my dad. Sometimes my mum will come, but she’s 
not a big raver like my dad. Everyone comes to me and I make a big meal so that 
everyone’s eaten.

Then my sister and I will turn my wardrobe upside down in search of a great 
outfit. I get cussed for not ironing my clothes, but my dad will help out and 
iron my stuff if he sees me looking a bit creased. I have a thing for shoes and 
I have managed to create a collection of Christian Louboutin in the six years 
since I wonX Factor <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-x-factor>, 
but I think my sister wears them more than me. I love trainers, so if I don’t 
have to wear heels, I put on a sneaker.

I love Mac and Make Up For Ever <http://www.makeupforever.com/int/en-int> is 
the greatest, but I am not a fan of wearing makeup all the time, it’s good to 
let skin breathe. The most I do with my hair is run it through with a GHD 
straightener. I have extensions sewn in all the time – you can have them cut 
into a fringe, add more or change the colour.

I am confident about my legs, but I don’t like having my stomach out. I like 
to do a lot of hot yoga, and performing keeps me fit. Now I am inThe Bodyguard 
<http://www.thebodyguardmusical.com/>, I don’t have to do that much gym work 
because I am on stage every night.

I dress myself for TV appearances, but for shows I have a stylist. I would 
never go on stage in jeans and a top, because I wouldn’t feel amazing. I feel 
my best when I am on stage, because those costumes are made for my alter ego 
and they bring out a certain kind of energy.

• Alexandra Burke’s EP Renegade is released on 25 March.
 