
Is the “digital divide” still a phenomenon for museums? Lack of internet 
access for many people used to mean missing out on all that cultural heritage 
had to offer online. These days we may no longer worry whether our audiences 
are regularly connected to the internet, but we do make attempts to check 
whether our social media presence is reaching the right people. We also worry 
about how best to make meaningful experiences for people whose mobile devices 
are part of their everyday lives.


The rise of the (often risible) idea of the contemporary “digital native” has 
sometimes made even museums wonder whether they’re on the wrong side of the 
divide, unable to provide as many digital experiences as apparantly required by 
a technology-hungry younger generation.


Perhaps the concept of a single digital divide itself belongs in a museum? 
This year’s annual Museums Computer Groupconference 
<http://museumscomputergroup.org.uk/2015/09/15/ukmw15-programme/>, Bridging 
Gaps, Making Connections, focuses on the multiple ways in which digital 
technology and smart thinking is overcoming gaps between museums, their content 
and audiences.


Sometimes you have to collaborate with others in order to reach your audiences 
and digitised collections are a fertile site for creative collaborations. But 
the sheer quantity of publicly available material generated through archival 
digitisation programmes can feel daunting.

Collaborating with creative practitioners is one way to forge new connections 
with local audiences. The Tyne & Wear Archives & Museums’sHalf Memory 
<https://twmuseums.org.uk/half-memory/half-memory-live-performance> project 
invited artists and musicians to dig through their collections and create new 
work. The result was a new album of music and a week-long internet radio 
programme. The connections made here move beyond the authoritative voice of 
“the museum” and allow new voices to speak (or even sing) about cultural 
heritage.

Massively open online courses (Moocs 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Massive_open_online_course>) and other digital 
learning environments have also made education more accessible, while at the 
same time moving it out of the classroom. Partnerships between Moocs and 
museums can put the collections and knowledge of the latter into engaging 
formats for learners. But how do we know what digital learners are doing? Tate’s
partnership <https://www.khanacademy.org/partner-content/tate> with learning 
portalKhan Academy <https://www.khanacademy.org/> uses audience data provided 
by tools such as Google Analytics to understand digital learners, their 
pathways and motivations.

Even on social media museums often work in isolation. We plug away on our own, 
joining a popular hashtag or tossing out a charitable retweet with our eye only 
on our own audience.

The #MuseumInstaSwap 
<http://blog.wellcomecollection.org/2015/09/09/museuminstaswap-through-a-different-lens/>
 project rewrote the rules on social media collaborations. Ten London museums 
paired up to lend each other their Instagram accounts for a week. The result 
was seeing each museum through the eyes of another, highlighting oddities from 
the collections in new contexts. The Natural History Museum found afantastic 
example <https://instagram.com/p/64jDm_SuRE/> of ostrich locomotion in the 
collections of the V&A. These kind of connections go beyond brand silos to 
enrich our experiences ofall museums.

Connections with organisations beyond the sector is also important. 
Melting-pot initiatives such asMuseomixUK <http://museomixuk.tumblr.com/> 
encourage collaboration between digital and non-digital experts, and between 
museums and local community organisations. Last year’s event at Derby Silk Mill 
saw a new wave of makers and artists collaborate with museum staff on 
rethinking the museum experience.

But as digital projects such as these become an increasingly core element of 
museums’ strategy, organisations face the challenge of bridging the gap between 
what they know how to do with technology and their aspirations for using it to 
enhance audience engagement with collections. Often this means having to make 
connections between different areas of digital expertise in large and complex 
organisations. Leicestershire county council’sClick; Connect; Curate; Create 
<http://connect-curate.com/category/information/> project is all about sharing 
best practice in using new tools and tech to improve digital access across its 
heritage and cultural activities.

If there’s not one digital divide but many gaps, then it seems that one of the 
core roles of digital technology in museums, archives and galleries is to find 
new ways of bridging those gaps – and helping each other by sharing what we’ve 
learned. We need to go back to first principles and build a web: a web of 
connections that brings together museums, partners and audiences to deliver 
inspiring experiences in the places where they’re wanted.

UKMW15: Bridging gaps, Making connections 
<http://museumscomputergroup.org.uk/2015/09/15/ukmw15-programme/> takes place 
at London’s British Museum on 26 October – book your tickets and find out more
here 
<http://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/ukmw15-bridging-gaps-making-connections-sponsored-by-beacontent-tickets-18201911407>

Mia Ridge is chair and Danny Birchall is on the committee of the Museums 
Computer Group <http://museumscomputergroup.org.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 