
What have I done? The phrase “uphill struggle” is used freely in many 
contexts, but I’ve got a feeling I’m going to learn its full definition in the 
next couple of weeks. I have signed up to take part in theHaute Route 
<http://www.hauteroute.org/>, cycle events going across the Alpine terrains of 
Italy, Switzerland, France and Spain. The scenery will be spectacular. The 
Haute Route rides are billed, with beautiful understatement, as “the highest 
and toughest cyclosportives in the world” and “as close as it’s possible for an 
amateur to ride like a pro”. It will take me to the edge of my ability, but, I 
hope, not to the edge of a cliff.

The Haute Route offers a choice of three seven-day rides – the Dolomites and 
Swiss Alps, running from Venice to Geneva, the Haute Route Alps (Geneva to 
Nice) and the Haute Route Pyrenees going from Ripoll in Spain all the way to 
the Basque coast on the Atlantic. I am taking on two new ones this year, the 
Dolomites/Swiss Alps and a compact version of the Alps, which, I’m told puts me 
in the so-called “iron-man” category. I would describe myself more as copper 
man, or even pewter man, as, due to work, I must spend way more time in front 
of a computer than training for this event, which worries me a great deal. At 
night I wake up in a sweat thinking of mountain roads that just go on, and on, 
and on.
 You’ve got to be kidding: there’s climbing, and then there’s this. 
Photograph: Haute Route 
Brutal but beautiful


But this nightmare is definitely going to come true. Haute Route is a 
mountainous combination of the Tour De France, the Giro D’Italia and the Vuelta 
a España. Therewill be uphills that never end. In first week I will have to 
ride 547 miles and climb more than 20,000 metres. Matt Holden, who helped 
devise the route, tells me thenew Dolomites course 
<http://www.hauteroutedolomites.org/en/race/course-overview> will be as tough 
as the already establishedHaute Route Alps 
<http://www.hauteroutealps.org/en/race/course-overview>, which includes 
notorious monsters such as Col de Madeleine, Alpe d’Huez and Mont Ventoux. 
Professionals weep doing this kind of thing. In addition, he says, “you will 
regularly be riding above 2000m which means the altitude may also make it 
harder”. Oh. Fantastic.

But he has good advice – not to overdo things on the first two days, a mistake 
he admits to making when he first tried the Alps route. “Days three and five 
will be really tough, because they are 94 miles and 110 miles, and you will do 
several peaks that include Oberalppass (2,046m) and Passo di Gavia (2,652m).” 
Is there any good news? Day three will be a time-trial of only 13 miles. That’s 
OK. Oh no it isn’t. It’s a continuous ascent all the way up to Passo dello 
Stelvio, at 2,758m, a ride described by cycling writer and expertClaude 
Droussent, as “very, very hard 
<http://www.hauteroutedolomites.org/en/race/stages/stage_4_individual_time_trial_bormio_passo_dello_stelvio>
 … with gradients up to 12.1% above 2,000m”. And that is not a perspective only 
for amateur athletes. Top British mountaineerKenton Cool 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kenton_Cool>, who has conquered Everest 11 times, 
tweeted <https://twitter.com/KentonCool/status/237916854646104066>after a 
previous Haute Route cycling day in the Alps: “Climbing Everest was easy 
compared to today’s stage … hardest thing ever.”

 More of this, please: riders take a dramatic downhill stretch in the Alps. 
Photograph: Haute Route 
Gearing up


Will a better bicycle help? I’ve ridden an entry-level Boardman road bike on 
trips for about three years, and have been very pleased with it, but decide, 
for the first time, to try out anew carbon model 
<http://www.halfords.com/cycling/bikes/road-bikes/boardman-road-pro-carbon-slr-bike-2014>
. I immediately notice a big difference, especially as I usually ride a much 
heavier bike to work. It’s like putting on a pair of slippers after wearing 
hobnail boots. The nearest local hill is an instant joy. But will that be 
enough? And what is the best gear ratio? Holden advises me get something as low 
as possible, perhaps down to 50 and 34 teeth on the chainring and as big as 32 
or higher on the cassette.


I even get to speak to the man himself – British team “secret squirrel” tech 
chief, bike designer, former Olympic champion, yellow jersey holder and pundit
Chris Boardman <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chris_Boardman>. “You definitely 
need at least a 32 on the cassette,” he tells me, without hesitation. “There’s 
nothing worse then being overgeared. I’ve seen riders tear up mountains then 
regularly blow up. They overdo it, and this is why they fade towards the end of 
climbs, and the high altitude also affects your recovery. The Alpine roads are 
nothing like those in the UK. Not necessarily steeper, but relentless. You have 
to take it slowly. It’s like walking instead of running.”


What about preparation? “Well, aside from base fitness, it’s as much about 
getting your head right, a mental state of knowing you have to climb 
continuously for long stretches.” So there you have it. It’s not just about 
getting the bike right, but just as important to get my brain and body into 
gear too.

Training


So how on earth do you train for an event that is so thrilling and challenging 
it has even been attended by former Tour De France winners Greg Lemond and 
Stephen Roche? The current Haute’s fastest man and ex-pro Frenchman Peter Pouly 
trains for six months for it. Well, I won’t be challenging you, Monsieur Pouly. 
I only signed up a few weeks ago, and have had precious little time to ride 
much more than five miles each way to work, go running two or three times a 
week, and the odd day out. And I haven’t even given up beer and cake. I’ve 
trained on a route including Muswell Hill in north London and the 100m steep 
hill in my local park, but I’d have to do this 500 times and that will still 
not replicate the continuous effort required.
 Peter tries a bit of hill training in his local park on the carbon Boardman. 
He only has to do this 500 times to replicate the Alps. Photograph: Peter 
Kimpton 
I consult two mortals who have lived to tell the tale. They cheer me up a 
little. London-based New Zealander Gretchen Miller has previously ridden the 
Alps and Pyrenees routes and called them “the best two weeks of my life. The 
scenery is amazing. I only started cycling five years ago and I found it tough 
but managed it.” She certainly is keen, and advises doing fast interval 
training to get her heart rate up, in six minute sprints. Yes, I can try that. 
Another Haute Route rider and bloggerBen Smithers  
<https://twitter.com/bensmithers>is also full of great tips and explains how 
friendly the event is. Jointly their most important advice is to “get your body 
used to doing more than one full day, so you have to ride again even when 
you’re tired”.

I know exactly what they mean, but sadly don’t quite have the time. Yet I 
comfort myself is having experienced this before, last year when riding theRide 
Across Britain John O’Groats to Land’s End route 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2013/jun/28/ride-across-britain-bike-blog>
, a wonderful day-to-day challenge. Despite aching knees and ankles, I got fit 
in that trip. It’s a shame that sharpness hasn’t stayed as defined as my memory 
of it during another year of working at a desk.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dof6LqccnNmg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dof6LqccnNmg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dof6LqccnNmg&media=>
 Video of highlights of the 2013 Haute Route Alps 
However, Smithers and Miller also give me the impression that the Haute Route 
will, like Ride Across Britain, also be fantastically well organised, with 
riders treated like VIPs, and I’ll imagine I’ll be fired up by the esprit de 
corps. There will be 500 or so taking part, around half British, but also a big 
selection from around the globe. And it will begin with a seven-mile peloton 
parade around Venice, which sounds magical. After that it will be just us and 
the mountains – daunting, but inspiring. The key, for me, and joy, behind all 
the toil, is that all we will have to think about is eating, sleeping and 
cycling. It is a sublime reduction towards cleansing the soul of habitual 
clutter. I only hope I will make it there.

Places are still available for this year’s Haute Route rides 
<http://www.hauteroute.org/>
 <http://www.halfords.com/cycling/bikes?brand=Boardman>

Boardman bikes are available from Halfords 
<http://www.halfords.com/cycling/bikes?brand=Boardman>

Follow Peter Kimpton’s progress from 15 August 2014 on his Twitter feed 
<https://twitter.com/PeterKimpton>

 