
Jay-Jay Okocha's arrival in Tunisia won't just see the Nigerian squad united 
with their captain, but the end of a long struggle for Okocha, who at several 
points in the past month had looked certain to miss Nigeria's African Cup of 
Nations campaign.

Okocha was called up to join the squad on December 19 for a four-week 
preparation period, prompting an enraged Sam Allardyce to ask his star player 
to retire from international football and concentrate on Bolton Wanderer's 
Premiership survival.

"Him having to go off to the Africa Nations Cup does leave me bewildered," Big 
Sam fumed.

"The fact is, I can't have my skipper for one of the most crucial games in the 
history of this club... that for me shouldn't happen. It is an outrageous 
situation for us to be in.

"It's a great shame for him and a great shame for us. We could pay a heavy 
price."

Needless to say, Okocha refused to leave behind a career as captain of an 
impressive Nigerian squad, and Sam was forced to seek a delay in Okocha's 
departure for the tournament.

But the Bolton chief's promises of a showdown with the Nigerian FA soon became 
unnecessary when it emerged that a Nigerian bank, with which Okocha held some 
of his money (speculation suggested as much as Â£4m of Okocha's personal fortune 
was held there), had run into difficulties.

Such were Okocha's concerns that he hinted in an interview with a Nigerian 
newspaper that he would have to forego the tournament to try and rescue his 
lost funds.

"My mind is with Nigeria. I love the country, I'm captain of the team and I 
know my responsibilities but honestly, I am troubled," he said.

"I have almost all my money in a bank, and now that bank has a problem and I'm 
in real trouble, in a real mess. I really don't know what to do."

His eventual course of action, to the delight of Sam Allardyce and the Bolton 
masses, was to stay on until just two days before the tournament to play and 
earn money in England.

"I want to continue to play for Bolton and earn money to take care of my 
family," he said.

At least the 5-2 hammering of Aston Villa should have put a nice little bonus 
in the Okocha family account - with the midfielder scoring two fantastic 
free-kicks.
 