
Your article on the Warwick commission report 
<http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/research/warwickcommission/futureculture/finalreport/>
, highlighting how the arts are “being systematically removed from the 
education system” (Creativity draining away from schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/17/arts-and-culture-systematically-removed-from-uk-education-system>
, 18 February) misses a key factor as to why this is taking place: league 
tables. These have been based on a hierarchy of subjects whereby the arts give 
schools no advantage. Michael Gove’s wheeze of an English baccalaureate had the 
effect of relegating subjects like drama, dance, art and design to also-rans. 
Senior managements in many schools reacted immediately to this proposal and 
actively encouraged students to choose geography or history instead of arts 
subjects. The management team in schools is often single-mindedly focused on 
improving the schools points score in the league tables. In the wake of the 
EBacc announcement, two successful drama departments in Leicester went from 
cohorts of 50-plus GCSE students to just over 20 the following year.
David Cross
Leicester

• You repeat the assertion that “in the amateur arts sector, only 2% of 
participants are from a black, Asian or minority ethnic background”. This is 
misleading. It comes from a 2008 report commissioned by the Department for 
Culture, Media and Sport which only looked at a very particular model of 
formally constituted amateur arts groups. Research by Voluntary Arts is 
revealing a fascinating picture of the range of ways in which amateur creative 
cultural activity takes place in the UK’s minority communities. In the week the 
BBC launches itsGet Creative campaign 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/3P7n390cZc3VBpn7cPn0F5T/about-get-creative>
 to “shine a spotlight on the creativity that surrounds us everywhere”, we 
should be recognising and celebrating the sheer scale, wealth and diversity of 
creative cultural activity committed to voluntarily and often to the highest 
standards  in black, Asian and minority ethnic communities – and in all 
communities across the UK.
Robin Simpson
Chief executive, Voluntary Arts <http://www.voluntaryarts.org>
 