
Graham Coxon, guitarist <https://www.theguardian.com/music/graham-coxon>


Modern Life Is Rubbish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/album/e7affd78-d157-4772-a468-675fa4309c61> 
[Blur's second album] was overlooked because of the rise of grunge, but we were 
halfway to somewhere, and with Parklife we arrived. The album was the 
convergence of a lot of influences: Alex [James, bassist] wanted to be in Duran 
Duran, I wanted to be inWire <http://www.pinkflag.com/>, and Damon [Albarn] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/damon-albarn> wanted to be … I don't know. 
There were songs on the album we were excited about, but I was surprised it got 
so many awards. One or two would have been all right.

A lot of people thought it was a celebration of Englishness, but it was 
actually very sarcastic. The Parklife single wasn't about the working class, it 
was about the park class: dustbin men, pigeons, joggers – things we saw every 
day on the way to the studio [Maison Rouge in Fulham 
<http://www.philsbook.com/maison-rouge.html>]. It epitomises what Blur were 
about – having fun and doing exactly what you want to do.

But Damon wasn't comfortable doing the verses – he just couldn't get into 
character. He thought it would be better to get in a celebrity, so I suggested 
the actorPhil Daniels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/29/phil-daniels-actor> because we 
were big fans fromQuadrophenia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/36323/quadrophenia>. At the line "There 
was a piece of my heart", Phil said, "Should I drop the 'h'? If I pronounce it, 
it'll sound more adorable." We didn't want to use a forced mockney accent, so 
he pronounced the "h".

I play a bit of the German national anthem on saxophone in the "vorsprung 
durch technik" line. It's a very comedic song, a knees-up. Oasis were accused 
of being Chas'n'Dave, but we weren't far away ourselves.

Stephen Street, producer

Modern Life hadn't been a commercial success, but the band were still drawing 
a big touring crowd so the fear of being dropped had gone. We went into the 
studio to doParklife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/album/67461c8e-d864-3910-9bf4-39e44357aac9> 
soon after.

Damon was directing his attention to a very English kind of inspiration: great 
records made bythe Kinks <https://www.theguardian.com/music/kinks>, and also 
imaginary characters likeTracy Jacks 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=poD6-YJsOCY> [Albarn's civil servant in the 
throes of a midlife crisis]. The album was made piecemeal: we did a few songs, 
then they were on the road again, then back in the studio. There were no 
arguments.

The style of [first single] Girls & Boys 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OXNvN8wFGY8> was unlike anything Blur had done 
before, but I thought it would be Top 5 – it was so downright basic. I felt the 
way I had when I producedthe Smiths <https://www.theguardian.com/music/smiths>: 
that as long as Morrissey was singing on it, it would be the Smiths. It was the 
same with Blur: they could put their hands to anything, and it would still 
sound like Blur.

Each song had its own sound and direction: End of a Century 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MuYUmnny0pU> is completely different from Girls 
& Boys, and different again from Bank Holiday 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AyL8IdZyz-0>. I knew [the song] Parklife would 
connect with people, and I still often hear it played at Loftus Road [Queens 
Park Rangers' ground]. In fact, a lot of football teams play it.

Phil Daniels was first approached to recite a poem over a song called The Debt 
Collector <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=anbRFFv0-6s>, but in the end it 
became an instrumental because Damon couldn't come up with a poem he liked. So 
we decided Phil should have a go at Parklife instead. The band and I were 
already pretty sick of that song, but he invigorated it and we were interested 
again – although personally, it's still not one of my favourites.
 