
Alex Poots, director, Manchester International Festival <http://www.mif.co.uk/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2F-sp-arts-creativity-alex-poots-ruth-mackenzie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417084056672%2Fa70a14b9-1bd8-4a69-8403-72b3bae119ce-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20the%20arts%20ensure%20it%20continues%20to%20push%20creative%20boundaries%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2F-sp-arts-creativity-alex-poots-ruth-mackenzie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20the%20arts%20ensure%20it%20continues%20to%20push%20creative%20boundaries%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2F-sp-arts-creativity-alex-poots-ruth-mackenzie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417084056672%2Fa70a14b9-1bd8-4a69-8403-72b3bae119ce-1020x612.jpeg>
 Alex Poots. Photograph: Antony Crook 
The really obvious answer is that we need to support and empower the people 
who are best placed to advance artforms and challenge received ideas – and 
that’s artists. We have to start with the art; it’s easy to talk among 
ourselves, easy to focus on structures, organisations and processes – and 
that’s undoubtedly important – but we need to make sure we aren’t putting the 
cart before the horse. The cultural infrastructure in this country is good and 
has the potential to be even better, but we are facilitators and producers in 
the service of artists, and we mustn’t forget that.

We’ve got a robust model for cultural funding in the UK – one that uses some 
public subsidy to draw in other funds from sponsors and like-minded partners. 
It’s certainly one that’s worked very well for the Manchester International 
Festival. If we’ve got other interesting organisations wanting to support us or 
collaborate with us, we know it’s a good indication that the right things are 
happening. We need to defend that public subsidy in order to keep supporting 
artists to make challenging work. Work that evolves artistic forms and 
hopefully enriches public discourse and ‘pays back’ on that public funding.

The arts can and should deal in challenging concepts and ideas. We need to 
reassess where one should look for new developments – look and listen carefully 
– and remember that “the future always flies in under the radar”.

Ian Livingstone CBE, co-founder of Games Workshop 
<http://www.games-workshop.com/Home;jsessionid=8EEC806CDCA8C75075F0544D68E00907?_requestid=8810121>
 and creative industries champion forBIS 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-business-innovation-skills>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2F-sp-arts-creativity-alex-poots-ruth-mackenzie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417084098413%2F1a22469c-1014-43fb-8d78-47749d263e80-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20the%20arts%20ensure%20it%20continues%20to%20push%20creative%20boundaries%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2F-sp-arts-creativity-alex-poots-ruth-mackenzie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20the%20arts%20ensure%20it%20continues%20to%20push%20creative%20boundaries%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2F-sp-arts-creativity-alex-poots-ruth-mackenzie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417084098413%2F1a22469c-1014-43fb-8d78-47749d263e80-1020x612.jpeg>
 Ian Livingstone 
A core strength of the UK that gives us an edge as a nation is our unique 
creativity. It is the envy of the world. The creative industries has grown five 
times the rate of the wider economy and now accounts for one in 18 jobs in the 
UK. The UK excels at creating world-beating intellectual property. In recent 
years, much has been done by government to support the creative industries as a 
sector, most recently introducing tax relief for video games, animation and 
high-end TV production. Computing has also been introduced as a mandatory 
subject in primary and secondary school curricula to promote problem-solving, 
computational thinking and digital-making skills to build new technologies.

An authentic education for the digital world is key, and the government must 
continue its vital role in evolving the curriculum, bringing the arts and 
sciences together to encourage innovation. It is essential that school is a 
place where creativity flourishes. We must not underestimate the contribution 
that art, music, drama and design make in promoting diverse thinking, 
self-expression and self-determination – the raw materials of the creative 
industries.

Ruth Mackenzie, interim CEO and creative director, The Space 
<http://www.thespace.org/>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2F-sp-arts-creativity-alex-poots-ruth-mackenzie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417084158448%2F08f18f0c-79a5-4fb4-80df-6690d8e72242-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20the%20arts%20ensure%20it%20continues%20to%20push%20creative%20boundaries%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2F-sp-arts-creativity-alex-poots-ruth-mackenzie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20the%20arts%20ensure%20it%20continues%20to%20push%20creative%20boundaries%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture-professionals-network%2F2014%2Fnov%2F27%2F-sp-arts-creativity-alex-poots-ruth-mackenzie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F11%2F27%2F1417084158448%2F08f18f0c-79a5-4fb4-80df-6690d8e72242-1020x612.jpeg>
 Ruth Mackenzie 
Artists are the key. Encouraging artists to take risks and experiment, 
supporting them through the process, trusting them to push the boundaries – 
that is the job of producers and curators like me. It sounds easy, but often it 
is not easy to believe that something unfamiliar, innovative or strange is the 
right way forward.

Innovations like photography, TV and film are typically mistrusted and often 
seen as weird new curiosities. Game changers that alter the rules and make the 
tools of art accessible, such as printing, which transformed literacy and 
creativity using the written word, or the internet, which has opened the door 
for creativity across the board of audio and visual media. These turn audiences 
into participants, and participants into artists. They change the art as well 
as the markets.

On The Space, we encourage artists to experiment in public – to create and 
share new work for audiences or participants anywhere in the world. We want 
anyone over the age of 18 to pitch us a new idea: to decide to be an artist via 
our regular open calls. We trust our artists to try out new ideas and we 
support them, even if their ideas are not immediately embraced.

Great hits, like Beethoven’s ninth symphony, were booed when they were first 
performed. Of course, every new work is not going to be innovative, change the 
artform and become a hit with audiences – and for artists, producers, funders 
and partners, creating something that is only recognised as amazing after your 
death may not sound like the most fulfilling career path. But exploring and 
inventing, experimenting and sharing is sometimes thrilling, often fun or 
exciting, occasionally provocative or even life changing. If you believe in 
artists, if you are curious and brave, if you trust your own instincts, if you 
hold your nerve, then you might make history.

Ian, Ruth and Alex will be speaking at the Remix summit in London 
<http://www.remixsummits.com/ldn/> on 2-3 December

More like this

• It’s time to give the artists more control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/jun/23/artists-more-control-politicians-leaders>
• Scrapping GCSE drama from the curriculum would be madness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/03/gcse-drama-curriculum>
• How mobile tech is changing the way we make and enjoy art 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2014/nov/11/-sp-mobile-tech-art-shakespeare-google-glass>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 