
The duffel coat may have been mothballed but Alan Davies is still able to duff 
up the opposition – in the ratings, at least. After a long period of mopey 
silence and intermittent one-offs, the first proper series of Jonathan Creek in 
a decade began last Friday,dominating its timeslot 
<https://twitter.com/TVRatingsUK/status/439695942800146432> by a margin of over 
4 million viewers (admittedly, the competition wasn't that strong – it's up 
againstthe new series of Gogglebox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/feb/20/gogglebox-friday-night-channel-4>
 this week).

That sounds like a win for Davies and Creek creator David Renwick. But not 
everyone was thrilled that the central mystery in the first episode – how a 
West End actress was stabbed while alone in her locked dressing room – wasn't 
really a mystery at all. The audience had already seen her get attacked the 
night before, conspire to literally cover up the injury, then accidentally 
exacerbate the wound to the extent that she slipped into a life-threatening 
coma. No smoke or mirrors required, just a flesh-coloured prosthetic.

Creek – with the help of his exasperated wife Polly (Sarah Alexander) – worked 
it out in the end, of course, but some fans were upset that the show had 
apparently gone "full Columbo" by revealing whodunnit – and howdunnit – within 
the first 10 minutes. Sifting through theimpassioned 
<https://twitter.com/thisislucyb/status/439511779509821441> and sometimes 
hilarious <https://twitter.com/violetcreme/status/439521547561472000> outrage 
on Twitter, it was clear that die-hard Creek devotees – Creekers? – felt like 
some sort of contract had been broken, that a vital element of their enjoyment 
of the show over the years was trying to work out the puzzle for themselves.

Was it really such a betrayal? If that delayed-injury technique sounds 
slightly familiar, it's because – and consider this a mild spoiler for another 
curly-haired-detective show – a similar gimmick was used in the recent Sherlock 
episodeThe Sign of Three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2014/jan/05/sherlock-recap-series-three-episode-two>
 (itself lifted from Sir Arthur Conan Doyle's original Holmes story The Sign of 
Four). As Renwick seemed hell-bent on ribbing the BBC's Sherlock reboot by 
spotlighting a scarf-wearing young criminology student with impressive-sounding 
but completely misguided deduction patter, the similarity was clearly 
deliberate. Knowing the truth ahead of time confirmed how off-base this 
supremely self-confident Sherlock-wannabe was, and served to further reinforce 
the gag.

That, combined with the episode's almost Harry Potter-esque title – The 
Letters of Septimus Noone, a reference to Polly Creek's family secrets – 
suggested Renwick's storytelling attentions were really focused elsewhere. And 
were all those Creekers really looking forward to trying to figure out yet 
another locked-room mystery? There were two of them in the first series alone: 
Jack in the Box – OK, that locked room was a nuclear bunker – and The House of 
Monkeys. Working out ways to get bodies or valuables in or indeed out of 
nominally secure spaces has been a recurring Creek trope ever since. The tetchy 
trick deviser has cracked locked garages (series two's Danse Macabre), medieval 
locked rooms (the 2001 special Satan's Chimney), a locked school gym (series 
four's The Coonskin Cap) and a spooky locked attic (the 2009 special The 
Grinning Man).

By squaring away this latest locked-room conundrum so quickly, Renwick might 
even be signposting a conscious break from Creeks past. Now that Jonathan is 
married, there's a slightly different dynamic – moreHart to Hart 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MfI-gRQ7phc> than Columbo – and physically 
moving him into the collapsing country pile of Polly's late parents creates a 
new status quo. The character has always been at home solving murders in 
country houses or uncovering diabolical secrets in picturesque villages but 
afterwards tended to scurry back to his isolated windmill or magic show 
rehearsals in the big city.

Now Creek will have to try and engage with village life on a more permanent 
basis, attempting to integrate with the locals, and enduring their scrutiny. 
The next two episodes dive deep into this Midsomer-esque milieu, and mostly 
manage to avoid or subvert the usual cliches of vicars and spinsters thanks to 
Renwick's knack for eccentric character details. We get to see Creek sighing 
and being slightly put out, and surely that's what fans love as much as his 
ability to work out the seemingly impossible?

Besides, there's no shame in going full Columbo – he's one of the most beloved 
characters in TV history. But at the risk of adding another sleuth to an 
already crowded debate, I'd argue that Creek has more in common withDirk Gently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/mar/05/dirk-gently-empire-tv-review>
, the holistic detective created by Douglas Adams who solved cases by observing 
that everything, however random, was connected. Like Adams, Renwick has always 
enjoyed throwing in strange signifiers – what coulda Spam sandwich 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/cult/jonathancreek/episodeguide/scentedroom.shtml> 
possibly have to do with the theft of a priceless El Greco? – before drawing 
together seemingly disparate plot points with an understated flourish. Just 
hanging out can sometimes be as satisfying as working something out.

Jonathan Creek is on BBC One at 9pm tonight
 