
When Matthew Lutton’s stage production of Joan Lindsay’s cult novel Picnic at 
Hanging Rock appears at the MalthouseTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> in Melbourne next week, it will not 
be merely a debut, but also something of a theatre victory.

Picnic at Hanging Rock: Rewatching classic Australian films
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jan/23/picnic-hanging-rock-rewatching-australian-films>
The title alone has the kind of mass, instant brand-recognition yearned for by 
any theatre’s marketing department. Lindsay’s 1967 novel about a group of white 
schoolgirls who disappear into a mountain on Valentine’s Day in 1900 has been 
of seminal influence on the Australian cultural psyche, especially since Peter 
Weir’s 1975 film adaptation received world wide acclaim. Forty years after 
cries of “Miranda! Miranda!” echoed among the panpipes of the Weir treatment, 
Lutton’s Malthouse team were but one of severalAustralian theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/australian-theatre> companies competing for 
the rights to reproduce the story for the stage.

Lutton may be the youngest artistic director of a major performing arts 
company in Australia, but in addition to his impressive critical achievements, 
his reputation for diplomacy is legendary; interviewed, he won’t tell me who 
his competition was. Instead, he affirms his gratitude that it was Malthouse’s 
pitch for the rights that won the day. It was Lutton’s good fortune that 
Lindsay’s literary estate is handled by the same administrators as that of 
Patrick White’s, who had granted Lutton the rights fora rare production 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/09/night-on-bald-mountain-review-scathing-satire-and-sensual-tragedy>
 of White’s Night on Bald Mountain at Malthouse in 2014. They were – to his 
relief – suitably impressed with what they saw.

“What we offered was to be faithful to the novel and to Lindsay’s language,” 
Lutton says of his adaptation, which has been scripted by Tom Wright. “It would 
be for female voices. And on stage, five women perform all the parts.”

Night on Bald Mountain review – scathing satire and sensual tragedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/09/night-on-bald-mountain-review-scathing-satire-and-sensual-tragedy>
Lutton’s stage conceit is that his ensemble of five female actors appear as 
contemporary schoolgirls, telling the story in alternating characters. “Each 
actor plays two or three characters,” he explains. “They each narrate parts, 
they play different roles, and they become possessed by the characters.”

The human element is not, of course, the only presence in the play. The 
unusual dramatic conflict at the heart of Picnic at Hanging Rock, in any 
adaptation, has always been a tension between the white colonial generation 
attending the picnic, and the Hanging Rock itself, representing the ancient, 
mysterious Australian continent that white society vainly attempts to control.

Unlike his Night on Bald Mountain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/australia-culture-blog/2014/may/09/night-on-bald-mountain-review-scathing-satire-and-sensual-tragedy>
, which represented an impressive ziggurat-like structural monolith onstage, 
Lutton’s Hanging Rock is not depicted so literally; he’s characterised the 
mysterious landscape that obsesses, possesses and disappears the girls as a 
metaphoric darkness.

“We evoke the rock through the language, and we have a deep blackness in the 
theatre, which acts as the palpable otherness that keeps impacting on the 
story,” he says. “There are blackouts that cause girls to disappear and 
reappear, so there’s this configuring and reconfiguring of the girls and 
objects as they come closer to the rock.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fhow-malthouse-theatre-plans-to-bring-picnic-at-hanging-rock-to-the-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca4ca9e7b254c1d34a1a9356382c0cd3114ec402%2F160_572_2870_3588%2F2870.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Malthouse%20Theatre%20plans%20to%20bring%20Picnic%20at%20Hanging%20Rock%20to%20the%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fhow-malthouse-theatre-plans-to-bring-picnic-at-hanging-rock-to-the-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Malthouse%20Theatre%20plans%20to%20bring%20Picnic%20at%20Hanging%20Rock%20to%20the%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fhow-malthouse-theatre-plans-to-bring-picnic-at-hanging-rock-to-the-stage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fca4ca9e7b254c1d34a1a9356382c0cd3114ec402%2F160_572_2870_3588%2F2870.jpg>
 Rehearsal picture from Matthew Lutton’s stage production of Picnic at Hanging 
Rock. Photograph: Pia Johnson/Malthouse Theatre 
For Lutton, it’s the explicit juxtaposition of Australia’s post-colonial 
society with the harsh reality of its environment that explains the enduring 
popularity of Lindsay’s story, as well as the recent competing attempts for its 
stage realisation. He says that “the constant unpacking of the colonial 
narrative” offered by Picnic at Hanging Rock has been a consistent interest for 
local audiences, to whom its metaphoric references – intrusion into the 
landscape, and displacement within it – are readily understood.

The character of the remote Miranda exudes a particular fascination for both 
the characters within the story and audiences beyond it, says Lutton, because 
she reconciles herself to her surroundings. “The story of Miranda is of someone 
who intuitively understands land, and that’s what makes her beautiful.”

It’s the specific contemporary challenge of Australia – to reconcile itself to 
its land – that Lutton suggests inspired the recent spate of offers to adapt 
Picnic’s text to production. In the era of climate change, and fear of a 
destabilised environment, the story takes on a new relevance. At the time the 
story is set, says Lutton, white Australian society was still coming to terms 
with the continent, while when Lindsay was writing, “it was no longer 
awe-inspiring – it was a thing that we were trying to get under control. Now, 
we’re trying to live in symbiosis with it”.

Does Lutton think we ever will?

Ever the diplomat, he demurs. “Picnic at Hanging Rock is a story we’ve turned 
into into a national myth,” says Lutton. “We know the story isn’t true but we 
want to believe it’s true. There’s an enduring need in Australia to build myths 
on incomplete stories ... I think that’s part of the Australian psyche.”

 * Picnic at Hanging Rock 
<http://malthousetheatre.com.au/whats-on/picnic-at-hanging-rock> runs at 
Malthouse theatre from 26 February until 20 March,before a season at Perth’s 
Black Swan State Theatre company from 1-17 April.  