
It was the issue that whispered rather than roared during the election 
campaign. With the number of over-85s set to double by 2030, we know there’s a 
huge challenge ahead as our population ages. We know too that, as the Lords’ 
report on ageing put it,the government and society are “woefully under-prepared”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/mar/14/britain-unprepared-elderly-people-lords>
. Yet still politicians seem reluctant to face up to the impact this 
significant demographic change will have on everything from health and social 
care services, to pensions provision, employment practices and housing stock.

A panel of experts and an engaged audience at a Guardian event discussed what 
the government should do to prepare for an ageing population. The lack of 
effective debate on the issue during the election campaign was down to 
politicians being afraid to confront some of the difficult choices ahead, the 
event heard. “All political parties are running scared of the pensioner vote – 
pensioners do vote so you do what they want you to do,” said crossbench peer 
Lord Bichard, chair of theSocial Care Institute for Excellence 
<http://www.scie.org.uk/>. 

Labour peer and broadcaster Lady Joan Bakewell said: “The most important thing 
is to think long-term and political parties don’t do that. What we see is 
short-termism which militates against the long-term plans we need for people in 
their 40s who are going to be in their 90s one day.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fpoliticians-challenge-ageing-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437466095079%2F71c434a4-4eff-4613-9fc9-7baefd030d8b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20politicians%20face%20up%20to%20the%20challenge%20of%20the%20ageing%20population%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fpoliticians-challenge-ageing-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20politicians%20face%20up%20to%20the%20challenge%20of%20the%20ageing%20population%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fpoliticians-challenge-ageing-population%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437466095079%2F71c434a4-4eff-4613-9fc9-7baefd030d8b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Panellists Ryan Bourne (left) and Lord Bichard. Photograph: Thomas 
Langridge/Guardian 
Such short-termism and vote-chasing are getting in the way of necessary reform 
to ensure health and social care can be properly funded into the future, 
according to Ryan Bourne, head of public policy at the right-leaningInstitute 
for Economic Affairs <http://www.iea.org.uk/>. “The answer is obvious – why is 
money going on the winter fuel allowance, free TV licences or bus passes that 
many people don’t want or need?” he said.

On top of the need to face up to some potentially tricky choices, there are 
some key areas where progress could be made – and the event heard a number of 
practical suggestions. They included making it easier for older people to 
continue to work when they wanted to and so maintain their independence for 
longer. For Bourne, this might involve changes to employment law to make it 
more attractive for employers to take on older employers who might be seen as a 
risker proposition.

The experience of the older generation could also be better tapped into by 
encouraging more volunteering, particularly in designing and monitoring 
services. “We have lost the knack of realising the potential of local 
communities and we have lost energy and potential as a result,” said Bichard. 
“You can’t maintain quality in residential home by visiting once a year,” he 
added. “If we had more ‘younger older people’ involved in visiting as 
volunteers we would have fewer problems.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fpoliticians-challenge-ageing-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437465674291%2Feda09fff-9aa1-4ec4-bad0-b325905fbf00-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20politicians%20face%20up%20to%20the%20challenge%20of%20the%20ageing%20population%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fpoliticians-challenge-ageing-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20politicians%20face%20up%20to%20the%20challenge%20of%20the%20ageing%20population%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fpoliticians-challenge-ageing-population%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437465674291%2Feda09fff-9aa1-4ec4-bad0-b325905fbf00-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Halima Khan: ‘There is a technology divide, but that is changing.’ Photograph: 
Thomas Langridge /Guardian 
Other ways to meet the challenges ahead include a better use of technology. 
Halima Khan, director of the innovation lab at innovation charityNesta 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/>, said: “There is a technology divide, but that is 
changing. Let’s help those who don’t want to engage with technology but let’s 
do more to develop its potential for the future.”

She added that there was a huge amount we could learn from other countries in 
better addressing the needs of the older population, such as co-housing schemes 
popular in some European countries where younger people and older people live 
in a community to provide mutual support. “We do need more investment but also 
better investment in models which are not necessarily the models we have now,” 
she said.

Bakewell said she had put forward the idea of a commissioner for older people, 
to bring together policies affecting older people across different parts of 
government. “I do think it would help with joined-up thinking,” she said. 
“Older people are affected by housing, transport, health, education – what we 
need is something which joins up government departments.” She also called for 
work to be done on creating a better career pathway for care workers and 
encouraging young people to work in care.

Beyond specific initiatives, there was much support at the event for a wider 
change in the way society views and treats older people. Bichard pointed to 
ageist attitudes which he claimed were still far too prevalent. “Too many 
people too often treat older people as if they are just always in need of care 
and support rather than a resource in community,” he said. “Government can take 
the lead on this – I want to see more older people not just listened to but 
used in co-production of services.”

Khan said categorising older people as one homogenous group was not helpful – 
and even the language around ageing and older people could “shut doors and 
close ears”. What was needed, she suggested, was not just traditional policy 
initiatives, but a change in norms and behaviour. “We need to think of this 
like a social movement like feminism or the civil rights movement,” she said.

Treating older people as one group means we fail to make the distinction 
between those struggling with poverty, isolation and inadequate care and those 
who are not. Bakewell said there was a perception that older people, many of 
whom had better pensions and better access to housing than the younger 
generations would, had had it quite good. But she warned that in the face of 
the challenges to come, it would be dangerous to pit the generations against 
each other. Instead, we needed “good and binding” relationships within 
communities. “We can’t wait for the politicians – we are going to have to help 
each other,” she said. “We need a groundswell.”

The future may be challenging, but as participants at the event stressed, it’s 
time to act – or as Bakewell put it, to move from outrage to action. “Outrage 
is just the start – we really have to engage.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fpoliticians-challenge-ageing-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437465827239%2F710c6f02-a678-4dac-9daf-9d61ecd36c82-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20can%20politicians%20face%20up%20to%20the%20challenge%20of%20the%20ageing%20population%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fpoliticians-challenge-ageing-population%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20can%20politicians%20face%20up%20to%20the%20challenge%20of%20the%20ageing%20population%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F21%2Fpoliticians-challenge-ageing-population%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F21%2F1437465827239%2F710c6f02-a678-4dac-9daf-9d61ecd36c82-2060x1236.jpeg>
 The ageing population panel. Photograph: Thomas Langridge/Guardian 
The panel 

Patrick Butler, editor of society, health and education policy, the Guardian 
(chair)

Lady Joan Bakewell, writer, broadcaster and Labour peer

Halima Khan, director, innovation lab, Nesta

Ryan Bourne, head of public policy, Institute for Economic Affairs

Lord Michael Bichard, crossbench peer and chair of the Social Care Institute 
for Excellence
 