
Six teenage boys dressed in tracksuits are sitting in a classroom in a 
training centre in Coleraine,Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>. Lined up in front of them are 
bottles of Vimto and Mountain Dew energy drinks – and a number of colourful 
plastic penises.

The boys, aged 17 and 18 and on a construction course, are having a condom 
relay as part of asex education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/sexeducation> session. It’s a boisterous 
lesson – the boys crack non-stop jokes and laugh uproariously at each other’s 
quips. “This is the best class ever,” says one boy, gasping for air between 
gales of laughter.


They play a game called “Who’s the Daddy?” where they all receive the results 
of a pregnancy test sealed in an envelope and are asked to consider what they 
would do in the event of a positive result. They are appropriately solemn as 
they peel open the envelope.


“I’d try my best to explain it to my mum, then I’d run out of the house 
crying,” says one. Others coo over the idea of having their own baby. Not one 
of them would consider having an abortion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Flets-talk-sex-northern-ireland-teenagers-sex-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffff1f08f4a3420f7d7cbebdedcb140ea3832d576%2F0_865_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Northern%20Ireland's%20abortion%20laws%20affect%20the%20way%20pupils%20are%20taught%20about%20sex&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Flets-talk-sex-northern-ireland-teenagers-sex-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Northern%20Ireland%27s%20abortion%20laws%20affect%20the%20way%20pupils%20are%20taught%20about%20sex&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fjan%2F08%2Flets-talk-sex-northern-ireland-teenagers-sex-education%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffff1f08f4a3420f7d7cbebdedcb140ea3832d576%2F0_865_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Girls would start their course in September and they’d be pregnant by 
Christmas, says Fiona Johnston, an outreach worker at the Brook clinic in 
Coleraine. Photograph: Paul McErlane for the Guardian 
“That’s sick, because ... that’s a child,” says one, and they all agree. They 
know it’s not legal inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>, and not one of them is in 
favour of legalising it.


Expect more teenage pregnancies and STIs as public health cuts kick in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/25/teenage-pregnancies-stis-public-health-cuts-nhs>
The young men in Coleraine are fortunate. Thanks to the sexual health charity 
Brook <https://www.brook.org.uk/>, which provides community-based sex education 
for young people in the province, they have had three half-day sessions to talk 
openly and honestly about every aspect of relationships and sex – including 
abortion – which is highly controversial in this part of the UK.


During this particular session, they have handed around 15 different types of 
contraception, discussing the pros and cons of each; they have squirmed in 
front of graphic pictures of every sexually transmitted infection (STI) known 
to humankind, as well as having considered the consequences of an unplanned 
pregnancy.


Relationships and sexuality education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/teacher-blog/2013/jun/10/sex-education-teaching-resources>
 (RSE) is compulsory in schools in Northern Ireland, but – as in England where 
it is not compulsory – some schools do it better than others. What makes 
Northern Ireland different is that the restrictive laws on abortion and the 
conservative, faith-based approach in many schools make it difficult for 
teenagers to openly discuss issues around sex, relationships, sexuality, 
contraception and abortion.


“Young people know when they are not being given the full picture in terms of 
sexual health but like any other issue it only becomes important to them when 
they find themselves needing help and advice,” says Mary Crawford, director of 
Brook NI which used to be regularly picketed by anti-abortion campaigners.


More generally, Crawford says, sex education in Northern Ireland is different 
from elsewhere in the UK because “the moral, conservative nature of our 
political, educational and social mores does not allow for open discussion on a 
number of issues, including abortion, homosexuality or pleasure.


“The result of this means our young people are disadvantaged in terms of being 
able to make informed choices when they may be feeling most vulnerable,” she 
adds.


Fiona Johnston is an outreach worker for Brook who previously worked in the 
Coleraine training centre where she now delivers sex education. There used to 
be a familiar pattern of pregnancies among the students – the girls would start 
their course in September and they’d be pregnant by Christmas, she says. One 
year, in a class of 21 trainee hairdressers, seven were pregnant within a 
matter of months, with only two completing the two-year course without getting 
pregnant.

“All of them kept their babies and they never returned to education. Most of 
them are still stay-at-home mums,” says Johnston. The teenage pregnancy rate is 
going down in Northern Ireland, as it is elsewhere in the UK (839 pregnancies 
in 2014, compared with 1,524 in 2001) but there is still ignorance. One girl, 
Johnston says, didn’t know whether ovaries were male or female organs; another 
didn’t know that men ejaculate.

“It’s supposed to be taught in schools,” she says, “but it’s done around the 
ethos of the school. If it’s a church school that doesn’t believe in 
contraception, they won’t teach it.”


Love for Life <http://www.loveforlife.org.uk/>, a Christian charity, is the 
biggest external provider of sex education in Northern Ireland’s schools. Last 
year more than 30,000 young people in both primary and secondary schools 
received a Love for Life programme, which is intended to support the curriculum 
already taught in schools. The Guardian recently sat in on a two-hour session 
in a boys’ grammar school in Belfast.


Unlike the Brook approach, which focuses on smaller groups, the Love for Life 
programme was delivered to more than 100 boys aged 14 and 15 sitting in the 
school hall, by two programme leaders armed with microphones and a white 
screen. The session is called Icebergs and Babies – icebergs, it turns out, 
refers to STIs – and it explores relationships and sex through two cartoon 
teenagers called Oscar and Martha.


It’s approaching the end of the school day, but the boys are brilliantly 
attentive, even when members of the rugby team have to shuffle out early for a 
match. They are invited to ask questions and they bravely contribute 
throughout, but the hall is too big and the numbers too great for any real 
honesty.


The presentation is lively and slick. We hear about the laws surrounding 
sexting and thesexualisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/mar/11/sexualisation-of-girls-peoples-panel>
 of society; about the pressure on young people to have sex; about choice and 
virginity; how the media unfairly portrays virgins as “geeks and freaks” and 
how you can get pregnant without having full penetrative sex if there is “skin 
to skin contact in the genital area”.

‘It was the scariest thing I've ever done’: the Irish women forced to travel 
for abortions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/abortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman>
“What about gay sex?” one boy asks unexpectedly. “There’s no chance of 
pregnancy,” the programme leader responds quickly, but no real discussion 
follows.


Then it’s on to STIs and contraception, but it’s nowhere near as comprehensive 
as Brook, although the pupils are younger. And the issue of faith keeps popping 
up. “There are lots of ways to reduce the risks of pregnancy and STIs,” the 
presenter tells the boys, adding, “If you follow a faith, that might have 
something to say to you about these things.”

Later, the issue of abortion is raised in the event of an unplanned pregnancy. 
“Obviously it’s illegal in this country and would involvea journey across the 
water 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/abortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman>
, which would have financial implications,” the presenter says, before turning 
once again to faith, religion, morals and what your family might teach you.

“Faith-based RSE is moralistic,” says Mark Breslin, director of the NI Family 
Planning Association. “It’s not our job to tell a young person what to think. 
It has to be an open, honest discussion. People talk about RSE being about 
young people having morals or values, but whose? It’s about giving a young 
person the opportunity to make an informed choice.”

The Coleraine boys have enjoyed the Brook sessions. At the end of the morning 
they grab their high-energy drinks and a few sample condoms and proceed to peel 
them out of their packets and on to the handlebars of the nearest parked moped, 
gigging all the while.
 