
The Higher Education Policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/policy> Institute (Hepi) 
is running a year-long comparison of the Australian and English university 
systems. The objective is to reveal some lessons for public policy.

Given that new evidence is the bread-and-butter of academia, it's been an 
unexpectedly bumpy ride. When we publishedour initial findings 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/2014/04/24/comparison-student-loans-england-australia/>, 
one observer claimed, "Hepi's suggestion that there are lessons to be learned 
from down under isparticularly misguided 
<http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/comment/opinion/uk-university-funding-dont-copy-the-australians/2013420.article>
".

In fact, it undoubtedly makes sense to compare and contrast the two systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/australia-fortnight>. 
They resemble non-identical twins: strikingly alike and strikingly different at 
the same time.

Moreover, the lessons run both ways. Australia has better support for 
postgraduate students, while England deals better with the living costs of 
full-time undergraduates.

But perhaps the critics have a point nonetheless. Restricting the comparison 
to just two nations gives an incomplete picture.

Take the issue of recouping payments from former students working abroad. 
Plenty of indebted Australian graduates leave the country soon after their 
studies. Similarly, many EU residents studying in England return home owing 
substantial sums to the Student Loans Company. Yet neither Australia nor 
England has found effective ways to collect the repayments of those who leave.

Australian graduates who have left the country owe hundreds of millions of 
dollars. Little is done to track them down.According to economist Bruce Chapman 
and senior lecturer Timothy Higgins, both at the Australian National University 
<http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2202574>, the Australian 
loan system "seems to be the only income contingent loan policy which does not 
include any regulations designed to minimise losses for taxpayers from 
graduates going overseas".

The English story is not much better. Around 6% of graduates are working 
overseas soon after graduating. Butaccording to Margaret Hodge MP 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/news/student-loans-report-publication/>
, the chair of the committee of public accounts, the Student Loans Company 
knows very little about them: "Will they ever pay back their loans? The Student 
Loans Company simply doesn't know."

The authorities are effectively playing a game of hide-and-seek in which those 
hiding can go anywhere in the world while those searching don't have the 
resources to do it properly.

Even those critics who would like to see an entirely new student funding 
system want to see the non-repayment problem tackled. Toni Pearce, the 
president of the UK's National Union of Students anda fierce critic of the 
current regime 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmselect/cmbis/558/55806.htm>
, has said: "I am a taxpayer and I am interested in making sure that the money 
is recouped."

A third Anglophone country may hold the answer. New Zealanders typically set 
off on "the big OE", or overseas expedition, shortly after graduating. When 
they do so, the government recalibrates their annual loan repayments so that 
they are obliged to pay somewhere in the region of 10% of their debt each year. 
In other words, their income-contingent loans come to look more like 
mortgage-style loans.

New Zealand also charges former students living abroad a real rate of interest 
that is not applied to others, and late payment interest can be applied too.

Those Kiwis who still manage to evade the system face more draconian action. 
They can even be barred from leaving their home country when they next go back 
to see relatives.

The authorities warn 
<http://www.ird.govt.nz/news-updates/like-to-know-sl-changes-2014.html> they 
will "request an arrest warrant to stop borrowers from leaving New Zealand next 
time they visit".

As more countries build up sizeable student loan books, the problems of 
non-repayment may encourage cross-border collection agreements. Australia and 
New Zealand have already shownsigns of starting to work together 
<https://www.pm.gov.au/media/2014-02-07/joint-statement-prime-minister-abbott-prime-minister-key>
 on the issue and, given the number of antipodeans who come to the UK each 
year, there is clearly scope to extend such co-operation.

In England, the problem of non-repayment by those who have left our shores 
will take on a new urgency in the months ahead. When the student numbers cap is 
removed next year, people in other EU nations will find it easier to come and 
study here, which will in time lead to an increase in the number of graduates 
from English universities who live elsewhere.

And were Scotland to become independent after this year's referendum, there 
would be a whole new set of cross-border loan repayment challenges for 
policymakers to grapple with.

Nick Hillman is director of the higher education policy institute 
<http://www.hepi.ac.uk/> â€“ follow him on Twitter @nickhillman 
<https://twitter.com/nickhillman>

This blog post is part of our series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/australia-fortnight> on 
the differences and similarities between Australian and UK higher education.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
andjob opportunities <http://jobs.theguardian.com/>, direct to your inbox. 
Follow us onTwitter @gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 