
David Pocock <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/david-pocock> is like a big 
lump of lead. He could stand the middle of a yacht in the Sydney to Hobart race 
and defy the raging tempest of a storm in Bass Strait. The man is ballast. It’s 
like he’s heavier than normal people. And over the ball, hoovering it up, all 
balance, body-height and impossible arms, you’d sooner shift a piano up the 
stairs. And the Wallabies would accept no substitute.


 Unless they have to because he’s injured, of course, in which case they could 
bung in the tearaway Sean McMahon. Or they could replace Pocock at No8 with Ben 
McCalman or Wycliff Palu, two big bodies who’ve been around. There’s even the 
dextrous and nimble openside “fetcher”, Queensland’s Liam Gill.

 But to combat these fit and strong and smart men of England, Wallabies fans 
will wish that Pocock’s cheekbones were made of the Terminator’s titanium that 
they appear to be. For Australia could not have lost a more important man about 
ruck and maul. Pocock owns the ground.

Wallabies star David Pocock ruled out for the rest of England Test series
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/wallabies-star-david-pocock-ruled-out-for-the-rest-of-england-test-series>
 And yet … and yet the new boy, McMahon, is a hard-running gun in the Michael 
Hooper mould, though probably even more of a hard-arse. Hooper, as his two 
tries in the first Test showed, could almost play in the backs. Indeed he did 
play inside-centre against the Lions in 2013. He can motor, Micky Hooper, and 
McMahon has some of that. McMahon can run. Indeed Wallabies coach Michael 
Cheika considered starting McMahon with Pocock and Hooper in an all-No7 
back-row. He’s a belter, Sean McMahon.

 Yet Scott Fardy held his spot in the No6 because his ball- and 
penalty-winning ability is strong enough. He learned it from Pocock. A couple 
of years ago Fardy came back from Japan on forty grand, barely enough to pay 
Canberra rent. But he learned from being around Pocock, learned about body 
height, targeted strength, dexterity in the maelstrom. Pocock, like the great 
George Smith, can inspire just by doing. Smith has coached England. All he’d 
have said is, “this is how I’d do it”. It’s plenty.

 And thus Cheika, shrewd and hard and interesting man that he is, has some 
game-planning and team selecting to do. With Pocock out, experienced lock Rob 
Simmons in doubt, and England buzzing after their first win in Brisbane, 
tactics and man-management will count plenty towards Saturday’s must-win Test 
match.

 The game plan? If the Wallabies can rip off 80 minutes like their first 20 
last Saturday, they could put a cricket score on England. From kick-off 
Australia’s plan was clear: run England ragged. Throw the ball wide, 
sideline-to-sideline, and repeat. Run and run and run. Quick ball from the 
breakdown, Nick Phipps shooting it out towards whatever side Israel Folau was 
on.Get it out there, get them running, make that Gilbert sing. And in that 
first 20 minutes of Blitzkrieg, the Wallabies dominated. It was entertaining 
stuff.

 But England didn’t go away. They hung tough, held on and didn’t panic. And 
Eddie Jones’s “Bodyline rugby” kicked in. And the game slowed to England’s 
pace. They set the tempo. Their forwards won penalties over the ball. Owen 
Farrell kicked goals. Bernard Foley had a try disallowed and soon enough it was 
10-9. And England effectively controlled things from there. It was smart, hard, 
pro rugby.

 Unlike in the World Cup, England seemed to embrace an “identity”. Their set 
piece was strong. They kicked well for position and kept their forwards moving 
forward. Athletic lock Maro Itoje was great in the lineout. Prop Dan Cole 
dominated Scott Sio and hooker and captain Dylan Hartley was powerful in tight.

Wallabies must be more disciplined against England, says Scott Fardy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/13/wallabies-must-be-more-disciplined-against-england-says-scott-fardy>
 But mainly it was about controlling tempo. They took their time at set piece. 
Farrell took his time kicking for goals, George Ford took his time kicking for 
touch. Once they were leading the game, they could do as they pleased. And the 
Wallabies were penalised in the scrum by a referee who once he’d seen one scrum 
dominate the other, couldn’t un-see it. Perception or reality, it amounted to 
the same thing: three points Owen Farrell.

 England’s attack without the ball was strong. Rushing defence, onside or 
otherwise, it amounted to the same thing. And they were executed effectively in 
contact. It was pressure footy. It’s always bothered the Wallabies, 
particularly a backline missing Will Genia, Matt Giteau and Adam Ashley-Cooper.

 It was what that caused England’s first try. Folau flung a dud to Foley 
before debutant No12 Samu Kerevi realised quickly that bad things were 
happening and fumbled before Jonathan Joseph swooped to score. And the 
Wallabies, for all their endeavour and running and “entertaining” rugby were 
behind 16-10. And they chased tails from there.

 Cheika and Foley will have plans to counter that fast-rushing “D”. Double 
cut-passes, a grubber, a chip for a runner. Switch the play inside, then switch 
it again. Play phase ball. Get some broken field action happening. Angled 
snipes from halfback, five-eighth and No12. Get some continuity, some flow. 
Tire the big bastards out.

 But England are fit. Eddie Jones’s strength and conditioning man John Pryor 
also has a mandate to eek out the weak. And England’s backs can run a bit, too. 
There are movers out wide and variety in the 10-and-12, as Luther Burrell’s 
early hook shows. England can make the Gilbert sing themselves.

 But they probably won’t. They’ll win how they have to. If they can amass 36 
points from 12 penalty goals, so be it. It seems to suit something in “English” 
bloody-mindedness, that it’s preferable to scrap for a win instead of playing 
for one, if that makes sense. And it seems Jones has tapped into that. See the 
celebrations for scrum penalties. England have not come to Australia to 
entertain. Australians can please – or indeed make metaphorical love to – 
themselves. Jones’ England have no mandate to enthuse Australian rules or rugby 
league fans in a “competitive sporting market”. England just want to win. And, 
anyway, England fans will be entertained more than enough if they win in 
Melbourne, however it occurs.

 Cheika said after the match that “it makes it hard to get the speed of the 
game going when it’s being punctuated by that many penalties”. It wasn’t an 
excuse or cop-out, it was fact. First 20 minutes, no penalties, up 10-nil. Lose 
the count 15-8, and give a kicker like Farrell enough chances, he’ll make you 
pay.

So how to beat them? Two words: organised chaos. From this standpoint, Cheika 
should throw in McMahon, have fliers either side of the ruck, and send the ball 
zapping around the ground, all parts of it. Secure it with those quality 
back-rowers and whoever’s there. And repeat. And attack. And the referee should 
reward that, as was the case at scrum time in the first Test: go-forward, 
dominant pack wins penalties. And controls the game.
 