
Late in the summer we began a project to tell the story of the internet using 
the internet - that is,asking you what you considered important 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2009/aug/11/internet-computing>. It is 
published today as aninteractive people's history 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/interactive/2009/oct/23/internet-arpanet> 
from that first Arpanet connection in 1969 (between Charley Kline at UCLA and 
Bill Duvall at Stanford, both of whom were video interviewed by technology 
correspondent Bobbie Johnson) to the events of 2009: most significantly - I 
think - the use of YouTube and other social media to bring footage of the 
Iranian democracy protests to the outside world after the Ahamadinejad 
government had forced out the international press and TV.

And there was plenty in between. As the project went on, it struck me the 
switching on of Arpanet was the mirror image of 1969's other big technological 
event - the moon landings. While the moon landings were the subject of enormous 
attention at the time and today, not a great deal developed from them. There 
were no Mars landings, for example.Arpanet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/arpanet> attracted the attention of 
very few - says Kline: "It was neat that it was working ... but nobody 
recognised that it was the beginning of something" - but what would develop 
from that first connection has had a huge influence on how we live today.

The development was not just the work of Arpa-funded computer scientists. 
Bulletin boards, Usenet and simple chat functions were also parents of the 
internet today. The interviews include people who put the technology to new 
uses - Dave Hughes, who turned the bulletin board to political purposes in 
Colorado Springs in the early 1980s (Roger's Bar), or Richard Bartle at Essex 
University who co-created multi-user online gaming (MUD) in the late 1970s.

Thanks too to other interviewees: Peter Kirstein at UCL, who, in difficult 
circumstances, connected Britain to Arpanet in 1973; Howard Rheingold on the 
early days of online communities; Nigel Titley on connecting British Telecom to 
the internet (without his superiors really wanting him to); Philip Edwards' 
tale of spam at the first school online in Wales; Ellen Buddle on being a 
teenager in the chatrooms of 2001; Dean Whitbread on podcasting; and Dave and 
Valerie Goodman, who met on Flickr and, when they married, were celebrated by 
the site as the first Flickr wedding. A lot of it is the story of people trying 
things out - and finding that they worked, sometimes better than they expected.

Finally, thanks to everyone who helped us tell the internet's story, many of 
whom are quoted in theinteractive people's history 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/interactive/2009/oct/23/internet-arpanet>.

And if you want more, G2 has a complementary special edition marking the 
internet's 40 years. Oliver Burkeman on howthe internet changed the world 
forever 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2009/oct/23/internet-40-history-arpanet>, 
Ivy Bean, the 104-year-old Twitterer,talks about her new-found celebrity 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2009/oct/23/ivy-bean-oldest-tweeter>, 
plus you get a run-down of theGuardian's reporting of the internet 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2009/oct/23/how-guardian-reported-internet>
 in the era of "junior cybernauts". See the contents listhere 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/series/internet-at-40>.
 