
Director: Alejandro González Iñárritu
Entertainment grade: B–
History grade: C–

This article contains spoilers.

Hugh Glass was a frontiersman working in the upper Missouri river area in the 
early years of the 19th century. On a fur trapping expedition in 1823, he was 
attacked and mauled by a grizzly bear.

Violence

Hugh Glass (Leonardo DiCaprio) is one of a group of men finishing up a fur 
trapping expedition in the wilderness. They are attacked byRee (Arikara) 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arikara> warriors. Whoosh! Someone gets impaled 
on a spear. Bang! Someone gets shot off his horse. Crack! Someone’s bones 
shatter. There’s an unflinching close-up of an arrow thwacking into a face, a 
gun butt bashing into a face, a flying kick to a face. A horse gets shot in the 
face. It’s exceptionally well choreographed and filmed.

The Revenant review – gut-churningly brutal, beautiful storytelling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/dec/04/the-revenant-review-gut-churningly-brutal-beautiful-storytelling>
This scene is based on a real-life incident: William H Ashley and Andrew Henry 
(the latter played byDomhnall Gleeson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/domhnall-gleeson> in the film) set up the 
Rocky Mountain Fur Company in 1822. In June 1823, Ashley’s band of around 70 men
was attacked by Arikara warriors 
<http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/ashleys-fur-trappers-attacked-by-indians>
 – they estimated around 600, though in the film it’s more like a dozen. 
Various accounts suggest that between 12 and 18 of Ashley’s men were killed.

Characters

In the film, 10 men get away. Among them are Captain Henry, Glass, Glass’s son 
Hawk (Forrest Goodluck) and trappers John Fitzgerald (Tom Hardy) and Jim 
Bridger (Will Poulter). They have a conversation, but it’s all so extravagantly 
mumbled that it’s hard to work out what’s going on. Fitzgerald is fighty and 
racist, so he’s the baddie. Glass is the goodie, because he loves his son (who 
ishalf-Pawnee <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pawnee_people>) in a gruff, manly 
way that involves telling him off a lot. The backstory about Glass’s love for a 
Pawnee woman is fiction. It has been suggested the real Glass had such a 
relationship, but there’s no firm evidence – and no evidence that he had any 
children.

Wildlife 

As the men make their way through a forest, Glass happens upon two bear cubs 
and their angry mama. If you felt wan after the face-smashing scene at the 
start, reach for the smelling salts. Chomp! Growl! Shake! The bear sniffs him 
to see if he’s dead, then jumps up and down on his back. Splinter! Howl! Slash! 
Glass shoots the bear. That really gets on its wick. It tries to rip his throat 
out. He stabs it in the neck. It flops on him and dies heavily, squishing him 
like a punctured bouncy castle full of blood.

The cinema audience is by this point laughing, half in horror and half because 
the scene goes on for so long that it becomes comical. Anyway, while historians 
are not certain of the precise details, the real Glass did get into a fight 
with a real bear, some time in August 1823.

Murder 

The men find Glass in a rum old state. Captain Henry pays Fitzgerald, Bridger 
and Hawk to stay behind until it is time for Glass’s inevitable burial. When 
the captain leaves, Fitzgerald tries to bump Glass off. Hawk interrupts, so 
Fitzgerald bumps him off instead. This didn’t happen in real life, because Hawk 
didn’t exist. In the film, the ailing Glass sees Fitzgerald kill his son, 
giving him an extra motivation to stay alive and seek revenge. When Fitzgerald 
persuades Bridger to bury Glass alive and abandon him, you know Glass isn’t 
going to go quietly.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fthe-revenant-video-review&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F14%2F1452791360720%2FKP_1372117_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Revenant%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fthe-revenant-video-review>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Revenant%20%E2%80%93%20video%20review&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F15%2Fthe-revenant-video-review&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F14%2F1452791360720%2FKP_1372117_crop_640x360.jpg>
 The Guardian film show reviews The Revenant 
Survival 

The real Glass survived his abandonment and dragged his battered body over 
hundreds of miles of terrain in pursuit of the men who left him for dead. 
Though he could read and write, Glass never set his story down in his own hand. 
It was first published by another writer inThe Port Folio 
<http://hughglass.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/1825-Hugh-Glass-article.pdf>, 
a Philadelphia journal, in 1825. It may well have been embroidered then. It has 
been embroidered many times since.

Hardship 

Ray Mears fact-checked The Revenant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jan/18/fact-checking-the-revenant-leonardo-dicaprio-ray-mears>
The film has invented some extra obstacles for Glass: it is snowing 
throughout, even though in real life his trek took place between August and 
October; the Arikara track him and chase him into a tree; he has to hollow out 
a dead horse to make himself a sleeping bag. It’s brilliantly filmed, but the 
characterisations and dialogue don’t match the sophistication of the visuals. 
Moreover, by the second lingering closeup of a horse’s eye or the sixth epic 
landscape shot with four-fifths sky and one-fifth land, even those 
sophisticated visuals begin to feel repetitive. As for the ending, it has been 
changed in one significant way: in real life, nobody got killed.

Verdict 

The Revenant <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-revenant> is an impressive 
film inspired by Glass’s real-life story, but lays it on a bit thick and ends 
up curiously unmoving. The whole thing is begging to be sped up into a 
two-minute YouTube video set to Benny Hill music.
 