
We’ve all been there: we want to shop online, find a new recipe for supper, 
catch up on the latest news or watch a video – only to be dazzled by a moving, 
blinking or flashing advert. These “autoplaying” ads are annoying for most 
internet users, but for those with disabilities or long-term conditions, they 
make those websites largely inaccessible.

For people with photosensitive epilepsy, frequently flashing or flickering 
images could trigger or increase the risk of a seizure, while automatic 
advertising can be distressing for those with learning disabilities because it 
hinders concentration and therefore comprehension of the content they are 
trying to consume.

Blind and visually impaired people can also have problems. “If you are blind 
or visually impaired and using text to speech software on your device, 
autoplaying animations or video that includes music or audio makes some web 
pages all but impossible to access,” says Robin Christopherson, head of digital 
inclusion at charityAbilityNet <https://www.abilitynet.org.uk/>, in his latest 
blog <https://www.abilitynet.org.uk/blog/autoplat-is-an-accessibility-issue>. 
“The audio that automatically starts playing completely obscures the speech of 
the screen reader. This means that blind people can’t hear thescreen reader 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Screen_reader> and therefore they can’t navigate 
to the ‘stop’ button to stop the noise.”

Apple v Android: the winner is… the disabled community
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2012/oct/18/apple-android-winner-disabled-community>
So this month’s launch of Apple’s operating system iOS 9 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/sep/15/apple-ios-9-review-iphone-ipad-software-better-battery-life-multitasking-siri>
 could revolutionise the lives of disabled iPhone and iPad users, because it 
will allowad-blocking software 
<http://techcrunch.com/2015/09/17/a-day-after-ios-9s-launch-ad-blockers-top-the-app-store/>
 to work on its mobile browsers for the first time. It won’t stop intrusive or 
auto-playing content on apps, but will filter it out from any web page accessed 
via a mobile browser.

The ability to block ads has existed for a while on desktops and for Android 
phones, but many disabled people choose to use Apple products because they have 
awide range of built-in accessibility features 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2012/oct/18/apple-android-winner-disabled-community>
. Android is catching up, and also offers options to make phones more usable, 
regardless of any impairment or disability the user may have.

Still, for some people, standard mobile phones are not the best option. The 
GeorgiePhone <http://www.georgiephone.com/> is more appropriate for blind and 
visually impaired users who need simpler technology. Available as an 
“alternative interface” on Android phones, it claims to be “far more than a 
screenreader for smartphones” by providing big talking buttons, clear print, 
simple layout and choice of colours. It enables you to use the clear on-screen 
keyboard or your voice to make calls, manage contacts, send and receive texts, 
hear the time and date, get assistance and set phone preferences. Additional 
GeorgiePhone functions include weather, finding the nearest bus stop, and basic 
colour detection to check if you are wearing matching socks.

Other specialist apps aim to enable those with sight loss or impairment to be 
more independent.Be My Eyes <http://www.bemyeyes.org/> makes life easier for 
blind people by connecting them to a network of sighted helpers through their 
iPhone app (it is not available on Android). This helps with tasks such as 
checking the sell-by date on the milk in the fridge, or finding the right tie 
to wear.

Blindsquare <http://blindsquare.com/> is an accessible GPS-app for the iPhone 
and iPad which describes the environment, and announces points of interest and 
street intersections as blind or visually impaired people travel.Talking Goggles
 <http://www.sparklingapps.com/goggles/> recognises images using a camera and 
internet connection, and speaks out what it finds. It recognises almost any 
image, including logos, landmarks, books, products, artwork and text. It is 
available for iPhone and Android.

For deaf users, in addition to in-built smartphone functions such as hearing 
aids <http://www.apple.com/accessibility/ios/#hearing>, the Dragon Dictation 
<http://www.nuance.co.uk/for-individuals/by-product/dragon-dictation-iphone/index.htm>
 app transcribes the words someone is speaking for the person who is hard of 
hearing to read, aiding conversation, whileMobileSign 
<http://www.mobilesign.org/> allows deaf people to learn British sign language 
on the go. For those who have no use of their hands,Sesame 
<http://sesame-enable.com/phone/> is a touch-free smartphone that is controlled 
by the user’s head movements using sensitive motion detection and the selfie 
camera function on the phone.

There’s still a long way to go, and technology companies could do more to 
ensure accessibility is built into new devices and app design. But digital 
innovation is doing much to enable those with disabilities and long-term 
conditions to live richer, more independent lives. And that can only be a good 
thing.
 