
“I think it would be very peculiar,” says Hussein Chalayan 
<http://chalayan.com/>, “for anyone interested in fashion not be interested in 
dance. It’s the ultimate expression of where bodies and movement meet clothes.” 
Chalayan, twice winner of British Designer of the Year, has himself worked with 
several choreographers, includingMichael Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/michael-clark> and Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sidi-larbi-cherkaoui>. But what’s different 
about his latest dance project,Gravity Fatigue 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2015/hussein-chalayan-gravity-fatigue/>, 
is that Chalayan is not only the designer of the work, he’s also the author of 
the entire production.
 Hussein Chalayan’s coffee table dress Photograph: chalayan.com 
It began in 2000, when Chalayan hired Sadler’s Wells in London to showcase his 
experimentalAfterwords <http://chalayan.com/afterwords/> collection. This 
famously included the circular coffee table that morphed, telescope-wise, into 
a long wooden skirt. Alistair Spalding, artistic director of Wells, was so 
impressed by its theatrical wit, he tried to persuade Chalayan to become a more 
regular collaborator. The designer’s creative interests had already begun to 
extend beyond clothes into video, photography and installation; while he 
accepted a couple of commissions, he was becoming less interested in serving 
someone else’s vision. Eventually Spalding saw that if he wanted Chalayan back 
on the Wells stage, he would have to give him his own show. “Hussein is so 
obviously more than a designer,” he says. “He’s got so many ideas himself. So I 
thought, ‘Let’s give it a go, let’s put him in charge.’”

While Chalayan didn’t hesitate, he had no illusions about having any ability 
to choreograph. “I didn’t expect to make the movement. The question was how to 
find a choreographer who would be willing to execute my ideas.” Spalding and 
Chalayan interviewed several candidates, and as soon as he metDamien Jalet 
<http://www.damienjalet.com/>, he knew the Belgian choreographer would be 
ideal. “I’m lucky to have him. He’s an amazing artist.”

The two men developed their collaborative process, with Chalayan using 
sketches, photographs and other visual materials to clarify the themes he 
wanted to explore, and the costumes he wanted. He’d been clear from the start: 
the clothes would be “dictating the grammar of the choreography” not simply 
dressing it. Jalet found this fascinating. “Usually, as the choreographer, you 
ask the designer to come in and create the clothes. Here it was going to be the 
reverse.”

Certainly, the rehearsal I watch has a very different feel. The 13 dancers 
work with Jalet on a raw, thudding percussive dance while, at every free 
moment, six of Chalayan’s assistants dart in with pins and measuring tapes, 
taking garments from a long clothes rail that, instead of a ballet barre, takes 
up one side of the room. “I’m afraid I’m going to rip this,” calls out one 
women nervously as she rolls on the floor, the elongated tails of her gorgeous 
burnt orange shirt rippling around her.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhussein-chalayan-gravity-fatigue-dance-choreography-fashion-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441808550931%2F1ab8ffaa-ef71-4d40-92c3-bb50d8ca266c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Hussein%20Chalayan%20fashioned%20a%20dance%20where%20costumes%20rule&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhussein-chalayan-gravity-fatigue-dance-choreography-fashion-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Hussein%20Chalayan%20fashioned%20a%20dance%20where%20costumes%20rule&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhussein-chalayan-gravity-fatigue-dance-choreography-fashion-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441808550931%2F1ab8ffaa-ef71-4d40-92c3-bb50d8ca266c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Gravity Fatigue Photograph: Manuel Vason 
There will be 110 garments in the work. Some have been designed to have a very 
obvious impact on the choreography. They range from floating veils to highly 
structured geometric garments; from an “elastic band” dress that can be pulled 
into multiple shapes by its wearer and her partner, to an outfit that’s still 
under construction. Chalayan cryptically refers to it as “the mechanical 
dress”. The problems it presents force the designer to leave this rehearsal, 
but he and Jalet have yet to experience any disagreement. “His ideas,” says 
Jaley, “very easily become mine.”

Chalayan elaborates: “I knew from the start what kind of movement I wanted – 
not too busy, not too obviously choreographed. I’ve always liked dance that’s 
more like an idea engaged with a body, like the work ofPina Bausch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/mar/29/dance-pina-bausch-tanztheater-wuppertal>
. When Damien and I began working together, I gave him and the dancers a brief 
and it’s been a most amazing experience to watch them channelling the ideas.”

The main themes are migration and displacement, issues that Chalayan has 
returned to many times. He was born to a Turkish-Cypriot family, and spent his 
early childhood in Nicosia, the capital of Cyprus, a city painfully split 
between its Greek and Turkish communities. When he was eight, his family moved 
to London, although a split between his parents led to him dividing his time 
between Cyprus and the UK. Now, at 45, Chalayan still feels shaped by a sense 
of rootlessness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhussein-chalayan-gravity-fatigue-dance-choreography-fashion-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441808676833%2Fc1199e5b-9288-40e8-b259-e45755a515ca-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Hussein%20Chalayan%20fashioned%20a%20dance%20where%20costumes%20rule&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhussein-chalayan-gravity-fatigue-dance-choreography-fashion-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Hussein%20Chalayan%20fashioned%20a%20dance%20where%20costumes%20rule&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fhussein-chalayan-gravity-fatigue-dance-choreography-fashion-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441808676833%2Fc1199e5b-9288-40e8-b259-e45755a515ca-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Fashion designer Hussein Chalayan in London. Photograph: Graeme Robertson for 
the Guardian 
All this has profoundly coloured his designs. For his graduate collection at 
Central St Martins, he drew on ideas of death and urban decay, making his 
garments from fabric that had been buried in a back yard and then dug up. 
Later, he designed an airmail dress, made of paper, that could be folded up and 
posted. “I always think in stories,” Chalayan says. “If you were wearing my 
clothes, you wouldn’t necessarily know it – you might only be thinking how do 
the clothes fit, how do they feel. But it’s much easier for me to design a 
collection if I have the inspiration of a narrative.”

He designed an airmail dress made of paper that could be folded up and posted

While Gravity Fatigue is partly about the trauma of having no fixed home, it’s 
also about the reverse side of such a displacement: the exhilaration of being 
free. In the complicated set design Chalayan has created, he’s tried to 
maximise the range of the dancers’ relationship with their physical 
environment, incorporating many surfaces and elements on to the stage, from 
water to a trampoline to a rigging of ropes.

“These are ideas I’ve had in my mind for years,” Chalayan says, “which I’ve 
never been able to realise before.” As fired up as he’s been by the challenge 
of directing a dance production, he’s been moved by the novel experience of 
working with dancers. “Fashion models are obviously very professional, but 
their job is really just to carry the clothes well. Dancers are so much more 
engaged, so much more expressive. It’s been amazing to see them channelling my 
ideas. I’m a little bit nervous about this piece, it’s a very ambitious 
project. But I’m excited to see what happens.”

 * Gravity Fatigue is at Sadler’s Wells, London, 28-31 October 
<http://www.sadlerswells.com/whats-on/2015/hussein-chalayan-gravity-fatigue/>
 