
In 2013, Dr Liam Fox – he insists on the “Doctor” – published a book on the 
challenges of globalisation, which read as if he had dictated into his phone 
between meetings.Rising Tides 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/rising-tides-3.html> was a meandering work. 
It took a long time to say little and did as abysmally as you would expect. 
Nielsen International, which monitors book sales, told me the English edition 
had sold a mere 1,723 copies in the UK and 1,876 copies in the English-speaking 
foreign markets it watches. (Most were probably in the US, where Dr Fox has a 
small following in America’s raging right wing.)

In 2014, Dr Fox received news that he was the beneficiary of a stroke of good 
fortune. Our new secretary for international trade may be hopelessly 
unqualified to deal with the dangerous pass he helped bring Britain to by 
agitating for Brexit, but he can trade on his own account.

The register of MPs interests shows that the oil-rich dictatorship of 
Azerbaijan, via its London lobbyists, paid Dr Fox £5,700 
<https://www.theyworkforyou.com/regmem/?p=10213> for the right to translate 
Rising Tides into an Azerbaijani Turkish edition. The generosity of 
Azerbaijan’s rulers did not stop there. On 1 February 2015, the regime flew him 
and an aide to Istanbul tolaunch the book 
<http://www.visions.az/en/news/593/3fb3dba8/> and put them up in a luxury 
hotel. The cost of the four-day trip was £3,579.94.

It wasn’t his first overseas promotion. The Azerbaijani press reported that Dr 
Foxwas in Baku in September 2014 <http://www.azernews.az/nation/70777.html>, 
where he was received by no less a magnifico than President Ilham Aliyev, the 
son of President Heydar Aliyev, who seized power in 1993, after the collapse of 
the Soviet Union, and passed control of the state down through the family.

The Panama Papers <https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> 
showed that the Aliyevs and their accomplicescontrolled assets worth $490m 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/business/panama-papers-how-family-that-runs-azerbaijan-built-an-empire-of-hidden-wealth-1.2597762>
 via offshore accounts. Any citizen who wonders where the money has gone runs a 
risk. The regime hasjailed critics, frozen the bank accounts of opposition 
groups and strangled free expression 
<https://www.hrw.org/europe/central-asia/azerbaijan>. I could go on about Dr 
Fox’s grotesque hypocrisy. He urged the British to leave the EU so we would“be 
able, through the ballot box, to throw out the lawmakers” 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/platform/2016/06/liam-fox-this-referendum-ought-to-be-about-the-issues-not-personal-attacks.html>
. The people of Azerbaijan enjoy no such liberty. InRising Tides, he sought to 
defend “the freedom we too often take for granted”. There is no freedom in 
Azerbaijan, unless it is the freedom of the ruling gangsters to rob and menace 
with impunity.

But there is a more pressing question, which once would not have mattered and 
now goes to the heart of this country’s crisis. Until a few months ago, Dr Fox 
was “disgraced former defence minister Liam Fox”, a nobody who had beenforced 
to resign after claims he had broken the ministerial code 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-15300751> to deliver favours to his 
friend and a self-styled adviser Adam Werritty. Brexit has brought him back 
into government. Theresa May has charged him with cutting trade deals with 
democracies and dictatorships the world over, including dictatorships as 
corrupt as Azerbaijan.

Here’s the problem for him and us. Dr Fox wrote a book, whose readers could 
not fill a non-league football ground. No one else felt the need to translate 
it into French, Spanish, Chinese, Hindi or any of the world’s other major 
languages. Only Azerbaijan wanted to give Dr Fox money and buy the rights. 
Buying books and papers is an old Soviet method of giving support to 
sympathisers abroad. The Kremlinused to order 6,000 copies a day of the British 
communist daily, theMorning Star 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/media/still-flying-the-red-flag-491723.html>
. It was hard in the Cold War to imagine anyone in Moscow wanting to read it, 
but Moscow found the bulk order a useful way to funnel cash to the 
dictatorship’s friends.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fliam-fox-azerbaijan-relationship-book-publishing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b4e04bd16b273709c43ab211512a3094a090307%2F0_184_3165_1900%2F3165.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Liam%20Fox%20got%20into%20bed%20with%20Azerbaijan%E2%80%99s%20kleptocrats%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fliam-fox-azerbaijan-relationship-book-publishing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Liam%20Fox%20got%20into%20bed%20with%20Azerbaijan%E2%80%99s%20kleptocrats%20%7C%20Nick%20Cohen&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Fliam-fox-azerbaijan-relationship-book-publishing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b4e04bd16b273709c43ab211512a3094a090307%2F0_184_3165_1900%2F3165.jpg>
 Ilham Aliyev, president of Azerbaijan: ‘There is no freedom in Azerbaijan, 
unless it is the freedom of the ruling gangsters to rob and menace with 
impunity.’ Photograph: Alexander Shcherbak/TASS 
By his sins of commission and omission, Fox show himself to be the Azerbaijani 
dictatorship’s friend. He had a tellingexchange with David Lidington, in 
January 2016 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/Commons/2016-01-25/debates/338a0300-1250-43a3-85b1-b394733d353a/ActionPlanOnHumanRightsAndDemocracy>
, when Lidington was still Cameron’s Europe minister. There was safety and 
strength in numbers, Lidington told MPs. The 28 states of the EU could “speak 
together” to promote freedom of expression and the right of “civil society 
organisations [to] operate free from threats or intimidation”, both of which 
are noticeable by their absence in Fox’s Azerbaijan. The EU had opposed 
executions in Saudi Arabia, Lidington continued, and condemned human rights 
abuses in Azerbaijan.

Dr Fox spoke up. He dismissed talk of democratic freedoms. He wanted to 
concentrate on how EU human rights campaigns were wasting “our taxpayers’ 
money”. We might be able to use it “better ourselves were we not encumbered by 
this excessive bureaucratic EU cost”.

I asked Dr Fox whether the money he received was a “reward for your support 
for the president of Azerbaijan or a normal publishing deal. If the latter, how 
many copies has the translation sold inAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan>?”A spokesperson for Dr Fox 
replied: “This was a publishing deal arranged by the publisher for a licence 
for the translation rights to Dr Fox’sRising Tides book.”

He did not say it but this quite clearly was not a normal “publishing deal”. 
The publishers were not an established company.Rising Tide was the first book 
published by the European Azerbaijan Society 
<http://www.visions.az/en/news/593/3fb3dba8>, which purports to be independent. 
It also paid for his flights and hotels. The regime’s overseas lobbying and 
propaganda arm is based in expensive offices in Westminsterfrom where it pumps 
freebies to pliable publishers, PR men and politicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/27/uk-politicians-wary-azerbaijan-overtures>
. Nor did the spokesman say how many Azerbaijanis had bought copies of a book 
that the British reading public had so sensibly ignored.

Every promise the Brexiters made has proved to be false. The jobs market is in 
freefall and the Bank of England is taking emergency measures. Far from being 
the breeze they promised, the difficulties facing Britain in renegotiating its 
trade relationship with every country in the world appear beyond Whitehall’s 
capacity to manage. Dr Fox has become a laughing stock for his ignorance of the 
basic fact that he cannot start arranging trade deals until we have left the 
EU. But Dr Fox isn’t a joke and this isn’t funny.

On its own and without the safety of numbers, a Britain desperate for deals 
will not dare raise human rights concerns with Saudi Arabia, Azerbaijan, China 
or anyone else. Dr Fox is a man for our debased times because his record with 
Azerbaijan shows the international trade secretary would not want to raise them 
even if he could. Our future is not going to be proud and independent, but 
grubby and murky and filled with bad deals with worse governments; a future, in 
short, where the foxes will rule the henhouse.
 