
The best anatomy of a mass murder to have been published in recent years is 
Åsne Seierstad’sOne of Us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/26/one-of-us-the-story-of-anders-breivik-massacre-norway-asne-seierstad-review>
, her account of the 2011 Norwegian massacre in which Anders Breivik shot and 
killed 69 people, most of them teenagers, and blew up a further eight outside 
Norway’s government buildings.

At the time of the atrocity, many were struck by Norway’s unpreparedness, both 
logistical and emotional, for a terrorist attack. The country had a single 
police helicopter in use, the crew of which were on holiday. Nationwide alarm 
systems failed to alert police stations to the killer’s number plate as he fled 
Oslo by car.

At the time of the atrocity, many were struck by Norway’s unpreparedness for a 
terrorist attack

When he reach the island of Utøya for phase two of the massacre, police were 
slow to coordinate a response. In the wake of the shooting and after the 
findings of a public inquiry, Norway’s chief of police resigned.

Breivik was a rightwing fanatic protesting against “multiculturalism”, and as 
such presented a different version of the existential threat that attended the 
Paris attacks four years later. But it was no smaller for that; and reading 
Seierstad’s book, one is struck less by the mistakes than by whatNorway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> did right.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fanders-behring-breivik-makes-nazi-salute-in-court-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anders%20Behring%20Breivik%20appears%20in%20court%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fanders-behring-breivik-makes-nazi-salute-in-court-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anders%20Behring%20Breivik%20appears%20in%20court%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fanders-behring-breivik-makes-nazi-salute-in-court-video&media=>
Anders Behring Breivik appears in court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/mar/15/anders-behring-breivik-makes-nazi-salute-in-court-video>
There is no such thing as a life sentence in Norway; the maximum prison 
penalty is 21 years, extendable by five-year increments should the prisoner 
still be considered a threat at the end of his sentence. In court the killer, 
who was in civilian clothing, was permitted to chastise the judge, question her 
impartiality and make long-winded mission statements before eventually being 
told to shut up, albeit politely. Earlier this year, Breivik won part of ahuman 
rights case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/anders-behring-breiviks-human-rights-violated-in-prison-norway-court-rules>
 brought against the government for unfair treatment in prison.

To British and American eyes, elements of this look lenient to the point of 
parody. But what was telling, in Seierstad’s account, was the ability of 
Norwegian civil society to absorb the horror of what happened by carrying on 
with business as usual. Its apparent mildness, rooted in the rule of law and a 
requirement to treat even the most horrific criminal with a level of dignity, 
crushed the aims of the killer more firmly than any number of wilder responses.

A welcome silence 


It was heartening to see Bill de Blasio, the New York city mayor, and 
Andrew Cuomo, the New York state governor, at a vigil in New York for the 
victims of Orlando this week – just as it was to see London’s Sadiq Khan in the 
same capacity in Soho.

Other voices were notable by their absence. Most of us have at least one 
relative who can be relied on, in the wake of a terrorist attack, to share 
pieces from fringe websites about the “Muslim threat”. Since Sunday, the 
silence from parts of my family has been so loud that it is deafening.

Sondheim’s sweet tone


I interviewed composer Stephen Sondheim at his home this week, ahead of a new 
theatre production of Into the Woods, which is coming to London later this 
year. I was reminded of an email I sent him many years ago, one of those 
snivelling entreaties journalists write when they’re trying to persuade someone 
unattainable to agree to a meeting.

I can’t remember most of it, thankfully, but I do recall trying to impress on 
him how much I loved the lyrics to Sunday in the Park with George, particularly 
the line “I love your beard, George”, which has always made me laugh and cry.

“Beards undo me,” I wrote, to which, in a tone both generous and that brought 
the exchange swiftly to a close, Sondheim replied: “You and me both, Ms 
Brockes.” Love speaks.
 