
We use flowers to mark all kinds of moments – celebration, remembrance, 
romance (or, for the more suspicious among us, a hint that the flower-giver has 
done something wrong). But at this time of year, they signify one thing above 
all else: the fact that spring is here and winter is finally on its way out.


So, as the blooms begin to break through the ground, here are some ways to use 
nature’s signal of warmer days ahead to explore a variety of topics with your 
students.

Primary

Get things started with this clever claymation video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dJjNh2pMSB8>, which explains the basics of how 
a seed becomes a flower in simple, easy-to-follow steps. Then see if your 
students cancorrectly identify common flowers with this worksheet 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22771/Flowers-----Word-and-Picture-Matching>
 fromPrimaryLeap <http://primaryleap.co.uk/>. It asks them to trace over the 
names of blooms including poppies, sunflowers and daffodils for handwriting 
practice, before giving green-fingered class members an opportunity to show off 
their knowledge of the different varieties.

How to teach … the seasons
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/feb/03/how-to-teach-seasons-spring-resources>
This find-the-flower activity 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22773/Find-the-flower> from 
Teachit Primary <http://www.teachitprimary.co.uk/> is another chance for your 
class to demonstrate their knowledge of the different types of flowers, such as 
marigolds, daisies, tulips and roses. You can then take the learning up a level 
with thismatching activity on the life cycle of flowers 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22769/Science-Resource-----Life-Cycle-of-a-Flower-Matching-Activity>
, fromPrimaryLeap <http://primaryleap.co.uk/>, which consolidates knowledge of 
technical terms such as germination, pollination and dispersal.

For a more artistic approach, this Teachit Primary 
<http://www.teachitprimary.co.uk/> resource looks at representations of flowers 
in the artwork of Claude Monet 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22772/Monets-impression-of-flowers>
. It introduces pupils to the concept of impressionism and the techniques used 
to create it, leading to an activity where they create their own Monet-inspired 
images of blooms, in the style of his iconic paintings.

For some foliage-based numeracy practice, these worksheets from Twinkl 
<http://www.twinkl.co.uk/> use pictures of flowers to reinforce understanding 
of simpleaddition 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/16532/Numbers-on-Flowers-Addition-Worksheet>
 andsubtraction 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/17170/Numbers-on-Flowers-Subtraction-Worksheet>
. Rather than using numbers, pupils simply count the petals and then draw the 
result of the sum in the centre of the flower.

And for an even more imaginative form of flowery numeracy, use these garden 
centre pricing labels 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/19284/Garden-Centre-Labels-----Flowers>
. You can get your students to set up make-believe shops selling flowers, and 
use the labels to reinforce their understanding of using money and simple 
arithmetic (you could challenge them to create their own flowers to sell as an 
art project).

Secondary

Petals and stalks may not be the first things that spring to mind when you 
think of physics and “deployable structures”, butthis lesson 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/20879/Flowers-----Natural-Deployable-Structures>
 from theRoyal Academy of Engineering <http://www.raeng.org.uk/> is out to 
change that. It explores how flowers can contract and expand depending on the 
space available, and asks students to create their own structures using these 
lessons from the natural world.

If you’d rather go back to basics, get your students to grow their own blooms 
(along with fruit and vegetables) in their own school garden. It will take care 
and commitment, but it needn’t be overwhelming –this spring guide 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22447/Month-by-Month-Guide-to-Edible-School-Gardening-Spring-term-from-the-Royal-Horticultural-Society>
 from theRoyal Horticultural Society <https://www.rhs.org.uk/> gives 
month-by-month details about what you should be sowing, what you should be 
harvesting and other essential jobs such as preparing soil with compost and 
placing supports for climbing plants. (There are also guides forsummer 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22448/Month-by-Month-Guide-to-Edible-School-Gardening-Summer-Term-from-the-Royal-Horticultural-Society>
 andautumn 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22446/Month-by-Month-Guide-to-Edible-School-Gardening-Autumn-Term-from-the-Royal-Horticultural-Society>
 terms).

This collection of articles 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22767/News-articles-for-teaching-flowers>
 fromThe Day <http://theday.co.uk/>, meanwhile, offers a wider perspective on 
flowers and nature. They touch on topics such as how the blossoms of spring 
have inspired artists through the ages; how the Tower of London’s beautiful 
floral tribute to the victims of first world war could have overshadowed the 
message; and why a ban on pesticides in an attempt to save bees is causing 
controversy across Europe.

Green-fingered teachers: how to grow fruit and vegetables in school
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jun/29/green-fingered-teachers-how-to-grow-fruit-and-vegetables-in-school>
The stripy buzzing creatures are also the focus of this activity pack 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/15663/Busy-bees-activities-for-ages-11-from-the-Bumblebee-Conservation-Trust>
 from theBumblebee Conservation Trust <http://bumblebeeconservation.org/>. It 
details how the increasingly endangered insects perform the vital task of 
pollinating flowers, as well as offering insights into different varieties of 
bees and the workings of their complex societies. A follow-up task asks 
students to design a campaign to raise awareness of their plight.

And finally, this game 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/11219/Lesson-plan-from-Mangahigh-----Flower-Power-----Ordering-fractions-halves-and-quarters-----UK-----v4>
 from online maths programmeManga High <https://www.mangahigh.com/en-gb/> 
blends technology with nature to help your students get to grips with ordering 
fractions, decimals and percentages. The aim of the game is to make money by 
growing and selling flowers, but they have to solve ordering problems and match 
the right bud to the plant stem to get going.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 