
Halfway though the concert, Daniel Melingo dramatically removes his left shoe 
to extract an imaginary pebble mentioned in the lyric he is singing. The shoe 
stays off for the rest of the night, much of which Melingo spends on his belly 
“swimming” across the stage, arms flapping loosely like a drunkard, as his 
breathy basso voice infuses the hall with that heady mix of disillusionment, 
longing and betrayal that is the hallmark of Argentina’s soul-searing tango 
music.

It has been said that listening to Melingo is like watching a Federico Fellini 
movie with your eyes closed. The circus elements beloved by the Italian 
film-maker are all present – the barrel-house music, the burlesque comedy, the 
soppy southern European sentimentalism.

Then there is the persona Melingo has invented for himself, a black-clad, 
rumpled-up, Chaplinesque vagabond that the singer has used to make tango cool 
again for a new generation of Argentinians raised on rap, hip-hop and the South 
American tropicalcumbia rhythm.

“My mother’s side of the family were tango people,” says Melingo, sitting down 
to talk at a cafe in the tree-lined neighbourhood of Villa Ortúzar where he 
lives, only a couple of days after his barefoot antics while performinghis new 
albumAnda <https://youtu.be/Ip71b3Jajvg> at a vaudeville theatre in downtown 
Buenos Aires. “But on my father’s side my grandmother sang opera. One of my 
first musical memories is listening to Ravel’s Pavane for a Dead Infanta on the 
radio with my grandfather holding me in his arms.”

His expressive eyes darting animatedly beneath bushy, grey eyebrows, Melingo 
lists off the stops on his European tour next month – Cologne, Lisbon, Paris, 
Antwerp, Zurich, among others, including agig at London’s Jazz Cafe 
<http://thejazzcafelondon.com/event/como-no-presents-melingo-02-11-16>.

Often compared to Tom Waits or Nick Cave because of his below-the-floorboards 
vocal register, Melingo did not initially set out to lure young people back 
into Argentina’s tango halls to retrace the complicated, embroidery-like steps 
their grandparents once cut when the tango was still young. But there has been 
a surge of interest both at home and abroad, partly due to Melingo and partly 
to fusion projects such as Bajofondo and the Gotan Project, which combine tango 
sounds with modern urban electronic beats.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmelingo-argentina-rediscovers-tango%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9553e21f919102df446fdf1ab1de7facbae6ca07%2F0_250_5378_3227%2F5378.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Argentina%E2%80%99s%20gravel-voiced%20crooner%20put%20the%20soul%20back%20into%20tango%20for%20the%20%20rap%20generation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmelingo-argentina-rediscovers-tango%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Argentina%E2%80%99s%20gravel-voiced%20crooner%20put%20the%20soul%20back%20into%20tango%20for%20the%20%20rap%20generation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F22%2Fmelingo-argentina-rediscovers-tango%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9553e21f919102df446fdf1ab1de7facbae6ca07%2F0_250_5378_3227%2F5378.jpg>
 People dance the tango at a Milonga in downtown Buenos Aires. Photograph: Alamy
His career began as a rock’n’roll star in two of Argentina’s biggest 1980s 
bands, Los Twist and Los Abuelos de la Nada, who shot to fame with the 
exhilarating cultural liberation after the collapse of the country’s 1976-83 
dictatorship, under which some 30,000 people, most of them young, had been 
“disappeared” in military death camps.

“It was very hard to be young in that ferocious era,” says Melingo, 59. “We 
survived like cockroaches, indoors, creating antibodies out of aesthetic 
ideas.” Artistic expression was heavily curtailed under a regime that not only 
killed young people for their political beliefs but also censored their 
artistic expression and persecuted them for the length of their hair, dragging 
them by the bus-load into police stations to have it shorn off.

Many artists escaped abroad, others went into internal exile, putting their 
careers on hold until the return of democracy. “We became masters at writing 
in-between the lines, describing poetically and metaphorically what was 
actually happening.”

Tango in Argentina is like ice to an eskimo, you don't notice it even though 
it's all around you
Daniel Melingo 
A classically trained musician who, aside from singing, plays the clarinet, 
Melingo was never far from the limelight after that initial post-dictatorship 
boost. Yet it wasn’t until 1997, when he turned 40, that the memories of his 
tango-dancing mother led Melingo to turn his talents instead to the music that 
some define as Argentina’s equivalent of the blues.

After a brief stint hosting a television show where he invited rock’n’roll 
buddies to play old tango tunes, Melingo made an abrupt career change. “I had 
to relearn everything at the age of 40, study tango technique, take singing 
lessons.”

In the process his voice seemed to drop by octaves as he began to deliver 
songs almost in a whisper.

His tango guide has been 79-year-old Luis Alposta, who wrote the words for 
classic songs by Edmundo Rivero during the 1970s. “The timbre and colour of 
Melingo’s voice correspond to what is traditionally known as a tango voice,” 
says Alposta of his younger friend. “He sings as if he was talking.”

The release of his first solo album in 1998, Tangos Bajos, catapulted Melingo 
into an international career that surpasses that of any other current 
Argentinian musical artist, especially in France, where he will be playing the
Théâtre des Bouffes du Nord <http://www.bouffesdunord.com/fr/la-saison/melingo>
. Melingo has his own explanation for his success far from home: “Tango in 
Argentina is like ice for an Eskimo, you don’t notice it even though it’s all 
around you. But outside Argentina, people really sit up and listen.” In a 
welcome surprise, Melingo’s incessant touring brought him into contact with his 
ancestral musical roots when a Viennese woman, Daniela Melingo, sought him out 
at one of his concerts in Austria. She turned out to be his second cousin, 
descended from a brother of Melingo’s Ravel-loving grandfather. “She told me 
our family came from the Greek island of Zakynthos, which had been the 
birthplace ofrebetiko, an anarchic-illiterate musical movement to which my 
grandfather belonged,” Melingo says.

The influence is clearly noticeable. At the concert in Buenos Aires the 
musical mood subtly shifted from tango torebetiko, from Buenos Aires to 
Zakynthos, Constantinople and Asia Minor, with Melingo the restless vagabond, 
those flashing eyes now invisible under the tilted brim of his black hat, 
proudly strumming his grandfather’s tinybağlama (a Turkish lute) as he 
meandered up to the microphone to sing.
 