
In recent years, two contradictory narratives have emerged about Kenya. There 
is one that sees the east African country as a land of immense progress and 
promise. It is, some commentators have said, the “new front door 
<http://www.financialmail.co.za/coverstory/2014/02/06/smart-money-is-on-east-african-growth>
” of Africa’s economy with a young, well-educated population and a growing 
middle class,coveted by a succession of global retailers 
<http://www.nation.co.ke/business/Walmart-says-its-difficult-to-enter-Kenyan-market/-/996/2740198/-/6ere9d/-/index.html>
. Its economy is based not just on commodities and agriculture but on a service 
industry with a well-developed human resource base and an increasingly 
important IT sector that has earned the country the labelAfrica’s Silicon 
Savanna 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/b/fa73fc02-c511-4824-806d-5656acdfae7c>.

Scores dead in al-Shabaab university attack in Kenya
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/02/kenya-minister-says-70-dead-in-al-shabaab-attack-on-university>
The flipside is as grim as the first side is bright. For the past four years, 
since the Kenyan military crossed over into Somalia to battle the al-Qaida 
affiliatedal-Shabaab group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/07/al-shabaab-kills-more-than-a-dozen-in-kenya-attack-weeks-before-obama-visit>
, the militants have in turn waged a low-grade insurgency in Kenya. Their 
methods have been brutal and caught the attention of the world. Thesiege on the 
Westgate mall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2013/oct/04/westgate-mall-attacks-kenya-terror>
 in September 2013 left 67 dead and dealt a hammer blow to the vital tourism 
industry. More was to come, with an attack in April this year in whichfour 
young men stormed the Garissa University 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/02/kenya-minister-says-70-dead-in-al-shabaab-attack-on-university>
 campus in the north-east of the country and went on an hours-long rampage that
left 147 dead <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-32169080>.

Which of these “two Kenyas” will triumph is a common topic of after-dinner 
conversation among the chattering classes. Kenya’s burgeoning class of tech 
entrepreneurs are not interested in waiting to discover the outcome, but have 
instead dived headlong into trying to solve the security crisis, in effect 
merging the two narratives.

Since Westgate, the security industry has grown in leaps and bounds. Private 
security firms now employ about 300,000 guards, according to industry insiders, 
making them the country’sbiggest private sector employers 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/business-29253098>. A booming trade has also emerged 
in closed-circuit television (CCTV) and access control systems.

An attempt to establish a forensic lab by the government collapsed amid 
high-level corruption

Tech entrepreneurs like George Njoroge, 34, have made greater strides than 
most in the sector. Njoroge is used to spotting opportunities and seizing them. 
As a young college student, he lost all the data for his final project and 
could not find a firm that could recover it. He founded East African Data 
Handlers in 2006 and within a decade the firm grew into a Sh100 million 
(£60,000) company and established itself as thebiggest data recovery company in 
the region 
<http://www.businessdailyafrica.com/33-year-old-techie-eyes-NSE-listing-for-Sh100m-company-/-/539552/2452688/-/item/0/-/11xv77s/-/index.html>
.

Njoroge has now ventured into the security solutions industry and is setting 
up a forensic laboratory, using privately raised funds. The absence of such a 
facility isfrequently cited as one of the main drawbacks 
<http://www.standardmedia.co.ke/article/2000028875/lack-of-a-national-forensic-lab-undermines-criminal-justice>
 in efforts to professionalise the investigative capability of Kenyan security 
authorities. A government attempt to establish a forensic lab collapsed amid 
the high-level corruption that often hampers such large-scale security 
projects. Njoroge’s lab is expected to offer services to security agencies 
across the region.

Safaricom <http://www.safaricom.co.ke/>, the biggest telecommunication network 
in the region, meanwhile, was contracted by the government to lay out a 
national surveillance programme, including theinstallation of tamper-proof CCTV 
cameras 
<http://www.capitalfm.co.ke/news/2015/05/safaricom-hands-over-phase-1-of-cctv-project/>
 in most major streets in Nairobi and Mombasa. While in many parts of the world 
such projects would trigger an outcry about privacy, in Kenya reaction has 
largely been muted, driven in part by shock over al-Shabaab’s tactics.

No matter how successful, no Kenyan would choose a burgeoning security 
industry over security itself. Instead we all hanker for the days when our 
unofficial slogan washakuna matata – “no worries” – as popularised by the 
Disney film The Lion King.

The threat of al-Shabaab has made many Kenyans jittery, as photographer Najam 
Quraishy knows too well. The father of three dropped off his children at a 
school in a well-to-do suburb of Nairobi in mid-July, then stopped to take a 
few pictures of crows perched on a nearby tree within the school grounds. 
Another Kenyan posted pictures of Quraishy on Facebook, speculating he was a 
potential terrorist, – sparking a panic andsending the police on the hunt for 
an innocent photographer 
<http://www.kenya-today.com/news/how-taking-photos-in-a-school-my-children-study-turned-me-into-a-terrorist>
.

The tech industry in Kenya is doing a good job looking for innovative ways to 
tackle the menace of al-Shabaab but, ultimately, solutions beyond the remit of 
private-sector players are needed to curb the threat. Battling corruption 
within the police force (consistently voted the most corrupt institution in the 
country 
<http://www.capitalfm.co.ke/news/2013/10/corruption-thrives-in-kenya-police-force/>
), improving border security (and the probity of immigration officers), 
boosting the capacity and training levels of anti-terror security forces, are 
all responsibilities of government.

Once they start doing their bit with as much creativity and commitment as the 
private sector, Kenya’s tech entrepreneurs can focus oninnovations that improve 
the lives of ordinary citizens 
<http://www.economist.com/blogs/economist-explains/2013/05/economist-explains-18>
: ultimately, what we need are more mobile cash transfer solutions, and fewer 
closed-circuit cameras.
 