
Where have all the women gone? It’s a question that’s become unexpectedly 
urgent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/oct/27/where-are-the-female-choreographers>
 during the last decade, as the choreographic profession has become more and 
more dominated by men. The point is obviously not that an entire sex has 
somehow run out of talent, rather that disproportionately few women now seem to 
be getting the high-profile commissions or running the high-profile companies.

In the case of ballet, it’s always been thus. But contemporary dance has 
historically been powered by women, from the early pioneers such asMartha Graham
 <http://marthagraham.org/about-us/our-history/> and Mary Wigman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/may/22/mary-wigman-german-modern-dance-pioneer>
, to the 60s generation ofTrisha Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/oct/13/step-by-step-trisha-brown>, 
Yvonne Rainer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/dec/24/step-by-step-yvonne-rainer>, 
Twyla Tharp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/feb/01/step-by-step-twyla-tharp-dance> 
andPina Bausch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jul/01/pina-bausch-obituary-dance>. 
When contemporary dance took root in Britain, the early decades were similarly 
rich in female choreography. Siobhan Davies, Rosemary Butcher, Yolanda Snaith, 
Lea Anderson and Shobana Jeyasingh were all significant, influential talents. 
Now, in 2105, there are women who are active and brilliant in the independent 
dance sector, but it’s men like Matthew Bourne, Wayne McGregor, Akram Khan and 
others who have the spotlight.

The Tamara Rojo revolution: bringing ballet into the 21st century
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/feb/17/the-tamara-rojo-revolution-english-national-ballet>
There are many possible explanations for the shift. As contemporary dance has 
moved on to a larger stage (with higher financial stakes and a much more 
visible public profile) women seem to be experiencing more of the inequalities 
and stress that exist in the wider professional world. Anecdotal evidence 
suggests that they appear to lack the confidence or even the desire to 
choreograph the kinds of large-scale work that attracts international funding; 
that those who want to have children, can find the time-pressured schedules of 
an international career brutally unworkable. Some women feel there is a 
persistent, lazy bias among programmers, directors and the media towards the 
promotion of a few predictable male names in the dance world, and some women 
feel their careers have been thwarted by more direct, deliberate sexism.

Live-stream: step into Rambert dance company's rehearsals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/oct/08/live-stream-rambert-dance-company-rehearsals-debate>
This Wednesday, Rambert will be attempting to move the debate forward, by 
hosting a public discussion that will focus less on the reasons why women are 
falling behind than on what can be done to support them. Should artistic 
directors now make a special point of commissioning work from women, as Tamara 
Rojo has done withShe Said <http://www.tamara-rojo.com/enb/>, the programme of 
all-female choreography to be premiered by English National Ballet next year? 
Should companies and funders try to make special provision for women in the 
matter of childcare and touring flexibility? Could more be done at the level of 
school and college to foster confidence in young women and develop their skills 
in self-promotion?

To debate these issues and more, Rambert have brought together a panel from a 
wide range of professional practice and experience. The discussion will be open 
to the public, but it will also be streamed online as part ofRambert Live 
<http://www.rambert.org.uk/explore/news-and-blog/news/rambert-live/>, the 
company’s virtual open day of classes and rehearsals. The debate can be viewed 
on theguardian.com/stage from 4.30-6pm BST. I’ll be chairing the event, and if 
you can’t attend and have any points or queries to raise, please tweet them in 
advance to me@judithmackrell <https://twitter.com/judithmackrell> or to 
@Rambertdance 
<https://twitter.com/Rambertdance?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 (#Rambertlive) and we’ll try to air some of them in the discussion.
 