
Albert Einstein was better known for his groundbreaking moves in physics than 
on the dancefloor, but he had respect for cutting a rug, claiming that “dancers 
are the athletes of God”. Since 1982, 29 April has been designatedInternational 
Dance Day <http://www.international-dance-day.org/en/danceday.html>, with 
events taking place across the globe to encourage greater attention and respect 
for the art form.

And there are plenty of reasons to shimmy. With childhood obesity on the rise, 
it could add some much-needed activity and, for the adults,research suggests 
that shaking your stuff has the same effect on happiness as 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/art/10781227/Dancing-makes-people-as-happy-as-a-1600-pay-rise.html>
 a £1,600 pay rise (take that, performance-related pay). So why not take the 
opportunity to teach your students about the benefits of busting a groove?


Primary

Before we go all macarena, this series of lessons 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22830/Time-To-Move-ten-pieces>
 fromBBC School Radio <http://www.bbc.co.uk/schoolradio> uses the classical 
music projectTen Pieces <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01vs08w> to guide 
students through a series of nature-based movement tasks. Themes include the 
sea, on the mountain and planet Mars. The activities are interactive and 
high-energy, challenging pupils to move in collaboration with others, respond 
to changes in musical tone, and create their own dance-based narratives.

Strictly biology: how I use dance routines to inspire young scientists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2014/dec/28/biology-lessons-science-teacher>
For a less physically demanding celebration of dance, try this reading 
comprehension activity 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/13509/Reading-Comprehension-I-like-to-dance-----English-Resource>
 fromPrimaryLeap <http://primaryleap.co.uk/>. It details the story of Louise, a 
six-year-old who loves to dance. Students can read her account of how much she 
likes to rock out in various places (including the kitchen and garden), before 
demonstrating understanding by answering a series of simple questions.


The Grammar Dance 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/12239/The-Grammar-Dance-----Mr-A-Mr-C-and-Mr-D-Present>
 is a great way to add to the creative chaos by bringing in singing, as well as 
dancing. It is an English-themed song, written byMr A, C and D 
<https://twitter.com/MrACDPresent>, that helps to counter pupils’ nerves about 
grammar tests.Lyrics 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/12240/The-Grammar-Dance-Lyrics-----Mr-A-Mr-C-and-Mr-D-Present>
 include: “Let’s get inventive/Think of a posh word for connective/To make a 
sentence function/Use the word conjunction.”

Meanwhile, this lesson from Sport Relief <http://www.sportrelief.com/> looks 
at thepower of dance from a philanthropic perspective 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22309/Sport-Relief-2016-Shimmy-with-Timmy-for-Nurseries>
, exploring how it can be used to raise funds for those in need. Suggestions 
include hosting a danceathon, creating a sponsored conga, holding a school 
disco and creating a school dance show.

And for lots more ideas fun dance activities, try these suggestions from 
Change4Life <http://www.nhs.uk/change4life/pages/dance-steps-games.aspx>. They 
include the DVD game – in which children have to respond to instructions such 
as fast forward and slow motion – and introduces pupils to the timeless classic 
that is Village People’sYMCA <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CS9OO0S5w2k> (a 
key skill to develop for the wedding receptions they will attend throughout 
their lives).

Secondary

Dance can be a powerful way to bring people together, as shown in this series 
of lessons fromMiriam’s Vision <http://miriamsvision.org/>, a charity 
established in memory of Miriam Hyman, who was killed in the London bombings in 
2005. The activities – all linked to a series ofinstructional videos 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tB1s-XHYhpY&list=PLK4EVg62r2J2gkn_00uqwr-TCPQ-Ps-4S&nohtml5=False>
 – explore howdifferent cultures share common ground 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/21513/Dancemodule-Different-backgrounds-common-ground-from-Miriam-Vision>
 by teaching students about Odissi, a classical Indian dance. After learning 
about the history of the artform, students create a piece of choreography by 
fusing it with their own moves.

And for more cross-cultural fun, try this group task. Working in pairs, 
students aregiven an image of art from another culture and have to create a 
sequence of five moves related to it using just their imaginations 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/21478/Cultural-Dance-Resource-----Inspiration-through-artwork>
. They then work with another pair with the same image and join their sequences 
together to create a 10-step dance. There are differentiation suggestions – for 
example, only using certain body parts – and extension activities include 
researching the cultures they have been working with, or setting their dance to 
music.

To explore what happens when dance hits the headlines, use this collection of 
articles 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22741/News-articles-for-teaching-Dance>
 fromThe Day <http://theday.co.uk/>. Topics covered include how posting a 
Harlem Shake video got some Australian miners fired; the case of a Russian 
ballet dancer who carried out an acid attack on his boss; and how a sexist song 
caused debates on dancefloors across the world.


And for a greater understanding of the history of dance and how it has been 
passed down through the generations, use thisarticle on dance notation 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/3788/Dance>. It explains 
how systems have developed to enable all kinds of dance to be replicated over 
decades and even centuries.

Stem subject snobbery: a student’s view on why arts subjects matter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/31/career-arts-gcse-dance-stop-the-stem-subject-snobbery>
Finally, take a look at how dance is used on the big screen with these lessons 
fromInto Film <https://www.intofilm.org/>. The guide to the 2004 film Bride and 
Prejudice 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22308/Bride-and-Prejudice-Film-Guide-from-Into-Film>
 looks at how dance is key to the Bollywood film tradition, while the resource 
onPitch Perfect 2 
<https://teachers.theguardian.com/teacher-resources/22734/Pitch-Perfect-2-Film-Guide-from-Into-Film>
 asks students to consider what is empowering about performing song and dance 
routines.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 