
So your politician did something with his penis. In an age of duelling 
sympathies – free speech v invasion of privacy, opposing revenge porn v 
exposing moralistic hypocrisy – it can be difficult to navigate quite how to 
feel. Should we care? Should we rage? Should we leave adult human beings to 
manage their own genitals? Should adult human beings who apparently cannot even 
be trusted to keep their own genital secrets a secret be trusted with very 
important big secrets, such as the President’s Book of Secrets?

Well, it depends.

In Britain this week, an exposé by the Sunday Mirror revealed MP Keith Vaz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/sep/05/why-the-sunday-mirror-was-justified-in-exposing-keith-vaz>
 allegedly enlisting the services of two male sex workers and offering to pay 
for cocaine. The tabloid justified its intrusion into Vaz’s private life by 
arguing that his position as chair of the home affairs select committee – 
which, after an extensive inquiry,recently recommended the decriminalisation of 
sex work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/01/decriminalisation-of-sex-workers-in-england-and-wales-backed-by-mps>
 – constituted a conflict of interest (Vaz has now resigned from the committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/06/keith-vaz-resigns-as-chair-of-home-affairs-select-committee>
).

That stance has been taken up and loudly championed by opponents of full 
decriminalisation, eager to use Vaz’s personal violation as a cudgel to 
discredit the committee’s findings. As Joan Smithwrote in this paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/05/keith-vaz-home-affairs-committee-chair-prostitutes-sex-trade>
: “To put it bluntly, he appears to have chaired hearings where campaigners 
proposed a change in the law that could, in theory, turn his own private 
behaviour into a criminal offence.”

In the US last week, former congressman Anthony Weiner strode boldly into yet 
another sexting scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-sexting-twitter-scandal>
 (his third), his passion for a career and a marriage apparently superseded by 
his passion for showing strange ladies what the outline of his penis looks like 
in boxer briefs. Which is fine, of course. We all have our hobbies and 
priorities. (Perhaps, though, Weiner’s lot is more accurately characterised not 
as a life intermittently derailed by public tumescence but as one long, 
continuoussext 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/29/did-anthony-weiner-want-to-get-caught-sexting>
 with the occasional breather.)

This time around, Weiner upped the grimace factor by taking a photo of his 
activated crotch about six inches from the head of his sleeping toddler. He 
also used that one-big-eye-one-small-eye-waggy-tongue emoji a lot, which should 
be illegal.

And by sending his penis pics to a “busty brunette” Trump supporter who 
gleefully made them public, Weiner handed the GOP fodder for several weeks of 
significance-free yowling about Hillary Clinton, whose longtime aide,Huma 
Abedin, happens to be Weiner’s now-estranged wife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-controversy-hillary-clinton-campaign>
. The implicit message in the Abedin melee is the same one that has clung to 
Clinton for decades: “If she can’t even satisfy her husband, how can she 
possibly satisfy America?” (Because this retrograde country’s first female 
president can’t just be a politician – she’ll also have to be America’s wife 
and mommy.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fkeith-vaz-anthony-weiner-affairs-political-sex-scandal-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32c7d0c31f309044b54fce0e39e64759f4faf9f4%2F0_247_4005_2403%2F4005.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20tell%20when%20a%20political%20sex%20scandal%20matters%20%E2%80%93%20a%20simple%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fkeith-vaz-anthony-weiner-affairs-political-sex-scandal-guide%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20tell%20when%20a%20political%20sex%20scandal%20matters%20%E2%80%93%20a%20simple%20guide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fkeith-vaz-anthony-weiner-affairs-political-sex-scandal-guide%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32c7d0c31f309044b54fce0e39e64759f4faf9f4%2F0_247_4005_2403%2F4005.jpg>
 Anthony Weiner, as then New York mayoral candidate, with his now-estranged 
wife and longtime Hillary Clinton aide Huma Abedin in 2013. Photograph: Kathy 
Willens/AP 
The case for the newsworthiness of the Weiner scandal appears to be that his 
name is Weiner and he does things with his wiener. Which – I get it – is a 
small joy in a grim world. But, assex columnist Dan Savage notes 
<http://www.thestranger.com/slog/2016/08/29/24525226/anthony-weiner-caught-doing-what-weiner-does-best>
, our love of a lurid tabloid story and a penis pun really doesn’t justify 
posting someone’s private sex pics without their consent:

“Making private sext messages public? Do it to anyone else, you’re the 
asshole. Do it toAnthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner>, he’s the asshole. Why the 
double standard? Posting dirty pictures or videos that were shared with you 
privately – or made with you privately – without the consent of the person in 
those pictures or videos is called revenge porn and it’s a crime in many 
states.”

So how do you tell if you’re looking at a newsworthy sex scandal or a 
prurient, exploitative one? Pretty simple. Just ask yourself:

1. Was this politician engaged in legal, consensual penis shenanigans 
(cheating, sexting, canoodling) or wicked, life-ruining penis crime (sexual 
harassment, rape, domestic violence, child pornography)?

2. In their capacity as a lawmaker, did this politician push oppressive, 
socially conservative legislation that regulated or criminalised the 
consensual, private sex lives of others? Did they yell all the time about gay 
people burning in hell or encourage parents to send their kids to abusive gay 
conversion camps or vote against anti-discrimination laws, while soliciting 
same-sex blowjobs in public toilets? Did they insist that abortion is 
baby-murder while procuring expensive secret abortions for their mistresses and 
daughters?

If the answer to 1 is “crime” or the answer to 2 is “YUP,” or if you’ve got 
yourselfa twofer like former US house speaker Denny Hastert 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/27/dennis-hastert-sentenced-prison-child-molestation>
, then congrats! That’s a scandal that actually means something. If not, and, 
on top of everything, you find yourself gawking at someone’s private 
correspondence that’s been dredged up by vultures or homophobes with an agenda, 
maybe take a pass.

By this metric, political stings for prostitution only matter if you believe 
that paying for sex should be criminalised (I don’t – I prefer to listen to sex 
workers when they tell us what keeps them safe). And Weiner’s escapade is a 
non-event. He’s not even a politician any more – just a guy who probably 
shouldn’t be in a monogamous marriage and wants to show his penis off to 
brunettes in the (illusory) privacy of his own phone. I understand why Abedin 
would care. It is hard for me to care.

Come on. Stop. Talk about real stuff, not this sideshow. (Also, abolish that 
emoji.)
 