
Something strange happens when you get turned into Al Pacino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/alpacino>. Singer-songwriter Steve Tilston’s 
career is usually about quietly admired albums, folk festivals, and 
budget-hotel-friendly tours.

Now his story is the basis of a Hollywood movie and he’s talking to me in 
London’s achingly hip Ham Yard hotel, drinking from an artisanal glass goblet, 
with a daintily cut lemon slice. He scratches his chin. “Beats a Travelodge, 
this, doesn’t it?”

In 2010, an interviewer had begged Tilston him to tell him something he didn’t 
know about his life. “So I said, ‘Oh, there was thisletter John Lennon sent me 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/music/music-news/7946804/John-Lennon-letter-to-aspiring-folk-singer-received-nearly-four-decades-later.html>
 with his phone number on it.’”

Steve Tilston: The Reckoning – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/jul/21/steve-tilston-the-reckoning-review>
The new film Danny Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/apr/10/first-look-review-danny-collins-al-pacino-dan-fogelman>
 takes this incident and turns it into something quite different. Or as the 
film’s opening screen says: “The following is kind of based on a true story – a 
little bit.” It follows an ageing rock star, ruined by drugs, women and wealth, 
played for laughs by a bouffanted, open-neck-shirted Pacino. Lennon writes to 
the much younger Collins in the film, sending it care of a magazine to which 
Collins had given a self-doubting interview, telling him to “stay true” to 
himself and his music. But the letter only turns up decades later, when fame 
has already done its worst, and a tale of self-discovery and redemption follows.

Lennon’s real letter was less gushy, but it did begin with a message that 
still pulses through the film: “Being rich doesn’t change your experience in 
the way you think.” (Lennon was, in fact, responding to Tilston’s comments in 
the British underground magazine ZigZag published in 1971: “If you get rich, 
you must change … your experiences will be different and they probably won’t 
have the same depth.”)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fletter-john-lennon-singer-steve-tilston-al-pacino-film-danny-collins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432211401401%2Fc33b139a-8b49-446d-94e5-f00e0ac6197e-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20letter%20from%20John%20Lennon%20to%20folk%20singer%20Steve%20Tilston%20inspired%20the%20new%20Al%20Pacino%20movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fletter-john-lennon-singer-steve-tilston-al-pacino-film-danny-collins%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20letter%20from%20John%20Lennon%20to%20folk%20singer%20Steve%20Tilston%20inspired%20the%20new%20Al%20Pacino%20movie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2015%2Fmay%2F21%2Fletter-john-lennon-singer-steve-tilston-al-pacino-film-danny-collins%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F21%2F1432211401401%2Fc33b139a-8b49-446d-94e5-f00e0ac6197e-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Al Pacino in Danny Collins. Photograph: Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Tilston, who is now 65, recently reread the interview he had given as a 
21-year-old in the wake of his debut album An Acoustic Confusion. “I found it 
quite embarrassing, really. I’d read a biography of Dylan Thomas, and I was 
really taken with the whole idea of art, and the poet having to say something.” 
But those were the times, he says, smiling; rock’n’roll was only young, after 
all. “I wasn’t unique. I think that feeling was around, as if we were on the 
cusp of some new thing.”

The fame Tilston feared briefly batted its eyelashes soon after. He signed to 
major labels in Britain and the US for his second album, 1972’s Collection, and 
a blues scholar, Samuel Charters, produced it, but the results didn’t please 
him. “It was the classic ‘Take a young singer-songwriter, put them in the 
studio, add string quartets, brass, everything bar the kitchen sink.’ ” Tilston 
ran away to fish mackerel in the West Country. “The record company kept saying, 
‘You’re just not taking this seriously.’ As far as they were concerned, anybody 
who lived west of Reading was a carrot cruncher.”

Tilston’s CV ever since has been noble, inspiring and busy. He has released 19 
solo albums and collaborations, and remains a fine guitarist and lyricist: 
2012’s The Reckoning won the Radio 2 Folk Awards’ best original song, and his 
forthcoming album, Truth To Tell, is full of beautifully delivered, personally 
touched compositions.

He first found out about the Lennon letter in 2005; it had obviously been 
plucked from ZigZag HQ, and sold into the collectors’ market. Then he saw a 
picture. “I was in a maelstrom of emotions. Here was this road not travelled 
that could have been so significant in my life, and it had been taken [from me] 
without me even being aware of it.”

Pacino kept touching my arm, asking about my accent, he was so affectionate

Tilston wondered what he and Lennon could have talked about, but then he made 
peace with the incident, and barely told anyone about it. Then came the 
interview that took the story everywhere. Soon after, the Hollywood producer 
Dan Fogelman (Crazy, Stupid Love; Cars) got in touch. He was “charming”, 
Tilston says, “and really honourable, too”, saying how he’d listened to his 
music and really enjoyed it. Recognising the letter as Tilston’s intellectual 
property, he also paid him; Tilston paid off his mortgage.

Tilston likes “the sweet film” Fogelman has made, though it’s not about him. 
He does feature, though, in the end credits, in a clip originally made by Leeds 
Metropolitan University; he didn’t know it would be there until he first saw 
the film last year. “I could hear my voice – what’s this? – and then, my God, 
that’s our front room!” He laughs. “My wife was all, ‘The fruit behind you’s 
mouldy, Steve! You didn’t tidy the room and now look!’”

Being involved in the film’s promotion has given Tilston an insight into the 
world he never knew. He met Pacino this week to record something for BBC1’s The 
One Show, and was touched by his warmth (“He kept touching my arm, asking about 
my accent, he was so affectionate”), and at the London premiere, he even went 
before Pacino in the press line. Has it changed Tilston’s mind about fame? 
“Well, this is nice to dip into, isn’t it,” he says, waving his water goblet. 
“But no, not at all. A guitar in a Travelodge is much more me.”
 