
The world is changing. Massive urbanisation, aging infrastructure, inadequate 
transportation systems and increasingly limited energy resources are all 
affecting how we live today and in the future. It has been said that necessity 
is the mother of invention, and there is no greater necessity than creating a 
world where all 7 billion of us (and growing) can live well while minimising 
the impact on the planet. We have always used design as a tool to solve 
problems and designers have an important role to play in imagining, creating 
and designing a better world of the future. The good news is thecloud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/cloud> is giving us all access to 
massive amounts of data and computing power, enabling designers to solve 
problems in a whole new way.

Thirty years ago, the PC completely changed the way people work. Today, we are 
witnessing a new revolution with the convergence of thecloud and the billions 
of mobile devices in use today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/dec/09/experts-cloud-computing-trends-2014>
. Physical location no longer matters either, so thebest talent can be sourced 
wherever they are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/jul/24/cloud-computing-transforming-workplace>
 to create unique, global teams based on expertise.

Although the cost of labour and materials is going up in many industries, the 
ability to have infinite computing power at a reduced cost is fundamentally 
changing the opportunities for businesses of all sizes. Previously, the upfront 
investment needed for processing this amount of data in a small office was cost 
prohibitive – now complex programmes and projects are in reach of businesses of 
any size. It's clear that the cloud is having a major impact on other 
technologies and software and not just our processes; computer-aided design 
(CAD) has matured beyond 2D and 3D graphics to incorporate simulation and 
analysis. Designers can now rapidly work through thousands of design and 
material options in order to select the optimum solution through a process of 
digital prototypes.

Consider Escape Dynamics <http://escapedynamics.com/>, which uses the benefits 
of the cloud to refine the design and build of novel aerospace systems and 
components, dramatically reducing development timelines, as well as cutting 
costs on physical prototyping. One component they are working on is an airframe 
for a reusable orbital launch vehicle. The optimisation process requires 
thousands of simulations that test various flight conditions and various 
geometries of the airframe. Before cloud technologies, this optimisation 
process would require the company to buy and operate a dedicated 
high-performance cluster of computers. With access to increased processing 
power and the ability to run simulations in the cloud, Escape Dynamics is well 
on its way to developing an extremely efficient airframe that will allow the 
company to build and fly a very efficient space launch vehicle in the near 
future.

In the case of large potentially sensitive infrastructure projects such as 
rail lines, power stations and civil engineering projects, more insights 
gleaned from simulations in the cloud lead to better decisions and better 
communication between the design teams and clients as well as public interest 
groups – it also affords the context to understand and see the big picture, as 
well as the ability to look ahead and spot potential problems. 

To take the city of Vancouver as an example, it has built a simulated version 
of the entire city by combining terrain files, building footprints, satellite 
photos and GIS data for parcels and streets into a 3D modelling programme. With 
this, they can demonstrate how shifts in population affect density and better 
understand the impact of new infrastructure projects in the planning stages. 
These simulations are becoming even more affordable and accessible now that 
they run in the cloud, not on the desktop.

Simply speaking, the cloud is enabling designers to do what they couldn't do 
before. We now have the ability to accurately identify the consequences of our 
design decisions and their impact on the world around us. We are moving to a 
world where computing, data and collaboration and communication between people 
are all integrated in the cloud, powerful new tools are in designers' hands and 
preparing them to address the world's most formidable design challenges. The 
agility, efficiency, collaboration and data insights enabled by thecloud are 
driving this innovation faster than ever before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media-network/media-network-blog/2013/aug/23/cloud-business-amazon-steve-midgley>
.

Pete Baxter is a vice-president at Autodesk UK <http://www.autodesk.co.uk/>

Get more articles like this sent direct to your inbox by signing up for free 
membership <https://register.theguardian.com/media/> to the Guardian Media 
Network <https://www.theguardian.com/media-network> – this content is brought 
to you byGuardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. 
 