
Ten years ago this month I listened to the chief executive of a US non-profit 
recount the first lesson his boss had taught him: "We are not-for-profit, and 
that means we are not for loss." In other words, you cannot deliver the social 
good you want if you do not manage the financial health of your organisation. 
Over the years I have learned from numerous social enterprises that their 
success depends on their ability to operate with the discipline of a business.

A great business begins with a great product. MyChoicePad 
<http://www.mychoicepad.com/> built an iPad app that helps people with learning 
or communication disabilities to communicate better. In its early days the 
company was funded from the sheer number of prizes it won, including its 
selection as anUnLtd Big Venture Challenge <http://unltd.org.uk/bvc/> winner. 
Co-founders Zoe Peden and Andrew Jackman were able to recruit top developers 
from their City of London jobs because of Peden's ability to explain the 
importance of the app. MyChoicePad has been downloaded more than 100,000 times 
by parents, schools and health institutions and has succeeded in making a real, 
sustainable difference to many lives.

Without sales, there is no business. Communicating the social good that a 
social enterprise delivers is a key part of the sales strategy.Patient Choice 
Foundation <http://patientchoicefoundation.org/> is a new type of healthcare 
company. It is completely impartial and unique in thestoma care market 
<http://www.patient.co.uk/doctor/Stoma-Care.htm> as the only prescription home 
delivery service dedicated to funding charitable activities. As a 
not-for-profit business, Patient Choice doesn't have shareholders, but instead 
supports charities and associations through the money it makes. The company is 
the brainchild ofNeil Basil 
<http://unltd.org.uk/2011/11/23/neil-basil-patient-choice/>, a patient himself, 
who through his years of experience in receiving products from home-delivery 
companies, decided that more could be done to improve the quality of service 
for customers.

What is so impressive about Patient Choice is how professionally it markets 
itself to new customers. They know that they'll only get patients switching to 
them if they provide a high quality, trusted, independent service first – with 
the charitable message coming second. However, those two messages together make 
a simple yet compelling sell to any potential customer. Great quality, great 
service – plus you're helping fellow stoma care patients, too.

To reach scale at speed, you need investment, and the vast majority of 
investors need some cash return on their investment. Even social investors need 
the cash to invest in the next generation of social enterprises. Which is why 
community interest companies find it so much more difficult to raise the sums 
they need. The first workshop I attended as anAshoka fellow 
<https://www.ashoka.org/> I picked up some great advice about how to structure 
a social enterprise to recruit investors while safeguarding the mission. For 
example, you can create a non-profit that carries out the social mission, and 
is funded by the royalties or revenues from a for-profit company that can 
receive investment. It is important to get good legal advice on how to 
structure correctly early on.

One of the great opportunities available to social enterprises is that lots of 
people want to help you succeed. Employees want to work for social enterprises 
because they believe in the mission. So make sure you mention it in every 
interaction your team has with the public because you are always recruiting. 
Experienced executives want to donate their knowledge and network to give back 
to society, so make sure you network across all sectors to spread the word 
about your work. You need help from every expert for every aspect of your 
business.

Finally, be greedy in your learning. Find the best in every field and 
interview them about their techniques; they want to teach you and you need to 
learn.

Dr Mohammad Al-Ubaydli is founder and chief executive of the healthcare social 
enterprisePatients Know Best <http://www.patientsknowbest.com/>. He is Ashoka's 
fellow of the month <http://uk.ashoka.org/blog> for January 2013. Ashoka is a 
global network of social entrepreneurs, with more than 3,000 fellows spanning 
72 countries. For more detailsclick here <https://www.ashoka.org/>.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional. To join the social 
enterprise network,click here 
<https://socialenterprise.guardian.co.uk/en/accounts/join>.
 