
Tony was talking about how he wound up getting paid to care less – less about 
his sick patients, less about the specialism that demanded years of study, less 
about the career he had spent decades practising. But all the talking proved 
something else: he still cares – a bit too much for his own good.

Remembering his 30-plus years as a pharmacist, he recalled, in a Midlands 
singsong, a man who once came in with a sore on his head that kept catching on 
his razor.

Tony had a look.

“I says, ‘Get to the doctor.’

“He says, ‘What, in a few weeks?’

‘No. Now.’”

It turned out to be a skin cancer that the doctor began treating straight away.

Then there was the woman who wanted more antibiotic eyedrops. Tony just knew 
something didn’t look right and refused to sell her anything. Instead he packed 
her off to the GP. And the doctor immediately flagged up a possible brain 
tumour.

“A hunch,” Tony shrugged. “Through years of experience you just develop an 
instinct.”

Such are the memories by which he measures out his life. No sprints down a 
hospital corridor, no anguished shouting in an operating theatre. His has been 
an unheroic career – but a life-changing, even life-saving, one.

How Boots went rogue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/apr/29/how-boots-went-rogue> 
“They’ve had cancer, marriage split-ups … men even talk about their 
impotence.” No wonder they bring these troubles to his counter: in his mid-50s, 
Tony emits the ready sympathy of a dad at the school gates at hometime.

How many of these patients guessed that their own chemist was sick? Over the 
past few years, depression has dug its claws into Tony. He is tired all the 
time. His weight, blood sugar and blood pressure have shot up.

The illness kicked in shortly after he began his latest job, in 2011. Tony is 
sure that that was the cause – sure that he is sick because of his employer, 
and what it is asking him to do. The cuts to staffing that have made him feel 
unable to serve patients properly, the business targets that he is expected to 
meet, the pressure to behave like a salesman as much as a medical professional 
– and he believes managers treat him as a disruptive threat for questioning 
these practices. Tony isn’t his real name and, along with all the pharmacists 
in this story, some details will be left vague to protect their anonymity.

From being “really confident” on joining, he has “been under virtually 
constant stress for the last three years”. He told me that “Every time more 
than two managers come to our store together I think, ‘What’s going on? Am I 
going to get dismissed?’”

Boots is to ­outpatient care what the high‑street banks are to the UK’s money 
system

The past few years have been spent on and off anti-depressants. When we met 
late last year, he had just started another course of pills and was back in the 
usual side‑effects cycle: sweating, waking too early, exhaustion, sexual 
dysfunction.

And the pharmacy chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/01/boots-chemist-trade-unions>
 that Tony blames for making him feel so bad?

Boots.

You know what rogue capitalism looks like. It is a pinstriped banker defending 
his bonus, a Silicon Valley executiveexplaining exotic tax practices to 
short-tempered MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/11/google-matt-brittin-salary-public-accounts-committee-tax-deal-grilling>
, a billionaire sportswear boss pouring more money into his pocket. It is 
zero-hours contracts and financial shadowplay, profits funnelled through 
offshore shell companies and giant warehouses teeming with temps on minimum 
wage.

What it is not is No 7 moisturisers, contact-lens solutions, angina pills. It 
is not the shop on the high street with the white-coated pharmacist who fills 
your gran’s prescription, the shop where your mum used to go for your cough 
medicine. What it is not, in other words, is Boots.

But Tony’s story isn’t about one man who can’t rub along with his bosses. It 
is about a radically changed business model that, in the eyes of many of the 
company’s own staff, appears to suck the care out of a caring profession, 
harming employees while enriching those right at the top.

This is the tale of how one of Britain’s oldest and biggest businesses went 
rogue – to the point where its own pharmacists claim their working conditions 
threaten the safety of patients, and experts warn that the management’s pursuit 
of demanding financial targets poses a risk to public health. (Boots denies 
this, saying that “offering care for our colleagues, customers and the 
communities which we serve…is an integral part of our strategy.”)

At the heart of this story is one of the most urgent debates in post-crash 
Britain: what large companies owe the rest of us – in taxes, in wages, and in 
standards of behaviour.

When David Cameron calls for a “responsible capitalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2012/jan/19/david-cameron-responsible-capitalism-video>
”, or the former Labour leaderEd Miliband decries “predator” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/31/ed-miliband-tax-changes-predator-capitalism>
 corporations, what both men are grasping for is a way of describing how some 
of our biggest and best-known businesses no longer resemble the societies they 
operate in. Lawfully exploiting the opportunities afforded them by 
globalisation and new technology, they hand over as little tax as possible to 
the countries on whose infrastructure and protections they rely, squeeze pay 
and conditions for employees even while handing out lavish rewards to managers, 
and underinvest in staff so as to over-reward shareholders.

This debate is not merely a moral abstraction, it is central to everyday life 
in Britain – from why the workforce is so unproductive to how your kids’Sure 
Start centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/12/sure-start-childrens-centres-face-worst-year-of-budget-cuts>
 got shut down.

As a case of rogue capitalism, Boots is sharply different and especially 
troubling. First, the online giants and investment banks that usually get 
blasted for bad behaviour by newspapers and select committees grew up in this 
new world of business. Boots, on the other hand, traces its origins back to the 
Methodist Nottingham of the 1840s. It has gone through dramatic changes to end 
up in this bracket.

Second, where the likes of Sports Direct and Amazon are criticised for their 
treatment of low-paid temporary workers, Tony and his colleagues are 
professionals. Their testimony shows how even “good jobs” are changing.

Finally, Britain relies on Boots – and Boots relies on Britons. It is by far 
the biggest pharmacy chain in the country. Healthcare professionals refer to 
the firm as an “essential component” of the NHS. It is to outpatient care what 
the high-street banks are to the UK’s money system: a massive private-sector 
firm delivering a vital public service.

And it takes a lot of public money to do so: around £2bn a year for 
prescriptions alone, according to independent financial analysis, or a third of 
Boots’s annual income in the UK. Then come the patient-care services paid for 
by the taxpayer, and the contracts Boots is now taking over from the NHS – to 
host GP surgeries in its stores, to run pharmacies in hospitals, to manage 
hearing test centres and specialist clinics monitoring drugs that prevent blood 
clots.

Boots gave Tony work experience in the 1980s while he was training to be a 
pharmacist. Back then, he said, it was a good employer, “a blue-chip, like 
Marks and Spencer”. But by the time he rejoined in 2011, it was under very 
different owners.

The transformation Tony was about to witness began in spring 2007, when Boots 
was bought for £11bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/jun/21/privateequity>. This was the 
frenzied peak of the greatest financial bubble in history and each day’s papers 
brought news of more crazy deals. Still, this stood out: it was the biggest 
buyout ever seen in Europe.

The deal was backed by one of the world’s largest private equity groups, 
Kohlberg Kravis Roberts (KKR), the debt merchants synonymous with the excesses 
of 1980s Wall Street. But it was led by the billionaireStefano Pessina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/02/stefano-pessina-walgreens-alliance-boots>
. Barely a few months earlier, in July 2006, he had merged the wholesaling 
business he had created, AllianceUniChem, with the venerable British name. The 
result had been Alliance Boots, a Europe-wide pharmacy chain, of which he was a 
director. Now he was buying the entire business, whipping it off the FTSE 100 
and into private ownership.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F361ecf757975e0223b36f7fd4e5f23f341a0aabe%2F0_131_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Boots%20went%20rogue%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Boots%20went%20rogue%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F361ecf757975e0223b36f7fd4e5f23f341a0aabe%2F0_131_2992_1796%2F2992.jpg>
 ‘Stefano Pessina looked less like a typical FTSE bureaucrat and more like a 
continental football manager, here to save the ailing local side.’ Photograph: 
Micha Theiner/City AM/Rex 
A near-unknown from the continent had just snapped up a high-street stalwart – 
and City newsrooms were agog. The guy evensounded exotic. He came from Italy, 
but had moved to Monaco, the principality famous for not levying income tax. He 
collected yachts and Italian old masters. Separated from his wife, he had got 
together with girlfriend Ornella Barra after buying her family’s business – 
then made her head of his wholesale operations. With his white hair and rimless 
glasses, Pessina looked less like a typical FTSE bureaucrat and more like a 
continental football manager, here to save the ailing local side.

“He confesses to living a peripatetic lifestyle, jetting between his home in 
Monaco, where he has to spend at least 90 nights a year to qualify for its 
low-tax regime, and his offices in Italy and in London,”reported the Telegraph 
in 2007 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/2806572/Business-profile-A-recluse-who-keeps-making-the-headlines.html>
. “The two mobiles and a BlackBerry laid in front of him are clearly more 
important than any office.”

After all, offices are not necessary when hunting for deals – and Pessina has 
a genius for making deals. By 2005, when he invited Boots executives for merger 
talks on his yacht off Sardinia, he had already bought more than 500 firms. Yet 
the press gave little consideration to the precise nature of this latest deal – 
and how that might change a business delivering a vital public service.

One man who was worried about Britain’s new king of medicine was Bill Scott. 
Until March 2015, Scott had been Scotland’s chief pharmaceutical officer for 22 
years, leading policy-making on pharmacy. It was from that vantage point that 
he watched the takeover. “The feeling was that it would fundamentally change 
the ethos of Boots,” Scott told me. He and his colleagues had always regarded 
the company as “ethical” – because it was “very much driven by pharmacists 
themselves”. Now, with the money men in charge, it seemed the future was less 
certain.

Scott had encountered Pessina once before. The two had met in the summer of 
2006 – just after Boots’s merger with Alliance Unichem, but a few months before 
the buyout. Pessina’s team had taken some of the top officials in Scottish 
pharmacy to the Balmoral in Edinburgh, a five-star hotel that still stations 
kilted doormen at the entrance.

Over what another attendee remembers as a “grand dinner”, the Boots team 
gathered intelligence about Holyrood’s plans for their industry. For his part, 
Scott wanted to know what Pessina had planned for Britain’s most important 
community pharmacist.

“The question I asked him was: ‘Are you going to stay in the health sector on 
the stock market?’” Each business on the FTSE (whereAlliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots> was then listed) is 
categorised in a particular sector, so Barclays can be found under “banks”, BAE 
Systems under “aerospace” and so on. Behind that innocently technical query lay 
a much bigger question – “I was asking: ‘Where’s your focus?’”

Pessina seemed to grasp Scott’s meaning. “He said, ‘Bill, this is a very good 
question and I understand why you’re asking it. But as well as pharmacy, 
there’s a bit of retailing – so we want to be in the retail sector.” It 
appeared that Pessina saw the future of Boots not as a healthcare business but 
alongside Marks and Spencer, Next and Carpetright. “I didn’t see him as someone 
with a clinical care,” Scott told me. “He’d just seen another market to get 
into to make money.”

Whether Bill Scott was right would determine life for Tony and his patients – 
and millions like them.

Prescription drugs, two packets of Beechams, a Shaper sandwich and some Brecon 
Carreg water. Over a century and a half, Boots had built up a business that 
serviced the most prosaic aspects of British life. Exciting, dynamic, a licence 
to print money? Nah. But at its core was a stability underwritten by government 
money, public goodwill and a solid reputation.

How did Pessina and KKR make £2bn out of Boots in five years?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2012/jun/19/pessina-kkr-boots-leveraged-buyout>
Outwardly, 2007 changed nothing. The pharmacists still wore white coats. The 
sign outside the shop was still the same blue and white cursive logo dating 
back to 1883. But behind the trusty facade was “the story of how one business 
model colonises another,” according to Colin Haslam, professor in accounting 
and finance at Queen Mary University of London. The everyday needs and ailments 
of communities across the UK had been reconfigured as thousands of little 
revenue streams for a small transnational elite of ultra-wealthy investors, 
whose fortunes depended on those streams getting bigger, and fast.

To see how that changed our medical services, I asked Haslam to examine the 
accounts of Boots UK, the main British subsidiary of the continental 
conglomerate Alliance Boots. The investors’ method, as Haslam describes it, was 
“stretch and extract”: stretch company finances and staff as far as they can go 
– then extract profits.

Stretching began immediately, by loading up the new asset with billions in 
debt. To buy Alliance Boots, Pessina and KKR had invested £2.5bn of their own 
money – but they borrowed almost £9bn from Barclays, the Royal Bank of 
Scotland, Citigroup, JP Morgan, and Merrill Lynch among other banks. The 
borrowed billions were then shoved onto the balance sheet of Boots UK Ltd – and 
those banks jumped to the front of the queue for repayment out of the profits 
made by the company.

Set in black ink on pink paper in the Companies and Markets section of the FT, 
these are no more than the technicalities of a company buyout. Yet they amount 
to a dramatic shift in power. Think about that previous paragraph again: a 
billionaire based in a tax haven, Pessina, and a small consortium of wealthy 
investors and funds, represented by KKR, pick up a 158-year-old company 
employing around 70,000 Britons. To do so, they borrow billions from a few 
global banks and dump most of these loans on the balance sheet of Boots in the 
UK – pushing it deep into debt, even though the debt has nothing to do with the 
actual business Boots does here. A firm that delivers an essential social 
service is now private, making it almost impossible for outsiders to see how it 
is changing. Finally, the profits made by Boots UK are used to repay the 
lenders faster and ultimately leave more profit for the investors.

In this way, British money – whether from customers or taxpayers – was 
siphoned offshore. The KKR funds that owned Alliance Boots were housed in the 
tax haven of the Cayman Islands, while the stakes held by Pessina were located 
in Luxembourg. A few months after going private, Alliance Boots shifted its 
headquarters from Nottingham to the low-tax canton of Zug in Switzerland.

There is nothing illegal about these arrangements, and a spokesman insisted at 
the time that the move to Zug was absolutely not for tax purposes: “We have 
chosen to locate the overall stewardship of the group in Switzerland as we 
believe it enhances the position of Alliance Boots as a leading international 
pharmacy-led health and beauty group.” Yet when Richard Brooks, a former tax 
inspector, visited Alliance Boots GmbH in 2012, he found that its 
“headquarters” in Zug was “one of around 50 unrelated companies dealt with by a 
local business service company, the proprietors of which were none too pleased 
with the visit.” And, he reported, no Boots employees were present.

All very complicated, yet perhaps rather lucrative for Pessina and KKR. In 
2013,a report published by War on Want 
<http://www.waronwant.org/media/boots-billion-pound-tax-dodge>, Unite and the 
US campaign group Change to Win, claimed that Alliance Boots had legally 
avoided paying over £1bn in taxes to the UK since going private. Yet around 40% 
of the revenues for its British business come straight from the NHS. The 
campaigners complained to the OECD, the rich-nations’ thinktank, about what 
they saw as a violation of UK tax laws, although the OECD rejected the claim.

A Boots spokesperson categorically rejected the tax campaigners’ claims, 
describing their calculations as factually inaccurate, “heavily biased” and 
“defamatory”. The spokesperson stated: “We organise our tax affairs strictly in 
compliance with all applicable laws in each jurisdiction.” In the financial 
year from 2013 to 2014, Boots paid “around £577m in tax in the UK”. The company 
refused to give any further details, apart from to say that the sum includes 
business rates and national insurance. Yet business rates and national 
insurance are the cost any firm must bear to run shops and employ staff. A 
family is not granted a lower council tax bill because it has already shelled 
out for the electric and water.

If Nottinghamshire heritage could be junked in the new regime, financial 
stability didn’t count for much, either. Before the takeover, Boots UK bore a 
modest 50p-worth of loans for every £1 of equity, or net assets. Immediately 
after the takeover, that ratio shot up five-fold. It was as if a house worth 
only £100,000 suddenly had a giant mortgage of £250,000. Haslam, who is a 
former corporate financier, believes that balancing such huge debt on 
comparatively little equity would be judged by an auditor as “high risk”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe78355eb7cb8ff4a59ce3a6b1bbfbc51dace84e4%2F0_363_5441_3265%2F5441.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Boots%20went%20rogue%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Boots%20went%20rogue%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe78355eb7cb8ff4a59ce3a6b1bbfbc51dace84e4%2F0_363_5441_3265%2F5441.jpg>
 ‘Boots says self-checking – where pharmacists monitor their own work – must be 
done only as a last resort’. Photograph: Alamy 
This is not an academic point, but a matter for public interest. To pocket 
Boots, Pessina and KKR had to outbid another private-equity baron,Guy Hands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/guyhands>. His outfit, Terra Firma, went on 
to buy Four Seasons Health Care, the biggest care home operator in the UK. It 
shares certain similarities with Boots: both private-sector providers of public 
services; both weighed down by the expense of running old-fashioned bricks and 
mortar, both controlled by tax exiles (Hands uses Guernsey as his base 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/feb/05/emi-citigroup-private-equity-terra-firma>
). Four Seasons, too, was landed with outsize debt – and over the last few 
months, the group has gone into meltdown: struggling to pay the interest on its 
loans, castigated by government inspectors for providing “inadequate” care in 
125 of its homes, forced to sell some properties and overhaul others.

Four Seasons is now a prime example of what happens when private equity – big 
borrowing, hard charging – goes wrong, with results that may be paid for by its 
residents and families and even taxpayers over the coming months and years.

This is not likely to happen to Boots. But Haslam sees the same conflict 
between outsize profit-seeking and public interest, claiming: “Boots is now 
about immuring tax, squeezing labour costs and taking out the dividends rather 
than reinvesting in the business.”

Whether as residents or patients, relatives or members of the public, we need 
our care homes and pharmacies to be reliably dull. When financiers get excited 
over such sectors, the rest of us should worry. Yet Pessina came to Boots 
promising double-digit growth. “There’s so much to do – the products are 
fantastic, the spirit of the people is fantastic,” he fizzed in a 2008 
interview. “The important thing now is to motivate them and to convince them 
they can succeed.”

Late last year, I went to the Midlands to meet Tony and hear his views on how 
his working conditions had changed. He took me on a tour of a branch of Boots 
very like his own, a large, relatively new shop in an out-of-town retail park.

Here, the chemist’s counter had a full complement of staff. So had Tony’s – 
when he began in 2011. But by then, four years into the buyout, job cuts were 
well under way, both in his store and across the country. Now for hours each 
day, he said, it was only him manning the counter and the pill dispensary while 
taking care of the shop’s photo business, too. With no other colleagues around 
to make sure he was giving out the right drugs at the right dosage, Tony had to 
monitor his own work. Pharmacists call this “self-checking”, and it leaves 
patients at greater risk of getting the wrong medication. In its own standard 
operating procedure, Boots says self-checking must be done only “as a last 
resort”. Yet Tony claims he was self-checking on a daily basis. (Asked for 
comment on this practice, Boots would say nothing on the record.)

Working by himself, Tony explained he also had to hand out vouchers for money 
off makeup. “We try to get the patient to redeem that voucher straight away. We 
have to: they monitor that kind of thing.” He added: “That commercial focus in 
pharmacy – 10 years ago it would have been unheard of.”.

But that was the least of Tony’s worries. It was the medicine-use reviews 
<http://www.boots-uk.com/about-boots-uk/healthcare/pharmacy/pharmacy-services/> 
(MURs) that really bothered him. Patients came to his consulting room and 
discussed their diet and health problems, while he took them through a chunky 
list of questions and advised them on what their medicines were meant to do and 
how best to take them. Free for the customer, a way of keeping a patient out of 
a GP’s waiting room, and for each one the NHS pays the company £28. To prevent 
the system from being abused, every pharmacy in the country is limited to 400 
MURs a year. Except Tony’s managers took that number as a target for his store 
to hit.

“Miss it and they get on your back,” said Tony. He adopted a manager’s whine: 
“You’ve done three MURs less than you should have done this week.”

A Boots pharmacist from another region described to me a recent staff awayday 
at which he and his colleagues were told: “400 MURs is an expectation now. We 
don’t need to tell you that.”

I have seen a 2008 email from a Boots area manager in yet another part of the 
country that states:

I personally don’t want colleagues to feel ‘brow-beaten’, but we do need to 
deliver our targets of 400 MCUs [medicine check-ups – another name for MURs] 
per store this financial year for two reasons:

1. Delivering 400 MCUs is a measure of Excellent Patient Care

2. The company can make £28 profit for each MCU, so each one we don’t deliver 
is a lost £28.

So keen was Tony’s store to make that profit, he claims it did reviews on 
anyone, no matter how unsuitable. Tony himself was told to have one – and to 
give one to a patient with severe dementia. His manager came in for one – no 
sooner had it begun than she walked out, but it still went towards the total. 
All so the shop could earn that extra £11,200 from a scheme intended to help 
the sick. (Asked to comment, Boots said: “We make it clear to our colleagues 
that these services should not be undertaken inappropriately.”)

Assuming each pharmacy churns out 400 MURs a year, that one NHS programme is 
worth an annual £30m to the company

These forms of outpatient care are a good earner for Boots. Assuming each of 
its pharmacies churns out 400 MURs a year, that one NHS programme is worth an 
annual £30m to the company. Stack alongside that thenew medicine service (NMS) 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Pharmacy-Health/Health-pharmacy-services/Pharmacy-services-support/Medicine-checks/New-medicine-service-NHS/>
 for patients on heavy-duty drugs, worth at least £25 a time, NHS flu jabs at 
up to £17 a pop, stop-smoking clinics, and a lot of public money is being sent 
to private companies to look after our health.

As far back as 2010, the NHS’s own research warned that MURs were being used 
to cream off public money and could be “of limited benefit and cursory in 
nature”. In 2013, thePharmaceutical Journal noted that 
<http://www.pharmaceutical-journal.com/news-and-analysis/feature/have-medicines-use-reviews-come-to-represent-profit-over-patient-care/11124150.article?MsgId=1009082>
 “some pharmacists face penalties for not meeting the targets, such as no pay 
rise or a possible loss of a bonus”.

Yet though it has tweaked the criteria for MURs, the cash-strapped NHS has no 
plans to scrap the system. A few chemists even falsify MURs. Those caught go in 
front of the regulator, the General Pharmaceutical Council, which publishes its 
determinations online. Sift through them and a pattern emerges.

From the hearing of a Boots pharmacist in the West Midlands, April 2012: “He 
said the pressure to meet targets was relentless … Area managers ringing him on 
a daily basis, asking how many [MURs] he had done and what he was going to do 
about them … He was told continuously that he was letting the store down …”

A Boots pharmacist in Nottingham, August 2012: “… She had felt under enormous 
pressure to carry out an unrealistic number of MURs …”

A Boots pharmacist in Cornwall, May 2014: “The only way he benefited 
personally was in not coming under pressure for failing to fulfil his MUR 
targets.”

A Boots pharmacist in Stafford, November 2015: “This Committee has experience 
of otherwise competent and honest pharmacists feeling themselves under pressure 
to pretend to have completedmedicine use reviews 
<http://guardian.co.uk/uk-news/2016/apr/12/boots-staff-under-pressure-to-milk-the-nhs-says-pharmacists-group>
 …”

On the one hand, you have an NHS looking to move more of its patient care into 
the private sector. On the other, you have giant chains such as Boots chasing 
lucrative new business. And in the middle, you have the humble pharmacist, 
responsible for diagnosing ailments and dispensing medicines – and personally 
liable for errors. Yet under intense managerial pressure, they are being 
stripped of their professional discretion – and some feel they are being turned 
against their own patients.

A Boots pharmacist based in the north-west told me a few of the targets he was 
set: “MURs, NMS, items [drugs dispensed] ... There’s an over-the-counter target 
for sales, as well … We have a texting service – the patient is texted when 
their medicine is ready. Then we started getting targeted on how many we signed 
up to the service and how many we actually text. And if you’re behind on 
dispensing, because of staff cuts, then people are coming in before their 
medicines are ready – so you’re not texting them.” He added: “If you miss any 
target, they want to know to the nth degree why you haven’t done it.”

He joined Boots out of university nearly 30 years ago. Then he had considered 
it a “family-run professional firm”. And now? “Big Brother, a giant 
profit-seeking monster.” The gold-plated final-salary pension scheme had been 
shut, resources cut. “There’s such a culture of fear.”

That fear comes wrapped in the corporate language of empowerment. Targets are 
“non-negotiable”, and staff who beat them get graded as “legendary”. A chemist 
advising a customer – “You know, like I’ve done my entire career,” as one Boots 
lifer puts it – is now having a “Great Conversation”. If the satisfied customer 
then compliments the chemist that is now a “Feel Good Moment” (although in 
performance plans they are unfortunately referred to as FGMs – so a chemist 
must notch up, say, five FGMs a week).

This is pure Apprentice-speak, an attempt to turn pharmacists into estate 
agents, career pedants with a duty of care into hustlers in labcoats. Tony 
played the game at first, but struggled to cope as the staff numbers in his 
section halved. When he complained, the manager classed him a “non-performer” 
and asked if he would move stores. His pay was frozen and he was subjected to 
regular performance reviews. (A spokesman from Boots stated: “the health and 
wellbeing of all our colleagues is, and always has been, a priority for the 
business.”)

“There are a huge number of very good pharmacists at Boots,” said Bill Scott, 
the former chief pharmaceutical officer for Scotland. “But if my bonus is 
dependent on the business targets I’ve been set, you are taking away from me my 
ability to practice my profession for the patient. And that’s got to be wrong.” 
And, he remarked, the sheer size of Boots meant that where it went, the other 
pharmacy chains and independents would follow.

I half-wondered if these were just a handful of malcontents – until I saw a 
poll that the trade union, the Pharmacists’ Defence Association (PDA) recently 
conducted of its members. The survey of working conditions, shared exclusively 
with the Guardian, is the first of its scale and kind the PDA has commissioned 
– and it says something deeply worrying about the profession Britons rely upon 
for their medicines.

Open to all chemists in the PDA, whatever chain they worked for, the survey 
attracted 1,988 responses, of which 624 were from Boots employees – more than 
one in 10 of all its chemists. The survey suggests that morale across the 
profession is low, but that Boots pharmacists feel more pressured than those 
employed by Lloyds, Asda and the rest. Like Tony, many routinely dispense 
medicines without anyone else checking their work. But their responses to two 
questions stand out. Asked how often “commercial incentives or targets have 
compromised the health, safety or wellbeing of patients and the public, or the 
professional judgment of staff”, more than 60% of Boots pharmacists said that 
was the case half the time or more. That compares to 52% of chemists at other 
chains.

Asked “how often do you believe financial cutbacks imposed by your main 
employer have directly impacted upon patient safety”, 56% of Boots chemists 
said that was true “around half” or “most” of the time. A further 20% said it 
was the case “all the time”. Taken together, these numbers outstrip by 10 
percentage points their counterparts at other chains, and should cause 
particular alarm given Boots’s position as Britain’s biggest pharmacy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf0aa5e6be3d3e4266459239da4a8b4e5e855b50%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Boots%20went%20rogue%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Boots%20went%20rogue%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faf0aa5e6be3d3e4266459239da4a8b4e5e855b50%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 ‘Asked what dangers cuts might pose to patients, the PDA identified overworked 
chemists giving out either the wrong medicine or the right medicines at the 
wrong dosages.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Three in every four of responding Boots pharmacists believe that the cuts 
imposed by their employer, whether the drop in staff numbers or increased 
workloads, threaten patient safety at least half the time or more. In response, 
Boots points out that it now employs more than 6,000 pharmacists in the UK, up 
from about 4,500 before the buyout. However, that rise tracks the increase in 
its number of stores, up from 1,400 in 2005 to around 2,400 today. I asked 
Boots what had happened to the number of dedicated pharmacy support staff, the 
dispensers and assistants that Boots chemists reported they were having to do 
without. The company did not respond.

Asked what dangers these cuts might pose to patients, John Murphy, general 
secretary of the PDA, identified overworked chemists giving out either the 
wrong medicine or the right medicines at the wrong dosages. He listed cases of 
medicine-related fatalities: a woman in a Chesterfield care home given six 
times her prescribed dose of morphine by a Boots pharmacy; a similar story in 
Weston-super-Mare; an 86-year-old widower in Felixstowe given the wrong drugs.

Boots rightly pointed out that such cases are very rare, stating that “patient 
safety is at the heart of what we do … Whenever [such cases] happen our 
priority is always to the family … and working with the relevant investigators 
to seek to understand what happened”.

Yet these incidents evidently play on the minds of Boots pharmacists. Below 
are a few of the many comments from those surveyed:

“All the company cares about is profit, figures, services. They are not 
interested in patient safety, appropriate staffing levels, training time for 
staff, appropriate breaks etc. Each day I am worried about making a mistake due 
to the enormous amount of pressure I am constantly under.”

“Efficiency has a limit, beyond which patient safety is compromised.”

“I am considering changing profession due to these working conditions … I 
would rather change profession than risk others.”

Boots is part of a dwindling band of high-street chains that bears a family 
name, rather than one created in some marketing lab. The man who built the 
firm, Jesse Boot, grew up in the Nottingham of the 1830s, in one of the 
thousands of back-to-back terraces that housed the city’s lace workers. He 
inherited a tiny shop. Between 1883 and 1920, he turned it into a chain of more 
than 660 shops, employing more than 14,000 people. As he got richer, he and his 
tough-minded wife Florence became more interested in the welfare of their staff 
and society. Jesse Boot was not content with providing workrooms, records his 
biographer Stanley Chapman, instead he commissioned “industrial palaces”. 
Welfare workers were recruited to improve the health of employees. He took 
staff on day trips and set up sports club after sports club: athletics, 
football, cricket, boxing, gymnastics …
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2704687717feb8a3485c494dda0b91324db45862%2F0_350_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20Boots%20went%20rogue%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20Boots%20went%20rogue%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fhow-boots-went-rogue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2704687717feb8a3485c494dda0b91324db45862%2F0_350_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 An early 20th-century branch of Boots. Photograph: Science & Society Picture 
Library/Getty Images 
Some of these still endure. And to wander around Nottingham University today 
is to walk on Bootland – literally. Boot donated 35 acres to the campus and 
built the white-stoned Trent building with its clocktower and Oxbridge-aping 
quads. He gave Nottingham its first women’s halls of residence and fretted over 
what kind of wastepaper baskets it would have. Downhill from the campus is a 
bust of Jesse Boot, facing his company’s sprawling Beeston complex of factories 
and offices that lie just over University Boulevard. The inscription reads: 
“Before him lies a monument to his Industry. Behind an everlasting monument to 
his benevolence.”

Jesse Boot was steeped in a culture that expected much more of its leading 
businessmen

In 1919, in the first issue of the company newsletter, the Beacon, Boot wrote 
to his staff: “Fellowship in recreation, fellowship in ideals, common hope, 
common sympathies, and common humanity bind us together; and whatever fosters 
this happy union is valuable.”

Today we know to smile at this as paternalism. Yet we have no popular term to 
describe the worldview of business leaders such as Pessina. A Yiddish joke has 
it that to a worm in horseradish the whole world is horseradish. When it comes 
to the culture of modern business, we are that worm.

You hear it when the BBC and the press treat the economy as it were merely a 
synonym for business – and business as if it were just a synonym for finance. 
You hear it when the term “entrepreneur” is applied to a carpetbagger with a 
good PR, or when chief executives defend corporate tax-dodging as being their 
duty to shareholders.

Jesse Boot reminds us that this was not always so. He would surely have 
recognised some of himself in Stefano Pessina: the wheeler-dealing, the gusto 
for marketing, the tireless expansionism. But Boot was steeped in a culture 
that expected much more of its leading businessmen. The point about Pessina is 
not that he is uniquely bad, but that he operates in a milieu that asks so 
little of its capitalists – even when they are reliant on public money.

Five years after taking Alliance Boots private, Pessina and KKR began selling 
the firm toAmerica’s biggest pharmacy chain, Walgreens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/19/pharmacy-walgreen-alliance-boots-merger>
– a process that was completed at the end of 2014.

The turnaround that Pessina promised never materialised: Colin Haslam from 
Queen Mary University points out that by 2014, operating profit margins for 
Boots UK – a key way of working out how much it actually makes on each pound 
going through its tills – were stuck at around the levels of 15 years earlier. 
Meanwhile, the model of stretch and extract – loading Boots with debt, then 
pulling out as much as possible for investors without reinvesting in the 
business – “has left its underlying financial structure hollowed out”. Asked 
about this, Boots replied that it had put money into both the employee pension 
funds and its chain of stores. Haslam points out that all firms are required to 
meet their pension-fund obligations.

But there have been some big winners from Boots. By 2012, Pessina was already 
claiming to have tripled the value of KKR’s investment in the company. He 
himself has not done too shabbily, either. In 2006, the year he merged his 
wholesale business with Boots, Forbes magazine ranked Pessina as the 428th 
richest man in the world. By 2015, he had shot up to 99th place.  
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/chasewithorn/2015/03/02/forbes-billionaires-full-list-of-the-500-richest-people-in-the-world-2015/#2eba307f16e3>
He has also gained a notably high vantage point in British public life. In 
2010, David Cameron and George Osborne – both of whom describe tax avoidance as 
“morally repugnant” – took Pessina as part of their entourage to China. In the 
run-up to the general election of 2015, Pessina claimed that a Labour 
government under Ed Miliband would be a “catastrophe”. This warning from a 
Monaco citizen, who once said he would never buy a home in Britain “because if 
I have a home here I have to run it”, was considered grave enough by the Sunday 
Telegraph to betreated as one of its major stories 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/retailandconsumer/11382145/Labour-government-will-be-catastrophic-for-Britain-warns-Boots-boss.html>
 of the day.

He is now both chief executive of and the single largest shareholder in the 
all-new entity Walgreens Boots Alliance, which has also shifted headquarters 
from Switzerland. Its new home, Delaware, is described by Alex Cobham of theTax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/tax> Justice Network as “the longstanding 
leader among US states in providing opaque corporate structures”.

Last year, the new entity announced plans to buy the US chain Rite Aid, a deal 
that will make it the largest pharmacist either side of the Atlantic – with 
73-year-old Pessina at its head.

Just how much Pessina made personally out of Boots is hard to say, as many 
details are not in the public domain. But going by the public information and 
assuming that Pessina sunk £1.25bn of his own capital into the 2007 deal, 
Haslam calculates that he emerged with 214m shares in Walgreen, worth £11.5bn. 
In seven years he turned that £1.25bn into an estimated net gain of around 
£10bn. Asked for a response, neither Boots nor Pessina had anything to say on 
the record.

Driving back to his house, Tony had taken me on a tour of his Midlands 
hometown. He had pointed out the comprehensive where he was one of only two 
boys in his year to do A-level biology. Back then, the school churned out 
pupils as “fodder for the metal bashing industries” – far rarer was the 
“academic type” like him.

Now Tony saw his workplace as a factory. “It’s a profit factory where we’re 
doing piecework,” he said. All these decades after university, his working life 
was suddenly dictated by people who had little respect for his education or his 
profession. “The standard of education of these managers … some of them can’t 
even spell prescription; they put ‘quiet’ when they mean quite.”

Tony was raised in Thatcher’s era; he had drunk in her values. “I thought 
people should work hard, they shouldn’t claim benefits, they should be 
responsible for their own destiny. That was the politics in the household: that 
you work hard and get your just rewards.”

For a long time that story rang true: first in the family to head off to 
university, a profession, a neat house and a car. Then came this job: the cuts, 
the crack-ups, the half-decade of unhappiness. The old faith had deserted him. 
“Boots are showing me that you can work hard but you still won’t get your just 
rewards.”

I looked around his small living room: the messages on the wall reading “If 
You Believe In Yourself Anything Is Possible” and “Live Every Moment, Laugh 
Every Day”, the framed pharmacy certificate among all the family photos, the 
drugs manuals stacked up by the CD rack. That male mingling of personal with 
professional pride. Tony had a question.

“How can Boots call itself a healthcare company when it’s done this to me?”

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 