
Sports volunteering in the UK

If you don't know where to start, these national sites can get you on your 
way. They can match up your interests with organisations across the country 
looking for help.

Sports England <http://sportengland.org/sport-you/volunteers-and-coaches> 
Sports Scotland <http://www.sportscotland.org.uk/>
Sport Wales <http://sportwales.org.uk/coaching> 
Northern Ireland <http://www.nidirect.gov.uk/sports-volunteering>

British Cycling Go-Ride 

An initiative to get young people into cycling and continue developing British 
talent: support one of the 300Go-Ride <http://www.britishcycling.org.uk/go-ride>
 groups across the country by becoming a volunteer club welfare officer, 
chairman, coach, or volunteer coordinator.

Green Towers, Leicester 

If you want to try climbing and combine it with volunteering, Green Towers 
Hinckley Youth Club <http://greentowers.co.uk/>, Leicester, is looking for 
recruits. You should have climbing qualifications, but if you don't, and 
volunteer with the club for a while, it can help you to gain the basic grades.

Tideway Sailability, London

Join this group <http://tidewaysailability.org.uk/> and learn to sail in 
easy-access dinghies while teaching disabled and able bodied children, aged 
eight and upwards. The central London organisation is 100% volunteer-led, and 
full training is provided. Recreational sailing takes place on Sundays and 
there are evening sails during the summer months. Check the Facebook group for 
other excursions.

Bolton Lads & Girls Club

This was first established in 1889 during the industrial revolution to support 
the influx of children coming to the city to work in the mills. Today, it's the 
largest youth club in the UK, with a strong emphasis on sport. If qualified,
sign up to oversee young people 
<http://www.boltonladsandgirlsclub.co.uk/get-involved/become-a-volunteer/> 
using the fully equipped gym, or help out coaching badminton, football, rugby, 
climbing and boxing.
 