
Despite the internet being several decades old (its exact age depends where 
you look it up on, funnily enough, the internet), some people still don't know 
how to use it without being a total loser. To be fair, I still don't know how 
to use the TV remote control in most hotel rooms without giving myself an 
electric shock and accidentally ordering a Jason Statham film. Hey, it takes 
some of us a while to learn how to use technology.

There's been a lot of focus of late 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jul/30/twitter-mp-committee-threats-women>
 on the weirdy-weirdos who send rape threats on Twitter, and rightly so. But 
much of the coverage makes several misguided assumptions. First, that angry 
misogynists only communicate on Twitter (allow me to introduce you to something 
called Reddit). Second, that this is a man-versus-woman thing. Some of the 
angriest messages I've ever received on the internet have come from women, 
usually telling me how ugly I am. Lovely to meet you, too! And third, that 
legislating against rape threats on the internet is a contravention of freedom 
of speech. Seeing as legislation against hate speech in the real world has not, 
as far as I know, contravened anyone's right to freedom of speech, this 
argument makes no sense, except, maybe, to people who make rape threats and 
whose grasp of logic is, perhaps, not whipsmart.

But as I said, technology is complicated and while the internet is not as 
tricky as a hotel TV remote (seriously, they could stump Nasa), it is perilous. 
So let's have a quick lesson in how not to be a dick on the internet.

1. Don't put photos of your dick on the internet

When you do this, you are literally a dick on the internet. In 2011 US 
politicianAnthony Weiner had to resign from Congress 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/06/17/nyregion/anthony-d-weiner-tells-friends-he-will-resign.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
 for putting photos of his dick on the internet. As part of his political 
rehabilitation, he spent much of 2012 giving interviews to magazines with his 
wife and child, insisting:"I feel like a different person." 
<http://nyopoliticker.files.wordpress.com/2013/07/weiner-people.jpg> But it 
turned out the only difference was the website he was using to postyet more 
photos of his dick on the internet. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/24/anthony-weiner-pressure-latest-revelations>
 In fact, it's difficult not to wonder if humiliation is part of the thrill for 
Weiner, along with putting his dick on the internet.

Conversely, over in Sweden last week government minister Lars Ohly 
accidentally revealed more than he intended when heput a photo of his new leg 
tattoo on Instagram 
<http://www.buzzfeed.com/tabathaleggett/a-swedish-politician-just-instagrammed-his-balls>
 (leg tattoo! On a politician! Love Sweden). Far from trying to bluff it out, 
dear Lars tweeted "Ha ha" and deleted the photo. Repeat: LOVE Sweden.

2. Don't send random abuse to strangers

By "abuse", I am, for the sake of brevity, referring to everything from actual 
hate speech, rape threats, racist slurs, antisemitic twaddle, furious random 
swear words and anything else that you wouldn't actually say in front of your 
mum. Obviously rape threats are in a different category of abuse from "YOUR 
UGLY", but they have an underlying commonality: the people sending such blether 
are losers. There are many theories about why some people behave so viciously 
on the internet, none of which will every capture the full story because – 
guess what! – people and trolls come in all kinds of flavours. As nice as it 
would be to think that all trolls are sad 18-year-olds who still live at home 
or sexless middle-aged men living in basements, research has repeatedly proven
this is simplistic 
<http://gawker.com/5950981/unmasking-reddits-violentacrez-the-biggest-troll-on-the-web>
 andnot true <http://www.newstatesman.com/helen-lewis/2013/07/who-are-trolls>. 
For the record, I lived at home foryears and never once did I feel the need to 
tell Mary Beard what I thought of her vagina. 
<https://twitter.com/waxpancake/status/361854405257072640/photo/1> Personally, 
I have long been a fan of shouting back, and whenever any weirdo emails or 
tweets me how much he hates women, I tell him to stop masturbating over the 
laptop as he'll make the keyboard sticky. (I am nothing but helpful.) Others 
argue that this gives the trolls the attention they crave and the number of 
trolling Twitter accounts that have cropped up since Stella Creasy and Caroline 
Criado-Perez took a stand over the weekend, with such imaginative names like 
@killcreasynow, would seem to support this. But this is like saying that women 
shouldn't complain about Page 3 because it proves to Rupert Murdoch that 
feminists are humourless. Fighting back is your human right. As for people who 
claim that an abuse button will be abused, well,that's what moderators are for. 
<http://bagelmouse.wordpress.com/2013/07/29/twitter-reporting-and-general-points-on-moderation/>
 I'm pretty sure Twitter can hire more staff. Look, it's not very complicated: 
if you threaten people with rape on the internet, police action will probably 
be taken. Cyberstalking is a crime. And finally, if you send abuse – any abuse 
– to people, you are a dick.

3. Repeat: there is no excuse for sending abuse to strangers

It doesn't matter if you think you are fighting the feminist cause by railing 
at newspaper columnists who you believe are insufficiently feminist, covertly 
racist, blatantly transphobic or anything else. Abusing people is not a good 
way to get anyone to consider your complaints seriously. As Helen Lewiswrote 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/helen-lewis/2013/07/women-bank-notes-i-was-wrong> 
in the New Statesman last week, "being a dick to people on Twitter is not 
activism". Hashtag truesay.

4. Fighting with commenters

Ahh, below-the-line commenters, the bearpit of all newspaper sites. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2011/jul/24/internet-anonymity-trolling-tim-adams?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
 But it needn't be like that, filled with people screaming at one another about 
how crap this article is, this journalist is, this world is. Calm down, 
commenters! That's easier said than done. When I see commenters screaming at 
me, I scream right back at them, and that's not really acceptable adult 
behaviour. But the truth is I, like everyone, am kind of a dick on the internet.
 