
Now seems like an appropriate time to look at the ways in which the classical 
sector is changing. Iván Fischersparked debate last year 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/music/classicalmusic/10001359/Ivan-Fischer-Orchestras-will-have-to-change.html>
 about the future of the symphony orchestra, something Ernest Fleischman had 
his own opinions on in the 80s. Taking inspiration (and our name) from the 
Florentine Camerata – a group of 16th-century musicians, scientists and 
thinkers dedicated to the progress of the arts –Manchester Camerata 
<http://www.manchestercamerata.co.uk/> is all about connecting with people and 
redefining what an orchestra can do. So here’s a look at some ways that 
orchestras and musicians are leading the way and championing a new look and 
vision for classical music.

Programming
With orchestras striving to find new and innovative ways to connect with both 
existing and new audiences, we’re seeing a wide variety of programming, concert 
formats and new series that step away from the traditional orchestra format of 
overture, concerto and symphony. Examples of this include the Orchestra of the 
Age of Enlightenment’sNight Shift <http://www.oae.co.uk/thenightshift/>, our own
UpClose <http://www.manchestercamerata.co.uk/whats-on/up-close> and Budapest 
Festival Orchestra’s Night Music, all of which place their musicians in what 
normally would be the “post-concert haunt” – bars and other unconventional 
spaces.

These orchestras throw all preconceptions out of the window and encourage 
audiences to do the same: relax, grab a drink, clap when you like and enjoy 
international classical musicians performing right next to you. At the other 
end of the spectrum, the Colorado Symphony Orchestra has teamed up with the 
industry that supports legal cannabis in the US state to presentClassically 
Cannabis <http://www.coloradosymphony.org/Events/Classically-Cannabis> (“The 
High Note Series”) – an exclusive event where attendees are encouraged to bring 
and smoke their own marijuana while basking in the sounds of an internationally 
acclaimed orchestra.

Collaborations
The BBC Proms is a perfect example of how innovative collaborations are 
attracting new audiences to what is predominantly a “classical” festival – this 
year’s highlight being theWar Horse Prom 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b04cb7t6> in collaboration with the National 
Theatre, which places a new suite of music from the show alongside Elgar, 
Bridge, Holst and Ravel. TheLate Night Proms 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/proms/whats-on/2014/categories/late-night-proms> offer a 
feast of eclectic music with everything from Paloma Faith performing alongside 
the Guy Barker Orchestra to an evening with singer-songwriter and opera 
composer Rufus Wainwright and Britten Sinfonia.

Earlier in the year, pre-eminent British trumpeter Alison Balsom took to the 
stage at Shakespeare’s Globe for a performance of Gabriel with musicians from 
the English Concert. Written by Samuel Adamson, the work requires the musicians 
not only to play from memory but to act and sing too, showing just how much the 
conventional orchestral musician has evolved.

Production
For the thrill seekers out there, Manchester Camerata has programmed an 
immersive concert called Challenging the Senses, using everything from scent 
bombs to blindfolds during an eclectic programme of chamber music. Not only do 
these concerts challenge existing audiences to experience music in a completely 
different way, they tempt the alternative culture vulture to test his or her 
palate with an immersive experience.

No longer will a white downward light and conventional orchestra formation 
suffice, as we are now seeing orchestras present and produce concerts in a 
different way. As if playing from memory in the first half of their Late Night 
Prom wasn’t enough, this month we saw the young, vibrantAurora Orchestra 
<http://www.auroraorchestra.com/> premiere Benedict Mason’s Meld, which had 
musicians moving around the Royal Albert Hall, each playing to a unique, 
personalised click-track.

Digital
With companies like the Metropolitan Opera, Royal Opera House and English 
National Opera screening live performances in cinemas throughout the world, no 
longer can we make the bold statement that classical music, opera and ballet is 
inaccessible. TheRoyal Opera House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/royal-opera-house> screens 11 productions 
each season, relayed to more than 1,500 cinemas in over 40 countries, 
showcasing exceptional world-class artists to the world.

For those of us who fancy a night in, the Berlin Philharmonic continues to 
champion itsDigital Concert Hall <http://www.digitalconcerthall.com/en/> that 
broadcasts 40 live concerts per season online, making them available at home or 
on the move. There is even the ability to spend hours viewing concert archives 
and documentaries (all at a reasonable price).

Composers are also using digital devices to mould performance, which is what 
the London Sinfonietta has done with composer Eve Harrison and artist David 
Boultbee as part of theirBlue Touch Paper series 
<http://www.londonsinfonietta.org.uk/blue-touch-paper>, which supports and 
encourages the next generation of composers to develop new multi-disciplinary 
work.

Community and learning
A collective of musicians is a very powerful thing. We hear them cry: “How do 
we connect with our community?” and “How do we become more relevant?” Taking 
the lead fromEl Sistema <https://www.theguardian.com/music/el-sistema> in 
Venezuela, its British equivalents (including Sistema Scotland) are thriving 
with support from the likes of Nicola Benedetti and Julian Lloyd Webber, who 
promote these genuinely life-changing programmes in schools and communities.

Of course, work like this isn’t happening in isolation; it’s a powerful way to 
develop the artistic output of an orchestra and its ability to engage with an 
audience.

Bob Riley is chief executive of Manchester Camerata 
<http://www.manchestercamerata.co.uk/>, which you can follow on Twitter 
@MancCamerata <https://twitter.com/MancCamerata>

More like this

• Play it again: how to make an opera’s second run a success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/19/opera-second-run-success-tips-score-conductor>
• Why opera neglects its talent both on and backstage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2013/sep/03/laura-bowler-size-zero-opera>
• Music education must move beyond classical and become more inclusive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/aug/11/music-education-inclusive-funding-hubs>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 