
Hugo Weaving likes playing faceless villains, he once told an American 
journalist, because it means people are less likely to recognise him in real 
life. It’s a good tactic but one that certainly isn’t working for him in sleepy 
Busselton,Western Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/western-australia>, where he’s in 
town to be honoured with the title of “screen legend” at the city’s annual 
CinéfestOz festival – home to Australia’s richest film prize.

Putuparri and the Rainmakers wins best film at 2015 CinéfestOz festival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/31/putuparri-and-the-rainmakers-wins-best-film-at-2015-cinefestoz-festival>
Over the course of five days, Weaving is repeatedly invited up to the mic – at 
opening ceremonies, screenings and lunches – and regularly stopped on the 
street by industry peers slapping him on the back or by local cinema-goers keen 
to take a selfie with him.

“It’s lovely to be here and a little embarrassing, but at the same time I 
appreciate it,” says Weaving, folding his 6’2” (188cm) frame into a chair at 
Busselton’s only hipster coffee outlet. “I do feel honoured but it’s hard to 
say that.”

This is not luvvie dissembling. Known to the world for his roles in the 
Matrix, Lord of the Rings and Hobbit trilogies, this modest, intensely private 
man has also been the linchpin in dozens of smaller Australian independent 
films, asLuke Buckmaster’s rewatching film blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/rewatching-classic-australian-films> 
reminds us on a weekly basis. It’s only a shame so few people have seen them.

“I could name 10 films I’ve done where I’ve thought: what a shame they didn’t 
catch on,” says Weaving, singling out Rowan Woods’ dark Sydney drama Little 
Fish withCate Blanchett <https://www.theguardian.com/film/cate-blanchett>, as 
well as Last Ride, Glendyn Ivin’s 2009 film about a father and son on the run 
across Australia. “Not because I’m in them,” he stresses, “but because they are 
great works and they express something about who we are.”

His latest outing, The Dressmaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2015/jul/13/the-dressmaker-trailer-kate-winslet-liam-hemsworth-video>
, which premieres at Toronto film festival this month, does not seem destined 
to disappear. A classic revenge Western dressed up in Dior, it stars Kate 
Winslet as the titular seamstress who returns from self-imposed exodus in 
Europe to her small “white-sliced” hometown and its smaller-minded residents. 
Liam Hemsworth, Judy Davis, Barry Otto, Shane Jacobson and Sarah Snook also 
feature – a who’s who of established and emerging Aussie talent.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fthe-dressmaker-trailer-kate-winslet-liam-hemsworth-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436764660213%2FThe-Dressmaker-001.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Dressmaker%3A%20watch%20Kate%20Winslet%20and%20Liam%20Hemsworth%20in%20the%20first%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fthe-dressmaker-trailer-kate-winslet-liam-hemsworth-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Dressmaker%3A%20watch%20Kate%20Winslet%20and%20Liam%20Hemsworth%20in%20the%20first%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F13%2Fthe-dressmaker-trailer-kate-winslet-liam-hemsworth-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F13%2F1436764660213%2FThe-Dressmaker-001.jpg>
 A first look at The Dressmaker trailer. 
“It’s certainly an ensemble piece,” says Weaving, adding that the days when 
everyone was on set had a “reunion” vibe to them. The film also reunites him 
with director Jocelyn Moorhouse, at least professionally – the two have been 
friends since Moorhouse directed Weaving opposite a young Russell Crowe inher 
excellent 1991 film, Proof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/28/proof-rewatched-an-enormously-compelling-character-study>
. “There is a sort of subterranean element to my relationship with Joss,” he 
says. “Proof was a long time ago but then there was the whole Eucalyptus saga. 
Or tragedy – whatever you want to call it.”

He’s referring to the 2005 Australian film that never was, adapted by 
Moorhouse from the Miles Franklin-winning novel by Murray Bail and set to star 
Nicole Kidman, Crowe and Weaving, until Fox cancelled production just three 
days into filming due to “creative differences” between Crowe and Moorhouse.
Reports at the time 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/Film/Crowe-scuttles-Eucalyptus-film/2005/02/11/1108061866965.html>
 suggested the differences were all Crowe’s. “The whole film going down was 
just really sad,” is all Weaving will say. “It was one of the greatest scripts 
I’ve ever read, just fantastic work from Joss. Fox ended up owning it and I 
don’t know whether she has ever got it back.”

The incident almost wiped Moorhouse out, Weaving adds, but she is back on 
confident form with The Dressmaker: “Joss has got such an eye for detail and 
specific sense of humour. There’s a surface expression to what she says and 
then something beneath that’s a little darker. I’m kind of interested in that.”

Hugo Weaving: 'Beckett has the most amazing sense of humour'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/02/hugo-weaving-luke-mullins-beckett-interview>
That same formulation seems to sum up Weaving’s acting – on stage, as well as 
screen. He has recently emerged from playing Hamm inSamuel Beckett’s Endgame  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/08/endgame-review-hugo-weaving-and-tom-budge-energise-beckett-classic>
at Sydney Theatre Company back to back with taking STC’s award-winning Waiting 
for Godot to London for a run at the Barbican. A “Beckfest”, as he calls it, 
and he’s still not had his fill.

“I’m just re-reading his four early novellas, these absolutely beautiful 
little stories, all different, all difficult, and I’d love to bring to them to 
the stage. Put two on one night, two the next, mix and match them a bit, 
possibly on the same set. They are just extraordinary pieces of work. He’s 
exhausting and wonderful at the same time.”

Whether Weaving gets to realise this project any time soon is another matter. 
He has been a fixture of Sydney Theatre Company under artistic directors Andrew 
Upton and (until 2013) Cate Blanchett. But Upton is leaving in late 2015,to be 
replaced by British theatre-maker Jonathan Church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/aug/25/jonathan-church-appointed-sydney-theatre-companys-artistic-director>
. Does it feel like the end of an era for what, in its regular use of the same 
actors, sometimes seemed like a rep company?

“It was a very fertile time,” says Weaving. “One thing leads to another and I 
loved that sense of exploration as a company, of moving forward as a unit.” He 
praises Upton for his openness and democracy in the rehearsal room, and 
Blanchett for her poise. “Cate’s extraordinary. She’s in hyperspace in terms of 
her profile – much more so me. But she manages to maintain her sanity, 
sometimes barely. I know it’s difficult.”

Is it easier to maintain a private life in Australia than in Hollywood? 
“Probably, says Weaving. “Possibly, a bit, yes, maybe. You’ve got to actively 
find that space for yourself. You’ve got to actively disappear. This industry 
is so vast that once you’re a part of it, you can easily lose yourself and the 
trade-off isn’t necessarily a great thing for your soul, you know.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fhugo-weaving-because-australian-films-arent-seen-doesnt-mean-they-dont-exist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc48c385fbd80120ad659b8d8e06ef0181508d744%2F212_0_3693_4134%2F3693.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hugo%20Weaving%3A%20Just%20because%20Australian%20films%20aren't%20seen%20doesn't%20mean%20they%20don't%20exist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fhugo-weaving-because-australian-films-arent-seen-doesnt-mean-they-dont-exist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hugo%20Weaving%3A%20Just%20because%20Australian%20films%20aren%27t%20seen%20doesn%27t%20mean%20they%20don%27t%20exist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fhugo-weaving-because-australian-films-arent-seen-doesnt-mean-they-dont-exist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc48c385fbd80120ad659b8d8e06ef0181508d744%2F212_0_3693_4134%2F3693.jpg>
 Hugo Weaving in front of his CinefestOz 2015 screen legend plaque. Photograph: 
Mac1Photography 
He hasn’t met Church but says “it will be a big change, a bit shift”, adding 
his hope that Church will nurture acting and directing talent, not just shows. 
It echoes Weaving’s stance on cinema. “Film is the great artistic medium and 
yet we don’t see it as that,” he says. “We don’t allow it to be everything it 
could be.”

At a meeting of Chinese and Australian film producers during CinéfestOz, 
Screen Australia showed a promo reel in which big name Australian actors – 
Blanchett andJoel Edgerton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/25/joel-edgerton-i-feel-devastated-for-film-makers-who-have-been-pirated>
 among them – sung to camera the praises of those working behind it. This is 
more than a sell, says Weaving, citing veteran Australian producers Jan 
Chapman, David Jowsey and Vincent Sheehan, and cinematographers Donald McAlpine 
(Moulin Rouge) and Stefan Duscio, whose work on Michael Petroni’s thriller 
Backtrack sees it in contention for the festival’s $100,000 prize.

“The industry exists here,” he insists. “Just because films aren’t seen 
doesn’t mean they don’t exist; doesn’t mean they’re not good. That’s always the 
tragedy for me. I get so …”. He tails off only to pick up again. “What do we 
have to do to mature to the extent that we choose to watch and look at our own 
culture? Why don’t we do that?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fhugo-weaving-because-australian-films-arent-seen-doesnt-mean-they-dont-exist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6af26fedb16061c03731b85328281609a29e790b%2F0_139_4134_2479%2F4134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hugo%20Weaving%3A%20Just%20because%20Australian%20films%20aren't%20seen%20doesn't%20mean%20they%20don't%20exist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fhugo-weaving-because-australian-films-arent-seen-doesnt-mean-they-dont-exist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hugo%20Weaving%3A%20Just%20because%20Australian%20films%20aren%27t%20seen%20doesn%27t%20mean%20they%20don%27t%20exist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2015%2Faug%2F29%2Fhugo-weaving-because-australian-films-arent-seen-doesnt-mean-they-dont-exist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6af26fedb16061c03731b85328281609a29e790b%2F0_139_4134_2479%2F4134.jpg>
 David Wenham, Sarah Snook and Hugo Weaving in Busselton. Photograph: Courtney 
McAllister/Mac1Photography 
Hugo Weaving stars in #WeCanDoThis marriage equality campaign
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/09/hugo-weaving-stars-in-wecandothis-marriage-equality-campaign>
The fault doesn’t necessarily lie with Australian audiences, he says. It comes 
“from the top”, by which I’m guessing Weaving means government. “Yes,” he says 
– coupled with a US-dominated industry that makes it hard for any other market 
to break through internationally. “I’m not into free markets. I think they are 
just an excuse for destroying things, an excuse to make massive profits at the 
expense of cultures and people.”

Weaving has never been shy of criticising the Abbott government, voicing his 
concerns about ongoing cuts to the ABC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/jul/23/hugo-weaving-on-macbeth-hollywood-and-tony-abbotts-fascistic-cuts-to-the-abc>
 in 2014, and recently adding his face to the stepped-upcampaign for Australian 
marriage equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/09/hugo-weaving-stars-in-wecandothis-marriage-equality-campaign>
. “It’s less about the marriage bit for me” – Weaving and his partner since 
1984, artist Katrina Greenwood, have two children but have never tied the knot 
– “and more about equality. Just because I don’t need to marry, doesn’t mean 
other people can’t.”

Conversation steers to the UK, where Weaving grew up, and its ramped-up 
rhetoric on immigration. “Now we’ve got Abbott lecturing the Europeans about 
what to do: “Turn back the boats.” You think, oh man! This is insane the world 
we live in.” Culturally, Weaving still feels the influence of his British 
upbringing. “My childhood and heritage and the stories I grew up with, well, I 
accept I’m not the purest Australian,” he says. “At the same time, I go back 
there and I don’t really feel English. We’re all a mixture of all the 
influences that made us.”

Australian film talent and stories deserve protection in order to be heard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/17/australian-film-talent-and-stories-deserve-protection-in-order-to-be-heard>
Should the government be protecting Australian film talent with production 
quotas,as some in the industry have suggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/17/australian-film-talent-and-stories-deserve-protection-in-order-to-be-heard>
? Weaving sees a bigger picture. When it comes to policy, everything is 
connected, he says: “Protecting your culture, protecting your environment, 
protecting your land, protecting your stories, protecting who you are, 
protecting your thoughts – it’s all crucial.”

And he still doesn’t know what the fix is. “If it were obvious it would have 
been done. In terms of the skilled practitioners making the films, they are 
here. And they’ll keep on doing what they do in the hope that somehow, at the 
end, when the tap’s turned on, something comes out. At the moment, we’ve got 
rainfall, but it’s not coming out of the tap.”
 