
Top Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> aide 
Huma Abedin announced on Monday that she had separated from her husband, former 
congressman Anthony Weiner, after the publication of newly revealed, explicit 
Twitter messages sent by Weiner to a woman he met online.

“After long and painful consideration and work on my marriage, I have made the 
decision to separate from my husband,” Abedin said in a statement. “Anthony and 
I remain devoted to doing what is best for our son, who is the light of our 
life. During this difficult time, I ask for respect for our privacy.”


Huma Abedin's split with Weiner ends one political drama as another unfolds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/huma-abedin-anthony-weiner-hillary-clinton>
Abedin, 40, and Weiner, 51, were married in 2010 in a ceremony officiated by 
Bill Clinton; the couple have a four-year-old boy.

The latest messages appear to follow a long-running pattern of conduct by 
Weiner online that hasmade a public spectacle 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/18/magazine/anthony-weiner-says-his-wife-never-agreed-to-that-documentary.html?_r=0>
 of his marriage and recalled the sex scandals attached to the Clintons’ 
marriage.

Weiner resigned from Congress in 2011 after similar explicit messages came to 
light. His 2013 New York City mayoral bid foundered on a similar scandal.

The Post on Monday published texts and images said to have been sent and 
received by Weiner about a year ago, in July 2015. The images include one that 
appears to have been sent by Weiner in which his young son, asleep, is visible 
in the background.

Abedin went to work for Clinton as a 19-year-old White House intern and has 
been her indispensable aide for about a decade, working for Clinton through her 
2008 presidential bid and during her tenure as secretary of state. Emails 
between Abedin and Clinton revealed by an investigation of Clinton’s email 
practices show Abedin coordinating travel for Clinton, managing access to her, 
and helping her with matters as small as fax machine operation.

“I have one daughter,” Hillary Clinton told attendees at Abedin’s wedding. 
“But if I had a second daughter, it would be Huma.”

Clinton’s political enemies moved quickly to capitalize on the break-up. 
Donald Trump, the Republican presidential nominee, released a statement warning 
that Weiner’s online behavior may have “greatly compromised” national security.

“Huma is making a very wise decision. I know Anthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner> well, and she will be far 
better off without him,” Trump said in the statement.

“I only worry for the country in that Hillary Clinton was careless and 
negligent in allowing Weiner to have such close proximity to highly classified 
information,” the statement continued. “Who knows what he learned and who he 
told? It’s just another example of Hillary Clinton’s bad judgment. It is 
possible that our country and its security have been greatly compromised by 
this.”

The Republican nominee had referenced Abedin’s relationship with Weiner on the 
campaign trail on many occasions in the past year. Hefirst railed against 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/28/donald-trump-clinton-huma-abedin-anthony-weiner>
 Weiner as a “sleazebag” and a “perv” in August 2015 at an event in 
Massachusetts. Trump opined then that Abedin was sharing classified information 
with her husband.

During Weiner’s time in Congress, Trump twice donated 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/indivs/search.php?name=trump+donald&cycle=All&sort=N&state=&zip=&employ=&cand=weiner&submit=Submit>
 to the New York Democrat and giving a total of $4,300 to Weiner’s campaigns.

As Weiner’s mayoral bid collapsed in 2013, Abedin, already anticipating 
Clinton’s presidential run, appeared alongside him and expressed support for 
him. She did not appear at a concession speech he gave at the end of the 
campaign.

The disintegrating mayoral bid, and the couple’s efforts to prevent the same 
from happening to their marriage, were the subject ofan award-winning 
documentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/may/20/anthony-weiner-documentary-political-lessons>
 released this year. That film, Weiner, is scheduled to be broadcast on cable 
television in October, weeks before the election.

Did Anthony Weiner want to get caught sexting? | Jamieson Webster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/29/did-anthony-weiner-want-to-get-caught-sexting>
Earlier this month, Weiner said that Abedin had never agreed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/18/magazine/anthony-weiner-says-his-wife-never-agreed-to-that-documentary.html?_r=0>
 to be featured in the documentary.

Abedin was widely reported to have sought Clinton’s counsel when her husband’s 
sexting was revealed in the summer of 2011. It’s not known what Clinton advised 
her. Unnamed intimates of the Clintons told the New York Times that year that 
the Clintons were unhappy with the situation and with Weiner.

Clinton followed the Weiner scandal closely via updates from other aides, 
internal emails show.

Weiner’s Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> account has 
been deleted.


Additional reporting by Ben Jacobs in Washington
 