
On 16 April this year, citizens of Chechnya had a new national holiday to mark 
the one-year anniversary of the officialend to Russia's counter-terrorist 
operations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/apr/16/russia-chechnya-anti-terrorism> 
in that country. There had been high hopes that an end to the decade-long "war 
on terror" would help to improve human rights there. In reality, as recent 
tragic events in Moscow demonstrate, conditions continue to deteriorate, not 
only in Chechnya, but across the entire North Caucasus region.

Far from being the "peaceful developing territory" that President Ramzan 
Kadyrov described recently, Chechnya is plagued by a volatile and worsening 
security situation. Separatist groups still clash intermittently with 
government forces and Kadyrov's regime has been accused ofpervasive human 
rights abuses 
<http://www.hrw.org/en/news/2009/12/16/memorial-international-human-rights-groups-return-chechnya>
, including torture and killings. This violence has also spread to neighbouring 
Ingushetia and Dagestan. There are few investigations into attacks and even 
fewer prosecutions, leading to a widespread culture of impunity.

Article 19 <http://www.article19.org/>, which campaigns globally for freedom 
of expression, has identified a systematic trend of abuses, specifically 
violations of the right to freedom of expression in the North Caucasus. This is 
exacerbated by the worsening security situation.

These concerns were echoed by the United Nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> Human Rights Committee in 
October last year, when it urged the Russian federal government to take 
immediate steps to protect journalists and human rights defenders. The UN 
strongly recommended that the Russian authorities ensure effective 
investigations and implement proper measures to sanction perpetrators of abuse.

Violent attacks on journalists and civil society representatives continued in 
the North Caucasus throughout 2009. Themurder of prominent human rights activist
 
<http://www.amnesty.org/en/news-and-updates/news/human-rights-activist-natalia-estemirova-murdered-in-russia-20090716>
 Natalia Estemirova in July was widely reported and both the international 
media and human rights communities mourn the loss of a woman who so 
courageously documented abuses in Chechnya.

However, there have been many others. Stanislav Markelov, a human rights 
lawyer was killed in January 2009. Markelov had represented another journalist 
– Anna Politkovskaya – whose own reporting on Chechan human rights abuses may 
have cost her life. Another eminent Ingush civil society activist, Maksharip 
Aushev, waskilled at a roadblock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/oct/25/opposition-activist-shot-dead-ingushetia>
 by unnamed armed men in October 2009.

There are also three unsolved murders of broadcast journalists who had worked 
in Dagestan – Ilyas Shurpayev, Gadzhi Abashilov and Telman Alishayev – for 
which nobody has been convicted.

These attacks highlight once again the enormous personal risks that activists 
and journalists take when they monitor and report on human rights abuses in 
this part of the world. The fact that the perpetrators of these crimes appear 
to enjoy impunity due to a lack of effective investigation and prosecution 
creates an additional chilling effect.

To make matters worse, Article 19 also notes an increasing trend of legal 
harassment, which is used to intimidate people who may be critical of the 
regime. Russia's antiextremism legislation, for example, is notoriously vague 
and its broad definitions make it easy to abuse in the name of silencing 
independent voices.

Particularly in the North Caucasus, the intensifying violence means topics 
related to extremism and the activities of law enforcement agencies have become 
very dangerous for the media to cover.

There is a prolonged lawsuit to close Chernovik, a Dagestani weekly newspaper 
based oncharges of extremism 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSL638299920080806> brought against several 
key staff. They are accused of inciting hatred against a so-called "social 
group" (in this case, the local police) and "justifying terrorism" after a 
series of articles criticised the police and quoted a militant leader (now 
deceased).

In these circumstances it is also worrying that Russia's legislators are 
currently considering legal amendments to allow the Federal Security Service 
(FSB) to take "preventive measures 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/Preventative_Measures/2034477.html>" against 
individuals suspected of engaging in "extremist" activity. These amendments 
were presented to the State Duma, the lower house of Russia's federal 
parliament, on 24 April 2010. If adopted, they will give the Federal Security 
Service powers to censor any publications deemed to "aid extremists" or "appear 
undesirable". The amendments also propose fines and imprisonment for 
journalists and editors who do not comply.

Acts of violence, harassment and intimidation erode the possibility for a free 
press to maintain itself in these republics, both because those attacks spread 
fear and because journalists depend on a small number of determined and 
authoritative individuals for reliable information. The Russian federal 
government is failing in its obligations to protect human rights, and the right 
to free expression, under international human rights law.
 