
For an individual who has been described as mysterious, secretive and opaque, 
the blazing spotlight under whichHuma Abedin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/huma-abedin> now finds herself must be a 
deeply uncomfortable place. For 20 years she has built a career out of being 
Hillary Clinton’s shadow, the trusted adviser and friend whose influence may be 
ubiquitous but is wielded firmly behind the scenes.


Now Abedin, 40, finds herself front and center in one of the strangest and 
most contentious presidential elections in US history. As FBI agents begin to
pore over thousands of emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-fbi-director-comey-emails>
 that were reportedly found on a laptop she apparently shared with her 
estranged husband, the sexting former congressman Anthony Weiner, her role has 
suddenly switched from that of Clinton’s loyal servant to number one threat to 
the Democratic nominee’s hopes of winning the presidency.

Will Hillary Clinton lose the US election because of the FBI email 
investigation?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/hillary-clinton-lose-election-fbi-email-investigation>
Scant information has emerged since the FBI director, James Comey, dropped his 
bombshell about a fresh batch of emails that could be pertinent to the 
investigation into Clinton’s use of a private server while she was US secretary 
of state. Up to 650,000 emails werereportedly found 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/laptop-may-include-thousands-of-emails-linked-to-hillary-clintons-private-server-1477854957>
 on the shared Abedin-Weiner laptop, among them several thousand that might 
have passed between her and her boss, raising renewed questions about potential 
breaches of security protocol.

The explosive announcement landed at a supremely bad time for both women. For 
Clinton, it has shaken what looked to be a smooth final sprint to victory in 
next Tuesday’s presidential election; for Abedin it has put a question mark 
over what was widely expected to be a senior role – some have even speculated 
chief of staff – in aHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> White House.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20is%20no%20case%E2%80%99%20in%20FBI%20email%20investigation%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%3A%20%E2%80%98There%20is%20no%20case%E2%80%99%20in%20FBI%20email%20investigation%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video&media=>
Hillary Clinton: ‘There is no case’ in FBI email investigation – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/hillary-clinton-fbi-email-investigation-video>
“It would be a distraction were she to be given a prominent position such as 
chief of staff, forcing the new administration on to the defensive,” said Ross 
Baker, professor of political science at Rutgers University. “It could derail 
any attempt to initiate many of the proposals Clinton has talked about.”

This is far from the first time that the Clinton-Abedin bond has been tested 
by a scandal engulfing the rambunctious and troubled Weiner. In 2011, when 
Abedin was five months pregnant and working as deputy chief of staff in 
Clinton’s state department, her husband was forced tostand down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/16/anthony-weiner-resigns-twitter-scandal>
 from his congressional seat after he inadvertently tweeted a lewd photograph 
intended for a woman in Seattle to his 45,000 followers.

Two years later, when he attempted a comeback run for New York mayor, he was 
struck low again when hisdigital dealings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/23/anthony-weiner-new-york-explicit-photographs>
 with a woman calling herself Sydney Leathers were exposed. Then this summer 
Weiner was revealed to have had anonline relationship 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3790824/Anthony-Weiner-carried-months-long-online-sexual-relationship-troubled-15-year-old-girl-telling-hard-asking-dress-school-girl-outfits-pressing-engage-rape-fantasies.html>
 with an allegedly underage girl, leading to the announcement of Abedin’slegal 
separation 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/30/nyregion/anthony-weiner-sexting-huma-abedin.html>
 from him in August, and in time to the current FBI investigation into his and 
Abedin’s emails.

Through the thick of all this, Clinton has stood by her woman. It may have had 
something to do with their shared experience of marital pain: Abedin first 
started as an intern in “Hillaryland”, as the then first lady’s coterie was 
called in the East Wing, in 1996, two years before President Bill Clinton was 
impeached for his liaison with a West Wing intern.

Or it may be that the two women have simply grown inseparable with the passing 
of the years, to the extent that Abedin has variously been dubbed “mini 
Hillary”, Clinton’s “second daughter” and her “younger sister”. From that 
modest beginning as a 19-year-old intern, Abedin has risen from “body woman” – 
a glorified maid – through travelling chief of staff during Clinton’s first run 
at the presidency in 2008, to the state department position and now vice-chair 
of Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign.

The union is so close that Abedin is said to carry Clinton’s cellphone in her 
bag, prompting Bill Clinton tocomplain 
<http://www.newsweek.com/2016/05/06/huma-abedin-hillary-clinton-anthony-weiner-453204.html>
 that even he can’t get past the gatekeeper.

Clinton emails: FBI gets warrant as Comey told he may have broken law
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-fbi-director-comey-emails>
“Over the years, we’ve shared stories about our lives, we’ve shared more meals 
than I can count, we’ve celebrated together, we’ve mourned together,” Abedin 
toldVogue 
<http://www.vogue.com/13464218/huma-abedin-family-job-hillary-clinton-campaign-strategist/>
 earlier this year.

What’s different about the current crisis is that though its root may have 
been Weiner – yet again – its danger stems directly from Abedin’s own conduct 
rather than indirectly in her role as wronged wife. Though it remains unclear 
exactly what, if any, transgressions might be revealed by the latest FBI 
investigation, her position iscomplicated 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/10/29/huma-abedin-swore-under-oath-she-gave-up-all-the-devices-containing-state-department-emails.html>
 by the fact that in June she swore under oath that she had already handed over 
all devices on which she may have had state department emails – a deposition in 
which she appears to have forgotten to have mentioned the shared laptop.

So far there is no sign of Clinton turning against her faithful adviser, with 
John Podesta, chair of the presidential campaign, stating: “We fully stand 
behind her.” But withFox News 
<http://nation.foxnews.com/2016/10/30/perjury-huma-abedin-reportedly-pleads-ignorance-after-swearing-turn-over-all-devices>
 invoking the word perjury, a new rightwing conspiracy appears to be well under 
construction.

Could this be one wrench too far for the Clinton-Abedin partnership? “Despite 
the closeness of the two women,” Baker said, “there’s an agreement among 
political people that even friendship must give way to necessity – and no one 
understands that better than Hillary Clinton.”
 