
Huma Abedin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/huma-abedin> has been the 
reluctant star of two political psychodramas in the past year.

The first – involving painfully public strains in her marriage to Anthony 
Weiner, the former New York congressman – ended, perhaps predictably, on Monday 
with news that she haddecided to separate from him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-sexting-twitter-scandal>
 following yet another sexting scandal.

Huma Abedin separates from Anthony Weiner after latest sexting scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/29/anthony-weiner-sexting-twitter-scandal>
But the second – Abedin’s emerging role as a central figure in the likely 
return ofHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> 
to the White House – may be only just beginning and remains of far greater 
public interest.


Just how crucial this 40-year-old campaign aide is to the presidential project 
became clear last July whenemails revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2015/jun/30/hillary-clinton-emails-released-state-department-updates#block-55934536e4b07edb74969b94>
 the inner workings of Clinton’s hectic life as secretary of state.

Then serving as deputy chief of staff to the secretary, Abedin appeared 
frequently in the email traffic, as a gatekeeper, personal assistant and 
professional confidante so close that Clinton said she was “like a second 
daughter”.

Initially, the tranches of emails painted Clinton’s right-hand woman in a 
flattering, but somewhat subdued, light: advising her boss on how to operate a 
secure fax machine and suggesting when it wastime to take a nap 
<http://dailycaller.com/2016/08/23/emails-show-huma-used-to-put-hillary-down-for-nap-time/>
.

But more recent batches underlined how far Abedin has come since this George 
Washington University student started out as intern working for the then first 
lady in the East Wing of an earlier Clinton White House.


In these latest emails, it has become clear that this loyal aide has become a 
key broker in the Clinton’s powerful nexus of international connections: 
dealing witheverything from requests to link U2 with the International Space 
Station to seeking a visa for a disgraced Wolverhampton Wanderers football 
player 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/08/23/from-wolverhampton-footballers-to-bahrain-princes-how-the-clinto/>
.

Both these more lurid requests for political favours were wisely squashed by 
Abedin, and her discretion and sound political judgment has led to a senior 
role in the 2016 campaign, of which she is vice-chairwoman.

But it is her constant access to the candidate, not the nominal job title, 
that makes this such an influential role. In the fast-moving and insular bubble 
of campaign travel, Abedin can be seen constantly by Clinton’s side – she is 
often the last person Clinton talks to before going onstage and the first to 
congratulate the presidential nominee on the way back in.

An idiot husband, a footballing felon: but Huma Abedin rises above it all | 
Peter Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/24/huma-abedin-politics-hillary-clinton-anthony-weiner>
The close ties to such a controversial figure have made her a lightning rod 
for political attacks. It is perhaps no accident that Trump’s aggressive first 
reaction to the news of her separation from Weiner was to question whether 
their relationship posed a security risk. Some of his supporters have been 
blunter still inclaiming that Abedin’s Muslim faith and upbringing in Saudi 
Arabia were somehow suspect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/26/hillary-clinton-conspiracy-theories-activists-rightwing>
.

But the close support and loyalty of the Clinton family may also help their 
young protege deal with the brickbats and barbs that come the way of the 
powerful. Both highly successful women already share the experience of 
overcoming public marital infidelity.

In a fly-on-the-wall documentary of Weiner’s failed run for New York mayor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/06/huma-abedin-hillary-clinton-anthony-weiner-documentary>
 – a bid destroyed by the exposure of his “sexting” relationships with other 
women – Abedin emerges as a stoic and sympathetic character. “This is like 
living a nightmare,” she says to camera at one point.

Her decision to finally cut him loose may come later than many observers of 
the marriage imagined, but it should finally free one of Washington’s brightest 
up-and-coming political stars to emerge as a public figure in her own right.
 