
Has Ed Miliband finally made the breakthrough he desperately needed to get to 
No 10? Social media is awash with claims that he’s hit a turning point, after 
an interview yesterday onAbsolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> in which he miraculously 
came across as a human being. Yes, it happened on April Fools’ Day, but 
apparently this shocking development is no joke.

Long has it been claimed that elections are just prom-like popularity 
contests. And no one has benefited from this more than Nigel Farage, whose 
acting skills alone have managed to turn a party without any discernible 
policies into one of the most successful political newcomers in British 
history, all because he “seems like someone you’d like to have a pint with” (if 
you like your Guinness with a side of casual racism, somewhere far, far away 
from the EU).

Even David Cameron seems to have fared better than Ed Miliband in these 
stakes, despite being an Eton-educated walking stereotype of entitlement who 
rubs shoulders with Jeremy Clarkson andrefers to himself as a “country boy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/24/david-cameron-kitchen-interview>
. After all, the man loves Top Gear. Who (women, Burmese people, Argentinians, 
producers who work for BBC and other assorted populations who nobody cares 
about aside) could argue with that?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D14Wy4Vh-4bM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D14Wy4Vh-4bM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D14Wy4Vh-4bM&media=>
 Ed Miliband on Absolute Radio 
We all have our favourite Ed-comes-across-as-a-robot-dropped-into-Hampstead 
moment – thebacon sandwich 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/ed-miliband-tucks-into-a-bacon-sandwich-on-a-morning-trip-to-buy-flowers-for-his-wife-9407561.html>
 incident is a frontrunner for most – but in the interview yesterday, he 
suddenly came across as charmingly self-deprecating and utterly sincere. When 
he requestedBastille’s Pompeii <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F90Cw4l-8NY> as 
his song choice and was asked by the presenter whether he’d been told by savvy 
PRs to say that, he laughed and said no, he’d actually heard them at a concert 
he’d been invited to and assumed he was late to the party anyway (he is: 
Pompeii was released at the beginning of 2013). Genuine or no, it was a smarter 
move than requesting something that had just hit the charts. His interviewer 
then suggested that during the break they get matching Bastille tattoos 
together, and Miliband’s response – “Don’t call me about that, I’ll call you” – 
was perfectly timed.

Undoubtedly the best part for Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> supporters about Miliband’s 
suddenly personable demeanour was the fact that he managed to deconstruct 
Cameron’s own branding, seemingly effortlessly. When the manager of his local 
north London curry house called in to ask if his curries were improving his 
speeches, Miliband laughed and said he thought they definitely were, before 
admitting that he doesn’t like his takeaways very spicy. “David Cameron takes 
his extra spicy,” the interviewer told him, to which Miliband replied 
sardonically that clearly that’s because Cameron “is a really tough guy”. 
Magically, Cameron’s “we have to be as tough with the deficit as I am with my 
chicken korma” marketing ploy seemed tired and vaguely embarrassing.

Among these dry asides, there was an encouraging discussion about how 
compassion lies at the centre of Labour policies: immigration policy is about 
ending exploitation, rather than “closing the floodgates”, while supporting 
businesses is about putting workers first, raising the minimum wage and 
outlawing zero-hours contracts, rather than worrying about the fat cats behind 
theletter to the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/labour/11507586/General-Election-2015-Labour-threatens-Britains-recovery-say-100-business-chiefs.html>
 supporting Cameron this week. Rarely have Miliband’s policies come across so 
simply and clearly as a cohesive strategy towards building a stronger, more 
socialist country. No longer did we feel that he was a bit bashful about 
privileging humanity over profit.

“Why aren’t you curled up in the foetal position every morning?” he was asked, 
when the interview turned to criticism by the media. Everyone’s favourite 
Miliband responded by stating that if he only pursued the prime ministership 
with “a power motivation”, then he wouldn’t be able to remain so robust in the 
face of often vehement dislike.

“Behind it all is a conviction in what I believe in, which makes it easier,” 
he added – and, for the first time since he announced his leadership bid, it 
seems like everyone actually believes him.
 