
The Australian Bureau of Statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-bureau-of-statistics> 
has referred 667 Australians for prosecution for failing to complete their 
census – with one Australian even facing a $10,000 fine – despite senior 
figures claiming they “rarely” enforce the penalty.

The ABS is facing an increasing backlash over the 2016 census due to privacy 
concerns over the extended retention of names and addresses for a period of 
four years.

The prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, has sought to reassure the public about 
the process and said on Wednesday the ABS “always protect people’s privacy”.

A range of groups are now openly calling for a boycott of the census, despite 
the possibility of heavy fines for failing to complete it.

2016 is census year! But you can stick your census in your ear, you won't get 
any data here | First Dog on the Moon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2016/mar/30/2016-is-census-year-but-you-can-stick-your-census-in-your-ear-you-wont-get-any-data-here>
The ABS has sought to diminish the frequency that it uses the punishment. The 
New South Wales census director, Liz Bolzan, told ABC radio on Wednesday that 
there was “a penalty for outright refusing to do your census form and it’s 
very, very rare for that to be enforced”.

The ABS said it had referred 667 prosecutions to the commonwealth Director of 
Public Prosecutions since 1990. Separate documents obtained by Guardian 
Australia under freedom-of-information laws that disclose the outcomes of 327 
of the cases show that of the 217 cases that went to court, 214 resulted in a 
guilty verdict, with two of those subsequently appealing. 110 of the referrals 
were discontinued for a variety of reasons.

In a case in 2000, a person was charged for 10 counts of failing to answer 
questions and was fined $10,000. There were 164 total fines, with some people 
avoiding penalties in court.


The fines across the timeframe of prosecutions disclosed by the CDPP show that 
they amounted to $52,455.

A single census fine 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/casa1905241/s14.html> can 
apply to just one question on the census and can also become progressively 
worse the longer a person fails to complete the census and the more directions 
are issued to them.

Jonathan Palmer, the ABS chief operating officer and deputy Australian 
statistician, said in a statement: “Australians strongly support the census and 
the need to enforce penalties is rare.

“The ABS actively seeks the willing cooperation of respondents. However, it is 
sometimes necessary to use the legislative provisions, in order to maintain the 
high quality of ABS statistics.”

Census 2016: Australians who don't complete form over privacy concerns face 
fines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/25/census-2016-australians-who-dont-complete-form-over-privacy-concerns-face-fines>
The chief statistician at the ABS, David Kalisch, told the ABC’s 7.30 program 
on Wednesday it was a matter for the director of public prosecutions if people 
failed to fill in their name on the census form.

“We would provide some information to the DPP, but in the last census, I think 
it was less than 100 people were actually prosecuted for not completing the 
census correctly,” Kalisch said. “Australians really love theCensus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/census> and I look forward to them 
completing the census on, before or after census night.

Labor’s Andrew Leigh, the shadow assistant treasurer, criticised the 
government’s handling of the census on Tuesday and said it should “step up” and 
listen to concerns being raised.

The small business minister, Michael McCormack, urged Australians to fill out 
their census and not to engage in a boycott.


“We can assure people that there’s never been a breach of the ABS census 
data,” he said. “By retaining names and addresses for longer the ABS will be 
better able to link the census data to the needs of government.”

The ABS has also reported 14 data breaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/29/australian-bureau-of-statistics-reports-14-data-breaches-since-2013>
 voluntarily to the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner. While 
none relate to the census – and they demonstrate a proactive approach to 
reporting breaches – the disclosures have continued to raise concerns about the 
handling of personal information.
 