
Anthony Keedi is a psychologist who works for Abaad <http://www.abaadmena.org/>
 (Arabic for "dimensions"), a gender equality NGO in Lebanon. He runs the 
engaging men and boys programme. He has also worked in conflict resolution, and 
with Iraqi and Syrian refugees to raising awareness of gender-based violence.

"The overbearing dominant abusive stereotype as the archetype of the alpha 
male is something that many cultures have been trying to break away from,"he 
says 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/syrian-war-sparks-gender-violence-strains-support-networks-neighboring-lebanon-1585462>
. "But men in our culture are still struggling with it."

Keedi will join the Guardian Global Development Professionals Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network> for a 
live Q&A from 5-6pm BST on Wednesday 11 June, to answer your questions about 
the challenges of fighting for gender equality in the Middle East. What would 
you like to ask? Post your questions in the comments below.

What inspired you to get into this kind of work?

I was walking through a bookstore and I came across a book called I Don't Want 
to Talk About It by Terrance Real 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Dont-Want-Talk-about-Overcoming/dp/1452604959>. That 
was what I used to say every time someone would ask me if something was wrong 
with me, or if I was sad. The book spoke about the traditional masculine gender 
role, and how men are socialised towards being unemotionally expressive, 
normalising their own pain and taught that violence is a masculine strategy to 
resolve conflict or respond to stress. I started to reflect on my own life and 
what I thought a "man should be". That's when I started thinking about how much 
traditional and illogical gender expectations and roles were hurting me and 
causing me to hurt others. That is what catalysed my journey into working on 
gender equality.

What fuels the fire to keep you fighting?

Hope. When you are able to see a change, no matter how small. When one man 
questions his use of violence (in any form â€“ physical, verbal, emotional, or 
economical), it is proof that people can change. If people can change, and 
enough of them do, then societies can change. Countries can change. The world 
can change. Even if that may take lifetimes, it can happen. Every little change 
gives that hope, and that is what helps anyone to keep progressing in the face 
of adversity.

What are the challenges to your job?

We are attempting to unravel a string of lies that people have been told for 
centuries. In general, it seems normal that the man should make more money, not 
cry very often, fight wars for "justice'" be the president. Likewise, it seems 
normal that women should cook, clean, love and take care of the children, 
aspire to motherhood above all else. Even when the people we work with 
understand how illogical these rigid roles can be, even when they realise how 
negatively it has affected their lives, and even when they know that changing 
these attitudes and beliefs will be beneficial for them and their loved ones, 
it still feels foreign. Generations upon generations have been told the same 
story, and anything different, such as truly gender equal principles, takes a 
very long time and perseverance from people in order to become a long lasting 
change.

What reactions do your friends, family and wider society have to your job?

Some of them admire me for what I do. Some don't understand. Some criticise or 
make fun of what I do. I never stop working. Even when I am with friends and 
family, I am pointing out the faults of a system that is based on that 
discrimination, misconceptions and present more gender equal solutions when 
hearing about personal issues. It sounds tiring, but it isn't. I know it must 
be just as tiring for them knowing that I am always going to take a gender 
perspective, so I think regardless of their reactions, the fact that we are 
still communicating is a good sign.

The live Q&A has ended. Scroll down to read through the highlights.

Highlights from the Q&A

Question from Celato <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/celato/public>:

Do you find women are more willing than men to challenge traditional roles?

Answer: 

Men are not the only people who encourage traditional gender roles. Many women 
also do so. It is a system that they are also a part of.

That being said, on a general level, yes I do think that women are more 
willing to challenge these roles. It makes sense that the people being 
discriminated against are quicker to realize they need to challenge that system 
then those who are not. I quick review of any Human Rights struggle will attest 
to that.

This is a good a place as any to make this statement. Please, anyone reading 
this: WOMEN'S RIGHTS IS A HUMAN RIGHTS ISSUE.

Question from Sroar <https://id.theguardian.com/profile/sroar/public>:

I'd like to know how you initiate discussion about gender roles? Do you 
collaborate with other groups e.g. youth or women's organisations? And lastly, 
how do you measure your success?

Answer:

The nice thing about initiating a gender discussion is that you can pretty 
much start anywhere. So much of what we do, how we think, and what we expect is 
influenced byGender <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> Roles.

For Example you could ask: When you have had a really stressful day (REALLY 
BAD), how do you deal with it. Many men have been socialized to think that 
talking about your emotions or displaying your emotions publicly is 'weak'. 
When I say publicly I don't mean running up and down the street crying. I mean 
crying in front of anyone. Many men will wait until they are all alone to have 
that reaction, even if it is an absolutely normal HUMAN reaction to stress.

Measuring success is always difficult. On a nationalistic scale, this type of 
work is still beginning, but ideally it would be when men are less resistant 
and actually supportive of statistics that imply progress towards Gender 
Equality. For example, less domestic violence, more women in the political and 
economical arenas in leadership positions, more fathers who work and are 
actively engaged in household chores and child care.

Question from nadinemazloum 
<https://id.theguardian.com/profile/nadinemazloum/public>

1- How hard is it to change the constructs of "manhood" when we see the most 
educated of males exhibiting misogyny as a sign of power inLebanon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/lebanon>?
2- How do females respond to derogatory terms such as "man hating feminist" 
when a woman identifies herself solely as a feminist fighting for women's 
rights?

Answer:

1) Education is not the same as Gender Awareness or sensitivity. That type of 
education is what is missing from our educational system. A Ph.D. in chemistry 
(sorry chemistry majors) does not bring you to an understanding of patriarchy, 
social norms, gender expectations, human rights, ect.

One overlying theme in this type of work is, although each man must take 
responsibility for his actions, the individual man/men are not the problem. The 
system is the problem. When these types of lessons/classes are not found in our 
schools or even our universities, and the basics should at least be mandatory 
as a human rights issue, how can we expect anyone to learn about them.

2) Speaking about injustices should not be a negative thing. That is what 
feminists are doing. Feminism is about equality and partnership. Perhaps 
feminism is greatly misunderstood, but that is what it is.
Now, let's say that a woman "feminist" gets a bit angry when she speaks.... 
That seems absolutely normal. When women are GLOBALLY harassed and assaulted by 
men, less likely to be educated, less likely to be given leadership positions, 
less likely to earn as much money, ect..... Yea, I would be a bit angry too.

Before we judge a women as nagging or being an "angry feminist", we have to 
try to understand their perspective. You probably will end up understanding 
their point much better if you do take that time.

Read all the questions and answers in the comments section below.

Join the community of global development professionals and experts. Become a 
GDPN member <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development/> to get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox
 