
John Ruch is the editor of two community newspapers in the US, the Jamaica 
Plain Gazette <http://jamaicaplaingazette.com/>and the Mission Hill Gazette 
<http://missionhillgazette.com/>. Though the size of his readership might be 
smaller than some of the big media behemoths like the Boston Globe, his work 
ethic is just as strong. His team worked for four days straight during the 
Boston Marathon and he doesn't believe in work/life balance.

As a part of our 'A day's work' series 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/series/a-days-work>, John has agreed 
to open up about his life and his work with Guardian readers, and answer 
questions throughout the afternoon. So what do you want to know? Leave your 
questions below and John will be online after 2pm ET | 7pm BST to respond.

Take us through your typical workday. 

Journalism is a funny – meaning, horrifyingly stressful – business because it 
combines a rigid, assembly-line schedule of deadlines with the utter chaos of 
people making news on their own time. The best and worst thing about my job is 
that I truly don't know for sure what I'll be dealing with tomorrow.

Assuming everything goes as planned, each day of the work week is devoted to 
different tasks and goals. Our week really begins on Wednesday, when we are 
sending that week's paper to the printer (and prepping it for web publication), 
while also planning the next week's edition. On Wednesday morning, I convene my 
reporters in an editorial meeting to go over the list of potential stories for 
the next issue. Then the production department ships me a PDF of that week's 
issue for proofreading, last-minute story inserts, etc. When that is ready, it 
ships to the printer, and I try to get some reporting done before day's end.

Thursdays are generally days we do reporting and I edit some early stories, as 
well as consulting the advertising manager about how the next issue's ads are 
looking. Fridays, I prepare photos and letters to the editor for the next 
issue; it's also the day the paper hits the street, so I usually field a lot of 
reader comments (pro and con) via phone and email, or just on the street. 
Mondays and Tuesdays are heavy editing days, and also the time I write my 
editorials; Tuesday is the deadline for reporters to turn in stories and the 
day I know how long the paper will be, which is based on advertising sales. And 
then Wednesday we start all over again.

Along the way, the story list is constantly changing as fresh news occurs. And 
deadlines can be blown by the president visiting the neighborhood, a major new 
business coming to town, a tipster telling us about a secret government meeting 
that day – all things that have happened on one of our deadlines.

What makes for a really good day on the job? 

Getting a scoop that enlightens and empowers the community is always good. 
Really good is when a reporter scores the scoop on their own without my 
prodding and suggesting, because that means they're working at a high level. A 
recent good day is when I was actually off the job on vacation.

One of my reporters scored a nice scoop on a nonprofit organization purchasing 
a gigantic, vacant former church that has been the center of a gentrification 
dispute – a major local story. He got the scoop because of his contacts and 
deep understanding of the issue. And I could trust him to write it up without 
my hovering. 

What's one of the biggest mistakes or errors you've made? How did you resolve 
it?

I once reported that a guy was dead when he was very much alive. That's a big 
no-no. I was repeating an incorrect translation from Spanish of public comments 
his ex-wife made. She told me it was OK and jokingly thanked me because she 
wished he was dead! I learned a lesson about being more careful about 
translations, and of course we published a correction.

There's been a lot of talk lately about people wanting work/life balance. Does 
your job provide that?

"Work/life balance" strikes me as code for "I hate my job." Community 
journalism is as much a lifestyle as a job. The pay is low, the stress is high. 
People who think of it as a job to "balance" don't do it for long. It's suited 
for people with misfit personalities and a profound commitment to public 
service. I do keep our office on normal business hours, but reporters have to 
attend many evening and weekend meetings/events, and a journalist is never 
truly off-duty. 

One example: I wanted to see the Wolverine movie last Friday. Late that 
afternoon, the cops decided to admit they had screwed up a major crime 
investigation in one of my neighborhoods. So I shoved the movie ticket back in 
my pocket and I began requesting police reports and hammered out a story as 
quickly as I could. "Work/life balance" is that I wrote fast enough to still 
make it to the movie.

Tell us about a fact or a reality of your day job that you think people might 
be surprised to hear. 

So many journalism stereotypes to choose from here – we probably laugh more 
and get excited about "good news" more than people expect. People might be 
surprised that I'm as critical of myself as I am of certain public officials, 
or that I truly don't care about some of the issues where I'm accused of "bias" 
(often by both sides simultaneously).
Maybe the biggest surprise, given the pushy attitude journalists must have, is 
that my job is extremely humbling. To have people entrust you with their 
stories, to talk one-on-one to people in stations of life drastically different 
from your own, to learn new info that challenges your assumptions, to juggle a 
hundred facts and try to get them all right – it's humbling. And then if you 
get it wrong, you have to admit and explain the mistake. Publicly. In print. To 
tens of thousands of people. Humbling.

Share a story that your team broke that you were proud of – or that had an 
impact on you in some way. 

I'm very proud of our Boston Marathon bombing coverage, where we operated 
nonstop for a little over four days and wrote 32 stories, despite a security 
"lockdown" that left my reporters working from home, and many of us still 
shaken from friends who had near-misses. Despite the challenges, we broke 
several stories about local people and companies affected, including rescue 
hero Carlos Arredondo, who became world-famous from AP photographs. Aside from 
the usual local angles we always look for, I decided to cover the terrorist 
manhunt as well because of the possibility that the street shootouts could come 
to our area. Those stories, even though they were hardly unique, were also very 
well read. That tells me that in times of crisis, people rely on their 
hyperlocal media and look to us to sort out the chaos for them. I'm very proud 
we earned that trust and performed that service.

• Do you have an interesting day job? Want to be featured on the Guardian? 
Have a tip or suggestion for someone we should feature? Email 
ruth.spencer@theguardian.com

Highlights from the Q&A:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> Guardian contributor
johnruchboston  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> 30 
July 2013 6:53pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25597265> 
Hello, all. Let me start by apologizing to Angelina Jolie and Eddie Murphy for 
my gorgeous photo running between theirs on the home page and making them look 
bad.

I'll do my best to answer your questions over the next hour before delving 
back into hardcore editing mode.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4227195> Leviathan212  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4227195> 30 July 2013 3:07pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25590449>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Approximately, what percentage of your revenue comes from advertising, and 
what percentage from subscriptions?

Do you see the website as a separate entity, or just as the digital version of 
the paper?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> Guardian contributor
johnruchboston  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> 30 
July 2013 7:45pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25598678> 
It's all advertising. We offer subscriptions as a convenience, not an economic 
driver.

Website is both. We put the contents of the paper there, and also breaking 
news. A new development for us is having a political column that appears online 
every Tuesday.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2532043> YarrowUnited  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2532043> 30 July 2013 3:17pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25590777>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Local news is dying in the UK. Various reasons - the web; falling ad revenues; 
greedy owners, and a more transient, diverse and less community-minded 
population.

Are these also factors for you and do you think your papers will still exist 
in ten years whether that be in print or digital form?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> Guardian contributor
johnruchboston  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> 30 
July 2013 7:34pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25598404> 
Those are all serious factors in the economic turmoil going on, but there is a 
lot of opportunity as well, and I do think localization in the future. My 
papers are owned by a small, independent chain of about a dozen papers based 
here in Massachusetts--as opposed to many papers that these days are owned by 
national or multinational corporations interested in little beyond quarterly 
profits. That was an issue in journalism well before the Internet economy, 
incidentally. Of course I think my papers will still exist, but I also think 
there will be more journalistic outlets like them.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3761271> JamesValencia  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3761271> 30 July 2013 3:22pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25590936>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
I want to be an editor. How did you land your first editorial position?

Next question: How did you land the second ?

Last question: Is accumulating editorial positions a hobby ?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> Guardian contributor
johnruchboston  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> 30 
July 2013 7:30pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25598301> 
Earned them. First time was working for an independent student newspaper at my 
college. Started reporting, got promoted and took it over.

Second one is this one. I was a reporter here for years, left, then got asked 
to come back by staff demand when the founding editor retired.

Your third question is one each person must answer for himself or herself in 
the long dark night of the soul.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10233993> Ian Bell  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10233993> 30 July 2013 3:52pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25591947>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Where do you stand on the great paywall debate?

Should a newspaper carry a natural political bias that plays to the views of 
its core readership?

If a major advertiser asked you to kill a story that was plainly in the public 
interest because it would embarrass their company would you still run it and 
risk the financial stability of the newspaper?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> Guardian contributor
johnruchboston  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> 30 
July 2013 7:27pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25598222> 
1) At my level, we're never going to drive the economic model, whether it is 
paywall or whatever. But bottom line, journalism is labor-intensive and 
expensive and it won't exist without someone paying for it. The paywall idea is 
elite readers subsidizing casual readers--interesting. Proof's in the pudding.

2) Ideological or identity-based journalism certainly has its place and 
tradition. I think it most effective to avoid any kind of traditional political 
allegiance or bias. I don't much care for party politics in politics, let alone 
in journalism. "Bias" is also a tricky word--papers should always have certain 
positions they fight for, such as freedom of information.

3) It is relatively common for advertisers to threaten to pull ads due to some 
kind of controversy. It happens to us maybe once a year. No, it doesn't scare 
us. There are other advertisers. Ditto for advertisers who ask for favors. We 
keep editorial and advertising decisions strictly separate as well--no joint 
meetings or anything.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4457040> oat876  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4457040> 30 July 2013 4:13pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25592653> 
Why are you still putting out a paper?

This is not a rude question....we keep on hearing it is the end of the age of 
the newspaper. Also, the New Media and twitter are competing with the old 
fashioned broadsheet. Then there is the falling circulation issue.

It must be hard to put out a paper in the age of the I -Pod and the Kindle.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> Guardian contributor
johnruchboston  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> 30 
July 2013 7:19pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25598027> 
I know people (including journalists) like to talk about Old Media vs. New 
Media. But the real issue is a business model that works vs. one that doesn't. 
The web doesn't make money. Print still does. Without getting into financial 
details I can't talk about, the paper subsidizes our online activity. Like 
everyone else in the industry, we've had a drop in ads, but not nearly like the 
big dailies, which had enormous profit margins, and no drop in readership. In 
fact, we're more widely read than ever as we take up the slack of what the 
dailies no longer cover. Our local focus is very important in this regard. You 
might skip CNN in the morning, but you're going to be interested in your own 
back yard.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11425564> Guardian staff 
heatherlong  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11425564> 30 July 
2013 5:44pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25595441> 
Do you read the letters to the editor? If so, what are some of the best 
letters/phone calls you've gotten? Do you keep them?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> Guardian contributor
johnruchboston  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> 30 
July 2013 7:09pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25597737> 
I not only read them; I edit them. I often work with people to better word 
their criticisms of me. Did I mention this job is humbling?

I tend not to preserve or even remember them, because it's part of the paper. 
I am more a collector of funny press releases from public relations companies.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10704514> Arlynlichthardt  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10704514> 30 July 2013 6:10pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25596144>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Rumors and hearsay can often lead to news-breaks. The old-time conventional 
sources were a host of "b's" -- barbers, bakers, butchers, bartenders -- 
vendors and service-providers that everyone in the community visited. Do you 
and your reporters still rely on some of these, or do you go to others for 
items of local interest?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> Guardian contributor
johnruchboston  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> 30 
July 2013 7:02pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25597524> 
Good question. If you remember nothing else I say--and why would you--remember 
this: A paper is only as good as its community, meaning its sources. We 
certainly still break news by chatting with local business owners over the 
counter and such. I'm also fortunate to work in neighborhoods that have a lot 
of savvy political and social activists who are constantly reaching out. Today, 
of course, many of these people also tweet, blog, etc., and we pay attention to 
those potential sources as well.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10704514> Arlynlichthardt  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10704514> 30 July 2013 6:42pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25596983>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
I'm curious about the actual print/publish process employed today. I assume 
the old-fashioned galley sheet has been replaced. How do you decide and 
visualize lay-out and final presentation?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> Guardian contributor
johnruchboston  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> 30 
July 2013 6:58pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25597408> 
You are correct--it's all digital for me. When I started in journalism, we 
were still blocking out stories on "dummy" sheets, printing out pages and 
cut-and-pasting onto boards. Today, I just put a lot of trust in our production 
person Scott. I give him a priority list of stories and other articles, and 
detailed instructions for what goes where. He eyeballs the stories to see their 
length, then lays it out. He uploads a PDF of the paper to a server; I download 
it and proof it on a screen. We repeat that step until it looks good. I never 
see paper until the actual paper is delivered from the printer.

However, I do still edit most reporters' copy in a printed-out form. Red pen 
is just easier and faster than Microsoft Word gimmicks.
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2408772> JohnYardDog  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2408772> 30 July 2013 3:03pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25590323>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Would you ever consider moving into national or international reporting? Or is 
the love of the local just too strong?

Also, I don't know exactly how it is over in the US, but I'd say here in the 
UK there is a lot of sneering at the locals as being 'less' than news. Do you 
encounter the same attitude over in the US?
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> Guardian contributor
johnruchboston  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12139229> 30 
July 2013 7:50pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/25598796> 
1) I'd consider anything. I've done a lot of things besides community 
journalism--film criticism, answer-man column, opinion pieces.

2) Sure, sometimes we're looked down on--I mean, who isn't at some point in 
life? There's always someone bigger and richer. But overall people really love 
these papers and they are well-respected across the city as well. I hear way 
more good than bad. Usually the criticism is because people have high 
expectations for us.
 