
On 23 January 1895, after his play Guy Domville had failed on the London stage,
Henry James <https://www.theguardian.com/books/henryjames>, in his early 50s, 
wrote in his Notebook 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=ger4tDwoLvYC&pg=PR17&lpg=PR17&dq=I+take+up+my+old+pen+again+%E2%80%93+the+pen+of+all+my+old+unforgettable+efforts+and+sacred+struggles.+To+myself+%E2%80%93+today+%E2%80%93+I+need+say+no+more&source=bl&ots=vbdLKhyLWh&sig=ntGbzgrJJpw2eIzqD562xpCVncs&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0CDUQ6AEwBGoVChMIl6GchIDMxwIV6inbCh0j0gAL#v=onepage&q=I%20take%20up%20my%20old%20pen%20again%20%E2%80%93%20the%20pen%20of%20all%20my%20old%20unforgettable%20efforts%20and%20sacred%20struggles.%20To%20myself%20%E2%80%93%20today%20%E2%80%93%20I%20need%20say%20no%20more&f=false>
: “I take up my old pen again – the pen of all my old unforgettable efforts and 
sacred struggles. To myself – today – I need say no more. Large and full and 
high the future still opens. It is now indeed that I may do the work of my 
life.”

I like these words. For anyone approaching middle age, or wading through it, 
they may be the most useful words anyone has written, words that if we repeat 
often enough we may even start to act upon. Words that could change our lives, 
or the long sweet stretch of it that is left.

How Edith Wharton led me on a long and winding road back to Henry James
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2014/aug/12/edith-wharton-henry-james-a-backward-glance>
Over the next six years James wrote a number of novels and stories. However, 
only one of them –The Turn of the Screw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/may/30/classics-corner-turn-of-the-screw>
 – matches earlier work such as Washington Square and The Portrait of a Lady. 
But what he was doing, or what his unconscious was doing, in those years as he 
wrote novels about English manners such as The Spoils of Poynton and What 
Maisie Knew, was collecting images for what would be one the most intense, 
valuable and rewarding short periods in the life of any artist. At the 
beginning of the 20th century, James published three great novels – The Wings 
of the Dove (1902), The Ambassadors (1903) and The Golden Bowl (1904).

While published second, The Ambassadors was written first. It tells the story 
of Lambert Strether arriving in Paris in middle-age from America to ensure the 
return home of his friend Mrs Newsome’s only son Chad, who has been lingering 
in the city and worrying his poor mother to death.

The implications surrounding our responsibility to live, and live sensuously, 
are at the heart of The Ambassadors

In England, Strether, who is in the company of Waymarsh, his flat-footed 
friend from home, meets the worldly and witty Maria Gostrey, who takes him in 
hand and who becomes a sort of novelist-within-the-novel, a figure who asks 
sharp questions and offers clever analysis.

At the opening of the book, as Strether prepares for his journey to Paris, 
James offers him “such a consciousness of personal freedom as he hadn’t known 
in years”. The novel, then, will become a drama about the conflict between 
restriction and personal liberty, and about the power of fresh experience to 
transform or indeed bewilder the self.

James, in all his work, treated personal liberty with immense care. He loved 
the openness of the imagination, but as a good son of New England he learned 
not to trust fully what he loved. When he played with notions of personal 
freedom, he always allowed limits to appear, or responsibilities. Thus while 
Strether becomes captivated himself by Paris, its beauty, the freedom it 
offers, the people he meets, the demands of Chad’s austere and worthy mother 
appear more pressing.

Strether notices that Chad has been transformed by the city, and especially by 
his association with the beguiling Madame de Vionnet and her daughter. It is 
part of James’s genius not to make Chad a mere spendthrift wanderer and not to 
make Madame de Vionnet, despite her allure, too exotic or strange. James drew 
his characters with a considerable amount of  shade.

Henry James’s father took his children from America to Europe because he was 
concerned that in America they were not getting a sufficiently sensuous 
education. The lesson of The Ambassadors comes when Strether says to a young 
friend of Chad’s: “Live all you can; it’s a mistake not to. It doesn’t matter 
so much what you do in particular as long as you have your life.”

The implications surrounding our responsibility to live, and live sensuously, 
are at the heart of The Ambassadors. James, however, was a novelist more than 
he was a teacher. His novels change our lives not for their telling us how to 
live, but for their enacting in a prose that is subtle and filled with nuance a 
drama replete with irony and pure clarity and then mystery. Nothing is simple 
in his world.

As Strether seems determined to notice everything, we learn in a brilliant 
scene that he has failed to see something essential, that in his hunger for 
fresh experience, his own innocence has emerged even more strongly.

Thus James, by his own great example, as he moved into his 60s, may show us 
how to keep the future “large and full and high”, as he wrote, and Strether, 
too, may in his response to fresh life show us that middle age may be more 
interesting and more open to suggestion than youth.

But the real way this novel changed my life was through its own complex 
textures, its own deep opposition to complacency, its own refusal to settle for 
anything small.

As we, the middle-aged ones, move along the last stretch, these may be the 
most important things to know and remember and believe in.

Colm Toíbín is Leonard Milberg lecturer in Irish letters at Princeton 
University. His novel Brooklyn was Costa novel of the year
 