
St Mungo’s Broadway <http://www.mungosbroadway.org.uk/> provides a home and 
support to 2,500 people who are homeless every night of the year.

It shocks many people to learn that over a third of residents in our hostels 
and housing projects have children.

As a charity, we mainly work with single adults but, while people may not live 
under the same roof as their children, that doesn’t mean they stop being 
parents. Many are traumatised by the loss of their children and struggle to 
cope with limited contact – especially as more than half of their children are 
under 18.

Clients aren’t expecting a magic wand. They often just want to talk

I work as a children and families adviser, a relatively new role for the 
organisation and the first in the sector. I talk to staff across the charity 
about the importance of having conversations with clients about their children. 
It is a key part of their identity, and therefore an important step in recovery 
from homelessness.

Being a parent, especially a mother, comes with high expectations. When 
parents are no longer in contact or caring for their children, they can 
experience very harsh judgment from others – their own families, professionals 
and wider society. Parents we are working with can become very isolated as they 
struggle to come to terms with the loss of their children from their care and 
not having anyone to share these feelings with.

Supporting our staff and delivering training is a large part of my job. I’ll 
start the day checking enquiries and providing advice. This could be anything 
from a simple question about child maintenance through to an emergency where a 
client’s child is at risk of being removed from their care. Most situations I 
see involve advice for people wanting contact with their children and also 
those struggling to come to terms with losing care of their child. Some want to 
reach out to children they are no longer in contact with, while others need 
information about navigating the complex system of children’s social care and 
the courts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fhomeless-parents-children-listening-st-mungos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438250120406%2F3a271127-6fd3-4476-b029-07066ca2cba7-1020x659.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20help%20homeless%20parents%20traumatised%20by%20losing%20contact%20with%20their%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fhomeless-parents-children-listening-st-mungos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20help%20homeless%20parents%20traumatised%20by%20losing%20contact%20with%20their%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsocial-care-network%2F2015%2Fjul%2F31%2Fhomeless-parents-children-listening-st-mungos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F30%2F1438250120406%2F3a271127-6fd3-4476-b029-07066ca2cba7-1020x659.jpeg>
 Jennifer giving training to parents at the charity’s parents academy. 
Photograph: St Mungo's Broadway 
I also check our case management system throughout the day to look after new 
enquiries. It’s an important step to understanding our client’s needs, looking 
at trends and ensuring any potential risks are well managed. This work is 
interspersed with visiting clients, some of whom have really complex stories to 
unpick, like Karen.

Karen is looking forward to seeing her son next week; they really enjoyed 
their time together a few weeks ago. We have supported Karen to ensure she is 
part of discussions about plans for her son’s future. She told the court where 
she felt he would do best at school and she is happy that they agreed with her. 
Today we are working together with her son’s social worker to make plans for 
next week.

It’s important to identify and manage risk so that contact is safe and 
enjoyable for the child. The most important principle when working with 
children is that their welfare is paramount.

I’m also going to see Stewart who will be going to court soon to ask for 
contact with his children. Due to changes in funding for legal advice and 
representation, many of our clients are not eligible for legal aid and have to 
conduct their own case in court. In response to this we have trained volunteers 
to act asMcKenzie Friends 
<http://courtwithoutalawyer.co.uk/mckenzie-friends.html>. These volunteers 
provide emotional and practical support at court, can take a note of 
proceedings and can assist with case preparation. They can’t speak in court but 
their help is absolutely vital.

Teaching homeless people basic skills transforms lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/aug/22/literacy-tutor-homelessness-skills-reading>
It’s the complexities of our client’s situations that mean no day is the same. 
Having said that, I can be found regularly delivering lessons at our parent 
academy, part of ourrecovery college 
<http://www.mungosbroadway.org.uk/st_mungos_recovery_college>. This is a short 
parenting course we have developed with clients which we co-deliver with people 
who have been through the same experiences. We look at things like talking to 
children about addiction and recovery or being in prison, and rebuilding trust.

I talk to workers about how important it is to offer clients a non-judgmental 
environment in which parents can just talk about their children and their 
feelings. Many will tell us that this is the first opportunity they have had to 
speak to someone who has not made a judgment about them. Clients aren’t 
expecting a magic wand. They often just want to talk and be listened to.

I usually wind up the day working with our policy team. At the moment I’m 
looking at how we can best support pregnant women in our services and working 
with children’s social care on how we can work more in partnership. Mondays 
will also see me leading a women’s running group as a volunteer withA Mile in 
Her Shoes <http://www.amileinhershoes.org.uk/>, a charity that helps homeless 
women through running. The perfect way to end a busy day.

Names have been changed

If you would like to feature in our Day in the Life series, or know someone 
who would, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com <mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com>
 