
News that Titty’s name will be changed to Tatty in the new film adaptation of 
Swallows and Amazons (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/25/arthur-ransomes-titty-name-print-swallows-and-amazons>
, 26 June) has started an impassioned national debate. I had no warning! A 
whole range of comments from fans has hit my social media pages.

I loved playing the part of Titty in the film Swallows and Amazons, made on 
location in the Lake District in 1973. It has been such an enduring success 
that children all over the world still call me Titty. It’s a sweet name. 
They’ll see me in the street and call out: “Hello, Titty! How are you?” That 
can turn a few heads. I was in France last year when an adult started calling 
me Titty. He apologised, realising he was calling me by the character name, and 
then went right on calling me Titty, quite naturally. I don’t mind a bit.

I often spend time with Suzanna Hamilton, who played my sister Susan in the 
movie. When she’s being practical or cooking I always call her Susan. If I say 
anything ethereal, make some wildly imaginative suggestion or even have a 
simple idea, she’ll call out, “Titty!”

I am sure the producer of the new film adaptation of Swallows and Amazons has 
a reason for changing the name. I have a young friend called Tatty who is just 
like the character, so can easily take it on board.Arthur Ransome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/arthur-ransome> was inspired by a real 
girl. Her nickname came from the fairytale Titty Mouse and Tatty Mouse. He 
insisted that Titty wasn’t short for anything. Roger Wardale, Ransome’s 
biographer, will confirm that she was just called Titty in the books.

I received the sweetest email from Japan saying “We love you, Titty!” I was 
once staying at Bank Ground Farm in the Lake District to record an interview 
for the BBC when two Japanese ladies arrived to stay there. They flung up their 
hands and screamed in delight. The name Titty echoed around the hills of 
Cumbria. I’ve told the full story inThe Making of Swallows and Amazons 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/The-Making-Swallows-Amazons-Classic/dp/0956100090>, 
published in 2014.
Sophie Neville
Lymington, Hampshire
 