
Lisa DiGiovine is an Emmy nominated non-fiction TV producer who resides in Los 
Angeles, California. Some of the shows she's worked on include: 

 * Celebrity Rehab <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Celebrity_Rehab_with_Dr._Drew>
  
 * The Ultimate Coyote Ugly Search  
<http://www.cmt.com/shows/dyn/ultimate_coyote_ugly_search/series.jhtml> 
 * The Marriage Ref <http://www.nbc.com/the-marriage-ref/> 
 * Extreme Expeditions <http://natgeotv.com.au/tv/extreme-expeditions/> 
 * Dr Phil <http://www.drphil.com/> 
 * Starting Over <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Starting_Over_(TV_series)> 
 * My Life is a Lifetime Movie <> 
She'll be online today at 2pm ET | 7pm GMT to answer your questions. So what 
would you like to know? Ask her anything in the comments.

What's your typical day like?

I work on many different types of shows, so there’s never a typical day. My 
credits range from reality and competition shows to entertainment, talk, and 
news. If it’s real or semi-real, I’ve worked on it. There are odd requests. 
Most recently it was: ‘Can we get the serial killer on the phone to do a phone 
interview?’And: ‘We need more emotion in the show – get somebody to cry!’ Or my 
favorite: ‘There’s nothing going on! Make something happen!’

What's the craziest thing that's ever happened to you on the job?

A couple of years ago I worked on a show called Outfitter Bootcamp for The 
Outdoor Channel, and we shot in the back country of Wyoming. The requirements 
for the job included: riding horses, and knowing how to survive in the 
wilderness. Well, I had bills to pay, so I did what anyone would do: I lied. I 
dined on rattle snake, survived a gale force wind that swept through camp and 
turned my tent upside down, and ascended to about 7,000ft above sea level on a 
mule – my only means of transport.

Generally, the hardest thing to do on a shoot is to find and get emotion from 
the participants. I listen intently and really try and feel out the individual 
I’m getting to know. On a shoot for the Discovery Network show Driver X, I was 
working with race car drivers who were very bland and cool with their answers, 
but when I got them talking about their families and partners, the emotions 
flew: men were crying, and sobbing. In fact, I had so many of them crying, the 
crew dubbed me ‘the Onion’.

What makes for a really good day on the job?

That’s a great question. I’d have to say a good day is when it all goes as 
planned, but, really, that never much happens, so I suppose it’s about rolling 
with the problems and making it work, staying organized, and having really good 
crews in the field and editor in post to back you up. Producers never act 
alone. Reality TV shows are at moments orchestrated, and at other times you 
just don’t know what’s going to happen, and when the group works together and 
pays attention, you can see and get the most wonderful responses and catch 
actions from real people that are very honest. 

What's your annual salary? Do you get benefits?

I’m a freelancer, so the salary ranges. It can be a day rate, or a weekly 
rate, and there are no benefits, but we do get credits: they’re just hard to 
read these days because they don’t fold over on the TV screen.

What's the biggest mistake you've ever made?

On a show I’d prefer not to name, one of the participants wanted off the show. 
It was a bit of a Survivor-type show and involved tormenting those involved – 
it was not Survivor – and I can’t say I was proud of participating in 
it. Management gave all the producers an emergency number for the staff 
psychologist just in case.

I felt our cast member should talk to a pro and made the call in the middle of 
the night. Needless to say nobody was happy, and by time the psychologist 
appeared, I had talked the castmate into remaining. Personally I was done after 
a season.
 