
Was Alain Robert <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alain-robert> insured? 
That was my first thought as he shinned up the side of the Lloyd's building in 
the City of London. To fall off here and not be insured would be crazy. But 
then that's what everyone thinks Robert - the world's leading (the world's 
only?) urban climber - is anyway. French and completely fou .

The Lloyd's climb - Robert prefers the word "ascent" - is a stunt, planned by 
Sky Movies to advertise today's TV premiere of Spider-Man. Secrecy and speed of 
execution are vital, so tipping off a score of news organisations and arriving 
dressed in a Spider-Man outfit is a bold strategy. Luckily for Robert, security 
at Lloyd's - a portly doorman in a top hat and red cloak who looks only mildly 
surprised by the number of TV crews milling around - is lax. Robert is out of 
the van and 20m up the outside of the lift shaft before the doorman has time to 
remove his top hat.

The police are on the scene quickly, one of them a fit-looking young man on a 
bicycle who thinks about giving chase. But by now Robert is 100m up and waving 
to the fast-growing crowd in the street below. "What's happening?" a 
middle-aged man with a pipe asks a policeman. "Spider-Man is climbing the 
Lloyd's building," he replies matter-of-factly.

It takes Robert 20 minutes to reach the top - a walk in the park for a man who 
has previously conquered the Eiffel Tower, the Empire State Building, the Sears 
Tower in Chicago and the Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur. His reward for 
reaching the summit is to be grabbed, brought back to earth and bundled into a 
police car. It is an odd sort of triumph, but everyone seems pleased: the 
police have their man; Sky has its plug; the bored office staff watching from 
the windows of neighbouring buildings have a superhero; Robert will have a 
small fine for creating a public nuisance and a healthy addition to his bank 
balance for creating a publicity sensation (he is coy about what he gets paid 
but Â£10,000-plus seems a fair bet). And I have my interview - because I 
astutely spoke to him at his hotel before he made the ascent.

Away from tall buildings, Robert is worryingly sane, though his attire - red 
leather trousers, orange shirt, necklace, earring, pointy snakeskin boots - 
suggest a streak of exhibitionism. He has long, carefully tended hair and a 
rock star persona which he cultivates - imagine a wiry, fleshless version of 
Jackson Browne. "I'm 40," he says, "but girls think I am 35."

Robert, who lives in the south of France with his wife and three sons, has 
become a cult figure among aficionados of extreme climbing. He is a superstar 
in the United Arab Emirates, where 100,000 spectators gathered for a recent 
ascent of the 200m-high National Bank of Abu Dhabi. An Alain Robert climbing 
school is now planned in the UAE - not previously considered a hotbed of 
mountaineering.

Orthodox climbers are less supportive. "Just because it's tall doesn't mean 
it's difficult to climb," said the general secretary of the British 
Mountaineering Council snootily when the Frenchman scaled Canary Wharf in 1995. 
The BMC are about six-week expeditions to the Himalayas with sherpas and stacks 
of equipment; they just don't appreciate the joys of spending 20 minutes 
shooting up the Lloyd's building in a Spider-Man outfit. They also stress the 
illegality - and the sheer danger of bare-hands climbing. "It will get his name 
known," says a BMC spokesman, "but is he stupid to risk his own life?"

Is he? "I am putting my life at risk each time I do it," admits Robert, "but I 
have the habit." His first climb was at the age of 11 - he had been 
accidentally locked out of his home, and climbed 50ft to reach an open window 
on the seventh floor. "I knew from that moment that I wanted to be a climber." 
He worked in a sports shop as a teenager, but spent most of his time climbing 
mountains in the Alps.

I ask him why so dedicated a climber has never ventured to the Himalayas, and 
he gives an answer that will horrify the BMC. "When I was young, I read a book 
by Reinhold Messner [the great Italian mountaineer], in which he listed the 
hardest ascents in the Alps. When I was 17, I did some of those mountains quite 
easily. I was disappointed. The people who made these ascents had been gods to 
me."

Robert moved on to climbing rock faces without equipment and established 
records for bare-hands climbing that still stand. He even attempted one ascent 
without using his hands, but says he "overconcentrated" and fell 40ft. The blow 
to his head left him with vertigo, though ironically the disorientation affects 
him more when he is walking than climbing.

He has had five serious falls, including one that left him in a coma for five 
days. His most recent was when he fell off the ceiling of his attic at home, 
which he uses to train, on to a concrete floor. He broke his skull. Happily, he 
has never fallen on one of his 70-plus urban ascents, though in that Gallic way 
he says he often ponders death as he climbs. "It gives me a sense of what is 
important on earth. When you are facing your own death, money is not that 
important." That does not mean, however, that he is willing to waive his fee.

He has turned his hobby into his job, and manages to combine enthusiasm with 
hard-headedness. He realises he can't do too many climbs or the media get bored 
("they don't understand the differences between the Sears and the Empire State 
- for them, a tall building is a tall building"). But he doesn't do it just for 
the cash and mawkishly describes each conquest as a "rebirth".

For Robert, tall buildings are his mountains. He eulogises the views from 
their summits and (police permitting) revels in the freedom. "When I climbed 
Canary Wharf," he says, "I got a lot of emails from people who said it was like 
a ray of light. They are stuck behind a computer, looking at the clock and 
suddenly they see this carefree bird outside their office window." Now all he 
has to do is convince the judge.
 