
Growing up, I always knew that the book world was strictly divided into two 
distinct categories. The first type had colourful covers, sometimes had 
pictures, were often new and could be demolished in a day or two. These were my 
books. The second type often had plain covers, no pictures inside and were 
invariably old and falling apart. They took weeks to read and you sometimes 
needed a magnifying glass to make out the tiny font. Those were my parents' 
books.

When I was younger, I really couldn't see the point of slogging through a 
grown-up book, not when such instant delights were available on my own 
bookshelves. Being a conceited little squirt though, I decided to read some of 
my parents' books to show that I was a big girl who could read big girl's 
books. As a result I read Neil Gunn'sThe Silver Darlings 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571090419>
 and Salinger'sThe Catcher in the Rye 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780241950432>
 when I was far too young to understand them.

When I was 12 we studied some adult books in English lessons at school but it 
still took a couple more years before I actually dared to try reading some 
adult novels in my own time, and then it was simply because I would steal 
whatever book my friend was reading when I got bored in class. However being a 
couple of years older (and German!) she tended to read very depressing novels, 
which meant that the first grown up books I read were dystopias like Kazuo 
Ishiguro'sNever Let Me Go 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571258093>
.

With hindsight, this isn't really how I would recommend starting your first 
foray into adult literature, so I have compiled a list of Ten Commandments for 
starting to read adult fiction, except they're more hints than commandments, 
and there's only nine of them… I wouldn't pretend to have completely shifted 
into grown-up literature; on the contrary, reading a "big person's novel" is 
still accompanied by a sense of occasion, and I happily devour teenage fiction 
at a rate of knots.

I promise though, that when those books on your parents' shelves and in the 
adult section of the library suddenly establish themselves as readable entities 
rather than ominous looking ornaments covered in dust, it is an amazing feeling 
– suddenly, your source of available reading matter has just quadrupled in size 
without any extra expense on your part!

1. Some books are actually for all ages

You know those books that you sometimes see in the teenage section of a book 
shop, while in another shop they're in the adult section? Most often spotted 
lurking in the sci-fi and fantasy section, these books are awkward customers 
which, quite simply, defy categorisation because they can be read by virtually 
any age between 11 and 111. Well-known examples of the species include Trudi 
Canavan's Black Magician and Age of the Five trilogies as well as the fantastic
Railsea 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781447213673>
, by China Mieville. Lesser spotted, but no less brilliant, authors are Chris 
Wooding and Kristin Cashore, both of whom write swashbuckling tales of fantasy 
and adventure. However, the king of this genre is surely Terry Pratchett. I 
would recommend reading one of his standalone books first - maybeGood Omens 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780552137034>
 (written with Neil Gaiman) – before you sink your teeth into his incredible
Discworld 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780861404216>
 series.

2. Try short stories

Short stories take a bit of hunting because they're not heavily promoted in 
bookshops, but they are great way of dipping your toe into the ocean of adult 
literature. Instead of backing away in horror from the leaden weight of 
Tolstoy'sWar and Peace 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781853260629>
, you can tackle these books a little bit at a time. They are quick to read, 
and yet often deal with quite complex ideas and emotions. I think of them as a 
cross between poetry and prose – more accessible than poetry, and less daunting 
than a long novel. Ease yourself in gently with the humorous –Terry Pratchett's
A Blink of the Screen 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780552163330>
 is very good, as isTopics About Which I Know Nothing 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007139446>
 by Patrick Ness (be warned, the final story is not for the squeamish). If you 
are feeling brave, Annie Proulx'sBrokeback Mountain 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007205585>
 is utterly beautiful, although I found some of the other stories in the 
collection rather disturbing, so don't tackle these too young. For the poetic, 
George Mackay Brown's collection The Sun's Net is exquisite, but my personal 
favourites are PG Wodehouse's short stories, which are perfection personified.

3. Listen to books

There are those who sneer at audiobooks. Pay them no mind, for they know not 
what they say. In Jane Austen's time, it was quite common for polite young 
ladies to read aloud to one another while they sewed, and indeed Austen's own 
novels work particularly well as audiobooks. So put on your bonnet/breeches, 
sit in your drawing room and pretend your sister is entertaining you with a 
chapter before the Bennetts call for tea. Alternatively, those with busy 
schedules can plug themselves into their iPods on the school bus in the morning.

4. Try the Classics

There are many Classic novels for young adults. Jane Eyre 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141441146>
,Treasure Island 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141321004>
,Robinson Crusoe 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781853260452>
,Kidnapped 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099573739>
,The Count of Monte Cristo 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781853267338>
 andThe Coral Island 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781853261701>
 are a few of my favourites, for while the plot is suitable for a younger 
audience, the writing is more challenging than in most modern teenage novels, 
while just knowing that you've read "A Classic" can do a lot for your 
self-esteem. Once I'd read a few of the above books, the heavy tomes bound in 
old leather sitting haughtily on my parent's bookshelves suddenly became much 
less intimidating.

5. Take your inspiration from film and TV

Have you just seen a film or TV series you really liked? Was that film or 
programme based on a book? Have you read that book already? If the answers to 
these three questions are yes, yes and no, then go and read the book. Many 
adaptations of books are fantastic –Sherlock Holmes 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781840220766>
,Lord of the Rings 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780261103566>
,The Three Musketeers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781853260407>
 andGame of Thrones 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007448036>
 are my favourites – and yet the books they are based on are equally brilliant, 
if not more so. Get reading.

6. Do English at school

It is fashionable to claim that, whatever the current English literature 
syllabus is, it does not really help students to appreciate good literature 
(the definition of 'good' often depending on your political hue). I must say 
however, that this is not my experience. Over the years, I have studied George 
Orwell, Virginia Woolf, Margaret Atwood, Annie Proulx andJohn Steinbeck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/johnsteinbeck>, plus a variety of 
playwrights and poets, and it was a brilliant starting point for exploring 
adult fiction. To begin with, there is the book itself to read (and you do need 
to read it properly, at home, on your own. Droning through it paragraph by 
paragraph with 20 other classmates, or merely copying down some key quotations, 
does not count). Then, there is related reading – other books by the same 
author, or from the same period or genre. The absolute best thing about this 
method though is that when your parents tell you off for having your nose in a 
book yet again, you can say quite honestly, "but I'm not just reading – I'm 
revising". And if you can remember a couple of quotes from said book, you might 
even get a few more marks in the exam. What's not to like?

7. Be creative in finding your books

I still find trying a new adult book a bit scary, but the experience becomes 
positively terrifying when it involves handing over a large sum of money – £8 
or £9! – to a bookshop. Therefore, my holy trinity consists of parents' 
bookshelves, second hand bookshops, and libraries. The first is pretty 
self-explanatory; if you are lucky enough to have parents who like reading, 
steal their books. Quick, easy and free, but watch out for domestic warfare 
when their books start mysteriously migrating into your bedroom. Second hand 
bookshops avoid this problem, and although you do have to hand over a couple of 
quid for your book, it often goes to support a charity, so you can feel 
virtuous instead of guilty about filling up your house with books. Libraries on 
the other hand, are a completely free way of trying unknown books, with no risk 
involved. Many libraries also allow you to borrow audiobooks for a small 
charge, or download them online for free. They are indeed the beacon of 
civilisation.

8. Know thyself

Carved above the entrance to Apollo's temple at Delphi are the Greek words 
"Gnothi Seauton" – know thyself. This applies equally to choosing how, why and 
when you are going to start trying some adult books. You know what you like 
(though parents, teachers and librarians can give tips if you get stuck) so 
roll with it. If you like historical novels, start with Philippa Gregory, 
Hilary Mantel and Alison Weir. If you love Caroline Lawrence's Roman Mysteries, 
try Lindsey Davies' grown up versions, theFalco  
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781846056734>
novels. If you're a dystopian at heart, head for the classic books that define 
that genre, namely1984 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781849432269>
,Fahrenheit 451 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780006546061>
,Brave New World 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099518471>
 andThe Handmaid's Tale. 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780099740919>
 It's so easy to feel that you should be reading a certain book and yet the 
only real rule for choosing books is that you should enjoy them. One thing I've 
learned, and am still learning, is not to worry about whether or not the book 
you're reading is considered 'clever' or not, but just to stick your head in 
and read. And don't stress if you haven't readWar and Peace 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781853260629>
,Paradise Lost 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140424393>
 and theAeneid 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140449327>
 by your 16th birthday. There's plenty of time and, as my parents are always 
reminding me, you can't read everything at once.

9. And finally, whatever you do, don't forget children's books

One of the most wonderful things about starting to read adult fiction, is 
going back to your favourite children's books and suddenly realising just how 
fantastic they are. Paddington is no longer just a cute tale about a bear, but 
a piece of perfection in which not a word is wasted. Artermis Fowl transforms 
from a fun adventure story into a finely wrought piece of comedy, and for the 
first time you can appreciate the exquisite pacing, balance of scenario and 
tightness of plot that makes the Harry Potter series a work of genius.

Whenever I go into a bookshop, I always start in the eight to twelve section 
and end up browsing around the various adult genres. The whole point of 
starting to read adult books is to expand your reading horizons, not to 
diminish them. So don't scorn children's books. They'll miss you – and you'll 
miss them too.

What books would you recommend for moving to adult fiction? Do you have any 
horror stories of youthful experimentation to share? Email us at
childrens.books@theguardian.com <mailto:childrens.books@theguardian.com>!

Your suggestions

Coreena
I recommend The Wind in the Willows and Watership Down. Both tell tell stories 
of adventure, friendship and loyalty that adults appreciate when we experience 
them. Good companionship, fighting for a good cause are things adults do in 
real life by signing a petition or lunch with a friend (Ratty & Mole). Both are 
classics that span generations and remind us of important things like love, 
friendship and the right to choose our destiny.

Pippa
I remember discovering Saki as a 15/16 year old. I got really into short 
stories, perhaps driven by the TV series based on Roald Dahl's Dark Tales of 
the Unexpected. Saki's amazing wit and scathing sense of humour really appealed 
to me as a know-everything teenager, and short and funny was definitely good 
when the alternative at school was Great Expectations or The Waste Land. I'd 
also say, you can do worse than go for prize-winners – think Life of Pi, God of 
Small Things, White Teeth… The more modern language can make a book so much 
more accessible for a teen, I think.

Corinne
When I was eleven I had read all the books in our local children's library so 
moved into the short story section. This was a big mistake as I started with 
Candide by Voltaire (what was that doing there?) then Rabelais and Kafka. 
Fortunately I moved on to Georgette Heyer and survived to become a school 
librarian and help others avoid my mistakes!
 