
I'm looking for some ideas of books for my 10-year-old niece who is very into 
adventure books, especially any set in a castle. Apart from the obvious Harry 
Potter I'm not aware of any others books set in castles and wondered if you had 
any suggestions? She loves the Helen Moss adventure island series and classics 
such asArthur Ransome <https://www.theguardian.com/global/arthur-ransome> and 
CS Lewis. It's her birthday soon so I'm really hoping I can surprise her with 
some new books for her to devour!
Rebecca

Your niece has good taste! Castles and islands make excellent settings for 
stories as they are full of exciting – and sometimes dangerous - spaces with 
lots of opportunities for adventures. High walls and surrounding seas also make 
it impossible for adults and especially parents to intrude!

In addition - and many authors take great delight in this, as JK Rowling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/jkrowling> does with Hogwarts - the space 
doesn't have to follow the normal and sometimes constricting rules of 
geography. The author can create a giant adventure playground of a castle or an 
island with all their favourite things like winding stairs, tall ramparts or 
sandy coves to be discovered.

If your niece likes castles and fantasy she might enjoy Diana Wynne Jones's 
Charmed Life 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780007255290>
 and the rest of the Chrestomanci Series. It is set in the very magical 
Chrestomanci Castle, a place where all kinds of unusual things happen. Sister 
and brother Gwendolen and Eric Chant are sent there, which is fun for Gwendolen 
as she has magic powers of her own, but not nearly as much fun for Christopher, 
or Cat as he is known, because he does not!

Alternatively, as might be guessed from its title, E Nesbit's The Enchanted 
Castle 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140367430>
 is also set in a place where unexpected things happen. When three children 
follow a tunnel into a castle they are only fantasise about it being a magical 
place. Once there, they find it is certainly full of much that is unexpected 
including invisibility and the dangerous Ugli-Wuglies.

Green Knowe, a very old house which provides the setting for a sequence of 
books that begins withThe Children of Green Knowe 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780571231461>
 by LM Boston is not exactly a castle but it has many of the same 
characteristics as those described. The past oozes out of its fabric and gives 
rise to all kinds of magical opportunities for the children's adventures.

My favourite island settings include the Island of Gont, the magical backdrop 
to Ursula le Guin's classic fantasyA Wizard of Earthsea 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780140304770>
 and the place that young Sparrowhawk is sent to train as a wizard in the first 
of the thrilling sequence. Or, for something as magical but also far more 
rollicking, there are the many and varied islands that make up the setting for 
Cressida Cowell's hilarious Viking stories. These begin withHow to Train Your 
Dragon 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780340999073>
 and tell of the daring – and not so daring - deeds of young Hiccup the Viking 
and his dragon.

And, if in doubt, your niece can always return to Enid Blyton's Malory Towers 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9781405224031>
, one of the most famous schools in fiction.

Your suggestions

James
I wonder whether you know The Palace Library by Steven Loveridge? This has 
castles and islands, even dragons, ships and (just to encourage readers!) an 
entire magical library with magical books. The children love it, and am I 
allowed to admit to liking it too? A fantasy adventure with books with more 
functions than an iPad!

Caroline
As well as Ursula K LeGuin's books already mentioned, I would recommend 'The 
Dark Angel' by Meredith Anne Pierce (if you can still find it in print), set on 
an alternative moon, a castle stroke fortress amongst other settings.

Karen
The Anne of Green gables books, by Lucy Maud Montgomery, are set on Prince 
Edward Island, in Canada. Excellent series for taking the reader to a different 
time and place!

Lindsey
Tales from the Turrets by Joan Lennon, published by Catnip Books. Three 
entertaining adventures set in - and around - castles.

J D Irwin's Edwin Spencer trilogy takes place in the King's castle in a 
parallel world called Hysteria. They're highly entertaining adventures for 9+ 
and the central characters - Edwin and Perpetua - transported to Hysteria from 
the 'real' world, are a splendid double act.

Also, Jane Eagland's Wild Song - published by Barrington Stoke, the publisher 
specialising in books for less robust readers - is for 10+ readers, the story 
of a girl who's grown up on an island, and happy to accept that her life will 
continue there as it has always done, until one day something is washed up on 
the shore... Readers may recognise the inspiration as The Tempest - but it's 
not necessary to know that.
 