
From Feeling Motherly, aged 30
Dear Carole, I got married last year to a man I love dearly. I've always loved 
babies and children, but lately I notice pregnant women everywhere, make faces 
at strangers' babies, and generally feel a powerful urge to be a mother myself. 
My husband is far more ambivalent about the idea of children, and has said that 
he thinks he could be happy with or without them. My father-in-law swears that 
women have a natural maternal instinct, while men rarely feel paternal until 
presented with their own offspring. Is there any evolutionary evidence to that 
effect, or is he making excuses for his son?
 Ask Carole: Chimpanzee wearing spectacles Photograph: Public Domain 
Carole replies:
Dear Feeling Motherly, Thanks for your email. It is common for women's 
maternal instinct to appear out-of-sync with their chosen man's paternal drive. 
There is a plethora of research highlighting significant differences between 
the genders when it comes to parenting. It has been argued that men's paternal 
strategies have evolved from ancestral gorilla-like family set-ups, where, like 
contemporary gorillas, a dominant male controlled a family group of breeding 
females and all infants were likely to be his progeny.1 
<http://www.apa.org/pubs/books/431608A.aspx> It is predicted that the ancestral 
dominant male's parenting role was a territorial one, defending ecologically 
rich grazing areas and giving protection from interloping aggressors who would 
murder his infants and mate with his females once his prime has passed.

Research on family life in traditional societies such as the Aché (a 
hunter-gatherer tribe living in Paraguay) has revealed that if a child becomes 
fatherless at any point before reaching age 15, they have a juvenile mortality 
rate of 45% compared to 20% for children under age 15 with fathers.2 
<http://www.springerlink.com/content/a15852x325k230k6/> Not only are children 
of absent fathers more vulnerable, but further research on the Aché has also 
revealed that children with "secondary" fathers have a 20% greater chance of 
surviving beyond age 15. Some women actively seek out extra male companionship 
as a means of increasing resources and family security. (Children born to 
skilled hunters had a lower mortality rate than children born to less able 
fathers.)

Research across all human cultures has revealed a far greater female/maternal 
engagement with the needs of juveniles than paternal involvement with the young.
3 In general, females naturally incline towards nurturing roles and this 
difference between males and females is in evidence from infancy with girls 
preferring to play with dolls and boys preferring to play with machines (such 
as toy cars).4 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Essential-Difference-Penguin-Press-Science/dp/0141011017>
 This gender divide is driven by empathic ability, which is usually higher in 
females. But there are always exceptions and some males are highly nurturing 
while some females are entirely without the ability to listen and give 
understanding.

Due to the massive discrepancy in paternal investment, with females spending 
nine months gestating, and in traditional societies at least two years 
lactating, women have evolved different behaviours to help them cope with the 
enormous burden of motherhood, and due to this burden women are rarely 
indifferent to the types of men they breed with. In general women have evolved 
to be superior at mind reading, enabling women to correctly second-guess men, 
find the man they want to breed with and anticipate unwanted sexual coercion 
and if need be outwit the female competition.5,6 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6V5T-4K4WMXP-2&_user=10&_coverDate=03%2F31%2F2007&_rdoc=1&_fmt=high&_orig=search&_origin=search&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_searchStrId=1456134543&_rerunOrigin=google&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=10bb1349832d438b8bdd79171c1c3510&searchtype=a>

Intelligent females seek out resourceful, skilled males who will protect and 
provide for any resulting infants. But how "broody" these males are prior to 
the birth of their children remains unclear. Research shows some males are 
ambivalent about their impending children right up to delivery and that this 
ambivalence will persist if they are in any doubt about their paternity. It has 
been noted that mothers and maternal relatives show a united behaviour of 
manipulating the father into believing the new baby resembles him, irrelevant 
of whether it does or not.7 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6X2B-45WDS24-X&_user=10&_coverDate=12%2F31%2F1982&_rdoc=2&_fmt=high&_orig=browse&_origin=browse&_zone=rslt_list_item&_srch=doc-info%28%23toc%237266%231982%23999969997%23316881%23FLP%23display%23Volume%29&_cdi=7266&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_ct=9&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=b526ad98d0509985d30f44c252690601&searchtype=a>
 "He has his father's nose!" Or "She has her father's eyes!" are familiar 
comments made by the maternal family soon after delivery. Comments like this 
help the new father to commit to raising the child. Having given birth, the 
mother's input is clear and the postpartumoxytocin 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oxytocin> coursing through her veins facilitates 
her bonding with her child.8 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1992.tb34350.x/abstract>

I don't think you should be dissuaded from feeling motherly, nor should you 
feel hurt by your partner's paternal ambivalence. My interpretation of your 
father-in-law's comments is that he has reflected on how he felt before and 
after the birth of your husband, and predicts that his son will react similarly 
to him and will show an interest once the infant arrives, particularly once 
your mum waxes lyrical about how much the baby looks like him!

I think your in-laws are giving you the green light to act upon your maternal 
urges and allow your husband's evolved gorilla-like paternal behaviour to be 
triggered once you start lactating.

Good luck with it all.

References
1. Geary, D. C. (2010) Male and Female: The Evolution of Human Sex Differences 
(2nd Edition). <http://www.apa.org/pubs/books/431608A.aspx> Washington DC: 
American Psychological Association.
2. Hurtado, A M, et al (1992). Trade-offs between female food acquisition and 
child care among Hiwi and Ache foragers. 
<http://www.springerlink.com/content/a15852x325k230k6/> Human Nature. 3.3: 
185-216.
3. Belsky, J, Rovine, M, Fish, M (1989) The developing family system, in 
Gunnar, M R and Thelen, E (eds) Systems and Development: Minnesota Symposia on 
Child Psychology (volume 22, chapter 4, pages 119-166). Hillsdale, New Jersey: 
Erlbaum.
4. Baron-Cohen, S (2003) The Essential Difference. 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Essential-Difference-Penguin-Press-Science/dp/0141011017>
 Penguin Press.
5. Rosenthal et al., (1979) Sensitivity to non-verbal communication: The PONS 
test. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
6. Rehnman, J, Herlitz, A (2007) Women remember more faces than men do. 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6V5T-4K4WMXP-2&_user=10&_coverDate=03%2F31%2F2007&_rdoc=1&_fmt=high&_orig=search&_origin=search&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_searchStrId=1456134543&_rerunOrigin=google&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=10bb1349832d438b8bdd79171c1c3510&searchtype=a>
 Acta Psychologica; 124 (3): 344-355.
7. Daly, M, Wilson, M (1982) Whom are new born babies said to resemble? 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science?_ob=ArticleURL&_udi=B6X2B-45WDS24-X&_user=10&_coverDate=12%2F31%2F1982&_rdoc=2&_fmt=high&_orig=browse&_origin=browse&_zone=rslt_list_item&_srch=doc-info%28%23toc%237266%231982%23999969997%23316881%23FLP%23display%23Volume%29&_cdi=7266&_sort=d&_docanchor=&view=c&_ct=9&_acct=C000050221&_version=1&_urlVersion=0&_userid=10&md5=b526ad98d0509985d30f44c252690601&searchtype=a>
 Ethology and Sociobiology; 3 (2): 69-78.
8. Insel, T R, Shapiro, L E (1992) Oxytocin receptors and maternal behavior 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1749-6632.1992.tb34350.x/abstract>
. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences; 652: 122–141.
 