
In recent days I have been called a traitor by some, and given words of 
encouragement by others. There have been recommendations about poems by 
Schiller and Goethe I should now be able to recite, and jibes that I may never 
be able to jaywalk again.

When I sat on the press benches of the Bundestag last Friday to hear a debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/23/germany-green-party-fast-track-british-citizenship-applications?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
 about enabling Britons to become German citizens in the wake of Brexit – for 
which precisely 77 minutes had been scheduled – it was as if I was being 
personally urged to take a long, hard look at my motivation for acquiring 
German citizenship.

Did I, as the CDU member for North Saxony, Marian Wendt, suggested, adopting a 
tongue-twister, merely want to avoid being a “nicht-Schengen Schlangen Steher” 
– a non-Schengen queue stander? Or was I driven by a deeper sense of conviction 
that I wanted to be a German?

Was I just a 'nicht-Schengen Schlangen Steher' – a 'non-Schengen queue 
stander' – or did I have deeper conviction?

His CDU colleague, Barbara Woltmann, might have been talking to me directly 
when she told the house that acquiring citizenship “is not like putting a piece 
of clothing on which you can later take off … it’s not arbitrary, it’s a clear 
statement to the country you’re living in”.

Post-Brexit, my much-treasured Irish passport, which I’ve held since 2002, 
will ensure I remain an EU member. But I am still left in the sorry situation 
that, having worked abroad as a foreign correspondent for the best part of 20 
years, I have lost the right to vote in the UK. (The length of time that a UK 
citizen can vote after moving abroad is limited to 15 years.) Quite painfully, 
that meant I was unable to vote in the Brexit referendum. But neither, despite 
being a taxpayer in Germany and having children in the education system, am I 
eligible to vote in national elections inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>.

“So I am disenfranchised unless I give up my job and move back to the UK, 
which is why I’d like to take on German citizenship,” I told the bureaucrat at 
my local town hall when I went to pick up the citizenship application papers at 
the start of the summer.

“That is fully understandable,” she said to me over her half-rimmed spectacles.

Who needs a coherent plan for Brexit when you have dreams and fantasies? | 
Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/brexit-royal-yacht-britannia-eu>
“But can you prove to me you speak German?” she asked, a half hour into our 
introductory chat, in German, which had already covered issues such as my 
willingness to declare my “verfassungstreue” (loyalty to the constitution) and 
confirmation that I harboured no “verfassungsfeindliche Bestrebungen” 
(anti-constitutional ambitions).

“No evening school certificate?” 

“No,” I replied, before it struck me. “But I do have a German degree!” 

“Ah super!” she exclaimed. “From what university?” 

“Leeds.” Adding in response to her puzzled expression: “It’s in the north of 
England.”

Sadly my degree did not count, so earlier this month I found myself among a 
roomful of other hopeful applicants for German citizenship. We came from 
Ukraine, Japan, Russia, Mozambique, Pakistan, India and the UK, and were 
spending a whole day being tested to level B1 (threshold or intermediate) at a 
cost of €116 (£100). “This is proof that Germany is getting more and more 
international!” said the invigilator, a woman in her 60s with a Merkel-style 
haircut, who appeared more excited than alarmed.

For the concluding conversation test I was paired with one of the two other 
Britons in the group. Ed from Ilford was an archaeologist turned embalmer who 
had lived in Germany for 28 years. He was from “Brexitland”, he explained, and 
wanted to secure his German citizenship so he could retain his residency and 
worker’s rights as a member of the EU.

'Have you forgotten who bombed us?' asked one person when I mentioned I was 
doing the test. Clearly he hadn't

Together, under adjudication, we had to discuss the finer points of internet 
shopping which concluded with everyone – us and the erstwhile stern-faced 
examiners – collapsing about laughing because we were far better than they had 
expected.


At a separate citizenship test, on another day, there were at least six 
Britons among the 17 candidates in the room. “Are you all here because of 
Brexit?” the examiner asked us, saying she’d never seen so many Britons taking 
the exam before. “Ja,” we all replied. If anecdotes shared on Twitter and 
Facebook are anything to go by, similar scenes have been witnessed in exam 
rooms across Germany – as well as elsewhere inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> – over the past few weeks.

On social media there have also been accusations of treachery. “Have you 
forgotten who bombed us?” asked one person when I mentioned I was doing the 
test. Clearly he hadn’t.

In fact the 33 multiple-choice questions left me in no doubt of the historical 
and moral burden that I will potentially be taking on. “When were the National 
Socialists with Adolf Hitler in power?” asked one. “Who built the Berlin Wall?” 
was another. “27 January is an official day of remembrance … what do we recall 
on this day?” (Answer: the victims of National Socialism.)

Other questions such as “To how many partners can you be married at the same 
time?”, or “Can a 13-year-old live in a relationship with a 25-year-old?” 
offered an insight into some of the challenges Germany continues to face.

My watermarked citizenship test certificate arrived a few days ago. I passed 
with full marks – as I should have done, having worked here for over 10 years. 
I’m now waiting on the language test results. But even then I’ll still need to 
provide a raft of officially-translated documents – from birth certificates to 
work contracts – for everyone in the family, tax returns, evidence I have a 
regular income, and that my partner’s income could also cover me, as well as 
proof I have a pension and even nursing care insurance. It’s good to know they 
take a long-term approach to this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fi-was-happy-living-as-a-briton-in-germany-but-then-came-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde9060c3e3faef5e4d47106a1a7d0bfdac6c47fd%2F0_46_2731_1639%2F2731.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20was%20happy%20living%20as%20a%20Briton%20in%20Germany%20%E2%80%93%20but%20then%20came%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fi-was-happy-living-as-a-briton-in-germany-but-then-came-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20was%20happy%20living%20as%20a%20Briton%20in%20Germany%20%E2%80%93%20but%20then%20came%20Brexit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fi-was-happy-living-as-a-briton-in-germany-but-then-came-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde9060c3e3faef5e4d47106a1a7d0bfdac6c47fd%2F0_46_2731_1639%2F2731.jpg>
 ‘Who built the Berlin Wall?’ is one of the questions in Germany’s citizenship 
test. Photograph: Walter Sanders/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Image 
A British acquaintance, a teacher, who came here in the Spring of 1989 before 
the fall of the Berlin Wall and fell in love, was smart enough to secure her 
citizenship ahead of the post-referendum rush. She described how at her recent 
citizenship ceremony a string trio played the German national anthem, followed 
by the European hymn, Beethoven’s Ode to Joy. “One man spontaneously started 
humming and gradually everyone in the room joined in,” she said, visibly moved 
by the recollection.

For some Germans, as for many Britons, the idea that Britons should be 
applying for German citizenship is ludicrous.“The British are British!” said 
one respondent on Twitter.

Brits in the EU: are you applying for citizenship?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/brits-in-the-eu-are-you-applying-for-citizenship>
The Greens have been calling on the government to make the procedure easier 
and quicker. Bearing in mind that many Britons do not qualify because they have 
not lived here long enough, and the two-year window betweenArticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50> being triggered and Britain’s 
exit from the EU – within which time Britons, as EU members, can keep their UK 
passports as well as obtaining German ones – there is some need for urgency.

Some members of the Bundestag see an opportunity, citing all the British 
talent – such as the many entrepreneurs and scientists – who live in Germany. 
But the phrase “Zwangsgermanisierung” or “forced Germanisation” was also doing 
the rounds during the Bundestag debate.

My view is that very few of us intended for this to happen. Much as I like and 
respect the Germans, I was quite happy being a Briton living on mainland 
Europe. But, as Ed the embalmer wrote to me in a WhatsApp message after our 
joint language test: “It’s a bit of an all-hands-to-the-lifeboats feeling.” We 
agreed to a reunion with the other Britons we’ve met during the process, once 
we’ve officially been, as Ed put it, “Deutschified”.

 