
Suranga is an area coordinator responsible for all Agency for Technical 
Cooperation and Development (Acted) operations in Zaatari, King Abdullah Park 
and Cyber City refugee camps. She’s an experienced humanitarian manager 
specialized in complex emergency and recovery programmes in conflict, 
post-conflict and natural disaster contexts. 

Leave your questions in the comments and Suranga will be back at 2pm ET | 7pm 
BST to respond

What is your typical day like?

Since my arrival in Zaatari last April, I have been working 12-hour shifts 
usually from 6am to 6pm in the evening inside the camp, six days a week most of 
the weeks. It’s quite intense but not unusual for most of my colleagues working 
here and even in other countries in similar contexts.

I start my day with a very early and quiet drive through northern Jordan 
desert roads from our guesthouse into the camp that allows me to think of what 
awaits us on that day.

On most mornings I have a walk inside the camp as the refugees are still 
asleep, looking at work done by our teams the previous day, taking advantage of 
the fresh temperature and the light to take shots of the camp and sometimes 
stop for a quick chat and chai with the elderly.

At 8am we kick off the day. Acted <http://www.acted.org/> is one of the 
leading Wash [Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene] agencies operating in Zaatari, as 
we provide the refugee population with the entire water supply, solid waste 
management, camp and sanitation cleaning, hygiene promotion, distributions and 
community mobilization. We have a team of roughly 300 individuals, both 
Jordanian and Syrians.

A typical day is a mixed bag:

 * Troubleshooting water truck drivers who are on strike because of multiple 
attacks on their trucks by refugees 
 * Fixing garbage trucks stuck in the camp because of lack of access and poor 
road and drainage infrastructure 
 * Coordinating weekly cash payment for [some] thousand refugee laborers who 
perform large scale camp and sanitation cleaning 
 * Distributing of baby diapers and soap 
 * Ensuring we are spreading the right messages and information on 
Wash-related services via our community mobilization teams 
 * Dealing with the occasional security incident which requires immediate 
relocation of teams until the situation becomes normal again. 
What's your annual salary? Do you get benefits?

I am currently paid €27,000 per year on a French contract and receive most of 
the benefits of the French labor law. It’s a decent salary in France, lower in 
comparison to other Anglo-Saxon agencies or the UN for whom I worked too for 
many years. I usually choose jobs mostly based on the context, the country and 
more importantly the roles and responsibilities involved as well as the type of 
projects implemented.

What is the most challenging aspect of your job?

Definitely insecurity and protection of staff: we often work in challenging 
environments with an increasing number of incidents and attacks targeting us 
directly, despite basic humanitarian principles and common sense. I’ve lost 
many colleagues I worked with in other missions who didn’t make it alive 
through indiscriminate shelling, and just last week, two Acted colleagues in 
Central African Republic were killed during an evacuation by armed men, and I’d 
like to take this opportunity to send our support and condoleances to their 
families and colleagues again for this tragic episode.

Here in Zaatari, we used to have a very high number of security incidents 
which would hamper the delivery of aid. While it has now significantly reduced, 
we are still on alert while also keeping in mind that it is the actions of only 
a small minority affecting a large population usually very supportive and 
grateful for our interventions.

What makes your work fulfilling?

There are two main aspects: First, one can hardly describe the rewarding 
feeling of being exposed to incredible human beings. I feel grateful to have 
met and worked with many, many unsung heroes who made it alive through war, 
natural disasters and their related traumas and will still smile, draw suns, 
and carry on with their lives. They teach me life, full stop. I remember a very 
old lady displaced multiple times by fighting in Northern Sri Lanka and carried 
her granddaughter for days while injured in the head and made it alive for her 
on the other side of the frontline. That lady is for me a modern superhero and 
their strength to resume their lives – with or without our help – is incredibly 
inspiring.

In addition, and equally as important, the most fulfilling aspect of this job 
is to build capacities and skills of our national teams: they are the 
cornerstone of many of our interventions as they know the context, the 
environment, and have been there before. And unlike us expatriates, [they] will 
be present after we [leave]. I have been lucky to work with very experienced 
and skilled teams and it’s really rewarding to see them grow in their roles and 
responsibilities with the right amount of management, space and trust. I feel I 
have done my job when projects are managed and run smoothly with little 
supervision or monitoring, that’s when it’s time to step out and let nationals 
run interventions in their respective countries.

What's one thing about your job that you think people should know?

I wish people – including my friends and family – understood that the 
humanitarian and development career path has become increasingly professional, 
competitive and requires highly qualified and experienced individuals. It is 
not just a part-life hobby but a genuine commitment from many of us with strong 
ethics and values to contribute to make a difference. The time when one had 
good intentions and will to help is long gone and it’s just not good enough to 
ensure high standards and quality of aid provided as we are accountable to both 
communities we are aiming to assist as well as tax payers back in our countries 
funding our interventions.

Highlights from the Q&A

Q: 
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11748342> BlackberryBlossom  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11748342> 19 September 2013 
1:26pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27138451>  This 
comment has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
How do you keep children in good spirits, given the circumstances? Do they 
receive education, for instance; or are there any play facilities?

A:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> Guardian contributor
SurangaMallawa  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> 19 
September 2013 6:49pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27150182> 
there are more than 2 million children displaced in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> and a million currently in 
neighboring countries as refugees which represent half of the total refugee 
population. In Za'atari, Unicef and its partners built schools and child 
friendly spaces to ensure children are given spaces to play and keep learning 
despite past traumas. Acted recently ran a fantastic Art project with Apt'Art 
aiming to raise awareness on hygiene promotion through painting murals in 
public spaces along with children focused art workshops : 
http://www.aptart.org/project/syria-jordan-2/

Q:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10998349> muttersUWS  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/10998349> 19 September 2013 
6:46pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27150111> 
What do you need but do not currently have in order to assist people there?

A:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> Guardian contributor
SurangaMallawa  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> 19 
September 2013 7:44pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27151602> 
hink there so much more that could be done especially within Syria. Given the 
current security situation, lack of access and limited number of partners, 
Internally Displaced Syrians are still not being given enough assistance and 
protection. While I strongly believe in a political settlement over a military 
intervention, Syrians inside Syria still lack access to basic aid such as 
access to health, water, sanitation, shelter, food etc....
Within the region and given the scale of the crisis, we still lack funding to 
provide sustainable assistance to refugees in and outside camps - winter is 
coming and it s going to be a big challenge to provide them with adequate 
shelter, non-food items such as cloths, shoes, blankets in addition to of 
course more important infrastructure works to reduce floods risks and provide 
them a safe environment.

Q:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11919283> Veiled  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11919283> 19 September 2013 
1:30pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27138619> 
What advice would you give to a young person aspiring to have a job like yours 
one day?


A:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> Guardian contributor
SurangaMallawa  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> 19 
September 2013 8:02pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27152052> 
I would advise anyone to specialise in a specific sector and even gain 
experience within the private sector even if it's in management. Humanitarian 
and Development jobs offer a very wide range of positions some technical and 
some relating to coordination and management and while I believe a lot of it is 
common sense, you still need some experience and skills to develop a mature 
understanding of contexts and issues. there also more and more Masters in 
Humanitarian related field that has mushroomed over the years and which could 
be a good start.

Q:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11700206> TheObamaRebooted  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/11700206> 19 September 2013 
1:39pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27139031> 
Do the Jordanian authorities allow freedom of movement to outside the camps???

A:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> Guardian contributor
SurangaMallawa  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> 19 
September 2013 8:06pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27152169> 
Refugees in Za'atari camp have no freedom of movement outside what is being 
called a 'bail out system' which is basically a sponsoring process by a member 
of their family or the community living in host communities. Only a very 
limited number of refugees get granted a pass. In reality many refugees leave 
the camp illegally...

Q:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4397299> SOUTHERNBIAS  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4397299> 19 September 2013 
1:52pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27139560>  This 
comment has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Does the conflict extend into the camp and if so how are the factions placated?

A:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> Guardian contributor
SurangaMallawa  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> 19 
September 2013 8:08pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27152251> 
Zaatari is located few kilometers away from the boarder with Syria but there 
is no active combat or fighting in Jordan.

Q:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1870526> jayant  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/1870526> 19 September 2013 
2:00pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27139906> 
Do you feel that you are the 'left arm of the state' trying to heal what the 
'right hand' (namely, military and police) has done to the refugees and 
displaced persons?

A:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> Guardian contributor
SurangaMallawa  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> 19 
September 2013 8:14pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27152398> 
I'd like to think that our intervention is impartial, neutral and apolitical. 
As for the right hand, the Jordanian Government and its citizens have been 
incredibly generous and cooperative in providing assistance and shelter to 
Syrian refugees by opening their boarders not only in camps but also in host 
communities where they shelter 4/5 of the refugee population.

Q:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2763543> WyldeWolfe  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2763543> 19 September 2013 
2:04pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27140100>  This 
comment has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
Your requires a deep compassion and courage. No doubt you could do as well 
financially without incurring the huge risks.

If you know then I curious about the level of resources being provided in 
relation to the needs of both the workers and their clients. Is there a 
shortfall and if so then how great is it? Are their significant health risks 
due to the shortfall? I'm sure there are significant risks to begin with given 
the lack of infrastructure but is it being exacerbated by the lack of food, 
clothing, water, shelter, etc.

And if you don't know then let me just repeat that you have my greatest 
respect for your efforts.

A:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> Guardian contributor
SurangaMallawa  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> 19 
September 2013 8:33pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27152917> 
thank you for your words.

Yes, the Syrian crisis remain largely under-funded, primarily within Syria and 
its neighboring countries hosting refugees. the regional appeal funding is as 
high as 3 Billion US$ for one of the largest humanitarian crisis keeping in 
mind that we are aiming to assist more than 2 million refugees in he region and 
almost en entire country on the road within Syria.

Q:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4294822> AdelphiOracle  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/4294822> 19 September 2013 
2:48pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27141849>  This 
comment has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
What languages do you speak? And where did you learn to speak them?

A:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> Guardian contributor
SurangaMallawa  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> 19 
September 2013 8:43pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27153167> 
I am French of Sri Lankan origin so speak French, Sinhalese, and English 
mainly. I did an intensive Arabic course of 3 months before starting to work 
here and I continue to take classes whenever my workload allows it. Being able 
to communicate with my team and Syrians in the camp or just outside work in 
Jordan where I have been living for now 9 months makes the whole difference.

Q:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2691408> darquelourd  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2691408> 19 September 2013 
4:16pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27145129>  This 
comment has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
How does one go from being a "refugee" to having an actual stable life?

A:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> Guardian contributor
SurangaMallawa  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> 19 
September 2013 8:49pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27153296> 
I don't believe any of these refugees have yet reached stability even those 
who have arrived a year ago. Surely they have reached safety and it makes the 
whole difference with those still inside Syria. they have clearly established a 
routine within the camp and started to settle but all of them - and this is 
true I believe for all IDPs and refugees regardless of time of exile or 
displacement - only strive to return "home" one day.

Q:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2278347> JennM  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/2278347> 19 September 2013 
4:53pm <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27146505> 
What would be the best and fastest resolution for these refugees?

A:
 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> Guardian contributor
SurangaMallawa  <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12317903> 19 
September 2013 9:01pm 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/27153608> 
It is imperative to end this war. An immediate cease-fire from all parties 
followed by a peace negotiation leading to a political settlement, elections 
and reconciliation process is my personal opinion. Not sure how fast this will 
happen but we have a responsibility to advocate for it and not get used to this 
chronic war and its consequences.
 