
Claudette Wilson is 20 and works two jobs in the fast food industry, one at 
Burger King and one at a pizza place. She is on her feet, sometimes for 12 
hours a day, and makes $7.40 an hour. She agreed to share her experience for 
the Guardian's A Day's Work series because she wants people to understandwhy 
fast food workers have been striking 
<http://www.arcamax.com/business/businessnews/s-1366073> for better wages.

Wilson participated in a protest in Detroit, Michigan 
<http://www.arcamax.com/business/businessnews/s-1366073> last week. Due to her 
demanding work schedule, Claudette might not be able to answer all questions, 
but she will be available later today to try to get through as many Guardian 
reader comments and queries as she can.

1. What is your typical day like?

Everyday for me is different. I can tell you how a typical Saturday is like: 
first I wake up around 8am to go to work at Burger King from 10am to 6pm. After 
I get off of work fromBurger King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/burger-king>, I go to my second job at 
Jet's Pizza from 6pm to midnight. After I get done with working, sometimes I 
hang with friends, sometimes I just go to sleep.

2. There's been a lot of talk lately about people wanting work/life balance. 
Does your job provide that?

My work/life balance is pretty rough at times. There's not even much time for 
me, let alone anyone else. In a weird way though, having both jobs does provide 
balance to me and a change of scene, but I'm not sure about others.

3. What's the craziest/most unexpected thing that's ever happened to you while 
on the job?

The most unexpected thing that happened to me when I was at work is when I 
witnessed a robbery at the Burger King I work at. The guy tried to get away in 
a cab. One of the cashiers and my manager at the time ran outside after the cab 
and chased it down to get the cab driver's attention. The driver stopped and 
got out of the car while the cashier and the robber tussled in the backseat for 
awhile. In the end, the robber got out of the car and ran across the street and 
got away.

4. What makes for a really good day on the job?

A good day on the job to me is when I arrive on time, and everyone is in their 
position and ready to work. There aren't many bad attitudes and the customers 
aren't being rude. The best kind of day is when everyone is doing their job and 
the day goes by swiftly.

5. What's your annual salary? Do you get benefits?

I get paid $7.40 an hour. My annual salary varies depending upon how many 
hours I work, but I have not made over $15,000 ever annually. I do not receive 
benefits. I have worked as a cook, cashier and in just about every position 
short of management off and on for the last three years. I still live at home 
with my mother and try to go to school on the side. I do dream of something 
more, but it's really hard to get jobs right now.

I participated in the strike on 31 July 2013 for District 15 
<http://detroit15.org/> (Detroit, Michigan area). I did it because I desire to 
accomplish a few things: I want to be able to form a fast food workers union 
and earn a higher wage. Also I would like to see fast food workers taken more 
seriously and actually respected for the hard work that we do.

â€¢ This article was amended on 6 August 2013 to correct Claudette Wilson's age. 
She is 20.
 