
A university with an international reputation for environmental science has 
been criticised by alumni including Ian McEwan andAndrew Motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/andrewmotion> for seeking to build a car 
park and rugby pitch on wildflower meadows.

The University of East Anglia’s (UEA) plans 
<https://info.south-norfolk.gov.uk/online-applications/applicationDetails.do?activeTab=summary&keyVal=O1O9ZCOQM3W00>
 have been branded “crude” and “thuggish” by McEwan, while Motion, the former 
poet laureate, said they were “scandalous” and “deeply destructive”.

The proposals will turn sports fields and wild grassland in the Yare valley, 
near Norwich, into parking for 218 cars, a floodlit artificial turf rugby 
pitch, a clubhouse and bar, and 30 further sports pitches.


UEA’s valleyside campus is richer in wildlife than many top nature reserves. 
It is home to 5,525 species, including water voles, otters, kingfishers, 
bitterns, the cetti’s warbler, pyramidal orchids, 935 species of moth and 23 
species of dragonfly.

McEwan, an inaugural graduate of UEA’s acclaimed creative writing course, told 
the Guardian: “UEA is privileged to be sited along the most beautiful natural 
river valley in Norfolk. Car parking and rugby have their place in the world of 
course, but not at the expense of an irreplaceable riverine ecology and 
gorgeous city resource. The plan seems crude, even thuggish.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fuea-university-east-anglia-development-criticised-ian-mcewan-andrew-motion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa1b4c46758e3738009bdfcf60207d1427961d33%2F62_308_3376_2025%2F3376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ian%20McEwan%20and%20others%20criticise%20UEA%20for%20'thuggish'%20development%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fuea-university-east-anglia-development-criticised-ian-mcewan-andrew-motion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ian%20McEwan%20and%20others%20criticise%20UEA%20for%20%27thuggish%27%20development%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fuea-university-east-anglia-development-criticised-ian-mcewan-andrew-motion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa1b4c46758e3738009bdfcf60207d1427961d33%2F62_308_3376_2025%2F3376.jpg>
 Ian McEwan was an inaugural graduate of UEA’s acclaimed creative writing 
course. Photograph: Nir Elias/Reuters 
Motion, a poet, novelist and former UEA professor of creative writing, said: 
“The Yare valley is an an exceptionally rich and diverse landscape – a very 
precious place. The threat posed to it by UEA – UEA of all institutions: they 
should be ashamed of themselves – is scandalous. Everything possible should be 
done to persuade the university to change its mind, and abandon these deeply 
destructive plans.”

Current professors have also criticised the plans for damaging UEA’s 
reputation for environmental excellence and contradicting itssustainability 
goals <https://www.uea.ac.uk/about/sustainability/strategy-and-policy>, one of 
which states that there should be no net loss of campus biodiversity.

Iain Barr, senior lecturer in ecology, accused UEA of failing to give planning 
authorities the scientific evidence they required to make an informed decision.

Barr, who has undertaken exhaustive biodiversity surveys of campus wildlife, 
said bats, including barbastelle, brown long-eared and noctule varieties, would 
be particularly affected by the floodlit pitch and loss of tree roosts in the 
green corridor through the western edge of Norwich. Barr believes there could 
be other rare bats on the site, including Bbrandt’s or whiskered, but no 
adequate survey has been conducted.

Nightingales and spotted flycatchers have nested within 20 metres of the 
proposed development.

Barr said the development was not “future-proofed” against climate change and 
increased flood risk. “It is all about status and finance and it is damaging to 
the UEA’s reputation. It’s putting finances over biodiversity and wellbeing and 
it isolates UEA more from the local community. I’m not against developing the 
existing sports pitches to make a better facility but this is going against 
their policies when it’s convenient for them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fuea-university-east-anglia-development-criticised-ian-mcewan-andrew-motion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb42efcde980f1cd0c847408ca49ac2c662b4f568%2F352_1051_1828_2284%2F1828.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ian%20McEwan%20and%20others%20criticise%20UEA%20for%20'thuggish'%20development%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fuea-university-east-anglia-development-criticised-ian-mcewan-andrew-motion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ian%20McEwan%20and%20others%20criticise%20UEA%20for%20%27thuggish%27%20development%20plans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fuea-university-east-anglia-development-criticised-ian-mcewan-andrew-motion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb42efcde980f1cd0c847408ca49ac2c662b4f568%2F352_1051_1828_2284%2F1828.jpg>
 Andrew Motion. 
Rupert Read, a reader in philosophy at UEA, said: “Like many people, I’ve 
known and loved this part of the Yare valley for 20 years. Once something like 
this is gone, it’s gone forever. That would be environmental vandalism. I do 
hope that UEA, with its strong environmental reputation in the balance, will 
think again.”
The university said the development would be done sensitively. A 
spokespersonsaid: “UEA takes its responsibility for protecting the environment 
extremely seriously, alongside its commitment to providing outstanding sporting 
facilities for its students and the wider community.

“The area has always been the university sports field and the proposed 
development would substantially increase the number of people who can enjoy the 
site, promoting physical activity and the resulting benefits to health and 
wellbeing. There will be a range of outdoor pitches, including football, 
lacrosse, cricket, softball and baseball, that can be enjoyed by the whole of 
the community.”

The spokesperson added: “The Yare valley is a very important part of the UEA 
campus. UEA recognises its responsibilities as a custodian of the valley and
spends time and resource 
<http://www.uea.ac.uk/about/media-room/latest-news/statements/-/asset_publisher/sM2Ps0KfWwRQ/content/statement-on-proposed-norwich-rugby-club-development>
 managing, maintaining and protecting the biodiversity within it. It has always 
been the intention to develop the sporting facilities in this area as the 
university grows. Our plan does this in a very sensitive way.”

Other alumni and experts to condemn the plans include the nature writer and 
Guardian country diaristMark Cocker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/06/uea-car-park-threat-crickets-norwich-uea-country-diary>
,Norfolk Wildlife Trust 
<http://norfolkwildlifetrust.blogspot.co.uk/2016/09/threat-to-wildlife-from-carpark-and.html>
 andTim O’Riordan 
<http://markavery.info/2016/09/05/guest-blog-threatened-valley-river-yare-prof-tim-oriordan/>
, emeritus professor of environmental sciences at UEA.

More than 2,500 people have signed a petition 
<https://www.change.org/p/south-norfolk-council-save-the-wildlife-habit-at-earlham-park-from-developers>
 opposing the plans, which are due to be considered by South Norfolk district 
council in early October.
 