
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
says taxpayers have been fully compensated for the multimillion dollar cost of 
the bungled 2016 census.

He said IBM <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ibm> had paid a “very 
substantial” but confidential settlement which “absolutely” covered the cost of 
the census debacle.

Last month, the head of the Australian Bureau of Statistics, David Kalisch, 
said the failure of the census websitewould cost taxpayers about $30m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/20/australias-2016-census-website-shutdown-to-cost-30m>
.

Speaking on radio 3AW on Friday, Turnbull said he planned to work through the 
recommendations fromAlastair McGibbon’s review of the census failure 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;query=Id%3A%22publications%2Ftabledpapers%2Fa41f4f25-a08e-49a7-9b5f-d2c8af94f5c5%22>
, which was released on Thursday. Thereview was critical 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/download/publications/tabledpapers/a41f4f25-a08e-49a7-9b5f-d2c8af94f5c5/upload_pdf/Review%20of%20the%202016%20eCensus%20-%20final%20report.pdf;fileType=application%2Fpdf#search=%22publications/tabledpapers/a41f4f25-a08e-49a7-9b5f-d2c8af94f5c5%22>
 of how IBM and the ABS handled the census fiasco and aftermath.

Census attacks 'eminently predictable', says PM's cyber security adviser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/25/census-attacks-eminently-predictable-says-pms-cyber-security-adviser>
It said the ABS had “steadfastly refused to own the issue and acknowledge 
responsibility for the factors leading to the events and shortcomings in the 
handling of events on the night”.

IBM “couldn’t handle a predictable problem”, a reference to the denial of 
service attacks thatshut down the ABS website on census night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/09/the-great-australian-census-fail-of-2016-website-crashes-under-load>
 in August.

Turnbull said on Friday the census failure was “overwhelmingly” IBM’s. 
“They’ve acknowledged that. They’ve paid up. They’ve accepted the blame and 
they should have,” he said. “They were being paid big money to deliver a 
particular service and they failed.”

When asked how much IBM had paid in compensation, Turnbull said: “It is 
confidential, but it’s a lot of money.”

Australian taxpayers paid nothing, he said. “The additional costs were well 
covered by the settlement.It would not be an exaggeration to say that we had a 
collective sense of humour failure about IBM’s performance here, and they have 
fessed up, they’ve paid up, and we’re going to learn the lessons of this 
incident very diligently.

The census farce is reminiscent of Wile E Coyote running off a cliff in 
pursuit of Road Runner | Dan Nolan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/10/the-census-farce-is-reminiscent-of-wile-e-coyote-running-off-a-cliff-in-pursuit-of-road-runner>
“IBM has paid up many millions of dollars.”


At a Senate estimates hearing in September, Kalisch blamed IBM for the census 
debacle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/23/australian-bureau-of-statistics-lays-blame-for-census-bungle-on-ibm>
.

On Thursday, a separate report into the census failure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/24/census-failure-like-sinking-house-with-cracks-in-walls-senate-committee-finds>
 was released by the Senate economics references committee.

It found the census was like a house with “a sinking foundation and cracks in 
the walls” because IBM and its subcontractors were in dispute over the bad 
build.

It said that primary responsibility for the debacle “lies with the government” 
and called on “the current minister, on behalf of the government, to take 
responsibility”.
 