
First it’s sea bass, and then an individually wrapped dover sole. Malcolm 
Walker is banging high-quality frozen seafood down on the table as if he’s 
demonstrating some kind of fish-based martial art. But he’s not planning an 
attack on theObserver – Walker is using the icy seafood as a key weapon in his 
attempt to fight back against the fast-growing discounters,Aldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> and Lidl, which are putting his 
home-grown discount chain under pressure.

Walker is trying to change the perception of Iceland from the home of the 
doner kebab pizza, cheap fish fingers and deals on fizzy pop into something 
with broader appeal. You can still buy frozen chocolate fudge cake for £1.50, 
two “deep dish” pizzas for £1 or a bag of Bernard Matthews mini-kievs for £2. 
But there are also frozen scallops, whole sea bass and swordfish steaks, as 
well as Slimming World ready meals, quinoa and frozen berries for juicing.

“We have been fighting on price for many years. Everybody knows we are cheap. 
Now we are trying to convince you that our food is better than you think it 
is,” says Walker.

“In England, frozen food has the reputation of being low quality – that’s 
nothing to do with it being frozen,” he says.

Findus Crispy Pancakes were ousted from Iceland’s freezers in 2014; the doner 
kebab pizza and bubble bobble prawns, which have generated many a column inch 
for Iceland in the past, have now been ditched in favour of cheese soufflés, 
frozen soup and woodfired pizzas, albeit alongside £1 cottage pies.

Bringing in more premium ranges has worked wonders for Aldi and Lidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl>, which have attracted middle-class 
shoppers with cheap lobster and champagne and managed to shrug off their image 
as the destination shop for skint students and those on benefits.

But Iceland has so far struggled to broaden its appeal in the same way. 
Whether it’s the cheesy Peter Andre ads, the lurid red-and-white branding or 
snobbery about stores piled high with cheap deals, the chain is a discounter 
that is not riding the discounter trend.

Aldi and Lidl are also able to offer the very keenest prices on everything 
from wine to nappies – because they focus on own-label products, sourced via 
their huge international parent companies, rather than the international brands 
that Iceland sells.

Iceland might also be continuing to suffer from its early link to the 
horsemeat scandal back in 2013.Traces of equine DNA were found in some Iceland 
burgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/may/10/horsemeat-scandal-timeline-investigation>
 in initial tests by Irish authorities, which generated huge adverse publicity. 
The level found – 0.1% – was well below the 1% threshold that UK food 
regulators later defined as indicative of contamination or adulteration. Other 
retailers, whose products were tested later, were not named for selling food 
with such trace levels of DNA.

Whatever the reason, sales at established stores sank 2.7% in the 40 weeks to 
1 January and underlying pre-tax profits slipped 1% to £107m.Last year, annual 
profits slumped by a quarter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/10/iceland-profits-fall-in-exceptionally-challenging-year-for-supermarkets>
.

So far, there is little sign that the upmarket food is pulling in the punters. 
New data published last week by research group Kantar showed grocery spending 
in the 12 weeks to the end of February up more than 15% at Aldi, and nearly 19% 
at Lidl, compared to the same period in 2015. Iceland spending was down 2.6%.

In terms of market share, Aldi now accounts for 5.8% of the UK grocery market, 
making it bigger than Waitrose and close to overtaking the Co-operative. 
Together, Aldi and Lidl have 10% of the market, meaning the big two discounters 
are snapping at Morrisons’ heels. Iceland has just 2.1% of the market.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ficeland-malcolm-walker-upmarket-food-to-fight-discounters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa0d058d3b412a198f527a96a2347283bae3f564%2F0_257_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iceland%20pins%20hopes%20on%20%E2%80%98posh%E2%80%99%20food%20to%20heat%20up%20its%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ficeland-malcolm-walker-upmarket-food-to-fight-discounters%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iceland%20pins%20hopes%20on%20%E2%80%98posh%E2%80%99%20food%20to%20heat%20up%20its%20profits&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Ficeland-malcolm-walker-upmarket-food-to-fight-discounters%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa0d058d3b412a198f527a96a2347283bae3f564%2F0_257_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 There are plans to change Iceland’s branding and store fronts. Photograph: 
David Sillitoe/Observer 
“Life is tough,” says Walker. “Aldi and Lidl are having a big impact but the 
growth in their market share is not that big at all ... but they have forced 
prices down because [rivals] want to be seen as comparable as much as they can. 
There’s food commodity deflation, the oil price is down and dairy prices are on 
the floor.

“In the past four years, 3,000 convenience stores have opened in Britain and 
then there’re the pound shops, Home Bargains and B&M. Five years ago, none of 
them sold food; now they all do. Everybody is eating away at market share. It 
is an oversupplied industry – and we have to compete with everybody on price.”

Despite the chain’s current trading difficulties, Walker, a veteran retailer 
who founded Iceland in 1970 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/15/iceland-boss-malcolm-walker-interview>
, last year won increased backing fromChristo Wiese, the acquisitive South 
African entrepreneur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/27/christo-wiese-south-african-billionaire-prepares-for-move-to-uk>
 who is also a major shareholder inSteinhoff International, the company 
currently trying to buy Argos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/19/home-retail-group-receives-takeover-offer-111m-pounds-higher-than-sainsburys>
.

Wiese’s Brait investment vehicle upped its stake in Iceland to 57% from about 
20% in October last year. It sees Iceland as a way to get a slice of 
food-discounter action in the UK and has been rumoured to want to link it with 
an acquisition of Morrisons.

That may or may not be true but, for now, Wiese is backing Walker’s plan to 
expand his new Food Warehouse chain – which has bigger stores and a broader 
range of products. Walker plans to double the number of Food Warehouse stores 
to about 24 over the next year, with outlets already planned in Manchester, 
Bristol and Reading.

Meanwhile, more exotic or premium items that have sold well in Food Warehouse, 
from scallops to ostrich and kangaroo steaks, are also being introduced into 
Iceland’s 850 stores. The group is taking £100,000 a week in sales of scallops 
and sea bass and sold 300,000 lobsters over Christmas. Walker says that is down 
to ordinary shoppers experimenting with new ideas, not an influx of BMW drivers.

He insists he is not trying to move upmarket and is happy with the chain’s 
demographics – about 30% of customers are middle class. “We still sell 
inexpensive foods. But if you want to buy an £8 dover sole, it’s there,” says 
Walker.

He believes the problem is a stigma about frozen food in the UK, although we 
have the upmarket Cook frozen ready-meals chain here. “We have such a strong 
brand but it is almost working against us now,” Walker says. He’s even toying 
with a new store front that would ditch the bright red.

Walker points out that in the Czech Republic, where Iceland now has four 
stores with plans for one more in the near future, the retailer is seen as 
posh. “Stupid, middle-class people think chilled is better. I am trying to 
remove the prejudice against frozen food and get people to understand it is 
better for you [than chilled or fresh],” he says.
 