
One of the most surprising statistics to emerge from Kleiner Perkins Caufield 
Byers' annualInternet Trends Report 
<http://www.slideshare.net/kleinerperkins/internet-trends-2014-05-28-14-pdf>, 
written by partner Mary Meeker, was the amount of time users spend consuming 
media on mobile devices. This highlights the immense opportunity mobile still 
presents.

According to the report, consumers spend 20% of their time using mobile 
devices, up from 12% last year. Despite this, advertisers are still only 
spending 4% of total budget on mobile ads, up 3% from last year. This is almost 
the inverse of print media, which still receives 19% of advertising investment, 
despite taking up just 5% of consumers' time. Advertisers are aware of these 
statistics and understand the value of mobile ads – but technical obstacles are 
preventing them from acting.

There are a number of roadblocks for potential mobile advertisers. These 
challenges include issues with attribution and tracking, the lack of 
standardised ad formats and how to create landing pages that will work across 
multiple devices. Some of these also extend beyond the advertiser's control, 
for example network load times and device usability issues. But on the plus 
side, some of these challenges are quickly being tackled – for example page 
load times are decreasing, partly due to advances in device speed as well in 
increases in wireless speeds as the rollout of 4G in Europe and 4G LTE in the 
US continues.

One challenge that persists is the issue of designing landing pages that look 
good across all devices. The smartphone and tablet market is ery fragmented, 
with a plethora of screen sizes that need to be supported. Even if you were to 
support only mobile devices from Apple, you would need to modify your landing 
pages to support the iPad, iPad Mini and two iPhone screen sizes. However, 
having a fully responsive site can be worth the effort you need to put in. 
Voices.comreported 
<http://www.marketingsherpa.com/article/case-study/b2b-web-optimization-mobile-responsive-design>
 a 140% increase in transactions from their responsive efforts.

As for tracking and attribution, Google has introduced Estimated Cross-Device 
Conversions 
<http://adwords.blogspot.co.uk/2013/10/estimated-total-conversions.html> in 
Adwords to enable advertisers to track actions that start on one device and 
lead to a conversion on another – such as when a customer does a search on 
their mobile device but switches to their deskop to complete the purchase. 
Facebook has also releasedCustom Audiences 
<https://www.facebook.com/business/news/custom-audiences> to allow advertisers 
to deliver targeted cross-device ads to users who visit their website or use 
their mobile application.

As for mobile ad formats, the Interactive Advertising Bureau (IAB) has been 
working closely with some of the largest internet companies to ensure the 
industry guidelines and ad specifications don't get left behind, through their
Mobile Rising Stars <http://www.iab.net/risingstarsmobile> program – an 
initiative to standardise cutting-edge ad formats. Facebook, which isn't part 
of this program, has been innovating quickly and testing multiple ad formats in 
its news feed. It seems it may have stuck gold: Mark Zuckerberg claims the 
company'sMobile App Ads 
<https://developers.facebook.com/docs/ads-for-apps/mobile-app-ads/> have driven 
350m downloads 
<http://venturebeat.com/2014/04/23/facebooks-app-install-ads-have-driven-350m-app-downloads-to-date/>
 from their 1bn a month active mobile users.

Facebook also launched Ad Network at the end of April, allowing advertisers to 
push their existing mobile ads – previously only viewable within Facebook – to 
a network of third-party applications. Their platform includes all their 
existing (and somewhat controversial) targeting tools, allowing advertisers to 
reach highly targeted users of third-party apps.

It's not just in-app advertising that is taking off, according to a report 
<http://www.marinsoftware.com/resources/whitepapers/mobile-search-advertising-around-the-globe-2014-annual-report>
 released earlier this year by Marlin Software, an ad management firm. The US 
mobile search prices for Google are up by nearly 21% on smartphones and 23% on 
tablets.

Innovation on all fronts (from device manufacturers, ad networks and 
businesses) has helped conversion rates – the percentage of website visitors 
that purchase – on tablets beat those on conventional computers for the first 
time ever. Last year conversion rates for smartphones and tablets jumped by 57% 
and 67% respectively, compared with 36% for computers.

In the face of these challenges, it may take some time before ad spend matches 
consumer consumption habits. Once it does, however, the market will be forever 
altered for advertisers and consumers alike.

John McLaughlin is a start-up founder and entrepreneur based in Manhattan.

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>. 

All Guardian Media Network content is editorially independent except for 
pieces labelled 'Advertisement feature'. Find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 