
I went back to my village in Nigeria this year, after an absence of 10 years. 
The Igbo are a travelling people: we cross towns, cities, nations and 
continents in search of new opportunities. Thus there is a saying in Igboland:
Agaracha (the traveller) must come back 
<https://twitter.com/chibunduonuzo/status/111827358754934785>. No matter how 
far-flung a person, no matter how many waters he has crossed, he must 
eventually make his way home. And here I was, 10 years after I left Nigeria for 
England,Agaracha returning to Ubulu.

Terrible traffic, no public toilets, no rail system – but millions of us ♥ 
Lagos | Tolu Ogunlesi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/24/lagos-nigeria-happiness-least-liveable>
I expected some epiphany to come to me . I had a certain idea of myself as I 
approached: portrait of the writer going home. My notebook lay open with my pen 
poised to jot down my first impressions.

The reality was more prosaic. When the bus turned off the main road into my 
village, the tarmac ran out and we were faced with a path of mud. It was the 
rainy season and the usually compact dirt road had disintegrated. We 
contemplated completing the rest of the journey on foot. It was not the 
glorious homecoming we had imagined, but we were hungry and eager to reach our 
destination.

The bus carrying our luggage went first, slipping and sliding its way to the 
far side where the road was firmer. Next, the van with our armed security 
guards sped through recklessly, wheels barely touching the ground. Last was our 
bus, laden with uncles, aunties and cousins, two generations of the Onuzo clan 
stuffed into a 40-seater Toyota. There was a horrible moment when it seemed we 
would be stuck in the mud. The wheels churned. The engine struggled. Then with 
a lurch we were free and on our way again.

When we finally reached the family compound, there was singing, dancing and a 
throng of waiting arms. There were strangers who said they were friends and 
strangers who said they were relatives. All were embraced. All were exclaimed 
over.

I sang and danced and embraced but something was wrong with my glorious 
homecoming. At the end of my first day in Ubulu, the only thing I had written 
in my notebook was, “Why is the road still not tarred?”

As I moved through the village over the next few days, I was delighted and 
dismayed by how little had changed. Ubulu was still as beautiful as it had been 
in my childhood. The squalid, grey urbanisation that certain types of 
“development” bring toAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> had not 
touched my village. There were still wild places to run in, tracts of free 
vegetation, acres of sky filled at night with stars you could see. I bit into 
mangoes seconds after they had fallen from trees. I breathed in clean air, 
fresher than the smog we inhaled in Lagos.

When I was a child, we never went home with armed guards – it would have been 
unthinkable

But yet, after a decade, Ubulu still had no electricity, no local industry, no 
municipal authority to collect the heaps of rubbish around the village, and no 
computers in the village school. The villagers were still the same wiry, 
hardened people who were quick to smile a greeting – but poor. Very poor.

There was a national election in Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> when I visited but you wouldn’t 
have known it. Ubulu doesn’t even have billboards. A few enterprising local 
aspirants had set up sandwich boards with their jowly faces on either side, but 
the big hitters, both at the state and federal level, didn’t bother with us.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fafrica-rising-villages-left-behind-nigeria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441816323715%2F9f606a2d-bbe0-4b50-b572-126e74cb4f3f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20Africa%20is%20rising%2C%20why%20are%20the%20villages%20left%20behind%3F%20%7C%20Chibundu%20Onuzo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fafrica-rising-villages-left-behind-nigeria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20Africa%20is%20rising%2C%20why%20are%20the%20villages%20left%20behind%3F%20%7C%20Chibundu%20Onuzo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Fsep%2F10%2Fafrica-rising-villages-left-behind-nigeria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F9%2F9%2F1441816323715%2F9f606a2d-bbe0-4b50-b572-126e74cb4f3f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 ‘When the bus turned off the main road into my village, the tarmac ran out and 
we were faced with a path of mud.’ Photograph: Chibundu Onuza 
And though there have been few material changes in the past decade, there will 
be stark social changes. When I was a child, we never went home with armed 
guards. It would have been unthinkable: such measures were for politicians and 
other dangerous people, not the doctors, lawyers and engineers that make up my 
family. Now, with kidnappings and armed robberies common in south-eastern 
Nigeria, you grit your teeth and pay the cost of the extra security. Throughout 
my stay, each night the guards would give a single blast of their sirens to 
warn any lurking village youths turned criminals that our compound was armed 
and willing to retaliate. It was a necessary precaution. Our compound had been 
attacked before.

Returning to Lagos was like travelling to a new country. Lights, roads, public 
transport, billboards, noise, enterprise: the good, bad and necessary of 
urbanisation were here. Lagos is far from perfect, but I could see why every 
day, thousands flock from rural Nigeria to my city.

Naturally I am proud of how Lagos continues to grow and develop year after 
year. It is true that regional discrepancies occur everywhere in the world. 
Northern Italy versus southern Italy, northern England versus the south-east, 
Greece versus Denmark, and so on. But I am worried by the tendency to conflate 
progress in Lagos with progress in Nigeria and the increasingly dominant 
“Africa rising” narrative, which focuses on megacities and hurries the cameras 
away from places such as my village. Yes, the economies of Lagos, Nairobi and 
Luanda are growing. Yes, the rich are getting richer and there is a burgeoning 
middle class. But where do places like Ubulu feature in this story?

Every oil boom has passed these villages by. Every military, civilian and 
interim government has forgotten us. I think of thenew Buhari government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/07/nigeria-muhammadu-buhari-first-100-days-video>
 in Nigeria, which came into power promising change. Change is not only for 
Lagos and Port Harcourt and Abuja. Change is not just for the urban centres 
where the foreign media will go. Change is forChibok 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/21/chibok-nigeria-boko-haram-kidnap-girls-school-borno>
. Change is for Ubulu. Change is for the villages of the Niger delta.

A country is not measured by the number of millionaires it can produce, or the 
number of private jets its citizens fly, or the gallons of champagne they can 
guzzle. A country is judged by how it treats it poorest and weakest. The people 
of Ubulu are still waiting for change.
 