
Is the Conservative party moving back to God – and what would it mean if it 
were? BothTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-the-vicars-daughter-poised-to-pull-the-tories-and-the-country-from-the-abyss>
 andAndrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/07/tory-leadership-andrea-leadsom-promises-prosperity-not-austerity>
 are unashamed Christians; Stephen Crabb might this week be a slightly more 
ashamed Christian after he was caughtsexting a campaign worker 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/dwp-secretary-stephen-crabb-accused-of-hypocrisy-after-sexting-woman-a7128451.html>
, but until that story broke he was very firmly counted among the Christians in 
the party and a paid-up member of the Conservative Christian Fellowship.

Theresa May: unpredictable, moralistic, and heading to No 10
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-the-vicars-daughter-poised-to-pull-the-tories-and-the-country-from-the-abyss>
Crabb gave the fellowship’s annual Wilberforce lecture last year 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/platform/2015/12/faith-freedom-and-one-nation-the-full-text-of-stephen-crabbs-recent-wilberforce-address.html>
, in which he blamed secularism for what he saw as its part in the rise of 
Muslim fundamentalism. “It is easier for a politician to admit to smoking weed 
or watching porn than it is to admit that they might take prayer seriously in 
their daily life,” he said.

May is undemonstrative about her faith but it is, by all accounts, a 
significant presence in her life. Although her time in the Home Office has been 
marked by an unremitting hostility towards immigration, she has also campaigned 
consistently and fiercely against human trafficking, and pushed theModern 
Slavery Act <https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/modern-slavery-bill> 
through parliament. This is a cause that goes right back to the beginning of 
Evangelical social action in England, with the 19th century campaigns against 
the slave trade, and one which unites the churches in this country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fconservative-party-god-theresa-may-andrea-leadsom-stephen-crabb-christians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6de455cf94a9cdd3a43f6c0b88820254b2b7a3fe%2F514_364_1408_844%2F1408.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20the%20Conservative%20party%E2%80%99s%20doing%20God%20again%2C%20what%20sort%20of%20God%20is%20it%3F%20%7C%20Andrew%20Brown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fconservative-party-god-theresa-may-andrea-leadsom-stephen-crabb-christians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20the%20Conservative%20party%E2%80%99s%20doing%20God%20again%2C%20what%20sort%20of%20God%20is%20it%3F%20%7C%20Andrew%20Brown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fconservative-party-god-theresa-may-andrea-leadsom-stephen-crabb-christians%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6de455cf94a9cdd3a43f6c0b88820254b2b7a3fe%2F514_364_1408_844%2F1408.jpg>
 ConservativeHome’s Tim Montgomerie was one of the founders of the Conservative 
Christian Fellowship in 1990. Photograph: Steve Meddle/Rex/Shutterstock 
Gareth Wallace, head of the Conservative Christian Fellowship 
<http://www.christian-conservatives.org.uk>, paid tribute to May’s dedication 
to the cause: in his previous job working for the Salvation Army, he had seen 
her turn up to a meeting organised in her constituency simply as an MP, not as 
the minister. This is important because the thrust of Christian political 
engagement is moving away from sexuality and towards social action.

Wallace says: “The culture has moved on. People have been burned, or they are 
reluctant to spend to much political capital on sexual morality.” Certainly 
none of the most prominent campaigners have taken up the really controversial 
positions espoused by some Christians, such as opposition to abortion, the 
large-scale resettlement of Christian refugees from the wars in Iraq and Syria, 
or even a commitment to the0.7% foreign aid goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/mar/09/uk-passes-bill-law-aid-target-percentage-income>
.

People have been burned, or they are reluctant to spend to much political 
capital on sexual morality
Gareth Wallace, CCF 
May has been a champion of marriage equality, in a quiet way, while Leadsom 
and Crabb rather more noisily opposed it. But it is difficult to pin English 
Christianity down to any particular policy positions. Theologically, there is 
probably very little to separatethe earnest evangelical Tim Farron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/26/tim-farron-liberal-democrats-interview-gods-plan-for-me>
, who now leads the Liberal Democrats, from Crabb, but politically there is a 
great gulf between them. The difference is perhaps that Farron goes to some 
lengths to draw attention away from his beliefs, while Crabb and the other 
advertise them. Meanwhile, the hierarchies of both the Church of England and 
the Roman Catholic church remain a long way to the left of the Conservative 
party. Only one of the Church of England’s 104 bishops has admitted to voting 
to leave the EU, while it’s quite clear that a large number of parishioners did 
so.

'Lasses' jobs' replacing industry led to Brexit vote, says clergyman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/08/lasses-jobs-replacing-industry-led-brexit-vote-hartlepool-clergyman-graeme-buttery>
But if bishops can no longer deliver the vote, why do politicians bother? One 
answer is personal conviction. There is little electoral advantage to being 
known as a fervent Christian, and in some circles, it’s a huge disadvantage. 
Nonetheless, open religious faith is more common among MPs, certainly in the 
Tories, than in the public at large. About a quarter of the parliamentary party 
are members or supporters of the Conservative Christian Fellowship.

Another possible reason is that organised religion, even in decline, manages 
to be much more successful as a voluntary organisation than most political 
parties. There are more Methodists than Conservative party members, and more 
people in Anglican churches on any Sunday than members of all the parties put 
together, even after the extraordinary recent surge in Labour membership.

The central paradox is that the forms of Christianity which are declining 
fastest are also those whichAndrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom> appealed to and 
articulated, or inarticulated: a cultural, nationalist and rural conservatism. 
Those that are growing, or declining least, are culturally much more flexible 
and greatly strengthened by immigration. The most Christian part of the country 
is London, which is also the most solidly remain. So the real question is not 
whether the Tories are growing more Christian, but what sort of Christianity is 
growing within them.
 