
Heroin and opiate use are on the rise nationally on a trajectory that’s 
alarming state and federal governments – the Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention announced in December that deaths from drug overdoses are at an
all-time high <http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm6450a3.htm>, with 61% 
from those two causes.

But this is nothing new in our correctional system, where heroin and opiate 
addictions have long been pervasive and untreated problems.

A 2004 study from the Bureau of Justice Statistics showed that 70% of state 
prisoners and 64% of federal prisoners used drugs regularly at the time they 
committed their crimes <http://www.bjs.gov/content/pub/pdf/dudsfp04.pdf>. 
Twenty-five percent of offenders convicted of violent crimes were high at the 
time of offense.

How opiates became the love of my life | Alisha Choquette
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/01/how-opiates-became-the-love-of-my-life>
The numbers are not specific to the type of drug used, but we’d be fools to 
think opiates don’t lead the list.


From serving more than six years in a maximum security prison in Connecticut, 
I know that many crimes were complicated by opiates. Of the 125 inmates who 
were my cellmates, 76 had convictions related to their heroin addiction. 
Countless more women throughout the prison had heroin habits but, because they 
were incarcerated for crimes such as robbery instead of possession, their 
addictions didn’t always turn up in the right statistics.

Heroin addicts are 15 times more likely to commit robberies, 20 times more 
likely to commit burglaries and 10 times more likely to commit larcenies 
<https://www.ncjrs.gov/pdffiles/drugsupr.pdf> than offenders who don’t use 
drugs. And when they leave prison, heroin’s siren song calls them back because, 
even though drugs find their way inside correctional facilities, the snitches 
and safety measures assure that the supply is never enough to sustain a habit.

Recidivism rates aren’t parsed out by the type of drug used by various 
offenders, but I know from seeing almost 85% of my cellmates return to prison 
while I was still there that the recidivism rate for opiate addicts is very 
high, especially after totaling drug-related charges like possession and 
distribution with drug-complicated charges like burglary and larceny.

There are ways to mitigate the crisis, but we aren’t using them. One key 
example: ever since 2010, when the FDA approved the long-acting shot Vivitrol 
for treatment of opiate addiction, prosecutors have described it as “exceeding 
expectations” in reducing recidivism and relapse for both opiates and heroin. 
In Washington County, Maryland,81 of 83 people who received a Vivitrol shot 
through a pilot program WHEN stayed clean 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/magazine/his-last-shot-will-a-monthly-jab-of-a-new-drug-keep-this-addict-out-of-jail/2015/03/05/7f054354-7a4c-11e4-84d4-7c896b90abdc_story.html>
; that’s a small trial, but a 98% success rate.

Departing prisoners who suffer from opiate addiction are actually the best 
candidates for Vivitrol, because people who can receive the shot must have 
refrained from opiate use for the previous seven to 10 days.

Despite the ideal conditions for Vivitrol administration, only a few prisons 
provide the shot to men and women as they leave custody because it is so 
expensive. Pilot projects in handful of correctional facilities have been 
supplied the drug at no cost from its manufacturer, Ireland-based Alkermes. 
Grants from the Justice Department and lowered prices for municipalities have 
enabled a couple more programs.

Once these returning citizens are enrolled in Medicaid, the entitlement 
program usually picks up the $1,000 cost for each monthly shot.

Until they are enrolled in healthcare coverage, though, people leaving prison 
with an opiate addiction but without a Vivitrol shot are at a high risk of 
relapse. The nature of the disease makes good choices impossible, and relapse 
within days from discharge happens in40% t0 60% of cases 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2014/08/10/332352845/recovery-coach-helps-an-addict-resist-heroins-lure>
. Somehow, despite all of its promise, we don’t use the shot as much as we 
should.

For instance, Vivitrol hasn’t injected itself into the front end of the 
justice system, into pretrial diversion and sentencing. If addicts who land in 
prison are lucky enough to get the shot, they’ve still already logged time 
behind bars. If judges could and would order Vivitrol administration for 
pretrial release (after the seven to 10 days of court-imposed abstinence) or as 
part of an alternative sentence, we would meet both our decarceration and 
public health goals.

Historically, alternative sentencing has been criticized as too lenient and a 
threat to public safety 
<http://harvardjlg.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/01/Hopkins.pdf> because many 
people recidivate during diversion. If used to keep people out of prison, both 
before and after the resolution of their charges, Vivitrol’s proven success has 
the potential to vindicate diversion programming because more addicts will 
remain free yet won’t relapse and reoffend.

Moreover, Vivitrol can erase concerns about treatment posed by traditional 
opiate substitutes like methadone and suboxone. Unlike Vivitrol, methadone and 
suboxone can produce a high and can be deadly by themselves, even moreso in 
conjunction with other substances. Among all narcotic-related deaths in 2004,
only cocaine <http://articles.latimes.com/2007/feb/26/local/me-methadone26> 
killed more people in the United States than methadone. It’s a well-intended 
treatment, but it’s far from ideal.

Substance abuse experts warn that Vivitrol isn’t magic bullet; that someone 
who’s in recovery needs to work on decision-making if they want to stay clean 
long term. That may be true, but Vivitrol might be the fairytale key that 
unlocks the doors of the prison of addiction and bolts them closed so people 
can’t turn back.

To protect public health and safety, there’s no reason not to administer 
Vivitrol to as many people who are eligible for its use. And the front line of 
a surging crisis is the perfect place to start.
 