
What is theatre for? Is it an economic motor or a social instrument? Or, as 
the Greeks thought, a fundamental part of the democratic process, as vital as 
voting? And what the hell are its audiences doing sitting there in the dark?

I am one of a group of a playwrights and academics who have tried to answer 
the last question in a report,Critical Mass 
<http://britishtheatreconference.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/05/Critical-Mass-BTC-AHRC.pdf>
, which forms part of a major research project by the Arts and Humanities 
Research Council to define cultural value (what people get from the arts that 
they can't get anywhere else). Over the past 10 months we have surveyed 
audiences at the Royal Shakespeare Company in Stratford, the Young Vic in 
London and Plymouth's Drum theatre.

There was good and bad news. The good is that audiences take their theatre 
hugely seriously. Most started young: 60% of our sample had been to the theatre 
before their 10th birthday, and many had performed at school and beyond. 
Audiences think about the shows they are going to beforehand, and almost 
everybody discusses the plays they have seen afterwards. For one respondent, 
theatre going provides a shared experience "you can talk about, and reminisce 
over in years to come".

Asked about what they value about theatre, "liveness" came top. But something 
fascinating happens over time. Asked what they got from a show immediately 
after a performance, most people mentioned sensual aspects and specific 
dramatic moments. Two months on, what they remember is meaning â€“ 67% of our 
respondents connected what they had seen to events in their own lives, and 84% 
to contemporary events, from Korean purges to Plebgate.

The bad news is twofold. Although the age range of our respondents has a 
reasonable spread, their educational status does not: 70% had degrees, more 
than half at postgraduate level. In this, our sample reflects national trends. 
In 2012 the cultural historian Robert Hewison analysed a range of studies, all 
of which confirmed that the most likely theatre-goers are highly educated 
Londoners, with adults from ethnic minorities the least likely.

The other bad news arises out of the good. If, as we found, the theatre-going 
habit starts with early theatre visits and participation in drama, if it 
continues to be buttressed and deepened by sympathetic familial and social 
networks, then the later you start, the less likely you are to place theatre at 
the centre of your life.

In speeches last month the culture secretary, Sajid Javid, and his shadow, 
Harriet Harman, rightly insisted thatarts organisations expand their social and 
ethnic reach <https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/culture-for-all>. But 
there's a danger in writing off the people who actually go the theatre (or 
flock in extraordinary numbers to see shows live-streamed to cinemas). 
Graduates are people, too. And if they go to the theatre, they are more likely 
to be women than men. Actual audiences showed us that theatre provides most 
value as a form of lifelong learning rather than an occasional treat. How, 
then, to extend these benefits?

The first, obvious way to do that is to give children early experience of 
theatre, as participants as well as spectators. This is exactly the opposite of 
what is happening: in primary school, participation in arts activities is down 
by a third since 2010 (and the number sitting arts subjects at GCSE is 
declining). The last thing the Arts Council should be doing is cutting grants 
to companies that appeal to working-class audiences and children, such as Red 
Ladder in Leeds and Birmingham's Big Brum. And companies should continue to 
extend the theatre experience beyond the show's duration.

Remarkably for a Conservative politician, Javid hardly mentioned the economic 
case for the arts, celebrating instead their power to move and transport. For 
the people we surveyed, theatre provided much more than "mere" entertainment. 
It bound them closer to their partners and families, gave them experiences of 
unique intensity, and expanded their view of the world. As one respondent put 
it: "It's hugely valuable to me. I would be bereft if I was unable to go."
 