
During his visit to Africa this summer, the US president, Barack Obama, 
addressedlegal discrimination against LGBT individuals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/25/barack-obama-african-states-abandon-anti-gay-discrimination>
. Meeting the Kenyan president, Uhuru Kenyatta,Obama said 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/07/25/politics/obama-kenya-kenyatta/>: “When you 
start treating people differently not because of any harm they are doing to 
anybody, but because they are different, that’s the path whereby freedoms begin 
to erode.”

Unfortunately, the response from Kenyatta was that “there are some things that 
we must admit we don’t share [with the US]. Our culture, our societies don’t 
accept.”

As I dug deep, I realised that African culture is no stranger to homosexual 
behaviours and acts

This is the same argument that Robert Mugabe used 
<http://www.washingtonblade.com/2014/03/28/zimbabwe-president-describes-homosexuality-inhuman/>
 to suppress the human rights of LGBT people in Zimbabwe; that the former 
president of Nigeria,Goodluck Jonathan, used 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/world/nigeria-president-goodluck-jonathan-bans-gay-meetings-1.2495376>
 when he signed the most dangerous law against LGBT people in the modern world; 
and thatPresident Yoweri Museveni used 
<http://www.monitor.co.ug/News/National/Museveni-s-Anti-Homosexuality-speech/-/688334/2219956/-/vinrt7/-/index.html>
 in a ceremonial signing of theanti-gay bill in Uganda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/02/uganda-celebrates-anti-gay-law>. 
This year Gambia’s president Yahya Jammeh called for gay people’sthroats to be 
slit 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/gambias-president-yahya-jammeh-threatens-slit-throats-gay-people-1919881>
.

When I was appointed by Berlin’s Humboldt University this year to teach the 
course “Pre- and post-colonial sexual orientation and sexual identity in 
Africa”, I knew I had a huge task before me. I had to teach students about a 
history that is mostly unwritten.

In digging up facts I found that, while many Africans say that homosexuality 
is un-African, African culture is no stranger to homosexual behaviours and acts.

For example, in my local language (Yoruba), the word for “homosexual” is 
adofuro, a colloquialism for someone who has anal sex. It might sound insulting 
and derogatory, however, the point is there is a word for the behaviour. 
Moreover, this is not a new word; it is as old as the Yoruba culture itself.

In the northern part of Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, 
yan daudu is a Hausa term to described effeminate men who are considered to be 
wives to men. While the Yoruba word might be more about behaviour than 
identity, this Hausa term is more about identity. You have to look and act like 
ayan daudu to be called one. It is not an identity you can just carry. These 
words are neutral; they are not infused with hate or disgust.

Barack Obama tells African states to abandon anti-gay discrimination
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/25/barack-obama-african-states-abandon-anti-gay-discrimination>
In the Buganda Kingdom <http://www.buganda.or.ug/>, part of modern-day Uganda, 
King Mwanga II 
<http://www.arcados.ch/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/MURRAY-ROSCOE-BOY-WIVES-FEMALE-HUSBANDS-98.pdf>
 was openly gay and faced no hate from his subjects until white men brought the 
Christian church and its condemnation. Though King Mwanga is the most prominent 
African recorded as being openly gay, he was not alone.

In Boy-Wives and Female Husbands 
<http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/at/summary/v047/47.1brockman.html>, a book 
examining homosexuality and feminism in Africa, the researchers found 
‘‘explicit”Bushman artwork 
<http://www.africaimagelibrary.com/?search=bushman+painting> that depicts men 
engaging in same-sex sexual activity. There have been other indicators that the 
transition fromboyhood to adulthood 
<http://www.arcados.ch/wp-content/uploads/2012/06/MURRAY-ROSCOE-BOY-WIVES-FEMALE-HUSBANDS-98.pdf>
 within many African ethnic groups involved same-sex sexual activities. So what 
accounts for the current dismissal of homosexuality on the continent?

One factor is the increased popularity of fundamental Christianity, by way of 
American televangelists, since the 1980s. While Africans argued that 
homosexuality was a western import, they in turn used a western religion as the 
basis for their argument. When I have challenged people who are anti-gay, many 
have said that it is not our culture. However, when you probe further, they 
argue that homosexuality is not in the Bible. But the Bible is not our 
historical culture. This shows there is real confusion about Africa’s past.

Reinforcing this is the fact that populist homophobia has kept many 
politicians in power. AcrossAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, 
if you hate gay people, you get votes.

As a Nigerian gay man, these myths about homosexuality create a dark cloud 
over my head. They leave me trying to navigate my way through self-denial, 
rejection, love and the burden of guilt. While to many people the assertion 
“homosexuality is un-African” might just be words, to all African LGBT people 
it puts our lives in imminent danger. It is used inSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica> to rape lesbians. It is used to 
pass laws and to jail, threaten or kill gay rights activists. It is used to 
dehumanise LGBT people across Africa and legitimise the hate that we face. It 
is the reason I receive death threats, which ultimately drove me into exile 
from my home in Nigeria.

As long as the notion that homosexuality is un-African persists, Kenyatta will 
receive applause, Mugabe will win elections, and parliaments across the 
continent will reintroduce harmful laws.

To stop all this, we need to start by re-telling our history and remembering 
our true African culture, one that celebrates diversity, promotes equality and 
acceptance, and recognises the contribution of everyone, whatever their 
sexuality.
 