
Emilia Price was 20 when she became pregnant. She was taking the contraceptive 
pill and did not want a child. But as she stared at her positive pregnancy test 
in a toilet cubicle in a shopping centre in Belfast, she knew she was facing a 
stressful decision: travel overseas for an abortion, seek out an illegal and 
potentially dangerous solution such as buying abortion pills online, or 
continue with the unwanted pregnancy.

Northern Ireland medics fear prison over abortion advice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/05/northern-ireland-medics-fear-prison-abortion-advice>
Although it would take her years to pay back the debt, she used her new credit 
card to pay for the journey from Belfast to London so she could have a 
termination.


“I remember trying to hide how sick I felt as I boarded the plane, terrified 
they wouldn’t let me fly. I felt desperately ill during the journey, and I was 
retching the whole way on my empty stomach,” Pricesaid. “I thought everyone on 
board must have known where I was going on that early morning flight.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fabortion-legal-northern-ireland-women-suffer-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F21%2F1450713067073%2FKP_865361_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='If%20abortion%20were%20legal%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%2C%20women%20wouldn't%20have%20to%20suffer'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fabortion-legal-northern-ireland-women-suffer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27If%20abortion%20were%20legal%20in%20Northern%20Ireland%2C%20women%20wouldn%27t%20have%20to%20suffer%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F05%2Fabortion-legal-northern-ireland-women-suffer-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F12%2F21%2F1450713067073%2FKP_865361_crop_640x480.jpg>
 ‘If abortion were legal in Northern Ireland, women wouldn’t have to suffer.’
Link to video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/jan/05/abortion-legal-northern-ireland-women-suffer-video>
Northern Irish law allows abortion in only a fraction of cases: if there is a 
serious risk to a pregnant woman’s life or of long-term damage to her physical 
or mental health. Just 23 legal NHS abortions took place in Northern Ireland 
last year, compared withmore than 200,000 in the rest of the UK 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjg3fDTjIHKAhUFXRoKHR0fDkwQFgggMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gov.uk%2Fgovernment%2Fuploads%2Fsystem%2Fuploads%2Fattachment_data%2Ffile%2F319460%2FAbortion_Statistics__England_and_Wales_2013.pdf&usg=AFQjCNEQzXXQ_HY6Bt-STtf8BBJRewborw&sig2=zE-uFe62CTlMqlkbx0RZ0Q&cad=rja>
.


“The clinic I went to was full of Irish girls,” said Price, which is not her 
real name. “I was crying as they sedated me, and an Irish nurse held my hand as 
it happened. She reminded me of my granny and I remember thinking that if my 
grandparents were alive they would have been horrified at what I was doing.


I remember trying to hide how sick I felt as I boarded the plane, terrified 
they wouldn’t let me fly
Emilia Price 
“But what makes me cry to this day is not being able to tell my mum. I would 
have given anything to have had her with me on that journey to London.”

Official figures for 2013 suggest 800 Northern Irish women travelled to 
England for an abortion, among them a 13-year-old who became pregnant through 
incest. This figure is based on addresses given by clients, which may mean that 
in reality the number is much higher.

Sarah Gallagher from Belfast, like Price , has told very few people about her 
abortions. Gallagher, whose name has been changed, travelled to England twice 
for the procedure between 1999 and 2006. The 45-year-old believes the stigma 
surrounding the procedure and the region’s narrow views on women’s sexuality 
and family affected her decision and significantly impacted her wellbeing.


“The trauma of travelling to England and the secrecy was much more preferable 
than it would have been to tell my family,” she said. “As well as making a very 
personal decision, the decision was clouded and complicated by trying to 
separate myself from my family, and the church.

“In a more free society I could have committed to having the child. However, 
in 1999 I felt that my family would not accept it, and couldn’t have dealt with 
me being pregnant outside of marriage and, truthfully, outside of any 
meaningful relationship. To this day, there would be a shame if I was to reveal 
this truth. And so, I do not feel I will ever talk publicly or open about it.”


Northern Ireland’s restrictive rules are often the hardest for people lacking 
the financial means or the close support networks..

Given women in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> are unable to access NHS 
abortion services at all, the costs of travelling to a private clinic in 
England can be anywhere between £400 and £2,000. This depends on how advanced 
the pregnancy is, whether an overnight stay is required, and the method of 
abortion. These costs inevitably result in some women continuing pregnancies 
they don’t want, or seeking dangerous and illegal solutions.

Clara from County Down found out she was pregnant in October. Already a mother 
to a young son, she did not want another child. But lacking the money to 
travel, she was left with no alternative but to terminate the pregnancy using 
abortion pills bought online.

Mifepristone and misoprostol, which are illegal in Northern Ireland and the 
Irish republic, are taken together to trigger a miscarriage up to the ninth 
week of pregnancy. A dip in the number of women travelling to England for 
abortions each year appears to correlate with the increasing number accessing 
these pills online.

“I had resigned myself to the fact that I would just have to carry on with the 
pregnancy as I wouldn’t have had the money to go to England,” Clara said. “If I 
hadn’t been able to buy abortion pills online, I would be continuing a 
pregnancy that was severely affecting my mental health. The pills take around 
two weeks to arrive, which is a highly stressful situation to be in, but I feel 
my mental health would be put at stake if I’d continued with the pregnancy. I 
was seven weeks pregnant when I took the abortion pills at home.”

The Netherlands-based organisation Women on Web <https://www.womenonweb.org/>, 
which helped Clara, counsels about 200 women from Northern Ireland and the 
Irish Republic every month, with online advisers available to answer questions 
during the procedure.


“For the few people I told, all of them were supportive. They were just 
worried about how I was doing it with the online tablets,” Clara said. “A huge 
weight was lifted from my shoulders, and I don’t regret it at all. The abortion 
laws in Northern Ireland force women to go to desperate measures like ordering 
pills online or hurting themselves if they find themselves in a position where 
they cannot afford to go to England.”

A high court judge ruled last month that Northern Ireland’s abortion rules 
breach the human rights of women and girls. But despite the ruling, there is no 
legal compunction on the politicians at the Stormont assembly to change the law 
to allow terminations in Northern Ireland for those who become pregnant through 
rape or incest, or are carrying a baby with fatal foetal abnormalities.

Laura Walsh found out at her 20-week scan that her baby had a fatal 
abnormality. She was forced to travel to a private clinic in Manchester for the 
procedure.


“My doctors were not even allowed to give me any advice that would have helped 
me to access an abortion in England,” said Walsh. “I was devastated because the 
procedure was badly botched. Mistakes were made and I had to undergo an 
emergency operation which has left me permanently unable to have children. I 
believe that because I live in Northern Ireland I do not have access to the 
safest option.


“I would still have made the same decision but avenues were, and are, still 
closed to me that would have made the process safer. I am now receiving 
counselling in Northern Ireland, and I will have to live with the devastation 
of this for the rest of my life.”


Three years ago, Sofia Perry’s 20-week scan showed that her baby had spina 
bifida. She knew immediately that she wanted an abortion but feared her only 
option was to travel to England.


“I was devastated at the news and desperate to get the baby out of me. I 
needed Valium to sleep that night and felt sick and panicked every time I felt 
the baby kicking,” she said. “This may sound cruel to some people as the baby 
was planned and much-wanted but nonetheless this is how I felt.


“I had discussed it with the doctor for hours and made it clear that I was not 
the sort of person who could pretend to be suicidal, as it was suggested this 
might be the only way I could get an abortion, she said.

‘It was the scariest thing I've ever done’: the Irish women forced to travel 
for abortions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/31/abortion-ireland-northern-ireland-women-travel-england-amelia-gentleman>
Farrah, a 23-year-old woman from Derry, said attempts to end her pregnancy 
added significant stress to an already distressing time in her life. She became 
pregnant after a man refused to wear a condom during sex.

“I didn’t ask or plan to be pregnant, and I wouldn’t have been able to cope 
with life if I had had to keep it,” said Farrah, who also wished to remain 
anonymous. “I had no money and was struggling to cope with life. Through lack 
of options, I ended up having to buy pills illegally over the internet as I had 
no money to travel abroad.

“Years ago I was pro-life so it was hard to make this decision. But I just 
couldn’t go through with the pregnancy. It felt like something was growing 
inside of me, that it was violating my body. I had to do it.”

A lack of abortion services means that there are inadequate safe spaces for 
women to get advice on reproductive care causing many, including Farrah, to 
deal with terminations alone.


“I had just got out of an abusive, long-term relationship,” said Farrah. “I 
thought he was the one, and I didn’t want to tell any of my friends what 
happened between us. I had no support and the protests outside the medical 
abortion clinic in Belfast made made me feel I couldn’t go there.

“Although I didn’t want the child I still felt loss and grief. But I also 
expected to feel guilty like anti-abortionists say. I felt no guilt. It was the 
right decision for me and the foetus.”
 