
Never one to be frightened of being told about my abnormalities, I went to see 
a posture specialist last week. My physiotherapist, Elizabeth Driver, had 
worked out a month ago that my knee injury was the result of a biomechanical 
fault in my right leg and I had been doing the exercises she had given me ever 
since. But the root causes of such alignment problems can go deeper.

Backaches, pain in the joints after exercise and muscle weakness or tightness 
can all be signs that the spine isn't in its classic S-shape. Looking side-on 
at a person with perfect alignment, you can draw a straight line from the 
centre of the head to the ground that would pass through the ears, shoulders, 
hips and ankles.

When the spine is out of its natural shape (usually because of imbalances in 
the strength of the muscles supporting it), the rest of the body also falls out 
of alignment. For runners, this can be a big problem.

Anna Kukhta, a posture specialist at the KX Gym in central London who 
specialises in core training and injury prevention and rehabilitation, told me 
that postural problems magnify during exercise, where the body is put under 
increased stress.

Anna found that my spine was flatter and stiffer than it should be. This means 
that my head juts out slightly and that my pelvis is tilted forward. Hence my 
legs also lean forward slightly. She said this kind of posture was common among 
office workers, who spend too long sitting at desks.

The tilted pelvis and dodgy legs mean that every time my feet strike the 
ground, too much force is distributed directly into the more delicate joints - 
knees, for example.

Correcting posture is relatively simple: you just need to stretch and 
strengthen the muscles that keep the spine in the right shape. For me, that 
meant strengthening the lower back, chest, hamstring and gluteal muscles as 
well as the hip flexors and the piriformis, which controls how far the thigh 
rotates outward.

And, you know what, it's working. After two frustrating months of knee pain, 
I've been for my first run. I took every step gingerly and (at Elizabeth's 
insistence) made sure my feet landed straight ahead each time. A mile later, my 
knee was pain-free and I was feeling brilliant. These are baby steps but 
there's no doubting their psychological impact: the race is definitely on.

Â· Alok is running the London marathon this year


Postural analysis by Anna Kukhta (email: ak@kxgymuk.com) at: 
KX GYM UK <http://www.kxgymuk.com>
151 Draycott Avenue
Chelsea
 London, SW3 3AL 
 Tel: 020 7584 5333 

Physiotherapy by Elizabeth Driver 
 Tel: 0870 220 2267
Email: e.driver@physiofactor.com
 