
President Obama opened his remarks at McGavock High School 
<http://abcnews.go.com/blogs/politics/2014/01/obama-visits-nashville-high-school-reeling-from-students-death/>
 in Nashville, Tennessee with a brief mourning of the death of a student there 
on Tuesday, the day of his State of the Union speech. Obamamentioned gun 
violence once 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/30/obama-state-of-the-union-gun-control-more>
 in his address to the nation. Again yesterday, the bulk of his speech was 
about education policy, not gun control.

The fact that McGovock was itself the site of a gun fatality only gave a 
glancing emphasis on the firearm policies he says he is trying to move forward. 
The setting perhaps emphasized just as much the futility of the rhetorical 
gesture. President Obama needs to talk more about gun policies in this country, 
but he has to do it differently. As horrific as school shootings are, gun 
violence takes more lives outside our classrooms than in them.

In the five years of Obama's presidency, mass shootings have been the one 
reliable catalyst for a presidential push on our nation's uniquely liberal 
firearm laws. He broke a three-year streak of non-engagement on the issue in 
January 2011, after the shooting of Congresswoman Gabby Giffords and 17 other 
people in Tucson, Arizona, giving one speech and writing one op-ed calling for 
more legislation. Then, the White House was for the most part silent for 
another 10 months, until Newtown. That tragedy brought a flurry of urgent 
officials pleas:18 sets of remarks 
<http://www.c-span.org/search/?sdate=12%2F15%2F2012&edate=&show100=&type=Videos&sort=Relevance&all%5B%5D=obama&all%5B%5D=guns&personid%5B%5D=55625>
 in five months, according to C-SPAN. After that, another season of silence, 
until the Naval Yard shootings in September 2013.

I understand that Obama has vowed to do what he can to limit access to guns 
"with or without" Congress, but it's clear that his administration sees mass 
shootings as their best leverage to accomplish the more substantial changes 
that come with new federal regulation. It's equally clear that it isn't 
working. I have some suggestions for a shift in emphasis.

Perhaps the White House believes the deaths of children are the most 
sympathetic emotional wedge. Fine. If you look at the data, Obama should have 
been talking about gun control legislation in the Senate twice a day, as 215 
childrendied 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/crime/2012/12/gun_death_tally_every_american_gun_death_since_newtown_sandy_hook_shooting.html>
 in the99 days 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/16/us/politics/congress-prepares-to-leave-behind-a-sluggish-2013.html?ref=politics&_r=2&>
 the Senate was in session last year. As many have argued, Americans are 
becoming numb to gun violence. If it's the scale of a tragedy that might 
inspire Congress, the murder of, say, three or more, then he should have 
hammered at them about once every two and half hours, the entire year. Over
12,000 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/crime/2012/12/gun_death_tally_every_american_gun_death_since_newtown_sandy_hook_shooting.html>
 people, adults and children, died from gun violence in 2013 – about 30 a day.

I suppose another aspect of mass shootings that makes them, in theory, the 
best bet for Congressional actions is that we assume that anyone who plans a 
massacre is, by most definitions, crazy. No one wants crazy people to have 
guns, right?

There are numerous different proposals that try to prevent the definably 
mentally ill from obtaining firearms, indeed, one of Obama's "without Congress"
proposals <http://www.hhs.gov/news/press/2014pres/01/20140103a.html> to curb 
gun access is an expansion of the ways a "lawful authority" can report on an 
individual who is prohibited by federal law from owning a gun. This is a step 
forward, to be sure, though the rule also gives the impression that the current 
background check system (National Instant Criminal Background Check System, or 
NICS) is working at all – and that the prohibited category is a useful screen.

First of all, using the NICS is voluntary – only 13 states use it for all 
commercial gun purchases (leave alone the gun show loophole for now). States 
that report to the database have incredible latitude as to what they include: 
some states limit the time period of the reporting (letting those with older 
sign of trouble slip through), some states narrowly define "mentally ill".

The patchwork of laws about reporting means that of all those denied a gun 
purchase because of a NICS search, even after the Virginia Tech shootings 
prompted a tightening of the reporting and search laws in many states,less than 
2% <http://smartgunlaws.org/mental-health-reporting-policy-summary/> of 
individuals run through the NICS database are turned down for mental health 
reasons. This is almost certainly an under-representation. What's more, 
evidence implies that many of mentally ill who are determined to get firearms 
will wind up "jurisdiction shopping". After Virginia started reporting its 
mental health records to NICS, 378 of the 438 thosedenied 
<http://smartgunlaws.org/mental-health-reporting-policy-summary/> guns because 
of a Virginia mental health record were trying to purchase a firearm in another 
state.

So I have a radical suggestion: cede to the gun rights lobby that bad actors 
who want weapons cannot be stopped – perhaps especially the mentally ill ones. 
Instead of focusing on how to stop a "bad guy with a gun", see what we can do 
to stop the guy in the mirror with a gun: amajority 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/05/24/suicides-account-for-most-gun-deaths/>
 of gun deaths are suicides, as I have noted repeatedly. (And will undoubtedly 
repeat again.) This actually opens up the debate about gun regulation rather 
than narrows it, because recent research has shown thatany reduction 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/crime/2013/12/gun_ownership_causes_higher_suicide_rates_study_shows.html>
 of gun ownership in a population decreases the number of suicides overall: 
looking at the years between 2000 and 2009, the study authors found that for 
each percentage point the portion of gun owners in a population goes down, 
suicides decrease by at least half a percent.

Many assume that focusing on preventing gun suicides falls under laws keeping 
guns out of the hands of the mentally ill, but most people who commit suicide 
do not meet even the lowest bar for gun ownership prohibition set by federal or 
state laws: previous documentation of violence to self or others.

Two-thirds of suicides <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12042175> do not 
have a contact with a mental health profession in the year leading up to the 
attempt. Another set of studies found that only24% 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11075627> of those that attempt suicide go 
on to another attempt. Suicide ideations are also fleeting; 25% of suicide 
attempts are based on less than five minutes consideration 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11924695>. What's more, those who commit 
suicide by firearm are theleast likely of all <http://pllqt.it/N7ggaA> attempts 
to have a record of mental illness – the most likely, it follows, to attempt 
suicide because of temporary crisis and moment of desperation. But 85% of those 
who attempt suicide by firearmwill never see the other side of that crisis. 
<http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/means-matter/means-matter/case-fatality/>. Firearm 
suicide beats the next most effective means (hanging) by a margin of 16%.

The math is easy: if you somehow (a waiting period, sophisticated gun locks) 
kept guns out of 10% of theover 19,000 
<http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/fastats/suicide.htm> in 2010 that died from a firearm 
suicide – if you forced the determined to use next most effective method – then 
about almost 600 of them would get another chance at life. And 76%, over 400 of 
them, would decide they'd stick around.

That's over 15 tragedies the size of Newtown's that could be prevented but 
weren't, and weren't mourned as the tragedies they all were. To put it in 
Obama-moved-to-speak math (18 speeches for each Newtown-sized group of deaths): 
would Obama be willing to give a speech on gun control 250 times a year, just 
about every day?

I don't know if such a consistent appeal would work on Congress. Would it work 
on you?
 