
This has been a grisly week, and the future looks rather a mess, so as light 
relief I’d like to report on something uplifting and beautiful I saw in London 
last week – anexhibition by artists 
<https://intoart.org.uk/news/save-the-date-intoart-annual-fundraiser-exhibition-in-central-london/>
 working with the charityIntoart <https://intoart.org.uk/> of ceramics, prints 
and paintings. It included a stunning48-piece tiled frieze 
<https://intoart.org.uk/artwork/auntie-mum-and-me-talking-about-my-fabric-collection/>
 byMawuena Kattah <https://intoart.org.uk/live-archive/mawuena-kattah/>, full 
of energy, colour, wit, and all about who and what she loves. I stood gazing at 
it and listening to how she had done it – a very complex procedure using 
photos, stencils, transfers, tracings, ceramic tiles, firings, paintings and 
slips, and all the more adventurous because she’d never done ceramics before, 
and has a learning disability, like all of Intoart’s artists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fart-education-creativity-transforming-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3b5d28019946c9f55271355881059a66a62860e%2F0_0_2400_1841%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20a%20world%20of%20fear%20and%20loathing%2C%20we%20need%20art%20more%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fart-education-creativity-transforming-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20a%20world%20of%20fear%20and%20loathing%2C%20we%20need%20art%20more%20than%20ever&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fjun%2F27%2Fart-education-creativity-transforming-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3b5d28019946c9f55271355881059a66a62860e%2F0_0_2400_1841%2F2400.jpg>
 Mawuena Kattah’s 48-piece tiled frieze Photograph: Josef Konczak/Mawuena 
Kattah/Intoart 
Helped by the Victoria and Albert Museum’s ceramics studio, she has been 
happy, brought pleasure to her family and to many who have seen her work, and 
become an established artist. Imagine her, or any pupil, managing to do this 
through our state school system. Fat chance. They will be lucky if they can 
borrow a recorder, never mind ceramics equipment.

We should all know by now that art and music make you feel good, and able to 
articulate visually or musically in a way that you may not be able to do 
verbally, and enhance your life and everyone else’s. I’ve taught music therapy, 
I’ve seen music light people up when nothing else can, and it’s the same with 
any art. I’ve banged on about this until I’m blue in the face, and our 
children’s laureates are now battlingto “ensure the future of creativity in 
British schools” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/25/children-laureate-fight-schools>
, but we’re doing worse than ever.

Last week, a survey by Arts Professional magazine 
<http://www.artsprofessional.co.uk/news/exclusive-arts-schools-plummets-new-figures-show>
 suggested a big drop in the takeup of arts subects for GCSE, just as there 
seems to be a surge in loathing, squabbling, fear and treachery, and we need 
the arts more than ever. Thank you, Nicky Morgan, for warning us that choosing 
arts over science, technology and mathscould “hold [pupils] back for the rest 
of their lives” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/education/educationnews/11221081/Nicky-Morgan-pupils-held-back-by-overemphasis-on-arts.html>
.

No, it won’t. It will give them the strength to wade through the 
ever-increasing ordure that the world will be throwing at them.
 