
Less than a month after the tragedy in Orlando, a familiar cycle is setting in.

On Wednesday, Americans went to bed thinking about one shooting. On Thursday 
morning, we woke up to another, watching an innocent victim die on a video 
taken by his girlfriend. On Thursday night, we fell asleep to the horrors of a 
third.

Such events used to feel like an aberration. And while the killing of 
blameless cops reporting for duty at a peaceful Black Lives Matter protest in 
Dallas on Thursday night is a new, heinous twist, the outcome – the gunning 
down of innocents – has become the status quo.

The trouble is, ending America’s scourge of mass shootings and the deep-seated 
bias in police killings will require many things that our country is not good 
at. It will require persistence and cooperation, empathy and bipartisanship. It 
will require policy reform and, specifically, gun control. It will require us 
to walk a line between numb detachment and murderous rage.

So far, we haven’t found the line.

President Obama sure tries. Overseas for a Nato summit in Warsaw on Thursday, 
he had just given extended remarks on the police killings of Alton Sterling and 
Philando Castile, when the ambush-style attack in Dallas forced him to take up 
the topic of gun violence yet again.

He proceeded to say the obvious things that somehow, sadly, still need to be 
said, that “there is no possible justification for these kinds of attacks or 
any violence against law enforcement”, and that their deaths are a reminder of 
the sacrifices they make for our safety.


And then he said the same thing he’s been saying since he took office seven 
years ago, that easy access to powerful weapons is a big part of the problem. 
He’s tried just about everything on that front: soaring speeches, executive 
actions, congressional entreaties, even leading a black congregation in a 
soulful rendition of Amazing Grace.

But nothing’s worked. Washington hasn’t budged. If anything, Republicans have 
dug in their heels.

House Democrats’ sit-in for a vote on gun control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/23/gun-control-vote-house-democrats-sit-in-symbolic-victory>
 last month was dismissed by their Republican counterparts as a “publicity 
stunt” and “not becoming US Congress”. And this week Republican leadership put 
its focus onways to punish Democrats 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/06/us/politics/house-gop-may-seek-to-punish-democrats-for-gun-control-sit-in.html?_r=0>
 for their actions.

Hours before the shooting in Dallas, GOP lawmakers delayed gun control votes 
indefinitely 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/house-gop-indefinitely-delays-gun-control-votes-225234>
.

It’s maddening and inexcusable, and it’s also just one strand of the 
interwoven problems in this week’s tragedies.

Because before Thursday night’s attack brought the narrative back around to 
gun control, the conversation was focused on the police killings ofAlton 
Sterling 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/13-painful-facts-about-alton-sterlings-life-and-death_us_577d1220e4b09b4c43c1b14e?section=>
 andPhilando Castile 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/philando-castile-what-we-know_us_577e77eae4b0344d514e2ae2?section=>
, along with the persistent racial disparity that dogs our criminal justice 
system.

At the time of this writing, Sterling and Castile are just two of 566 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database>
 who’ve died at police hands so far this year, according to the Guardian’s 
tracking project The Counted. A disproportionate number of them are minorities.

And so Obama in his first speech from overseas called for a reform of our 
justice system in which these deep-seated biases are “rooted out”.

He also said something else that would turn out to be sadly prescient. Namely, 
that recognizing problems within law enforcement shouldn’t be confused with 
being anti-police.

“If communities are mistrustful of the police, that makes those law 
enforcement officers who are doing a great job, who are doing the right thing, 
that makes their lives harder,” he said.

In retrospect, it was an understatement. Conflating a few bad actors with the 
identity of a group is precisely what suspects involved in Thursday’s shooting 
did. The gunman who opened fire on officers Thursday said he “wanted to kill 
white people, especially white officers”,according to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/08/dallas-police-shooting-gunman-kill-white-officers>
 Dallas police chief David Brown.

And while many specifics of the shooting remain unclear, like whether more 
than one suspect opened fire (three are in police custody; the alleged gunman 
was killed) or how, precisely, this deranged plot was carried out, many things 
are completely straightforward.

Among them is the fact that the police department targeted in Thursday’s 
shooting was among the most forward-thinking and transparent in the country, 
according to Radley Balko, a prominent criminal justice reporter and author of 
Rise of the Warrior Cop.

What’s clear is that top leadership of the Dallas police department is made up 
ofpeople of color 
<http://www.dallaspolice.net/Shared%20Documents/DPDOrgChart.pdf>, and that as 
far back as 2014, Balko singled the department out in the Washington Post for 
itsenlightened approach 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/opinions/wp/2014/01/16/two-and-a-half-cheers-for-dallas-police-chief-david-brown/?tid=a_inl>
 to police training, an approach aimed at doing everything possible to cut down 
on fatal police shootings. What’s clear is that as recently as 2015, there was 
evidence the department’s progressive policieswere bearing fruit 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-watch/wp/2015/01/12/what-dallass-historically-low-murder-rate-can-teach-us-about-policing/>
. Murder rates in the area were the lowest they’d been since 1965.

What’s clear is that the policemen shot in Dallas should have been the model 
for departments all around the country, not the victims of some blind act of 
hate. And that when you kill innocents to avenge the death of innocents, it’s 
not justice or even retaliation, it’s senseless murder.

That’s what Obama was getting at when he warned that black lives matter but 
blue lives matter too, and that life everywhere precious. These actions were 
carried out by individual actors. Not one of the fallen deserved to die.

And the real enemy, the real danger, is anyone who thinks for a moment that 
one group of people is more deserving of death than any other, and acts on it 
with a gun.
 