
It won't much improve Ricky Ponting's mood, after becoming only the second 
Australian captain toconcede the Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/aug/24/ashes-australian-press-reaction> 
twice on English soil, to be praised by a Pom paper. He is hardened enough to 
know that some of the standing ovation as he came out to bat at the Oval on 
Sunday was offered under the reasonable assumption that Ponting, in possibly 
his last appearance in the Ashes in England, was heading for defeat. But 
staring down the barrel of a loss that must have hurt more than any other in 
his career, Ponting showed what a class act he is in two ways that matter. 
First, his batting: at least two sublime pulls, quick in eye, feet and thought, 
arguably the most attractive shots ofa desperately tense test match 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/aug/23/england-win-ashes-oval-test-australia>
. Over this series Ponting became the highest run-scorer in Australian history, 
now at 11,345. In his country's batting pantheon, there may only be Bradman 
above him. While he was at the crease there was still a chance that his side 
could pull off the most remarkable final-innings score of all time and it took 
a stunning runout to remove him. And second, in the aftermath: in a post-match 
interview, with a (mostly) ecstatic crowd listening on, an unflinching, honest 
assessment. Yes, the pitch was poor – but no excuses; and yes, his side scored 
six more centuries, and they should have won in Cardiff – but no self-pity. And 
praise from the heart for Andrew Strauss, the England captain, at the end of a 
hard, good-spirited series. Ponting understands that winning is everything but 
not the only thing.
 