
It can not be said of many broadcasters that years after their death, their 
words live on in the minds of a nation. But it can be said ofAlistair Cooke 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/alistaircooke>, the absence of whose Letter 
From America leaves a 13-minute lacuna in the lives of millions who made the 
slot part of their weekly routine. As the collection of his articles that we 
publish today makes abundantly clear, his career covers an astonishing 
historical span. From the H-bomb test at Bikini Atoll to McCarthy, the Cuban 
missile crisis, Bobby Kennedy's assassination (which he described first-hand 
with brutal honesty) the Vietnam war, Nixon's resignation, Clinton's 
impeachment and beyond; his 2,866th letter, in February 2004, suggested how 
George Bush should explain the failure to find weapons of mass destruction in 
Iraq. He urged the president to follow the example of Humphrey Bogart in 
Casablanca and say: "I was misinformed." There are threads that run through 
both his quarter-century of writing as a correspondent for the Guardian and his 
work for the BBC: his love of the English language; his respect for the US 
constitution and its founding fathers; his abiding admiration for the creative 
possibilities of the American people. The class of his copy was not always 
appreciated by his editors. The BBC initially agreed to give his letter a 
13-week run, with possibly another 13 weeks "but no more", and for a large part 
of Cooke's career they just forgot about him - until he shone again in 
television with his grand history of America. He remains a colossus of 
journalism.
 