

Faye Dunaway and Warren Beatty having a right old laugh in Bonnie and Clyde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/bonnie-and-clyde>. Photograph: Kobal 
Collection

A few years ago I wrote a piece entitled The Case of the Missing Film 
Directors, in which I tried to discover what happened to certain directors who 
were very much in the public eye for a particular period and then faded into 
comparative oblivion. Among the many on my list werePaul Mazursky 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005196/>, Monte Hellman 
<http://montehellman.altervista.org/>, Michael Cimino 
<http://uk.movies.ign.com/articles/368/368173p1.html>, Miklos Jancso 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mikl%C3%B3s_Jancs%C3%B3>, Andrej Wajda 
<http://www.wajda.pl/>, Kon Ichikawa 
<http://www.sensesofcinema.com/contents/directors/04/ichikawa.html>, Richard 
Lester <http://film.theguardian.com/Guardian_NFT/interview/0,,110592,00.html>, 
Bob Rafelson <http://www.filmfestivals.com/cannes98/starsus7.htm>, Peter Yates 
<http://www.screenonline.org.uk/people/id/827219/index.html>, Ken Russell 
<http://www.channel4.com/bigbrother/housemates/housemate_news.jsp?id=4> and 
Arthur Penn <http://www.sensesofcinema.com/contents/directors/03/penn.html>.

The last mentioned has re-emerged into the limelight at the Berlin Film 
Festival 
<http://www.berlinale.de/en/das_festival/festival-sektionen/hommage/index.html> 
where he is being awarded an Honorary Golden Bear because, according to the 
festival press office, he is "one of the most innovative American film-makers 
of his time." Perhaps the key to the recent invisibility of Penn, now 84, lies 
in the phrase "of his time."

In the late 60s, Arthur Penn <https://www.theguardian.com/film/arthur-penn> 
was one of the most fashionable film-makers around. His strong sympathy for the 
outsider and an anti-establishment stance made an impact on the anti-draft, 
anti-Vietnam war, middle-class college students of that tumultuous period.

Bonnie and Clyde <http://movies2.nytimes.com/gst/movies/movie.html?v_id=6614> 
was one of the most influential American movies of its era thanks to its amoral 
attitude to the "outlaw", seen from a modern psychological and social 
viewpoint, and its meticulous recreation of the Depression-era (sepia 
photographs, carefully selected music, d√©cor etc). The script, the 
cinematography, the players, and Penn's controlled direction, move the black 
comedy ineluctably towards the much imitated ending: hundreds of bullets 
pumping into the miscreant pair who die in slow motion.

Drugs, country and western music, protest songs, anti-Vietnam war sentiments 
and the hippy philosophy of all-embracing love were served up in 1969'sAlice's 
Restaurant <http://blogcritics.org/archives/2006/05/26/030108.php>. Elsewhere, 
The Chase <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0060232/> (1966) was linked to the 
law/outlaw theme of Bonnie and Clyde, with Marlon Brando's fair-minded sheriff 
trying to stop the bigoted inhabitants of a small Texas town from lynching 
ne'er-do-well Robert Redford. The ending echoes the killing of Lee Harvey 
Oswald.

Nineteen Seventy's Little Big Man 
<http://www.ronaldbrucemeyer.com/reviews/bigman.htm> views the past from a 
modern standpoint (there is even a gay Red Indian and bluesy music), seeing the 
Cheyenne as "ethnic" hippies contrasted with corrupt white civilisation. The 
section whereCuster <http://www.garryowen.com/> attacks an Indian village could 
not help but stir memories of theMy Lai 
<http://www.law.umkc.edu/faculty/projects/ftrials/mylai/mylai.htm> massacre and 
the photos of Vietnamese on fire that were seen in all the newspapers and on 
television. At the time, student audiences were in no doubt as to the 
intentions of the scene, and would chant "My Lai! My Lai!" as well as cheering 
the death of Custer, whom they identified as Lieutenant Calley, the soldier 
found guilty of murder at a court martial for his part in the massacre which 
claimed the lives of 500 South Vietnamese civilians.

Little Big Man began a trend in which the western was appropriated by 
directors eager to express their liberal views. Indians were seen as 
representing theViet Cong 
<http://www.diggerhistory.info/pages-conflicts-periods/vietnam/tunnels.htm>, 
19th century negro slaves spoke like members of theBlack Power 
<http://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/stokelycarmichaelblackpower.html> 
movement, and detailed bloodbaths were presented as condemnations of violence. 
The Western was moving outside its frame, until it almost disappeared 
altogether. This is almost what happened to Penn when the era from which he 
drew his inspiration ended.

Penn made only two further films in the 70s - Night Moves 
<http://rogerebert.suntimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20060326/REVIEWS08/603260301/1023>
, a murky thriller steeped in the disillusioned malaise of the Watergate era, 
andThe Missouri Breaks <http://film.theguardian.com/Film_Page/0,,957711,00.html>
, which the Los Angeles Times critic described as "a pair of million dollar 
babies in a five and ten cent flick." The babies' wereBrando 
<http://film.theguardian.com/brando> and Jack Nicholson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/quiz/questions/0,5961,445406,00.html> who each got 
a million dollar cheque, while Penn apparently pandered to their every whim. 
Brando, who simulated an Irish brogue and romped around outrageously in granny 
drag, accepted the role to bring money to his pet cause, the plight of the 
Native American.

After that, Penn went into decline. His last film was the feeble Penn and 
Teller Get Killed <http://www.answers.com/topic/penn-teller-get-killed> and he 
has now gone 18 years without making a movie.

Fortunately, in contrast to Hollywood's 
"you're-only-as-good-as-your-last-film" philosophy, film history is kinder to 
its participants, and always highlights the successes rather than the failures, 
something which the Berlin Film Festival recognises. After all,Billy Wilder 
<http://film.theguardian.com/features/featurepages/0,4120,1602941,00.html> will 
be remembered for Some Like It Hot when Buddy Buddy is forgotten, and the final 
judgment onFrancis Coppola 
<http://film.theguardian.com/quiz/questions/0,,1118642,00.html> will surely 
ignore the horrendous Jack. When one mentions Arthur Penn in the future, it 
will be the likes of Bonnie and Clyde and The Chase that will sustain his 
reputation.
 