
The world is full of men who are happy not saying very much about anything. 
High on the list of the things such men prefer not to say much about is their 
underwear. This is a pity, since men's underwear can be surprisingly 
interesting. Alan Greenspan long agoidentified sales of men's underwear  
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/04/08/mens-underwear-sales-gree_n_184863.html>
as a reliable guide to economic wellbeing â€“ and, yes, sales are currently down. 
Sadly, UK statistics on underwear sales are not detailed enough to confirm the 
current impression that British men nevertheless seem to be buying morelong 
johns <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Long_underwear> these days than they did in 
the past. If that impression is correct, then the trend is one to be 
encouraged. Long johns may seem like the garment that only your grandad wore, 
but there's nothing necessarily wrong with that, and the arrival of cold 
weather is a bracing seasonal reminder of exactly why he did so. Long johns are 
extremely warm and comfortable, except in the overheated buildings of which we 
should all disapprove. Outdoors, though, long johns come into their own. They 
provide excellent insulation in winter and even a measure of protection against 
catching colds, yet long johns remain locked in the cultural closet. Who even 
admits to possessing a pair of them, much less to wearing them? A short and 
unscientific survey among Guardian men suggests that over half possess a pair 
of long johns, even though few seem at ease about admitting it. Men should stop 
being furtive about their long johns. And too many just don't know what they 
are missing.
 