
I arrive after dark, driving past piled up snow and pull up by a darkened log 
cabin office. No one comes out. I turn off the car lights and step into the 
freezing air. As my eyes adjust to the Arctic night, I see a green glow in the 
western sky, at first just two smudges on either side of the valley, a cosmic 
reptilian blush that grows into a phosphorescent super-highway that vaults 
across the snow-capped peaks. It is my 10th wintertime visit to the Arctic and, 
at last, I’ve seen the aurora.

At that moment a 4x4 comes up the road driven by my contact, Stig. “Follow me 
in your car,” he says softly. “At the top, when we get out, don’t make sudden 
movements or noises.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4c5b5f7613d6e1b4e78c66a8e163dfa8559a1bb%2F0_383_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20company%20of%20wolves%3A%20animal%20encounters%20in%20Narvik%2C%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20company%20of%20wolves%3A%20animal%20encounters%20in%20Narvik%2C%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4c5b5f7613d6e1b4e78c66a8e163dfa8559a1bb%2F0_383_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Kevin’s first sighting of the aurora came at Polar Park. 
The snowploughed track leads between two very high fences trimmed with an 
electric wire. I chuckle to myself, thinking: “This is Jurassic Park – with 
snow.” I leave the car by a gate in the wire beyond which a tunnel leads up to 
a brightly lit lodge on a small snowy hill. The purpose of that tunnel, I know, 
is to access the lodge without the inhabitants of the enclosure accessing me. 
Then the howling starts: a long eerie cry that reaches deep into lost 
primordial corners of the mind, evoking shivers of excitement. An answering 
howl makes Stig frown. “Sometimes I think there are more of them out there, not 
only ours.”

We are at Polar Park, a 110-hectare zoo, 70km north of the Norwegian town of 
Narvik. Polar Park is not like most other zoos: there are very few animals and 
they live in large enclosures. And they have a programme to accustom wolves to 
people, sufficient to allow meetings. That is why I am here: to stay a night 
inside the wolf enclosure and, with the consent of the Norse gods, make 
contact. I say “consent” advisedly: there is a sense of provisionality about 
it, no matter the eye-watering expense of the experience. As your grandmother 
might have mentioned, wolves are not to be relied upon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0db6ee3b53a6bae97c7a5b9553d445f004c12faa%2F0_316_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20company%20of%20wolves%3A%20animal%20encounters%20in%20Narvik%2C%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20company%20of%20wolves%3A%20animal%20encounters%20in%20Narvik%2C%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0db6ee3b53a6bae97c7a5b9553d445f004c12faa%2F0_316_3024_1814%2F3024.jpg>
 Who’s afraid of the big bad wolf? … not Kevin Rushby, not really 
Once we are inside the plush mountain lodge, peering out of the large picture 
windows, Stig explains. “We have to be very slow and steady. You can’t put 
energy into the wolf, they become unpredictable. We don’t allow under-18s to 
meet them or pregnant women. You can’t wear fur, down, gloves, hats or 
earrings. If they knock you over, you keep calm and wait for the keepers to 
move them away.”

Out in the darkness we hear a sudden, rather vicious, wolf fight. “There are 
five of them, all siblings, and they are just working out the hierarchy. We 
don’t interfere.”

We eat dinner and then stand by an open door, watching the aurora roll and 
flicker. Occasionally, silhouetted against it, are the swift shadows of running 
wolves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c2b6dd337c75ca05f11840389ce2da7f7ef673b%2F0_90_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20company%20of%20wolves%3A%20animal%20encounters%20in%20Narvik%2C%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20company%20of%20wolves%3A%20animal%20encounters%20in%20Narvik%2C%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c2b6dd337c75ca05f11840389ce2da7f7ef673b%2F0_90_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Teeth encounter … they just want to play 
The wolf is making something of a comeback in Europe. By the end of the last 
century, the remnants of a once-great population were holed up in northern 
Italy on the edge of extinction.

But then something changed. Declining rural human populations led to increased 
forest cover and deer numbers. In 1994, a pack was found in France’s 
Alpes-Maritimes and the animal has since recolonised 16 other departments, 
edging to within 60 miles of Paris. In 2015 one was spotted in Holland, 
probably the first since 1897. With the resurgence has come realisation that 
the wolf’s presence, like the beaver, can bring a cascade of biodiversity and 
environmental health. It has also, predictably, brought a cascade of fear and 
loathing, based on knowledge garnered from fairy tales. The Daily Mail reported 
that Dutch wolf with the headline: “The wolf’s at the door: First killer beast 
turns up in Holland for 150 years 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2361758/The-wolfs-door-Killer-beasts-roaming-Western-Europe-time-100-years.html>
”. Videos showed a rattled animal trying to escape back to Germany within hours 
of crossing the border. In fact, as Stig said: “When wolves see people, they 
normally run away. They are frightened.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b919427c76e2eb503e75f11cb611a6c9658f356%2F0_265_4989_2993%2F4989.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20company%20of%20wolves%3A%20animal%20encounters%20in%20Narvik%2C%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20company%20of%20wolves%3A%20animal%20encounters%20in%20Narvik%2C%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b919427c76e2eb503e75f11cb611a6c9658f356%2F0_265_4989_2993%2F4989.jpg>
 Just chillin’… reindeer wonder (or lie around) freely at Polar Park 
Next morning I am trying to keep that in mind when we venture out and spot the 
pack loping eagerly towards us. They jump up excitedly and lick our faces. Two 
of them have a snarling stand-off over who should lick me first, but then 
decide to lick my camera instead. Apart from that one moment, it’s all 
remarkably non-threatening. We stroll to a low snow-covered hill where they do 
a bit of a howl and hold a wrestling contest. Only when I drop my phone is 
there a sudden intimation of what can happen. They are instantly curious and 
pushy, flooded with predatory instincts. Moving slowly, I retrieve it. Stig 
casually mentions that they always show plenty of interest in anyone who is 
sick, limping or weak. It’s that predatory nature, combined with the power of 
the pack, that earns our respect, and fear.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab53c3114be02b214a825d8f011187a58c354476%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20the%20company%20of%20wolves%3A%20animal%20encounters%20in%20Narvik%2C%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20the%20company%20of%20wolves%3A%20animal%20encounters%20in%20Narvik%2C%20Norway&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fwolves-norway-arctic-narvik-polar-park-zoo-wildlife%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab53c3114be02b214a825d8f011187a58c354476%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 A wintry mid-afternoon sunset over Dyrøya island 
Later we walk around the other enclosures, seeing lynx, musk ox, moose and 
Arctic fox. The bears are in hibernation, appearing occasionally for snacks; 
the reindeer just wander freely. Polar Park is a zoo although much more 
pleasant than most. Nevertheless, predators don’t take incarceration easily, no 
matter how benign, and I drive away wondering about the ethics of it. The 
initial feeling of a Jurassic Park resonates: the sense of humans attempting to 
control, for profit, part of nature that is inherently uncontrollable. 
Nevertheless, the wolf encounter does bring a much-needed jolt of reality to 
the issue of the animal’s resurgence: these wolves are certainly not cuddly 
toys, nor are they monster killer beasts.

More than 11,000 Norwegians line up to shoot 16 wolves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/30/norwegian-hunters-line-up-for-licences-to-shoot-wolves>
In the end, however, any animal glimpsed in the wild is more interesting than 
one cooped up. I join Oddgeir Sagerup, a local photographer and his expatriate 
Scottish colleague, Cameron, on a wildlife safari 90 minutes’ drive away on 
Dyrøya island. There is little chance of seeing one of Norway’s three known 
wolfpacks: they all stay away from the inhabited coast. But with Oddgeir’s 
informal network of contacts helping, we soon locate moose browsing in a river 
bed and sea eagles soaring overhead. Then, on a local farm, miles from 
anywhere, we jump aboard a sledge pulled by a snow scooter and head off for a 
madcap adventure into the forest that ends with us buried, laughing, in a snow 
drift, watched by three rather startled moose. I was rather relieved they 
weren’t wolves.


Way to go

 The trip was provided by Visit Norway <http://www.visitnorway.com/>. Polar 
Park <http://polarpark.no/polar-park-english.html> wolf encounters cost £125pp 
(adults only), park entrance £20pp (family £53); overnight in the lodge with 
wolf meeting, dinner and breakfast is £830 for two.See and Explore 
<http://www.seogopplev.no/#!home/cdwq> trips with Oddgeir Sagerup from £116 
adult, £70 child. Flights provided bySAS <https://www.flysas.com/en/uk/>, which 
flies to Narvik Evenes, via Oslo, from London, Manchester, Edinburgh and 
Aberdeen, £102 one way
 