
The decision by the Indian board to suspend its side's tour of Australia 
<http://sport.theguardian.com/cricket/story/0,,2236571,00.html>, however 
temporarily, is a sign of the times. Regardless of whether or not Harbhajan 
Singh called Andrew Symonds "a monkey" during the second Test at Sydney - and 
the International Cricket Council's match referee Mike Procter says he is 
"satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt" that he did - the BCCI's brinkmanship 
says everything about India's place at the head of cricket's top table.

No other team in the world could grandstand like this because no other team 
possesses India's political and financial clout. This is not the post-imperial 
lament of a white man struggling to accept cricket's great power shift away 
from England and Australia and towards the subcontinent. It is just the way 
things are. See how you like the world game without us, goes the Indian 
implication. As moves go, it's big, and it might even be clever. But it's not 
exactly edifying.

We should point out early on that the western cricket cultures can never 
instinctively understand the seriousness of accusing an Indian of a racial 
slur. No issue in cricket is more sensitive, and the outrage which the media 
would have us believe is currently engulfing India has to be seen in this 
context (even if Sky's decision to wheel out the hysterical Navjot Singh Sidhu 
to speak for the man on the street was sensationalism at its cheapest).

There will also be claims that Procter's decision to ban Harbhajan for three 
Tests was in some way influenced by criticism from on high over his failure to 
reprimand Yuvraj Singh for standing his ground after being given out in the 
first Test at Melbourne. Some are evenconflating Harbhajan's ban with India's 
harsh treatment at the hands of the umpires 
<http://sport.theguardian.com/cricket/story/0,,2236661,00.html> at Sydney and 
crying conspiracy. They argue there is no reason to believe Australia's version 
of the Harbhajan-Symonds incident when Ricky Ponting, their captain no less, 
claimed a catch at silly point that he had clearly pushed on to the ground 
before regaining full control of his movements, as the laws demand. And anyway, 
didn't Brad Hogg say something unpleasant to Anil Kumble?

These are all red herrings, for there are other, less emotional, more 
important, issues to consider. Would Procter, faced with disastrous PR for the 
game possible legal wranglings, really have taken the action he did unless he 
was sure of Harbhajan's guilt? WouldMark Benson have thwarted the lip-readers 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-images/Sport/Pix/pictures/2008/01/07/benson3.jpg>
 during his on-field discussion with Harbhajan had he not realised the 
seriousness of the situation? Would Symonds, a man who famously made no fuss
when subjected to monkey chants 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/Opinion/Editorial/TIMES_VIEW_Andrew_Symonds_disturbed_by_crowd_behaviour_at_Vadodara/articleshow/2461557.cms>
 during a one-day international at Vadodara in October, have allowed the story 
to get out of hand if Harbhajan had merely called him an idiot?

The conspiracy theorists will have their own answers to these questions. But 
if Harbhajan did indeed call Symonds "a monkey", India can have no grounds for 
complaint. And if he did not, they should not have wilfully inflamed the 
situation by reacting as they have done.

What happens next? Will the lawyers become involved, as they did after Arjuna 
Ranatungaled his Sri Lankan team off the field at Adelaide 
<http://www.indianexpress.com/res/web/pIe/ie/daily/19990124/02450145.html> in 
protest at Ross Emerson's decision to call Muttiah Muralitharan for throwing in 
a one-day international against England in 1998-99? If so, will they be able to 
make enough out of the "burden of evidence" argument and get the chances 
against Harbhajan dropped? It's one of the many sad aspects of this affair that 
we even have to ask these questions.
 