
The ABC television documentary Recognition: Yes or No is an opportunity lost.


It features the Aboriginal activist and politician Linda Burney 
<http://www.alp.org.au/linda_burney> and the self-declared “Indigenous” (though 
non-Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander) conservative polemicist and staunch 
ABC critic Andrew Bolt.

They are, the voiceover tells us, “two people with passionate views on a 
journey to challenge each other’s beliefs” about the undefined proposal to 
constitutionally recognise Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.

It’s just an hour long but still feels like a meandering, marathon road movie 
absent of coherent plot.

Recognition: Yes or No review – Bolt's barney with Burney an exercise in cheap 
spectacle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/20/recognition-yes-or-no-review-bolts-barney-with-burney-an-exercise-in-cheap-spectacle>
Recognition: Yes or No could have seriously scrutinised the costly Recognise 
campaign forits arguable capacity to improve black lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/18/i-dont-want-your-recognise-campaign-its-nothing-but-a-sham>
. It could have challenged the largely bipartisan insistence of the political 
class to afford recognition precedence over treaties and sovereignty 
resolution. Instead we were offered a formulaic reduction: yes (black) v no 
(white).

“Soon you will be asked to vote in a referendum to recognise Indigenous 
Australians <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/indigenous-australians> 
in the constitution,” the voiceover reads. “This referendum will unite or 
divide our nation – how will you vote?”

Yet there is no proposed form of words for any constitutional amendment and no 
clear timetable for a referendum. Politics appears to have stymied plans to 
coincide one with the 50th anniversary of the 1967 Indigenous citizenship 
referendum.

Choosing Bolt for the program – a man who describes as a “myth” the stolen 
generations 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/blogs/andrew-bolt/column--how-the-stolen-generations-myth-kills/news-story/ba1a3510aec5ab5384dd270249e83ad7>
 (one of many malevolent products of assimilation, itself directly 
consequential of European invasion and dispossession) andapparently determines 
Aboriginality by skin colour 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/blogs/andrew-bolt/column--the-new-tribe-of-white-blacks/news-story/2084e333d698f20fafd8b0a3f88c77b4>
 – rendered it a laughably inadequate vehicle to tackle the questions relating 
to the desire (or otherwise) for recognition within Indigenous Australia – 
which is, after all, where it would impact most.

Burney, a lifelong activist, more recently the first Indigenous woman to sit 
in the House of Representatives, is a leading public proponent of the official 
Recognise campaign. She is an articulate advocate who, with others, believes 
that even fundamental constitutional acknowledgement might improve black lives 
(a proposition just as many, if not more, Indigenous people vociferously 
challenge). It is, however, legitimate to ask Burney why and how she ever saw 
fit to appear opposite Bolt and, in doing so, add legitimacy to his stance.

Bolt for the no vote explains that recognition is “an attempt to address 
racism by imposing an even more explicit racism”.

He says: “To resist this new racism is to be defined as racist yourself, which 
is perverse. There wouldn’t be many Australians more against racism than me.”

Good-oh then.

They travel around. And, yes, they meet (mostly highly recognisable) 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people including Stan Grant and Mick 
Gooda, both key Recognise supporters. And there’sWesley Aird 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/national-affairs/race-shift-must-be-minimal-says-wesley-aird/news-story/b2c2346717c1d81fa9b75f4c7b12adfd>
, too – embraced by the right as a “conservative Indigenous adviser” and 
opponent of recognition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Findigenous-recognition-deserves-serious-debate-andrew-bolt-shouldnt-be-part-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5724b635c444ec42572042084f533e013f1fed47%2F0_0_3968_2232%2F3968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Indigenous%20recognition%20deserves%20serious%20debate.%20Andrew%20Bolt%20shouldn't%20be%20part%20of%20it%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Findigenous-recognition-deserves-serious-debate-andrew-bolt-shouldnt-be-part-of-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Indigenous%20recognition%20deserves%20serious%20debate.%20Andrew%20Bolt%20shouldn%27t%20be%20part%20of%20it%20%7C%20Paul%20Daley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Findigenous-recognition-deserves-serious-debate-andrew-bolt-shouldnt-be-part-of-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5724b635c444ec42572042084f533e013f1fed47%2F0_0_3968_2232%2F3968.jpg>
 Linda Burney and Andrew Bolt meet Murrumu, who has abandoned Australian 
‘citizenship’ to form his own Yidindji sovereign nation. Photograph: Mark 
Rogers/ABC 
They catch up, at Bolt’s request, with my old mate Murrumu in Cairns. 
Something of a living, breathing cryptic crossword,Murrumu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/postcolonial/2014/aug/26/-sp-the-man-who-renounced-australia>
 – who has promoted considerable debate around the constitution by abandoning 
Australian “citizenship” to form his own Yidindji sovereign nation – apparently 
bamboozles Bolt with his presentation of visitor ID cards and with his stated 
desire to negotiate agreements and treaties with the Australian state.

They visit the Yolngu in wondrous north-east Arnhem Land where Mr No seems 
most pleased that Indigenous culture exists outside museums.

The ABC sees fit, meanwhile, to indulge Bolt’s pet assertion that he, too, is 
“Indigenous ... because I was born here”.

There’s barely a cutaway, unfortunately, of the remarkable Jenny Munro, the 
face of the recent Redfern protests, in which she declares: “Recognise will not 
stop police killing us in jail cells, will not stop welfare authorities taking 
our children.”

It’s quite a critique. But one that’s not adequately developed.

Instead, this show complies with a general mainstream media failure (with some 
notable exceptions) to explore the many complex arguments against Recognise 
within Indigenous Australia – arguments that bear no relation whatsoever to 
Bolt’s assertion that recognition addresses “racism by imposing an even more 
explicit racism”.

Indeed, many fear Recognise is merely part of a bipartisan process that 
assuages non-Indigenous guilt and reassures a horrified global community that 
Australia is at least cognisant of its Indigenous disaster space.

Tens of millions of dollars are being spent on Recognise, with much more in 
the pipeline, at a time when the Abbott/Turnbull governments have cut at least 
$550m from Indigenous programs. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander opponents 
of Recognise are not motivated by a concern it might discriminate against 
privileged white men; rather, they worry it may either have a negligible – or, 
conversely, profoundly negative– impact on the lot of some of the world’s most 
underprivileged people.

I don't want your Recognise campaign – it's nothing but a sham | Celeste Liddle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/18/i-dont-want-your-recognise-campaign-its-nothing-but-a-sham>
They are concerned Recognise will impede a dramatically re-energised treaty 
movement and the ongoing fight to have sovereignty (and not just the people to 
whom it belongs) rightfully recognised and appropriately – finally – reckoned 
with.

This is but another reason why choosing Bolt to represent the “No” case was 
remiss. Why not reflect the nuance and complexity of argument and concern 
within Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australia by having Indigenous 
proponents on both sides of the debate?

How easy would it be for non-Indigenous Australia – especially its federal 
politicians – to say, after a minimalist act of constitutional recognition, 
that, having done “the blackfella referendum”, treaties can wait a bit longer 
still than the 200-plus years that have already passed. Just look at what 
politics has done lately to the prospects of gay marriage in Australia.

 Governments insist that poor literacy rates and remote living accounts for an 
estimated Indigenous voting enrolment rate of 58% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/30/only-58-of-indigenous-australians-are-registered-to-vote-we-should-be-asking-why>
. I’m told that as few as 30-35% of Indigenous Australians actually bother to 
vote. Many I know abstain on ideological/political grounds – a protest against 
legitimising and acknowledging what they view (inthe words of Megan Davis 
<https://griffithreview.com/articles/listening-but-not-hearing/>, a member of 
the Recognise movement’s consultative committee) as the “settler state”.

 Will they turn out in greater numbers to vote on – never mind support – any 
Recognise constitutional amendment? I doubt it.

 Meanwhile, the Recognise consultation panel keeps hearing Indigenous voices 
crying out not, foremost, for recognition but for a truth and reconciliation 
process to deal with the horrific legacies of continental occupation and 
violent dispossession.

 Which of course brings it all back to land and the pressing need for 
treaties. And that’s something recognition alone can never deliver.

• Recognition: Yes or No is available to stream on iview 
<http://iview.abc.net.au/>
 