
Previously unknown Ingmar Bergman script to be filmed by former antagonist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/27/unknown-ingmar-bergman-script-filmed-fellini-kurosawa>
Ingmar Bergman’s work was often erotic, even, or especially, when sex was not 
the ostensible subject matter. There is a stark sensuality and fascination in 
some of the bleakest situations; an eros to go with the thanatos. But the 
recently discovered screenplay Sixty-Four Minutes With Rebecka – which Bergman 
evidently intended to retitle The White Wall and make as an English-language 
movie, forming his part of a tripartite collaboration withFederico Fellini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/federico-fellini> and Akira Kurosawa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2010/mar/23/akira-kurosawa-100-google-doodle-anniversary>
 – really is notably sexy, even if the sexiness is coloured by his distinctive 
anxiety, self-inspection, self-reproach, and intimate marital anguish. For 
Bergman, like Socrates, the unexamined sexual life was not worth living.

From what we have been able to glean from extracts, and from the description 
offered by director Suzanne Osten, who will initially be mounting a radio 
production, the script is Bergman’s answer to the liberated excitement of the 
late 1960s, offering treatments of sexualities gay and straight, and the kind 
of contemporary political slant that he was sometimes attacked in his lifetime 
for avoiding. It was also composed in a period when Bergman was beginning to 
look outsideSweden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> for co-production 
opportunities.

A beautiful, pregnant young woman, Rebecka (Bergman planned to cast Katharine 
Ross, famed at the time forThe Graduate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/from-the-archive-blog/2014/nov/21/mike-nichols-the-graduate-review-1968>
) is a teacher of hearing-impaired children. Bored with her existence, she 
yearns for sexual and social liberation. There are violent, transgressive 
scenes involving a visit to a sex club.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fingmar-bergman-64-minutes-with-rebecka-new-screenplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8a1f213e7e2ad617cd4c16954ec1df73660cc98%2F0_0_1965_2270%2F1965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ingmar%20Bergman's%20Sixty-Four%20Minutes%20With%20Rebecka%3A%20intriguing%2C%20sexy%20and%20intense&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fingmar-bergman-64-minutes-with-rebecka-new-screenplay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ingmar%20Bergman%27s%20Sixty-Four%20Minutes%20With%20Rebecka%3A%20intriguing%2C%20sexy%20and%20intense&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fingmar-bergman-64-minutes-with-rebecka-new-screenplay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8a1f213e7e2ad617cd4c16954ec1df73660cc98%2F0_0_1965_2270%2F1965.jpg>
 Bergman had intended for Katharine Ross to play Rebecka. Photograph: Cine 
Text/Sportsphoto Ltd/ Allstar 
At first glance, the project bears an eerie similarity to Richard Brooks’s 
1977 shocker Looking for Mr Goodbar, starring Diane Keaton as a teacher of 
hearing-impaired children who goes on her own sexual quest. That was based on a 
1975 novel, in turn based on a 1973 news story; there can be no link, other 
than the spirit of the times. One scene which has been published online 
describes Rebecka teaching a sullenly sexy and provocative young girl, Anna. 
The intense confrontation, the hint of unspoken understandings and sympathies, 
might conceivably put the audience in mind of Bergman’s Persona. Or the 
similarly intense generational resentment and rage bound up in the 
teacher-pupil relationship might recall Autumn Sonata. As for the other scene 
which has been published, we are on the familiar ground of intimate domestic 
discord, which Bergman was famously to dramatise in 1972 in Scenes from a 
Marriage.

As for Fellini and Kurosawa and their own planned contributions, this is an 
open question: La Strada and Rashomon were on Bergman’s personal list of 11 
favourite films. He had made a little-liked pastiche of Fellini’s 8 ½ in 1964 
called All These Women, and had a profound admiration for Kurosawa, calling his 
own The Virgin Spring a “lousy imitation” of that film-maker. Whatever was 
supposed to happen to the “Rebecka trilogy”, he and Kurosawa don’t appear to 
have had any close relationship. On Bergman’s 70th birthday, Kurosawa, then 77, 
wrote him what amounted to a fan letter that does not refer to their supposed 
joint venture, urging him to come out of retirement, because “a human being is 
not really capable of creating good works until he is 80”. Sixty-Four Minutes 
With Rebecka, written by the 51-year-old Bergman, promises to be intriguing.
 