
In a year in which 243 black men have been killed by the police in the US, 
television has been tackling race with a new vigour. New heroes were created, 
old ones were rediscovered and one set of initials loomed large: OJ.

The former actor and NFL star OJ Simpson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/simpson> was the subject of not one, but 
two projects, which used his story to reflect race relations, riots and reality 
TV.

Glee creator Ryan Murphy’s take on the Simpson murder trial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/16/the-people-v-oj-simpson-review-a-great-real-life-drama-becomes-a-superb-on-screen-one>
 was at times camp and ridiculous, but managed to tune in to the key element at 
play – racial tensions in Los Angeles. Courtney B Vance’s performance as 
defence attorney Johnnie Cochran was one of the best this year, as was Sarah 
Paulson’s as besieged prosecutor Marcia Clark, while Sterling K Brown’s turn as 
her conflicted colleague Christopher Darden, who was painted by many as a race 
traitor.

But it was Ezra Edelman’s extraordinary eight-hour documentary, OJ: Made in 
America 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jan/24/oj-made-in-america-espn-review>
, which is among the favourites in the best documentary race at the Oscars, 
that really showed what led to the trial of the century. He painted Simpson as 
a remarkably talented athlete who knew from an early age that he had to operate 
in a white world. From Simpson’s lack of solidarity with fellow African 
American athletes to his infamous statement that: “I’m not black, I’m OJ,” 
Edelman provided a backdrop that makes the trial strategy of the “dream team” – 
to accuse the LAPD of racism and paint Simpson as just another black victim – 
look all the more ruthless.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsecure-oj-and-the-night-of-how-tv-tackled-race-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9457e80123ee9cf9ebd3b50846721a33a08edc2%2F12_177_1458_1823%2F1458.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insecure%2C%20OJ%20and%20The%20Night%20Of%3A%20how%20TV%20tackled%20race%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsecure-oj-and-the-night-of-how-tv-tackled-race-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insecure%2C%20OJ%20and%20The%20Night%20Of%3A%20how%20TV%20tackled%20race%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsecure-oj-and-the-night-of-how-tv-tackled-race-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9457e80123ee9cf9ebd3b50846721a33a08edc2%2F12_177_1458_1823%2F1458.jpg>
 Whimsical, inventive and skewering ... Donald Glover in Atlanta. Photograph: 
Guy D'Alema/AP 
“What interested me was everything that surrounded it,” Edelman said when 
explaining why he chose not to focus solely on the trial, “and trying to 
explain why two groups of people – white and black – looked at one thing and 
saw something completely different.” It’s a search that reveals a city and a 
country in which parallel lives are brought crashing together by the trial of a 
person who could not care less about racial harmony.

Away from Simpson, 2016 saw other progressive TV commissioning that has become 
a key component of this golden age. But unlike the more mainstream, established 
brands ofShondaLand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/sep/26/-sp-women-shonda-rhimes-shondaland>
,Empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/feb/08/empire-black-family-drama-changing-look-american-tv-lee-daniels>
 or evenBlack-ish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tvandradioblog/2014/sep/24/black-ish-abc-show-race-issues-review>
, these new shows had a for-us-by-us feel. When news emerged that Community 
star and rapperDonald Glover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/30/donald-glover-rapper-comedian-martian-star>
’s forthcoming series would focus on a struggling hip-hop star,few could have 
imagined a show like Atlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/19/atlanta-donald-glover-show-example-young-black-writers-creative-tv>
. Strange and whimsical, it was an off-kilter ride through the lives of Paper 
Boi (Bryan Tyree Henry) and his crew, including his cousin Earn Marks, played 
by Glover. Ever inventive and skewering, Atlanta succeeded in avoiding huge 
statements about race in favour of small cautionary tales.

Issa Rae’s Insecure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/11/issa-rae-insecure-misadventures-of-awkward-black-girl-hbo-tv-comedy>
 captured a similar audience, and, like Glover, she succeeded by showing a 
world rarely seen on TV – that of a twentysomething black woman in LA. She 
takes part in impromptu rap battles, makes dubious romantic decisions and deals 
with a group of well-meaning but accidentally racist colleagues.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsecure-oj-and-the-night-of-how-tv-tackled-race-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3559c3a78d4718c4eb7b79ec7cd4ef8a0f70add2%2F538_0_2462_1477%2F2462.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Insecure%2C%20OJ%20and%20The%20Night%20Of%3A%20how%20TV%20tackled%20race%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsecure-oj-and-the-night-of-how-tv-tackled-race-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Insecure%2C%20OJ%20and%20The%20Night%20Of%3A%20how%20TV%20tackled%20race%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Finsecure-oj-and-the-night-of-how-tv-tackled-race-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3559c3a78d4718c4eb7b79ec7cd4ef8a0f70add2%2F538_0_2462_1477%2F2462.jpg>
 Bulletproof black man ... Mike Colter in Luke Cage. Photograph: Netflix 
The basic premise of Netflix’s Luke Cage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/30/luke-cage-netflix-marvel-a-bulletproof-black-man-the-superhero-america-needs-now>
 – a bulletproof black man – was one of the biggest political statements of the 
year. Released the same weekend asSolange’s album A Seat at the Table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/30/solange-a-seat-at-the-table-a-stately-sprawling-celebration-of-black-identity>
, there was a similar buzz around a show that presented a righteous, 
dark-skinned superhero living in Harlem. What could have been a bit of summer 
filler became, alongside Stranger Things, one of TV’s biggest surprise hits of 
the year.


Then there was The Night Of, starring Riz Ahmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/15/the-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-5-the-night-of>
. The most surprising thing about the tale of Nasir Khan, a Pakistani American 
student caught up in a murder, is that the story had already been told inthe 
2008 UK original, Criminal Justice <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1188927/>, 
which starred Ben Whishaw. In its new iteration, it took on contemporary 
issues, playing not only with the failures of the justice system, but also 
racial and religious identity. A sleeper hit that takes on “the system”, it 
joined the ranks of The Wire and American Crime.
 