
Alan Greenspan had a dream, or rather a nightmare. Greenspan seems to have 
woken up in a cold sweat one morning in fear that the period of 
"disinflationary pressures" that had kept inflation low since the 1990s was 
about to end. This was 2007, when he published his autobiographical economic 
treatise,The Age of Turbulence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/oct/06/politics>. Despite his 
well-known love for economic data, and poring over the latest reports from 
every statistical agency, he did not realise that he wassitting on a housing 
bubble of epic proportions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2010/mar/08/financial-crisis-subprimecrisis>
. Not seeing the bubble (he also missed the prior stock market bubble that 
accumulated and burst on his watch, causing the 2001 downturn), he could not 
know that it would soon collapse and cause a very ugly recession, in which 
inflation would be irrelevant.

This by itself should be enough to question the wisdom of central bankers, 
since the evidence for both of these world-historic asset bubbles was 
blindingly obvious once they had reached a certain size. But Greenspan's 
nightmare is scary for other reasons, some of which will become increasingly 
relevant as the world economy recovers.

As Greenspan details in his book, the reason for his nightmare is that the 
world was depleting its stock of hundreds of millions of unemployed people, 
including those of the former Soviet Union and also in rural China. In other 
words, "too many" of them had become employed, and this was allowing for wages 
of factory workers in China to rise. So long asChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> had a huge mass of unemployed, wages 
were held in check, and – according to Greenspan – competition from low-wage 
production there held down wages in the rest of the world, including even rich 
countries like the United States. All good! Until the nightmare started.

Is there something wrong with this picture, that one of the world's most 
powerful economic decision makers (at the time), dreads the decline of mass 
unemployment and rising wages among people making 80 cents an hour? What, then, 
is the purpose of economic development, if not to raise living standards for 
poor people? Some may dismiss Greenspan's values as unrepresentative – he was, 
after all, adevotee of the extreme libertarian writer Ayn Rand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/sep/29/comment.comment>. And 
his autobiographical narrative is rather unusual: although we learn about his 
love of baseball, music (he attended the Julliard School), and how he became 
interested in economics, there is something missing. Most public figures of his 
stature, and even most economists, would have offered at least a perfunctory 
paragraph about how his economic thinking was aimed at helping those at the 
bottom of the social ladder – whether true or not. Greenspan didn't bother.

But unfortunately Greenspan is not an outlier but a moderate among central 
bankers. What is worse, their perverse world view has a hugely disproportionate 
influence on reporting and discussion of economic issues. As the press has 
recently reported, wages in China are again rising, due to the additive effect 
of the global economic recovery and the world's most effective economic 
stimulus programme, which enabled China to plough right through the world 
recession with 8.7% growth in 2009. The reports are somewhat less negative than 
they were a few years ago, but Greenspan's nightmare is everywhere: a dreaded 
"labour shortage" is forcing Chinese wages up and this will add to inflation. 
It is not clear what is wrong with a "labour shortage" being resolved in the 
way that markets resolve other shortages: ie the price of labour goes up until 
quantity supplied matches quantity demanded.

"China has drained its once vast reserves of unemployed workers in rural areas 
and is running out of fresh labourers for its factories,"reports the New York 
Times <http://www.nytimes.com/2010/02/27/business/global/27yuan.html>. 
"Personnel managers here say they are also abandoning the informal tradition of 
not hiring anyone over 35 – they say they are now hiring workers up to 40 years 
old, and sometimes older, despite concerns about whether they can keep up week 
after week with the rapid pace of Chinese assembly lines."

"Managers can no longer simply provide eight-to-a-room dorms and expect 
labourers to toil 12 hours a day, seven days a week,"says Business Week 
<http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/06_13/b3977049.htm>.

There is more, but we wouldn't want to give Alan Greenspan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/alan-greenspan> a heart attack.

To its credit, the Times recognises the positive aspect of rising wages for 
Chinese workers and also notes that the Obama administration, which has 
complained about the Chinese yuan being undervalued, should welcome this 
development. An increase in Chinese wages, to the extent that it raises the 
price of the country's exports, has the same impact as an appreciation of the 
yuan.

But the reality is that the Obama administration, as well as Congressional 
leaders, are not really serious about a more competitive dollar. If they were, 
they could push down the value of the dollar worldwide, rather than trying to 
blame the Chinese for our overvalued currency. But they don't do that because 
the Greenspan/Wall Street view prevails: anything that lowers inflation is 
good, whether it's an overvalued dollar, cheap imports from repressed overseas 
labour, or US workers' wages stagnating, as they have, for decades.

All this despite the fact that the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office 
projects inflation over the next 10 years averaging less than 1.7% annually – 
lower than any decade for more than half a century. Imaginary threats of 
inflation could turn out to be one of the more real threats to the United 
States' economic recovery.
 