
If you’ve seen Amy Schumer’s Hamilton parody Betsy Ross 
<http://www.cc.com/video-clips/b3dce7/inside-amy-schumer-betsy-ross>, then 
you’ve already seen the funniest thing about the first episode of Inside Amy 
Schumer, which returns for its fourth season on Thursday at 10pm ET. It’s not 
that the sketch comedy series isn’t as funny, it’s just hard to live up to the 
premiere of last season, which featured the immediate classic sketchesMilk Milk 
Lemonade <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HeiSx5MNDvg> and Last Fuckable Day 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XPpsI8mWKmg> starring comedy legends Tina Fey 
and Julia Louis-Dreyfus and Oscar-winner Patricia Arquette. In comparison, the 
Hamilton sketch just isn’t all that.

This is going to be a tough season for Schumer just because of the insane year 
she’s had. First there was the incredibly solid last season of her show, which 
was capped off with her winning the first Emmy for outstanding variety sketch 
series. Then there was the summer blockbusterTrainwreck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/09/trainwreck-review-amy-schumer-romcom-judd-apatow>
, a bunch of viral stories about herfriendship with Jennifer Lawrence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/26/jennifer-lawrence-amy-schumer-pair-up-to-write-screenplay>
, aSuper Bowl commercial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/07/super-bowl-ads-best-and-worst>
, ahunky new boyfriend 
<http://www.etonline.com/news/180331_amy_schumer_boyfriend_ben_hanisch_declares_he_love_with_her/>
 and a certified seat at the table of the coolest girls in the entertainment 
industry.

All that, and she also has to create more signature sketches that are not only 
funny but also insightful, subversive and threatening to the patriarchy. Not an 
easy task.

Sketch comedy shows, especially ones that also include standup routines and 
interviews, as Schumer’s does, are inherently uneven, but the first two 
episodes, which were made available to critics, feel especially hit or miss.

In the first episode, a spot about a group of senators in the exam room where 
Schumer is getting a pap smear seems a little too on the nose. The same goes 
for a fake commercial for a yoghurt called YoPuss that makes a woman’s vagina 
taste like nothing. These are the kind of sketches the audience tunes in to Amy 
Schumer to see, but they just don’t have the daring punch that last season’s 
30-minute12 Angry Men Inside Amy Schumer did 
<http://www.cc.com/episodes/d6vl24/inside-amy-schumer-12-angry-men-inside-amy-schumer-season-3-ep-303>
.

The best part of the first episode, besides the Hamilton sketch, is about a 
mock SportsCenter program scoring a showdown, between Amy and a fictional 
boyfriend, about who is going to be the first to say they don’t want to have 
sex. It’s a funny conceit, but it plays a bit too long and could have pushed 
the joke much further.

The second episode fares better, with one all-star segment featuring Jennifer 
Hudson <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/jennifer-hudson>, Julianne Moore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/juliannemoore>, Laura Linney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/laura-linney> and Maggie Gyllenhaal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/maggie-gyllenhaal>, mocking the roles that 
get women nominated. There’s also an excellent series of sketches about 
husbands who sleep with nannies that dismantles the easy advice of “don’t hire 
a hot nanny” and shows how absurd it is. That is what Schumer has always done 
best, and she’ll definitely be changing minds with this one.

 However, there is a long sketch about fantasy football that comes out of left 
field (or more accurately, the other team’s end zone) and is clever, but not 
really hilarious. It also feels like it belongs on some other show – one that 
genuinely cares about things like sports.

Many fans fear that Schumer won’t have time for little old cable television 
now that she’s moved on to the big, bad world of movies. Yes, there are some 
small changes to the show – she no longer does man-on-the-street interviews, 
probably because they would degenerate into her taking selfies with strangers 
all night – but one of the show’s hallmarks has always been that the next 
genius sketch is just around the corner.

Given Schumer’s success, the audience is expecting that genius on a rather 
more reliable basis. I’m sure it’s coming, even if it isn’t evident right out 
of the gate.
 