
Egypt went out of the Cup of Nations in the group stage six years ago but in 
17 games since they are unbeaten. They won the tournament on home soil in 2006 
and then became only the second North African side to win it in West Africa, 
triumphing inGhana <https://www.theguardian.com/football/ghana> two years later.

Tomorrow, if they beat a youthful Ghana in the final, they will become the 
first team to win the tournament three times in succession.

It is not hard to pinpoint the reason for the upturn. After the departure of 
Marco Tardelli in 2004,Egypt <https://www.theguardian.com/football/egypt> 
turned to Hassan Shehata, and he has glowered successfully from behind his 
moustache ever since.

Once a prolific centre-forward with Zamalek, he was not an obvious choice, 
having developed a reputation as a promotion specialist, guiding Menia, 
Sharquia and Suez into the top flight in successive seasons before taking 
charge of the national youth set-up.

The 60-year-old insisted on a team ethic, stamping on the egos that had been 
so troublesome in the past. Perhaps the defining moment of his career came in 
the 2006 semi-final against Senegal after he substituted Mido. The 
then-Tottenham forward reacted furiously but as he and Shehata quarrelled on 
the touchline, his replacement Amr Zaki headed the winner: Shehata was 
vindicated and Mido has barely played for the national team since.

Religion is part of the process of bonding the team. In Ghana the squad joined 
in sacrificing a cow and they are expected to pray together. It is Islam that 
Shehata credits with having brought the at times tempestuous Borussia Dortmund 
forward Mohamed Zidan into line.

"I did not like how he used to be aloof and not mix with the rest," he said. 
"I convinced him of the need to pray and how important it is. He has been 
praying since."

It has clearly worked for Zidan, who missed the 2006 tournament because he 
preferred to fight for a place in the team at his German club Mainz. He has 
become an integral part of the side, setting up the only goal in the final two 
years ago and orchestrating the evisceration of Algeria on Thursday. "He's a 
very good coach," Zidan said. "What's important is that he has a good 
relationship with us."

With his refusal to co-operate with the media and brusque touchline manner, 
Shehata appears a sergeant-majorly figure but Zidan says the reality is very 
different. "He's like a father," he said. "We make jokes with him. He's not a 
young coach and it's strange to see somebody of his age who is so close to his 
team. Maybe other people don't see this â€“ they just see him in the game when he 
is tense and is giving us instructions."

As ever, Shehata has imposed a media lockdown in the knockout stages of the 
tournament and it seems to work. If his side, who with 14 goals in five games 
have been by some way the best attacking team in the tournament, can overcome 
the best defence, he will equal the great Ghanaian coach CK Gyamfi's record of 
three African titles.

Ghana v Egypt: How they compare 
Cup of Nations record This will be a record eighth final for both sides, 
although it is Ghana's first since they lost 11-10 on penalties to Ivory Coast 
in 1992. Egypt have won the title six times, Ghana four.
Key clash At 34 Ahmed Hassan remains probably the best creative midfielder in 
Africa but after almost a decade unchallenged the 21-year-old Ghanaian Kwadwo 
Asamoah has emerged as a worthy pretender. Their scrap in midfield could be 
crucial.

Preferred set-up Egypt will use the 3-5-2 that has brought them such sustained 
success, while Ghana will probably stick with their 4-4-1-1, which means Hany 
Said, the Egyptian sweeper, will have to step into midfield if they are not to 
be outnumbered there.

Africa Cup of Nations final: Ghana v Egypt, Luanda, Sunday 4pm (GMT)
 