
The inaugural Queen Elizabeth Prize for Engineering <http://www.qeprize.org/> 
was yesterday awarded to five engineers who helped to create the internet and 
the world wide web. The work of these engineers was substantially based on 
pioneering research and development by a team of British engineers and 
scientists at theNational Physical Laboratory <http://www.npl.co.uk/>, a 
government R&D establishment, under its leaderDonald Davies 
<http://www.internethalloffame.org/inductees/donald-davies>. We do not wish in 
any way to denigrate the work of the engineers selected, yet not one of the NPL 
team has been included.

The communications technology that underpins the internet is packet switching. 
This was independently invented, and named as such, by Davies in 1965, and has 
been widely acknowledged. The idea was developed into a proposal for a wide 
area network, similar in many ways to the internet, by a small team of 
engineers, including ourselves. It was also conveyed in 1967 to a US team 
planning theArpanet <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/arpanet>, the 
network that was the principal forerunner to the internet.

Davies's British team was limited to building a local area network within the 
NPL campus, which it successfully completed in 1971. This was the first digital 
local network in the world to use packet switching and high-speed links. The 
NPL team undertook a wide range of internationally recognised research in the 
field of computer networks, as well as collaborating with the Arpanet and 
broader international community. Most importantly from the point of view of 
this award, members participated in an international working group whose job 
was to define the function of inter-network gateways and the development of the 
Internetwork Protocol that led directly to the creation of the internet, 
co-authoring one of the seminal publications on this subject. This was one of 
the areas singled out for its significance by theRoyal Academy of Engineering 
<http://www.raeng.org.uk/> judges.

But it appears that the work of the pioneering British team that introduced 
packet switching has been airbrushed from history by the RAE judges. Davies's 
contribution (he died in 2000) to the development of packet switching was 
recognised by the US IEEE institution, among others. When Arpanet reached its 
25th anniversary, the NPL team were hailed in the US as "the packet-switching 
pioneers". It is galling that while US institutions are willing to recognise 
the significance of NPL's work, the UK establishment appears incapable of doing 
so.
Roger Scantlebury
Peter Wilkinson
Former NPL engineers
 