
The company that owns the infidelity site Ashley Madison, which suffered a 
mass privacy breach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madison-hackers-release-10gb-database-of-33m-infidelity-site-accounts>
, has agreed to court-enforceable improvements in handling personal information.

A joint Australian and Canadian privacy commissioner investigation into how 
the details of millions of users were published online by hackers has released 
a “highly critical” report of the website’s privacy.

Among the users were hundreds of Australian government employees and thousands 
of citizens,including some who had paid Ashley Madison to delete their accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madisons-paid-delete-option-left-data-identifying-users-post-claims>
.

Ten questions Ashley Madison needs to answer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/21/ten-questions-ashley-madison-needs-to-answer>
The hacked data, released on the dark web last year, included credit card 
details, email accounts and home addresses.

The joint report investigated the privacy practices of Ashley Madison’s parent 
company Avid Life Media, and found it did not have an adequate information 
security framework.

In the first joint Australian-Canadian privacy investigation, the 
commissioners investigated ALM’s retention of personal information after 
profiles were deactivated.

They also looked at ALM’s practice of not confirming the accuracy of users’ 
email addresses and its transparency over handling of personal information.

The report made a series of recommendations, all of which ALM has agreed to 
implement.

They include reviewing protections of personal information, advising staff of 
security procedures, stopping retention of information from deactivated 
accounts and no longer charging users to delete their information.

The hackers, who called themselves the Impact Team, demanded the site be shut 
down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/20/ashley-madison-hacked-cheating-site-total-shutdown>
 before releasing the data in retaliation.

The commissioners say the report contains important lessons for other 
organisations that hold personal information.

“The findings of our joint investigation reveal the risks to businesses when 
they do not have a dedicated risk management process in place to protect 
personal information,” the Australian privacy commissioner, Timothy Pilgrim, 
said.

Companies must think beyond IT systems to staff training, policies, oversight 
and clear lines of authority, he said.

Life after the Ashley Madison affair
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/28/what-happened-after-ashley-madison-was-hacked>
The commissioner also used the report to warn customers to guard their 
personal data.

“While ALM fell well short of the requirements we would expect for an 
organisation managing personal information, breaches can occur in the best-run 
companies,” Pilgrim said.

“Be clear about what you are providing, the value you are getting in exchange, 
and understand that no organisation is breach-proof.”

 