
Never has an attraction promised so much yet delivered so little. It was the 
roller coaster without a ride, thehelter skelter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/may/06/olympics-orbit-anish-kapoor>
 without a slide, a £20m mountain of steel leering above London’s lean Olympic 
stadium as a mocking monument to the vanity of the city’s former mayor, Boris 
Johnson, and its funder, the steel magnate Lakshmi Mittal.

Designed by artist Anish Kapoor and engineer Cecil Balmond, the ArcelorMittal 
Orbit was conceived as a money-making machine, intended to reap £1.2m a year 
for the upkeep of the Olympic park. Instead it has cost the taxpayer£10,000 a 
week to maintain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/olympic-parks-orbit-tower-costing-taxpayer-10000-a-week>
. Of all of Johnson’s follies, fromthe empty Thames cable car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/shortcuts/2013/feb/18/emirates-air-line-cable-car-london>
 to theoverheating bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/18/routemaster-buses-in-london-to-be-refitted-with-windows-that-open>
, it has been the most useless totem pole of mayoral hubris.

In a delirious red blur … you catch bleary glimpses of Olympic-scape before 
plunging into darkness around hairpin bends

But when you’re hurtling down through the structure’s contorted loops on the 
new corkscrew slide that opens this weekend, all this can be momentarily 
forgiven.

All that steel, which the engineers of the neighbouring stadium worked so hard 
to avoid using, shoots by in a delirious red blur. The awkward marriage of 
Kapoor’s tangled structure, that clunky staircase, the lift and boxy corporate 
entertaining suite dissolve in a dizzying 40-second thrill ride. As Guy de 
Maupassant said of the Eiffel Tower, being inside the Orbit is the best place 
to be – because it’s the only place you don’t have to look at it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcarsten-holler-arcelormittal-orbit-slide-first-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F502055c8f456f63a13a8e9ac08835bc86b0f7708%2F0_0_6875_4652%2F6875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Into%20Orbit%3A%20my%20dizzying%20drop%20down%20the%20world's%20biggest%20slide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcarsten-holler-arcelormittal-orbit-slide-first-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Into%20Orbit%3A%20my%20dizzying%20drop%20down%20the%20world%27s%20biggest%20slide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcarsten-holler-arcelormittal-orbit-slide-first-ride%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F502055c8f456f63a13a8e9ac08835bc86b0f7708%2F0_0_6875_4652%2F6875.jpg>
 Downward spiral … Oliver Wainwright going down the slide. Photograph: Linda 
Nylind for the Guardian 
Through transparent sections of the slide’s roof, you catch bleary glimpses of 
the surroundingOlympic-scape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/jul/21/london-2012-olympics-architecture-legacy>
, before plunging into darkness and jolting around 12 hairpin bends at speeds 
of up to 15mph (which feels much faster, believe me).

You see the bulging roof of Zaha Hadid’s swimming pool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/feb/25/olympics-aquatics-centre-opens-london>
, the thicket of Stratford’s tacky apartment towers, the gilded souks of 
Westfield, theskeletal stadium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/25/west-ham-welcome-juventus-first-game-olympic-stadium>
, all whisked up in a woozy cocktail, before you’re spat out at the bottom. It 
brings back the thrill of the Games – that one moment when the nation suspended 
cynicism over this £12bn regeneration project – in a brief white-knuckle gulp.


Carsten Höller: ‘It is impossible to travel down a slide without smiling’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/17/carsten-holler-travel-down-a-slide-without-smiling-decision>
Billed as the longest and tallest tunnel slide in the world, it is the most 
extreme work yet of Belgian artistCarsten Höller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/17/carsten-holler-travel-down-a-slide-without-smiling-decision>
, a research scientist turned purveyor of slides to major global art 
institutions since 1998. For Höller, who first brought his steel spirals to 
London atTate Modern in 2006 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2006/oct/10/familyandrelationships.arts>, and 
attached a pair of corkscrews to the front of theHayward Gallery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/14/carsten-holler-decision-review-duane-hanson-hayward-serpentine>
 last year, the slides are an experiment in letting go.

They are, he says, a way of propelling visitors into a state of “simultaneous 
delight, madness and voluptuous panic”. This last bit is a quote from the 
French writer Roger Caillois, who in the 1950s described sliding as 
“surrendering to a kind of spasm, seizure, or shock which destroys reality with 
sovereign brusqueness”.

When you’re 76 metres up in the air above Stratford, kitted out with the 
obligatory elbow protectors and padded hat, then ceremonially stuffed into a 
sack and left peering into the gaping steel tube, the brusqueness certainly 
bites. And the ride doesn’t disappoint.At £17 a go, this is no cheap thrill, 
especially in the context of three of London’s poorest boroughs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcarsten-holler-arcelormittal-orbit-slide-first-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f1a5a90978b144594dd604914fbef4df334d271%2F0_0_4000_4139%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Into%20Orbit%3A%20my%20dizzying%20drop%20down%20the%20world's%20biggest%20slide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcarsten-holler-arcelormittal-orbit-slide-first-ride%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Into%20Orbit%3A%20my%20dizzying%20drop%20down%20the%20world%27s%20biggest%20slide&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fjun%2F23%2Fcarsten-holler-arcelormittal-orbit-slide-first-ride%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f1a5a90978b144594dd604914fbef4df334d271%2F0_0_4000_4139%2F4000.jpg>
 ‘Spasm, seizure, shock’ … Anish Kapoor’s ArcelorMittal Orbit, adorned by 
Carsten Höller’s slide. 
The ticket price is part of an effort to make this white elephant’s hopeless 
business plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/oct/20/olympic-parks-orbit-tower-costing-taxpayer-10000-a-week>
 stack up. Projected to receive 350,000 visitors annually, less than half that 
number came last year. Abseiling was introduced in 2014, at £85 a pop, but that 
did little to help balance the books, nor did corporate events help. The view 
from the top of the tower, even with Kapoor’s funfair hall of mirrors, simply 
wasn’t enough of a draw. You see pretty much the same from the John Lewis 
luggage department nearby. And that has a cafe.

When the plan for the slide was first mooted, Kapoor was blunt. “The mayor 
foisted this on the project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/26/anish-kapoor-addition-artwork-foisted-on-him-boris-johnson>
, and kind of insisted,” he said. “It felt to me as if it was turning the whole 
thing in the wrong direction.” Now he claims to be “delighted with the 
collaboration”. Never has an artist been commissioned to add a sticking plaster 
to another artist’s failed work in such a public manner, even if Johnson 
jovially compared the situation to being “like Bernini adorning the work of 
Michelangelo”.

The truth, according to a source close to the project, is that Boris had been 
keen on a slide from the very beginning, when he first dreamt up the plan for 
an Olympic tower, fearing the flat-pack stadium might lack the wow-factor he 
desired. AlongsideKapoor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/26/anish-kapoor-addition-artwork-foisted-on-him-boris-johnson>
, he invited two other artists to submit ideas, including Antony Gormley, who 
proposed a gigantic model of himself through which visitors could clamber, and 
the architects Caruso St John, who came up with a vertical seaside pier.

Designed with artist Eva Rothschild and curated by Jeremy Deller, it would 
have been a kiss-me-quick ascent of palm-reading and fish and chips, telescopes 
and fairy lights, easy to dismantle and recycle after the Olympics. But however 
much the mayor pleaded for a slide, no one played ball. The entrants preferred 
to occupy the higher pedestal of art than funfair attraction.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fmay%2F06%2Fanish-kapoor-orbit-olympics-timelapse&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Constructing%20Anish%20Kapoor's%20Orbit%3A%20time-lapse%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fmay%2F06%2Fanish-kapoor-orbit-olympics-timelapse>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Constructing%20Anish%20Kapoor%27s%20Orbit%3A%20time-lapse%20film&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fmay%2F06%2Fanish-kapoor-orbit-olympics-timelapse&media=>
Constructing Anish Kapoor’s Orbit: time-lapse film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2012/may/06/anish-kapoor-orbit-olympics-timelapse>
Five years on, Höller’s £3m slide has finally given this knotted steel monster 
a use. It will pay itself back in five years, in the optimistic dreams of the
London Legacy Development Corporation 
<http://queenelizabetholympicpark.co.uk/our-story/the-legacy-corporation>. But 
what if it doesn’t? Might it become the fantastical testing ground fora 
succession of ever more lurid spectacles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/shortcuts/2016/apr/28/stick-a-slide-on-it-the-surefire-way-to-improve-any-landmark>
 of public art? They could commission Jeff Koons to cover it in flowers, or 
Christoto wrap it up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/jun/18/the-floating-piers>
 so we no longer have to see it.

Why every British landmark would be improved by a slide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/shortcuts/2016/apr/28/stick-a-slide-on-it-the-surefire-way-to-improve-any-landmark>
In tougher times, hated public art was simply pulled down. When John Nash 
erected a 20-metre pillar in Kings Cross, topped with a statue of George IV, it 
was damned as a “Doric monstrosity”. As the Home Counties magazineput it 
<https://archive.org/stream/homecountiesmaga12londuoft/homecountiesmaga12londuoft_djvu.txt>
: “The whole was such an execrable performance that ridicule killed it”.

Perhaps that might eventually be kinder fate than letting this reviled 
zombie-pylon stagger on. It contains enough steel to make 265 double-decker 
buses, trumpets the promotional blurb. It’s hard not to think that might have 
been a better use for it.

 * The Slide at the ArcelorMittal Orbit, Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park, London, 
is open from 24 June <http://arcelormittalorbit.com/whats-on/the-slide/>  