
To the confused climes of the International Olympics Committee's moral 
universe, which – for those never sure of the co-ordinates – lies firmly 
through the looking glass. "It is very clear," claimed the IOC president Thomas 
Bach this week, "the Games cannot be used as a stage for political 
demonstrations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/jan/27/sochi-winter-olympics-ioc-thomas-bach>
".

But is it clear? It does not seem to be entirely clear to Vladimir Putin, who 
is swanning about his $51bn ice-world like a homophobicMr Freeze 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Mr+Freeze&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=PN3oUteMKYOShge_xoGQCg&ved=0CDQQsAQ&biw=1189&bih=902#facrc=_&imgdii=_&imgrc=Ysy9ZIsnzR2YkM%253A%3Buvtai-yjhUOIkM%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fstatic2.wikia.nocookie.net%252F__cb20120422221229%252Fbatman%252Fimages%252F4%252F4d%252FMr._Freeze_%28Arnold_Schwarzenegger%29_3.jpg%3Bhttp%253A%252F%252Fbatman.wikia.com%252Fwiki%252FMr._Freeze_%28Arnold_Schwarzenegger%29%3B571%3B800>
, just as it didn't seem to be entirely clear in 2008 to the Chinese 
government, whose Games were a sporting event in the same way the Death Star 
was moon-shaped. Which is to say it was, but that was hardly the salient point.

In fact, having examined the realities of the IOC's typically faultless logic 
on this one, it would seem helpful to delineate the actual rules on politicking 
at the Games, intuitive though they may feel to us all by now. And so … People 
who are permitted to use the Olympics as a vehicle for advancing their own 
messages and agendas: the president of the host nation, the organisers, the 
sponsors, the IOC, the sportswear manufacturers, and anyone who pays (except 
the lowly customers). People who aren't: the athletes.

Any attempt to send a message from the podium – via peaceful gestures, 
obviously – will be punished by the IOC, whose motto should really be Faster, 
Higher, Stronger, Silenter.

Consequently, just as it always does, this policy will serve to emphasise the 
IOC's serial willingness to appease powerful governments at the expense of the 
competitors. The more the IOC (and indeed its spiritual twin, Fifa) continues 
to gift its sporting events to authoritarian regimes, the more they become one 
giant political demonstration, in which the athletes are a mere plot device. 
Their role is to shut up and compete, providing charming and unquestioning 
window dressing for events that are about something else entirely.

It is often remarked that bunfights like the Olympics are just war by other 
means, and increasingly these global sporting events really do seem to find 
their closest analogy in the characteristics of international conflict. Both 
involve incontinent spending, the corrupt awarding of contracts, and a civilian 
populace required to pay for it all unquestioningly or be accused of being 
unpatriotic, while allegations of human rights and civil liberties abuses 
always ensue.

Or as the IOC president prefers it: "When the athletes will be in Sochi, it 
will become clearer and clearer that theOlympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> are first of all about the 
athletes and about sport."

Bless him, but if he spends four seconds thinking about it, I don't think Mr 
Bach will find it's about the athletes and sport for the Russian president. If 
it were actually about the athletes, of course, those competitors would be 
extended the same rights of expression as whichever cocktail of corporations 
and Kremlinites has bought the event this time round.

Richard Keys' absence not the only talking point in Andy Gray return

Terrible news planning by surviving Beatles Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2014/jan/27/the-beatles-paul-mccartney-ringo-starr-grammys-2014>
, whose Grammys collaboration ended up being only the weekend's second most 
poignantly incomplete comeback. Still, that's what happens if you clash with
Andy Gray's return to British football punditry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/jan/25/andy-gray-return-commentary-bt-sport>
.

The erstwhile Sky Sports commentator was back in business thanks to BT Sport, 
with the outing only serving to throw the absence of Andy's banter buddyRichard 
Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> into even more 
bittersweet relief. Then again, I say "absence". And I say "comeback". But, of 
course, those who follow the mercilessly observed Keys parody account on 
Twitter – it is a parody, isn't it? – will know that "we've never been away. 
We're just working elsewhere".

Qatar, in fact, which Richard painted as a veritable paradise in an engrossing 
interview last year 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/profiles/richard-keys-sky-have-done-their-money-the-novelty-of-gary-neville-and-jamie-carragher-will-wear-off-and-then-what-8827984.html>
, where he lamented press manipulation in the UK. "It's a huge thing for me," 
he declared of his Qatar residency, "to live in a country where that sort of 
hypocrisy doesn't exist. It just doesn't exist."

What a mind he is. And as the Zen master of hanging-out-the-back-of-it 
explained to a Twitter user only this weekend: "I'm far richer emotionally and 
financially my friend. I'm a long way from bitter."

But is he a long way from rekindling his bromance with Andy – his brobantz, if 
you will – on British telly? Well, as far as what actually happened withThe 
Unpleasantness at Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2011/jan/26/richard-keys-resigns-sky-sports>
 is concerned, Richard seems to have drunk deeply from the well of conspiracy. 
To read his timeline is to see tantalising references to "the real story" and 
"the full facts" as to what befell him and Andy. Detractors are warned to "come 
back to me when the full story emerges". "We were set up as a distraction," he 
hints darkly. "We were bugged."

It would be helpful to think of the pair's quest for the truth as some kind of 
Jason Bourne-style thriller, where the stakes never stop getting higher, the 
danger is clear and present, the enemies go all the way to the top of the CIA, 
the World Bank and the Vatican, and which will soon require Andy to shake down 
some kind of hostile agent at dead of night in a Qatari storm drain while 
Richard demands: "Who is the keymaster?Who is the keymaster?"

Whether the denouement will come in time to make Richard and Andy the 
commonsense pick for Preston North End and Nottingham Forest's fourth round 
replay is unclear. But we can only wish our plucky enemies of the state all the 
best.
 