
Iranian judges have ordered a young female writer and activist to serve a 
six-year jail term for writing an unpublished fictional story about stoning to 
death in her country.

Golrokh Ebrahimi Iraee received a phone call on Tuesday from judicial 
officials ordering her to Evin prison in Tehran, where her husband,Arash Sadeghi
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/23/iran-activists-jailed-speaking-out>
, a prominent student activist, is serving a 19-year sentence.


Ebrahimi Iraee told Voice of America’s Persian network this week that she had 
been sentenced to five years in prison for insulting Islamic sanctities and one 
extra year for spreading propaganda against the ruling system.


“They haven’t issued a written summons [as required by the law],” she said in 
a Skype interview. “They called me using the telephone of one of my friends, 
Navid Kamran; they had gone to his shop to arrest him and they called me from 
there to summon me.”


Boycott of world chess championship 'would hurt women in Iran'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/30/boycott-of-womens-world-chess-championship-iran-tehran>
Ebrahimi Iraee said the authorities had ordered her to go to Evin to serve her 
sentence by noon on Wednesday. It was not clear on Thursday whether she had 
since gone to prison.

Amnesty International <https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international>
 said that Ebrahimi Iraee’s plight was linked to a fictional story that the 
authorities discovered in September 2014 when they ransacked the couple’s house 
in Tehran and confiscated their belongings.


“The charges against Golrokh Ebrahimi Iraee are ludicrous,” said Philip 
Luther, Amnesty’s research director for itsMiddle East and North Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/middleeast> programme.

“She is facing years behind bars simply for writing a story, and one which was 
not even published – she is effectively being punished for using her 
imagination.”

Stoning to death is one of Iran’s most controversial punishments, often used 
against women accused of having an illicit relationship outside marriage. It 
sparked an unprecedented global outrage in 2010 in reaction tothe high-profile 
case of Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sakineh-mohammadi-ashtiani>, a woman 
sentenced to death by stoning for adultery.

Under pressure, Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> ultimately said 
it would not use the punishment against Ashtiani, who was also accused of 
alleged complicity in the murder of her husband, but it is not clear whether 
she is still in prison or has been freed.


Luther said: “Instead of imprisoning a young woman for peacefully exercising 
her human rights by expressing her opposition to stoning, the Iranian 
authorities should focus on abolishing this punishment, which amounts to 
torture.

“It is appalling that Iran continues to allow the use of stoning, and 
justifies it in the name of protecting morality,” he said.

Luther described Ebrahimi Iraee’s conviction as farcical. “She was denied the 
right to a defence and her sentence was a foregone conclusion. This is just the 
latest example of the Iranian authorities’ utter contempt for justice and human 
rights,” he said.

Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani could be hanged in Iran
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/26/sakineh-mohammadi-ashtiani-hang-iran>
Iran’s judiciary has a history of using similarly vague charges against other 
activists and campaigners in cases that are regarded as politically motivated.

Luther said: “We are urging the authorities to immediately quash Golrokh 
Ebrahimi Iraee’s conviction and that of her husband Arash Sadeghi, who has been 
behind bars since June for peacefully exercising his rights to freedom of 
expression and association.”

Evin, situated on the foothills of the Alborz mountains towering over Tehran, 
is home to some of Iran’s most respected activists and lawyers, who are serving 
lengthy prison terms.

Soon after the 1979 Islamic revolution, the prison was meant to be converted 
into a museum to showcase the injustices under the late shah. But it has become 
the Islamic Republic’s most notorious prison, which many of its former inmates 
ironically refer to as “Evin university” since it is a place where many 
prominent figures meet and share ideas.


A damning report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/ban-ki-moon-troubled-by-lack-of-progress-human-rights-iran>
 by the UN’s outgoing secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, released earlier this 
week, also shed light on Iran continuing to hand down stoning sentences. Ban 
said at least one woman, Fariba Khalegi, who was arrested in November 2013 and 
has been accused of alleged involvement in the murder of her husband, was 
facing death by stoning in Iran.


“Khalegi was initially released without charges but was later charged with 
having a sexual relationship with her husband’s alleged murderer,” the report 
said. “On 15 October 2014, she was reportedly convicted of adultery and 
sentenced to death by stoning. On 27 January 2015, the supreme court reportedly 
upheld the sentence.”

Ban’s report said Iranian officials had been adamant that judges in Iran could 
still sentence convicts to stoning if the punishment was consistent with 
interpretations of Islamic law.
 