
Storming an embassy was once a symbolic act, initiated by ardent 
revolutionaries to make their voices heard and championed by the most senior 
officials in Iran’s Islamic republic. But the familiar act, now considered 
merely hooliganism, is coming back to bite the hands of the very people who 
endorsed it in the first place.

In the latest episode, thanks to Iranian hardliners who set ablaze the Saudi 
embassy in Tehran and attacked its consular offices in the eastern city of 
Mashhad, the focus is now being shifted from the Saudi execution of 47 people 
in a single day toan ensuing diplomatic crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/04/bahrain-cuts-diplomatic-ties-with-iran-in-row-over-saudi-execution-of-shia-cleric>
 involving Tehran.

This was the moment when Iran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> could 
have argued that Saudis were to blame for the growing sectarianism in the 
region, but instead it scored an own goal.

The focus is now less on the execution of the Shia cleric Sheikh Nimr al-Nimr, 
a serious critic of the Saudi monarchy, than it is on Saudi Arabia and its 
alliessevering diplomatic ties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/03/saudi-arabia-cuts-diplomatic-ties-with-iran-after-nimr-execution>
 with Tehran. Whether more countries will follow suit remains to be seen.


Attacking a foreign diplomatic mission has a precedent in Iran. After the 1979 
Islamic revolution, students – angry about US support for the despotic Shah –
stormed the US embassy in Tehran and took 52 diplomats hostage for 444 days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/14/from-1979-iran-hostage-crisis-to-2015-nuclear-deal>
, sparking a crisis whose reverberations are still heard today. In2011, another 
group attacked the British embassy in Tehran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/blog/2011/nov/29/iran-protesters-attack-uk-embassy-tehran-live>
, ransacking offices and diplomatic residences, which resulted in Britain 
expelling all Iranian diplomats from London.


From hostage crisis to nuclear deal: prisoner and captor look back at the 
Iran-US cold war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/14/from-1979-iran-hostage-crisis-to-2015-nuclear-deal>
Although the hostage crisis was originally started by revolutionary students 
without official consent, it was soon endorsed by the then supreme leader, 
Ayatollah Rouhollah Khomeini, who praised the perpetrators and labelled the 
embassy “a den of spies”. That incident has been a national day in the Persian 
calendar for more than three decades, celebrated annually to keep its memory 
alive.


In 2011, however, when a mob attacked the British embassy in Tehran, Iran’s 
current supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, took the unusual step of 
criticising it and saying thatit was not right for the students to carry out 
the attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2012/aug/07/storming-british-embassy-not-right-says-khamenei>
, even though, he said, their sentiments were justified.

As the Islamic republic tries to reintegrate itself into the international 
community, it finds itself hampered by the “death to this, death to that” 
chants at Friday prayers and the burning of enemies’ flags, which have become 
familiar pictures that unfairly dominate the world’s view of Iran.

Iranian hardliners have refrained from setting fire to the Saudi flag because 
of the script written on it, which is an Islamic creed orShahada, in praise of 
the prophet Muhammad.


Since the storming of the Saudi embassy at the weekend, Iranian officials have 
gone to great lengths to distance themselves from the attack. Iran’s president,
Hassan Rouhani <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani>, whose 
administration is highly embarrassed by such attacks, strongly condemned it as 
“totally unjustifiable”, ordering the police to identify and arrest the 
perpetrators.


 “The actions last night by a group of radicals in Tehran and Mashhad leading 
to damage at the Saudi embassy and consulate are totally unjustifiable, as the 
buildings should be legally and religiously protected in the Islamic Republic 
of Iran,” the Iranian president was quoted as saying, according to AFP.

“I call on the interior minister to identify the perpetrators of this attack 
with firm determination and introduce them to the judiciary … so that there 
will be an end to such appalling actions once and for all.”

But as the Persian proverb says, the antidote has come too late. 
 