
Western businesses are jockeying for investment opportunities in Iran as the 
country regains access to the global financial system following thelifting of 
sanctions at the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/sanctions-against-iran-to-be-lifted-after-compliance-with-nuclear-deal>
.

Russian investment firm Renaissance Capital has described Iran as “the last 
remaining sizeable global economy cut off from international capital to 
reopen”. The Iranian president,Hassan Rouhani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hassan-rouhani>, said on Sunday that 150 
companies from 50 countries had recently visited Iran for investment.

Local media quoted Abbas Akhondi, the minister for roads and urban 
development, as saying that Iran had struck a deal with the French companyAirbus
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> for the purchase of 114 new 
planes, estimated to be worth more than $10bn (£7bn).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Frouhani-hails-golden-page-in-iran-history-as-sanctions-are-lifted-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F17%2F1453028413396%2FKP_1427756_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rouhani%20hails%20%E2%80%98golden%20page%E2%80%99%20in%20Iran%E2%80%99s%20history%20as%20sanctions%20are%20lifted%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Frouhani-hails-golden-page-in-iran-history-as-sanctions-are-lifted-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rouhani%20hails%20%E2%80%98golden%20page%E2%80%99%20in%20Iran%E2%80%99s%20history%20as%20sanctions%20are%20lifted%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F17%2Frouhani-hails-golden-page-in-iran-history-as-sanctions-are-lifted-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F1%2F17%2F1453028413396%2FKP_1427756_crop_640x360.jpg>
Rouhani hails ‘golden page’ in Iran’s history as sanctions are lifted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jan/17/rouhani-hails-golden-page-in-iran-history-as-sanctions-are-lifted-video>
On Monday the German automotive firm Daimler said it had signed letters of 
understanding with local partners to return its truck business to Iran, six 
years after sanctions interrupted its activity.Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> has a huge car market and French 
manufacturers including Peugeot and Renault are also considering a comeback.

International business leaders mulling ways to sell their products in the 
Middle East’s second largest economy have already embarked on fact-finding 
missions. But the lifting of sanctions,which came into effect on Saturday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/sanctions-against-iran-to-be-lifted-after-compliance-with-nuclear-deal>
 after the implementation of last summer’s landmark nuclear deal, gives the 
business community the green light to exchange money. Iranian banks have also 
reconnected to the European financial system via Swift, which facilitates 
international transactions.

Germany, France and Italy are leading the pack as Europe aims to increase 
trade with Iran from the current level of €7.6bn (£5.8bn) to the pre-sanctions 
figure of almost €28bn.

In the short to medium term, China’s president, Xi Jinping, is to visit Tehran 
next week, and the British chancellor, George Osborne, and Germany’s economy 
minister, Sigmar Gabriel, are planning to take trade delegations to Iran in 
May. Rouhani is expected in Rome and Paris soon. .

Iran celebrates lifting of sanctions but many caveats remain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/iran-celebrates-lifting-of-sanctions-but-many-caveats-remain>
Ramin Rabii, chief executive of Turquoise Partners, which manages more than 
90% of all existing foreign portfolio investment on the Tehran stock exchange 
(TSE), underlined Iran’s business potential.


“The implementation of the nuclear deal has brought about a new era for the 
Iranian economy and its investment potential,” he told the Guardian. “Iran has 
a young and sophisticated population, is rich in energy and mineral resources 
and has a well-diversified economy with a widespread industrial base. With the 
re-emergence of Iran and its reintegration into the global economy, Iran can 
potentially be the engine for regional and perhaps even global economic growth 
in the next five to 10 years.”

Rouhani races to implement nuclear deal with eye on Iran elections bounce
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/08/iran-president-hassan-rouhani-post-sanctions-era-new-year>
Esfandyar Batmanghelidj, founder of the Europe-Iran Forum business conferences 
series, was critical of those in the west predicting a “gold rush”. He said: 
“This misunderstands the real nature of the Iran opportunity, which is not so 
much about foreigners flocking to Iran to trade and invest, but about a new 
ability for Iranians to invest in their own economy … as they eye global 
markets.

“Historically, gold rushes are fleeting and exploitative. I think Iranians are 
hoping implementation day leads not to a gold rush but to a golden age, and 
it’s their efforts that will make it so.”

Rabii predicts the Iranian economy will grow at a rate of 6-8% in the coming 
years. “There has been a lot of media attention on the oil and gas sector but 
there is a lot more to the Iranian economy than the energy sector,” he said.

The petroleum sector constitutes only 15% of Iranian GDP and 30% of the 
government’s annual income. Iran is expected to immediately add half a million 
barrels per day to its crude exports, which will have an impact on plummeting 
prices and a global oil market already under pressure due to oversupply.

“It is hard to say how this deal will impact the average person’s pocket in 
the next month or even a year, but I can tell with confidence that this is 
potentially a turning point for the Iranian economy which will create value for 
Iran and will improve the quality of life of its citizens in the medium to long 
term,” Rabii said. “From an investment and business perspective, Iran is the 
market of the future. Iran may not be the best performing market of the next 
year, but I will bet my money that it will be the best performing market of the 
next decade.”

Alstom, the French electricity generation and rail transport company, is 
seeking contracts to work on the expansion of the metro in Tehran and building 
two more lines in the city of Mashhad, as well as participating in the 
electrification of the 600-mile (1,000km) Tehran-Mashhad railway. The French 
industrial group Bouygues and Aéroports de Paris are also in talks with Iran to 
construct the country’s largest transport project, the second terminal at 
Tehran’s Imam Khomeini international airport.
 