
Airbus €22bn (£16.8bn)

Aiming to renovate its ageing air fleet after years of sanctions, Iran Air has 
ordered 118 commercial passenger planes including 12Airbus A380s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/28/airbus-a380-future-in-doubt>, 
the world’s largest jet airliner.

In total, there are 73 wide-body and 45 single-aisle aircrafts on the list 
<http://www.airbus.com/newsevents/news-events-single/detail/iran-deal/>. Iran 
has signalled that it needs as many as 500 new planes, and other companies such 
as Boeing are considering whether to do business with the country.

“The deal with Airbus <https://www.theguardian.com/business/airbus> is one of 
the largest foreign contracts ever signed in the history of the Islamic 
Republic,” Iran’s minister for roads and urban development, Abbas Akhondi, said 
in Paris after the deal was announced. “We’d like to restructure Iran Air and 
bring it back to the market which can compete with other airlines in the 
region. Certainly we can do this within five to seven years.”

Airbus’s chief executive, Fabrice Brégier, said the skies had “cleared for 
Iran’s flying public and Airbus is proud to welcome Iran’s commercial aviation 
back into the international civil aviation community”.

Danieli €5.7bn

The Italian metal industry firm has signed a contract to supply heavy 
machinery and equipment toIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>.

Saipem €3.5bn

The Italian oil and gas contractor has agreed a deal to revamp and upgrade the 
Pars Shiraz and Tabriz oil refineries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Firans-dealmaking-europe-seven-biggest-contracts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7f2aa7840636aa0a95c932c44e87c99721d4bb6%2F0_132_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran's%20dealmaking%20with%20Europe%3A%20the%20seven%20biggest%20contracts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Firans-dealmaking-europe-seven-biggest-contracts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%27s%20dealmaking%20with%20Europe%3A%20the%20seven%20biggest%20contracts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Firans-dealmaking-europe-seven-biggest-contracts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7f2aa7840636aa0a95c932c44e87c99721d4bb6%2F0_132_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 An Iranian worker assembles a Peugeot 206 at the state-run Iran Khodro plant 
near Tehran. Photograph: Ebrahim Noroozi/AP 
Peugeot €400m

The French carmaker made a deal for a joint venture with the Iranian vehicle 
manufacturer Khodro to modernise a car factory near Tehran, where three new
Peugeot <https://www.theguardian.com/business/peugeot> models will be 
manufactured. The two companies worked together before sanctions, and the 
project will produce 100,000 vehicles a year starting in late 2017.

Total 

The oil giant signed a contract with the national Iranian oil company to buy 
as many as 200,000 barrels of crude oil per day (€6.6m at current prices), 
according to the French firm’s chief executive, Patrick Pouyanné.

Aéroports de Paris and Bouygues

The French company will assist in the construction of a second terminal at 
Tehran’s Imam Khomeini international airport. Akhondi said: “Imam Khomeini 
airport is located in the best place in the region and with contracts that we 
have signed with Aéroports de Paris, we are building a city airport to make it 
a regional hub and to establish Tehran [as an] international financial centre.”

Vinci

The Italian construction firm will develop a new terminal at Shahid Hashemi 
Nejad airport in Mashhad, north-east Iran.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Firans-dealmaking-europe-seven-biggest-contracts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85355cf9d09046ffa6c997e2904b3da34758a709%2F0_25_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Iran's%20dealmaking%20with%20Europe%3A%20the%20seven%20biggest%20contracts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Firans-dealmaking-europe-seven-biggest-contracts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Iran%27s%20dealmaking%20with%20Europe%3A%20the%20seven%20biggest%20contracts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F29%2Firans-dealmaking-europe-seven-biggest-contracts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F85355cf9d09046ffa6c997e2904b3da34758a709%2F0_25_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 An Iran Air Boeing 747 at Mehrabad airport in Tehran. The airline has signed a 
deal with Airbus to begin replacing its ageing fleet. Photograph: Hasan 
Sarbakhshian/AP 
The obstacles that still lie ahead …

Despite the deals and the desire of European governments to begin trading with 
Iran, financing remains a big issue asmajor European banks remain reluctant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/24/europes-big-banks-remain-wary-doing-business-with-iran>
 to handle Iranian payments, deterred by previous huge fines from the US 
treasury. Nuclear-related sanctions have been lifted but other US measures 
relating to terrorism and human rights are still in place.

Andreas Schweitzer, senior managing director at the investment firm Arjan 
Capital <http://arjan.capital/>, which is active in Iran, said banks, 
especially those with a big US presence, were unlikely to support large 
transactions “because there is too much US uncertainty about secondary 
sanctions”. He said smaller banks or those unconcerned about the US market 
would be the first to do business with Iran.

“Iran is a large market with growth potential, there is a big potential but it 
comes with a few obstacles on the way which are not unsurmountable,” he said. 
“But if you come to Iran you have to bring some money, you have to bring a 
little bit of good nerves and bring some patience and if you’re willing to do 
that you’re fine, and if you’re not willing to do that you’ll be an unhappy 
visitor.”
 