
The Irish Times is unimpressed with a surprise decision by Ireland’s prime 
minister, Enda Kenny, to reiterate his call for a poll on the future status of
Northern Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland>.

In a stinging editorial 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/editorial/the-border-poll-call-re-surfaces-1.2727512>
, the paper referred on Wednesday to Kenny’s suggestion as a “pointless 
refloating” of the idea, seeing it as little more than “a cynical chance” by 
the leader of the Fine Gael party “to steal Sinn Féin’s nationalist colours.”

It was a reference to the fact that, immediately after the EU referendum 
(which returned a remain majority in Northern Ireland), Sinn Féin’s Martin 
McGuinnessdeclared that the result intensified the case for a poll. 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/sinn-f%C3%A9in-to-intensify-demand-for-united-ireland-vote-following-brexit-1.2697704>

“Kenny must know it will not go anywhere,” said the Irish Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times>. He “has shot himself in the 
foot with, no doubt, a decommissioned Sinn Féin blunderbuss.”

So, as far as the paper is concerned, Kenny was merely playing politics. His 
remarks 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/brexit/prepare-for-border-poll-in-the-wake-of-brexit-taoiseach-34894843.html>
 wereseen by an Irish Independent writer 
<http://www.independent.ie/irish-news/politics/stress-on-peace-and-the-border-seen-as-better-approach-to-ukeu-negotiations-34898005.html>
 as a way of opening the EU’s eyes to the problems now facing Ireland.
 How the Irish Independent headlined Enda Kenny’s remarks Photograph: Public 
domain 
In raising the matter, Kenny will also have been aware that Brexit has become 
a major concern and talking point among the Irish people.

Having been in Donegal continuously since 23 June, I have lost count of the 
number of times I’ve been asked about the issue. Main question: will it mean 
the restoration of a border between the Republic and the north?

No-one can imagine it, although plenty in this border county can remember both 
the long-gone customs posts and the British army checkpoints. The peace process 
has since eradicated all sense of a border.

The only way you can tell you have crossed from one jurisdiction to the other 
is the change in road signs from mph to kph, or vice versa.


Kenny’s notion of there being an opportunity to reunite Ireland was based on a 
provision in the1998 Belfast Agreement 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Good_Friday_Agreement> that allows the secretary 
of state (now James Brokenshire) to trigger a poll within Northern Ireland.

To do so, the minister would need evidence that “a majority of those voting 
would express a wish that Northern Ireland should cease to be part of the UK 
and form part of a unitedIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.”

There is, however, precious little such evidence at present. Virtually all 
unionists, who still form a majority, remain committed to the UK link. And even 
though I am aSinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> 
supporter and favour unification, I have to concede that opinion polls show 
plenty of nationalists would vote against.

The major unionist party, the DUP, is unwilling to enter into formal talks 
with the Republic about post-Brexit arrangements across the island. Its leader, 
and first minister,Arlene Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arlene-foster> (who advocated an EU leave 
vote), has made that abundantly clear.

But that’s not to say that the issue will slip quietly by. As Ian McBride 
argued in Wednesday’s Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/brexit-northern-irish-politics-border-eu-good-friday-agreement>
, Brexit undermines the spirit of the Belfast Agreement: “England’s unilateral 
declaration of independence means that the border will dominate politics 
again.” He wrote:

“First, the agreement clearly envisaged that Northern Ireland’s future 
constitutional arrangements would be worked out in the context of continuing 
partnership between the north and the south.

To remove Northern Ireland from Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> without its consent is not only 
morally wrong and politically risky; it is also a rejection of the fundamental 
bilateralism of the peace process.

Second, the all-Ireland dimension of the Belfast agreement was fundamental to 
securing the support of nationalists. The republic felt able to revise its 
constitution, recognising fully the legitimacy of partition for the first time.”

Those are the facts, but it doesn’t mean they will engender action. There is 
plenty of room for political fudge in the short term while, in the long-term, 
the determining factor will surely be the economic, as distinct from political, 
effect of Brexit.

In truth, as newspaper commentators both north and south of the border have 
reflected in a variety of speculative pieces, no-one can really determine 
Brexit’s outcome. But, day by day, in pubs, shops and in the street, I note 
that it makes for a much more interesting conversation opener than the 
weather...
 