
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> is back in recession for 
the first time since its 2010 bailout, official figures have confirmed.

Irish GDP shrank 0.6% in the first quarter of 2013, but the recession was 
confirmed when official data revised down the economy's performance in the 
final three months of 2012 to a decline of 0.2%. It means that Ireland has 
endured three successive quarters of contraction, despite the presence in 
Ireland of multinationals such as Apple, Google, IBM and several big 
pharmaceutical companies.

The blow comes as Ireland reels from the unfolding Anglo Irish Bank scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jun/26/anglo-irish-tapes-germany-offended>
, in which executives at the bailed-out bank were caught on tape joking about 
their multi-billion euro rescue in 2008 and, at one point, singing "Deutschland 
Ã¼ber Alles" as they quipped about German deposits shoring up the bank.

The output drop reflects an ongoing depression in consumer demand, amid 
unemployment of nearly 14%. Personal expenditure declined by 3% between the 
fourth quarter of 2012 and the first quarter of 2013. The decrease in demand 
reflects Irish consumers' fears for their jobs and a reluctance to get into 
debt following the credit-fuelled spending boom of the Celtic Tiger years. 
Exports fell by 3.2% in the first quarter, in a stark reversal for an economy 
that had enjoyed an export-led recovery.

The slip back into recession will be deeply disappointing for the Fine 
Gael-Labour coalition, which has slashed public spending in a bid to drive down 
the country's debt while placating the troika of the International Monetary 
Fund, European Union and European Central Bank who bailed out the country in 
2010. Ireland's deputy prime minister, Eamon Gilmore, admitted this week that 
the Anglo Irish revelations could harm attempts to win further debt relief from 
the European Union.

On a brighter note, the construction industry in the Republic is showing some 
signs of recovery. The latest figures point to a 2.1% increase in building 
across the state in a sector which was devastated by the property crash of 
2008-09, and which has been a huge factor in lengthening the country's dole 
queues.
 