

Two of Ireland’s biggest media outlets are to mount a high court bid to enable 
them to report on the relationship between one of the country’s richest men and 
the“toxic bank” whose collapse helped trigger the country’s 2010 bailout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/sep/30/anglo-irish-bank-bailout>.

The Irish Times and the public-service broadcaster RTÉ are separately seeking 
judicial clarification on their right to report on remarks made in the Irish 
parliament about Denis O’Brien and theIrish Bank Resolution Corporation, 
formerly Anglo-Irish Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/sep/30/ireland-banks-bailout-allied-irish>
.

Tuesday’s applications came after Catherine Murphy, an independent TD (MP), 
raised allegations in the Dáil that O’Brien had received preferential loan 
terms from the IBRC. Alleging that he paid unusually low interest rates on the 
borrowings, she said: “Mr O’Brien was enjoying a rate of approximately 1.25% 
when IBRC could, and arguably should, have been charging 7.5% [on] sums of 
upwards of €500m [£360m]”.

Murphy made her remarks as part of a motion to extend the remit of the Irish 
government’s comptroller and auditor general to cover the IBRC, which is wholly 
owned by the state and is being wound down.

She said IBRC was “no ordinary bank” and it was “the people’s money we are 
dealing with” and there should “no dispute regarding the public interest in 
this”.

O’Brien, who is said to be worth about £5bn, had argued that even the rich and 
powerful had a right to privacy and that Murphy’s remarks were “materially 
inaccurate”, based on stolen information and made in breach of an earlier 
injunction he had got against RTÉ banning it from reporting details of his 
banking arrangements.

The Irish Times <https://www.theguardian.com/media/irish-times> initially 
reported the remarks online but then removed its article following a letter 
from O’Brien’s lawyers.

RTÉ, which had been independently investigating the telecoms and media tycoon, 
consulted its lawyers and did not broadcast details of Murphy’s speech as it 
feared they could have been in breach of the O’Brien injunction granted 10 days 
ago.

The clash between the billionaire and the media has been front-page news in 
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> for the past four days.

On Monday, the Irish Times said the attempt to use the earlier court 
injunction to gag reporting of parliament was “an attack on the public interest 
right to know the details of the banking arrangements of one of the country’s 
richest men”.

In an editorial 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/editorial/in-defence-of-parliament-1.2232589>
, it described the legal move as “a deeply worrying erosion of a pillar of our 
parliamentary system”.

The former attorney general Michael McDowell has also waded into the row, 
arguing that parliamentary privilege trumps any court injunction and backing 
Murphy’s attempts to shed light on IBRC’s dealings with the rich and powerful.

The billionaire O’Brien, who made his first fortune out of a mobile phone 
licence in Ireland and who has significant interests in Irish newspapers and 
radio, has argued that he is a private citizen and is entitled to 
confidentiality in his banking affairs.

In a letter released to the media over the weekend, O’Brien criticised Murphy 
for making “seriously accusatory statements” that were “materially inaccurate” 
and based on “information which you know to have been stolen”.

He accused her of abusing parliamentary privilege and speaking “contrary to 
the determination of the courts”.

However, McDowell said Murphy’s remarks were of “significant public interest”, 
given that IBRC was owned by the taxpayer.

“Where the state has had to bail out a bank, the treatment of its business 
customers is a matter of the highest public importance, if that treatment has 
implications for the exchequer and taxpayer,”he wrote. 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/opinion/controversy-over-d%C3%A1il-claims-raises-serious-issues-about-democracy-1.2231433>

Anglo Irish’s debts were taken on by the Irish state, which in turn pushed the 
government to seek a bailout from the International Monetary Fund, the EU and 
the European Central Bank in 2010. Anglo Irish was eventually rebranded as the 
IBRC, which was tasked with winding down the bank’s operations.

McDowell said the country was “in dangerous territory where the alleged 
privacy rights of the powerful call into question the freedom of speech of our 
parliamentarians and of the citizens’ right to know”.

He pointed out that while RTÉ and the Irish Times had been gagged, Murphy’s 
comments were published verbatim by the Guardian and Irish websiteBroadsheet.ie 
<http://www.broadsheet.ie/> and available on the Oireachtas (Irish parliament) 
website. 
<http://oireachtasdebates.oireachtas.ie/debates%20authoring/debateswebpack.nsf/takes/dail2015052800027>

They have also been published by the Irish edition of the Sunday Times. 

“We now also have the ridiculous situation in which O’Brien’s spokesman uses 
the airwaves to condemn Deputy Murphy for ‘peddling lies’ in the Dáil but 
listeners are not told what her allegation is,” said McDowell.
 