
Statistics show 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/creative-industries-economic-estimates-january-2016/creative-industries-economic-estimates-january-2016-key-findings>
 that the UK’s creative economy is a shining light – and so agrees chancellor 
George Osborne, judging by his comments on the economic importance of arts and 
culture in last year’s autumn statement.

According to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS), the creative 
economy wasworth £133.3bn in 2014 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/creative-industries-economic-estimates-january-2016/creative-industries-economic-estimates-january-2016-key-findings>
, accounting for 8.2% of the overall UK economy and 2.8m jobs. More than half 
(1.9m) of these jobs are in creative occupations – a varied group including 
artists, design professionals and computer programmers, but who all tend to be 
highly educated, skilled and drivers of innovation.

To ensure the creative economy continues to thrive, we cannot rely on today’s 
talent; we need to have the right education system in place to produce 
tomorrow’s creative minds. But arecent survey 
<http://www.nsead.org/downloads/survey.pdf> of teachers by the National Society 
for Education in Art and Design (NSEAD) worryingly suggests that the UK has 
taken steps backwards.

More than a third of the 1,191 teachers surveyed said they have had less time 
to teach art and design over the past five years (across all key stages), with 
93% pointing to the English baccalaureate as a major contribution for the 
sidelining of these subjects.

The recommendations from NSEAD are clear: “Schools should actively promote and 
strengthen links with other subjects to build on the value of the contribution 
of art and design to the Stem subjects.” Essentially, they should provide 
Steam: science, tech, engineering, art and maths.

Most often, Steam is interpreted as encouraging students to take both Stem and 
art and design subjects, but it’s also about all the subjects coming together 
more holistically and organically. Schools can do this through 
multidisciplinary teaching practices, such as those devised at last year’s 
inspiring 24-hourSteam hack 
<http://www.culturallearningalliance.org.uk/news/steam-hack-october-2015/> at 
the Science Museum, hosted by the Cultural Learning Alliance. Suggestions that 
came out of the event included crowdsourced Steam object library databases and 
Steam journals for students and teachers to explore the crossover between 
subjects through specially designed notebooks.

Progress in English schools, however, has been slow, despite digital 
technology increasingly aligning traditionally disparate areas of learning.


Art and design make unique contributions to the development of creative skills 
that are crucial to jobs in a growing number of industries. DCMSestimates 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/439714/Annex_C_-_Creative_Industries_Focus_on_Employment_2015.pdf>
 suggest that there are roughly as many creative jobs outside the creative 
industries as within. These numbers should help counter the idea that the arts 
are “soft” options that compromise career options for students.

But as with policy more generally, initiatives to promote Steam in schools 
must be based on rigorous data. At Nesta, for example, we published an
interactive data visualisation <http://www.nesta.org.uk/blog/full-steam-ahead> 
that explores the combinations of subjects that Scottish Highers students took 
over the past three years.

It shows that the percentage of students taking at least one Stem subject 
ranged from 57% (for those taking three subjects) to 94% (for those taking 
five). Students taking Steam combinations ranged from 13% (three subjects) to 
31% (five).

The data visualisation further shows that the most popular Steam combination 
in Scotland is physics, maths and graphic communication. English makes up the 
fourth most popular combination among students taking four subjects.

Students who take at least one Stem subject are also more likely to take an 
arts subject than a foreign language. However, those who take five Highers are 
slightly less likely to take one arts subject than those who take four.

Over the coming year, we plan to provide a more historical and in-depth 
examination of Steam qualifications in Scotland and of the take-up in secondary 
schools in England. As well as providing objective evidence on the numbers 
opting for a Steam education and how this varies over time, which is important 
for assessing policy, we also hope to measure how the take-up varies by student 
characteristics, such as gender, ethnicity and level of deprivation.

Building this evidence base is not an academic exercise. It will give 
policymakers a valuable means of ensuring that schools are equipping young 
people with the multidisciplinary skills that creative Britain needs to 
continue to thrive.

 Hasan Bakhshi is director of creative economy at Nesta 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 