
A friend, who teaches English literature at a top UK university, recently met 
with a first-year student who was planning to drop out of his degree. He 
explained that he had not expected an English degree to involve reading books 
(and so many of them!), rather than the extracts he was used to at A-level. 
Having done a cost/benefit analysis, he also didn't think that the potential 
outcomes of his course were worth the amount of debt he would accumulate.

It is hard to argue with such logic. Indeed, many academics also fear that 
arts and humanities subjects are being devalued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/mar/10/english-education-market-ucl>
 and may survive only by leaving the academy. There has been new evidence for 
this over the past few weeks, with the launch of the IF project, a free 
university in London which aims to put "a broad liberal arts education within 
reach of unemployed school-leavers and young workers". The project has largely 
been welcomed,including by Peter Wilby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/mar/18/university-humanities-not-just-rich>
.

The impulse to leave the academy is not a new one. In a 1974 essay, Towards a 
female-centred university, the poet and essayist Adrienne Rich critiqued the 
male-centred academy. Rich concluded, however, that it would be "na√Øve to 
imagine that the university can of itself be a vanguard for change", and that 
reform was more likely to come from an "unrecognised, unofficial 
university-without-walls".

Similar radical hopes have been expressed by a range of free universities over 
the past few years, includingthe Social Science Centre 
<http://socialsciencecentre.org.uk/>, a co-operative in Lincoln; the Free 
University of Liverpool <http://thefreeuniversityofliverpool.wordpress.com/>, 
which from 2010 to 2013 offered a six-month introduction to "changing the 
world"; and theRagged University project <http://www.ragged-online.com/> in 
Edinburgh.

The IF project is a welcome addition. It aims to use London as a giant 
lecture-hall: students will make use of free events, galleries and concerts, 
alongside online lectures, weekly workshops and seminars, led by academics and 
thinkers who volunteer their time. The range of subjects covered will be broad 
and the organisers are exploring options to accredit the course as a foundation 
year.

Yet, compared to some free university projects, what is striking about IF is 
its conformity. The emphasis on 18-30-year-olds and school-leavers, for 
example, replicates the biases in the current university system. It rules out 
those who dropped out of school and older mature students who have been 
affected by the fee changes.A Universities UK report 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CC4QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.universitiesuk.ac.uk%2Fhighereducation%2FDocuments%2F2013%2FPowerOfPartTime.pdf&ei=Bp0yU-2pK-2p7Aa4mYDgBQ&usg=AFQjCNEpDxJA_mA6uTmWylZPUrdBqyusXA&sig2=tGDeWtypoW11vN7wlneozA&bvm=bv.63738703,d.ZGU&cad=rja>
 last year showed that since 2012 there has been a 40% drop in part-time 
students in the sector, a group aged 21 to over 80 who often have 
unconventional educational histories.

IF may be free, but students will need a reasonable income to afford time for 
studying (with no bursaries available). As with Moocs (massive open online 
courses), the project will also need students to be self-motivated. There is
growing evidence 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v503/n7476/full/503342a.html> that Moocs 
thus overwhelmingly recruit the well educated. This is a reminder that the 
pedagogic work of universities goes beyond the classroom, and that reaching 
those without prior experience in education requires financial help, pastoral 
support and study skills.

It is not clear, for now, whether the ultimate aim of IF is to offer a 
sustainable alternative to universities or to reform the current system from 
the outside. But reform is possible, as work within universities shows.

At Bristol, for example, we have recently set up a foundation year in the arts 
and humanities <http://www.bris.ac.uk/arts/courses/foundation/>, a form of 
provision which has existed inother institutions 
<http://www.foundationyear.ac.uk/> for some time. The course's first-year 
students range in age from 18 to 71 and are from a huge range of backgrounds; 
90% do not have A-levels. Yet some of these students may not progress to a 
degree because of the cost. There is a need for alternative provision outside 
the system.

IF is in its early stages and may still offer new models of funding and 
pedagogy. The co-operative model might be one option, with students ultimately 
leading their own study groups or offering seminars on alternative forms of 
culture. The project could create a network to rival those contacts that 
conventional students build up at universities, perhaps alongsideArts 
Emergency's Alternative Old Boy Network 
<http://www.arts-emergency.org/alternative-old-boys-network/>. And a 
co-operative model might also be more sustainable than one in which lecturers 
donate shards of time, which risks being another example of our economy's
insatiable need for free labour 
<https://www.jacobinmag.com/2014/01/in-the-name-of-love/>.

IF may not be a utopian model: it replicates contradictions in the system, and 
is likely to reach those who just miss out on higher education, rather than 
those who are most excluded from it. But it is still a valuable project. We 
urgently need to imagine alternatives to a university system with which the 
problems, asrecent events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/mar/21/tuition-fees-former-tory-adviser-government-maths-wrong>
 make clear, are both real and severe.

Tom Sperlinger is a senior teaching fellow at Bristol University.

This content is brought to you by Guardian Professional 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-professional>. Looking for your next 
university role? BrowseGuardian Jobs <http://jobs.theguardian.com/> for 
hundreds of the latest academic, administrative and research posts.
 