
David Hockney says he’ll keep on painting into his 80s and may well have his 
greatest work ahead of him. “The Chinese have a saying,”the 78-year-old told 
the Radio Times 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2012-01-08/david-hockney---an-artist-for-all-seasons>
. “Painting is an old man’s art. I told Lucian Freud that a long time ago. I 
think it is, actually. It means it’s an accumulation of things.”

Is Hockney right? Do painters get better with age? There is no question Freud 
got better as he matured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jul/21/lucien-lucian-freud-obituary>
. Was this the accumulation of skill? Partly, yet it also reflected a greater 
freedom. Freud braved more and dared more the older he got. His brushwork, 
which in his youth was careful and precise, became more suggestive and sensual. 
Early paintings by Freud such asInterior at Paddington 
<http://www.liverpoolmuseums.org.uk/picture-of-month/showlarge.aspx?id=171> 
(1951) are striking but his greatness lies on masterpieces such ashis portraits 
<http://www.artcritical.com/2014/04/30/phoebe-hoban-on-lucian-freud/> of 
performance artist Leigh Bowery with their heroic admiration for the flesh.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fdavid-hockney-painting-old-mans-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b54654e4ec0d6f75269d92b474d52b0f12496d0%2F0_0_1300_1175%2F1300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20David%20Hockney%20right%20to%20say%20painting%20is%20an%20old%20man's%20art%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fdavid-hockney-painting-old-mans-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20David%20Hockney%20right%20to%20say%20painting%20is%20an%20old%20man%27s%20art%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fdavid-hockney-painting-old-mans-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b54654e4ec0d6f75269d92b474d52b0f12496d0%2F0_0_1300_1175%2F1300.jpg>
 Experimental and poetical … Titian’s The Death of Actaeon, c.1559-75. 
Photograph: The National Gallery, London 
Freud himself was well aware he was a late bloomer. He identified with the 
grandest of all art’s grand old men, Titian, whose late art he championed when 
there wasa national appeal 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/about-us/press-and-media/press-releases/diana-and-actaeon-is-secured-for-the-nation>
 to keep Diana and Actaeon in the country. Titian lived to be about 86 and he 
painted to the end. Hisearly paintings 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/titian-bacchus-and-ariadne> are 
perfect Renaissance works. But his late ones go into another realm of 
expressiveness and mystery, their colours ever more experimental and poetical. 
His unfinished masterpieceThe Death of Actaeon 
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/titian-the-death-of-actaeon> has 
a romantic sorrow and inwardness that anticipates art movements yet to be 
imagined when he painted it.

So it is not simply that painters accumulate skill, but that the more skilled 
they become, the more risks they are ready to take. Endless practice does not 
make perfect – it makes for freedom. It would be wrong to dismiss younger 
painters for not being as good as the late Freud orCy Twombly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jul/06/cy-twombly-obituary> – 
another painter who improved with age.

Painters in their 40s or even 50s are just getting started. If they work hard 
at their craft they may have a period of genius to look forward to in old age.
George Shaw’s current exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/09/george-shaw-review-my-back-to-nature-national-gallery>
 at the National Gallery, for example, is an impressive performance by an artist
visibly leaning on the job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/nov/15/george-shaw-interview-every-second-every-ounce-of-time-has-to-be-accounted-for>
, as all true painters must.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fdavid-hockney-painting-old-mans-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbafe54491bb09c890645e5875b639baa01b9685%2F0_0_3504_2217%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20David%20Hockney%20right%20to%20say%20painting%20is%20an%20old%20man's%20art%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fdavid-hockney-painting-old-mans-art%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20David%20Hockney%20right%20to%20say%20painting%20is%20an%20old%20man%27s%20art%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fdavid-hockney-painting-old-mans-art%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcbafe54491bb09c890645e5875b639baa01b9685%2F0_0_3504_2217%2F3504.jpg>
 Innovation … Henri Matisse’s Cut-Outs on show at Tate Modern. Photograph: Guy 
Bell/Rex 
Yet it is not always true that artists get better as they age. In fact it can 
be a bit of a cliche. Some painters explode into genius when they are young and 
spent a lifetime failing to live up to their first brilliance.Jackson Pollock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/jun/29/jackson-pollock-blind-spots-tate-liverpool-review-art-as-nervous-breakdown>
 was in his 30s when he did his greatest paintings. He was dead at 44, but by 
then his talent had already started to decline. It is hard to imagine him as an 
old master.

Flowers or vaginas? Georgia O’Keeffe Tate show to challenge sexual cliches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/01/georgia-okeeffe-show-at-tate-modern-to-challenge-outdated-views-of-artist>
Picasso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/apr/11/pablo-picasso-portraits-national-portrait-gallery-london>
 changed art forever – for once the hype is true – when he was in his 20s. His 
youthful masterpieceLes Demoiselles d’Avignon 
<http://www.moma.org/collection/works/79766> is a hand grenade thrown into an 
art museum. He did not decline but carried on evolving creatively and 
transforming art several more times over – until he hit his old age. His late 
art is often compelling but it is simply not as powerful as the work he did 
before the second world war.Matisse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/mar/29/henri-matisse-cutouts-tate-modern-drawing-scissors>
, on the other hand, soared in his last creations of cut-up coloured papers, 
doing some of his best work in an entirely new medium.

This month we are getting two more chances to assess if age is good or bad for 
painters.Georgia O’Keeffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/01/georgia-okeeffe-show-at-tate-modern-to-challenge-outdated-views-of-artist>
, soon to be shown at Tate Modern, lived a long time and kept working. Likewise 
Hockney himself, who at 78 is still busy andshortly to reveal his latest 
portraits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/29/david-hockney-royal-academy-edith-devaney>
at the Royal Academy. Is painting best left to the young or do oldies do it 
best? Let’s see.
 