
Weighed down by scandal and financial woes, American Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/14/american-apparel-files-bankruptcy-us>
’s retreat from the high street is looking more likely by the day. So a space 
opens up for a brand that provides ethically produced basics with a zeitgeisty 
point of view and respect for the power of a nice typeface. Enter Everybody, 
the fledgling set up by two American Apparel alumni Iris Alonzo and Carolina 
Crespo.

The duo, at American Apparel for 14 and 11 years respectively, set up Everybody
 <https://everybody.world> as a fashion label with a difference. Yes, they 
launched this month with the most basic of basic items – a white T-shirt made 
from recycled cotton for $25 (£20) – but actually the rest of the items on the 
site weren’t their idea at all. Each item is designed by a friend or creative 
in LA, where they’re based.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fis-everybody-the-natural-successor-to-american-apparel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2c5020e9e925b0a5e1a3c9e70c55b3b77465d8b%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Everybody%20the%20natural%20successor%20to%20American%20Apparel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fis-everybody-the-natural-successor-to-american-apparel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Everybody%20the%20natural%20successor%20to%20American%20Apparel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fis-everybody-the-natural-successor-to-american-apparel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2c5020e9e925b0a5e1a3c9e70c55b3b77465d8b%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
 Carolina Crespo. Photograph: camraface 
With drops of these limited items on the site weekly, first up is a 10ft (3m) 
body pillow made by art collector Jean Pigozzi, while a mac by artist couple 
Mae Elvis Kaufman and Kalen Hollomon is next. “The only rule that we have is 
that we have to know how to make it,” says Alonzo. While anything is possible, 
there’s a general tendency towards the fundamentals of a wardrobe: the perfect 
mac, shirt or sweatshirt. “It’s about what is missing in your life, what you 
don’t have in your closet … or a 64-year-old art collector who has everything 
made a body pillow that fits to his body, and is shaped like a snake.” Hey, 
whatever works.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fis-everybody-the-natural-successor-to-american-apparel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cb808978ecbd2cf21cb8c56130b8732946c9ec3%2F0_0_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Everybody%20the%20natural%20successor%20to%20American%20Apparel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fis-everybody-the-natural-successor-to-american-apparel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Everybody%20the%20natural%20successor%20to%20American%20Apparel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fis-everybody-the-natural-successor-to-american-apparel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cb808978ecbd2cf21cb8c56130b8732946c9ec3%2F0_0_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Everybody green sweatshirt. Photograph: camraface 
If, currently, Everybody’s contributors are chosen by Alonzo and Crespo, the 
hope is that eventually they will be joined by members of the public, with 10% 
of the brand’s output generated by customers themselves. This sort of 
crowdsourced fashion is something Alonzo thinks reflects the direction in which 
fashion and shopping are going. “It’s the opposite of the traditional design 
concept and instead reaches out to people,” she says.

A kind of community is the goal – with stories, and really nice, no-brainer 
clothes, at the heart of it. “We’re reliant on word of mouth and people caring 
about what they consume,” says Alonzo. “A shirt is a shirt. But if there’s a 
story behind it about a 74-year-old man who plays chess in the park and it’s 
the same price as the one in another store, we hope you’ll buy this one.”
 