
Some still call Hammerin' Hank the home run king

It’s 40 years since Hank Aaron launched career home run number 715 over the 
wall at Atlanta’s Fulton County Stadium 
<http://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/mlb/news/20140408/hank-aaron-715-home-runs-anniversary-barry-bonds/>
, passing Babe Ruth and claiming one of the most prestigious records in 
baseball. Aaron, now 80 years old, was honored before the Braves game with the 
New York Mets on Tuesday, commemorating the anniversary of the day he lifted the
record-breaking blast off Dodgers pitcher Al Downing. 
<http://m.mlb.com/video/v3224106/bb-moments-hammerin-hank-aaron-hits-hr-no-715> 

Aaron had been under immense pressure leading up to his famous swing, facing 
death threats from those who prefered the record not be broken by a black man. 
He persevered despite receiving letters such as this one:

Whites are far more superior than jungle bunnies. My gun is watching your 
every black move.

Four decades on, Aaron remains a hero to many African Americans. He also 
continues to be the career home run record holder in the eyes of many in the 
baseball community, despite the famed mark beingeclipsed in 2007 by Barry Bonds.
 <http://sports.espn.go.com/mlb/news/story?id=2965584>


Growing up as a baseball fan, there were two numbers that stood out and had 
immense meaning - 755, the total “The Hammer” eventually finished up on, and 
Ruth’s career home run tally of 714. Personally speaking, as a kid baseball 
fanatic, I had these numbers memorized long before I knew my own phone number. 
Today the record belongs to Bonds, and I had to look up the exact home run 
total, which is 762. Clearly the career home run record ain't what it used to 
be.


Bonds is seen to be one of the poster boys of the so-called steroid era, and 
has been rejected by the group that elects players unto the Hall-of-Fame 
<http://mlb.si.com/2014/03/10/barry-bonds-hall-of-fame-peds-san-francisco-giants/>
, the Baseball Writers’ Association of America. Bonds denied knowingly using 
steroids during 2003 grand jury testimony and was convicted for obstructing 
justice, a charge that was upheld upon appeal in 2013.


Because of his association with PED’s, many called for an asterisk to join 
Bonds’ name atop the list, a notation that never materialized. 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/07/02/sports/02iht-hall.1.14161963.html>

Regardless, support for Aaron poured in on the anniversary, specifically from 
the Commissioner ofBaseball <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/baseball>, Bud 
Selig, who watched Aaron play while growing up in Milwaukee. Selig was in 
attendance for the ceremony, and had this to say to reporters asking about 
Aaron’s being dubbed the true home run king by supporters.


I’m always in a sensitive spot there, but I’ve said that myself and I’ll just 
leave it at that.

Selig is being passive aggressive in his response, an inappropriate one 
considering his track record around performance enhancing drugs. Despite his 
drive to clean up the sport by negotiating testing into the Collective 
Bargaining Agreement with the players, standards that were stiffened yet again 
this Spring, the fact that Selig presided over baseball's steroid era means 
that if there’s anyone who is not in a position to pass judgement on the owner 
of the career home run record, it’s probably him.

There are many guilty parties when it comes to apportioning blame for the 
unchecked, unquestioned proliferation of PED’s in the game during the 1980’s, 
90’s 2000’s and beyond. Blame the players, the owners, the press, team 
management, managers, trainers, and perhaps even fans, who fawned over the long 
ball, asking no questions despite years of baseball data failing to rhyme with 
gaudy offensive totals. Mostly though, blame Bud Selig, who was correct when he 
said “I’m always in a sensitive spot here”. Selig ran the game during the 
steroid era, making him one of the main reasons that his longtime friend and 
baseball legend is no longer the official career home run king.

Instant replay a work in progress

On Wednesday afternoon in Cleveland, Indians outfielder Elliot Johnson stepped 
back towards the right field wall while chasing a ball off the bat of San 
Diego’s Chris Denorfia.Elliot reached up, made the catch and hit the fence 
before dropping the ball as he transferred it to his throwing hand. 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/news/article/cle/transfer-rule-focus-of-cleveland-replay?ymd=20140409&content_id=71485458&vkey=news_cle>
For as long as most baseball fans can remember, a fielder who dropped a ball 
after making a catch, while moving it from the glove to the hand, was awarded 
with an out. On this occasion, umpires ruled the runner not to be out, as did 
replay officials in New York after Tribe manager Terry Francona challenged the 
ruling on the field. Johnson was not amused.


Can we get some common sense? I mean, is it going to get to the point where a 
guy can catch a ball, run all the way off the field, go to give a ball to a 
fan, a souvenir, drop it. What, now he dropped it, so we're going to pull 
everybody back on the field? We're going to make up where the runners go? At 
what point do we use some common sense? Obviously, that's getting extreme, but 
still.

The expansion of instant replay has, for the most part, been welcomed early on 
in 2014. Even so, it’s clear that the system will need to be tinkered with in 
coming seasons, and Major League Baseball has admitted as much, realizing that 
trial and error is part of the process. Despite a ruling that led to the Padres 
first runduring Cleveland's 2-1 defeat to San Diego, 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2014_04_09_sdnmlb_clemlb_2&mode=recap_home&c_id=cle>
 Terry Francona is exhibiting patience alongside his usual sense of humor.

I thought, if anything, maybe they would call traveling, because he took about 
three steps.

Yu swing, Yu miss
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fapr%2F10%2Fis-hank-aaron-or-barry-bonds-home-run-king-mr-bud-selig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F10%2F1397111465662%2F7049da33-af27-4ae4-b917-a0d2e0581471-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Hank%20Aaron%20or%20Barry%20Bonds%20the%20home%20run%20king%2C%20Mr%20Selig%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fapr%2F10%2Fis-hank-aaron-or-barry-bonds-home-run-king-mr-bud-selig%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Hank%20Aaron%20or%20Barry%20Bonds%20the%20home%20run%20king%2C%20Mr%20Selig%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2014%2Fapr%2F10%2Fis-hank-aaron-or-barry-bonds-home-run-king-mr-bud-selig%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F4%2F10%2F1397111465662%2F7049da33-af27-4ae4-b917-a0d2e0581471-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Yu Darvish is already up to 500 strikeouts in his short MLB career. 
Photograph: Kim Klement/USA Today Sports 
On Sunday, Texas Rangers starting pitcher Yu Darvish leaped off the disabled 
list and into the record books. After sitting out for three weeks with neck 
stiffness, his strikeout of the Tampa Bay Rays' Wil Myers made him the quickest
to reach 500 for his career, doing so in just 401 ⅔ innings 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24516767/yu-darvish-comes-off-dl-becomes-fastest-to-500-k-in-mlb-history>
. What that record means during a time in baseball history where strikeouts are 
coming easier and easier to pitchers is debateable. Here are some numbers that 
appeared on SNY’s television broadcast of the Braves and Mets on Wednesday:

 * Last season eight teams had more than 1300 strikeouts, that’s two more than 
the previous high.

 * Prior to 2001 there were no teams with 1300 strikeouts during a season.

 * Prior to 1996, one team had reached 1200 strikeouts.

Once upon a time, strikeouts were a four letter word to many hitters. At some 
point, they became a willing trade off for an increase in home run power. Last 
season there were 36,710 strikeouts over 4862 regular season games for an 
average of 7.55 per contest. Heading into Wednesday's games, that average 
number rose to 7.85 per game, and counting. Soon to be Hall-of-Fame slugger 
Frank Thomas believes that MLB are juicing the ball 
<http://www.cbssports.com/mlb/eye-on-baseball/24520038/frank-thomas-thinks-mlb-is-juicing-baseballs>
 (not the players) to reverse the trend and bring back home runs to the game, 
but stats indicate otherwise - there were 0.95 homers per game last year, 0.84 
this season thus far. With pitching dominating the game in a way we haven’t 
seen since before the steroid era, MLB may consider doctoring the ball sooner 
than later.


Angel out of the outfield

The Los Angeles Angels of Anaheim, a franchise that has spent two full seasons 
in the doldrums while failing to live up to lofty expectations, suffered yet 
another blow on Tuesday.Josh Hamilton will be out of the lineup for six to 
eight weeks after suffering a thumb injury during Tuesday’s loss against the 
Seattle Mariners. 
<http://espn.go.com/los-angeles/mlb/story/_/id/10758097/josh-hamilton-los-angeles-angels-6-8-weeks-torn-thumb-ligament>
Hamilton started out the year on a tear, locked in at the plate, seeking to 
bounce back from a miserable first season in Anaheim that saw him fail to match 
the output he delivered for the Texas Rangers. Now, after tearing the ulnar 
collateral ligament in his left thumb while sliding into first base head first 
(which does not get you to the base faster than sliding feet first), Anaheim’s 
energized lineup will miss a key cog. If there’s a bright spot it’s thatAlbert 
Pujols has homered twice in two nights, 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/gameday/index.jsp?gid=2014_04_09_anamlb_seamlb_1&mode=recap_away&c_id=ana>
 showing some signs of being the elite power threat he was signed by the Angels 
to crazy money to be. Meanwhile, with or without Hamilton, the Angels pitching 
continues to be an issue - they’ve put up the 12th worst team ERA over the 
first eight games of the season.


Gold rush in San Francisco

Baseball hitters face an uphill battle for success against pitchers, but don't 
tell that to Tim Lincecum - the two-time Cy Young award winner had yet another 
miserable night on the mound while facing his nemesis, Paul Goldschmidt.

If the Arizona slugger came up to the plate barefoot, standing with his back 
to the pitcher, he probably would still be able to take Timmy deep, just as he 
did, again, on Wednesday. Goldschmidt came into the game against the Giants in 
San Francisco with 12 hits in 23 at bats against The Freak, 
<http://www.mercurynews.com/giants/ci_25534942/giants-tim-lincecum-hit-hard-gives-up-three>
and then crushed a three run home run, his seventh career blast against 
Lincecum.

Before the game, Big Time Timmy shrunk at the thought of facing Arizona's 
slugger.

I'm going to start throwing underhand to him or something. I don't know. It's 
a game of adjustments. He's constantly making them against me, so I've got to 
do the same thing against him. That will be for the next go-around.

Lincecum may consider the underhanded option after Goldschmidt helped chase 
the hurler after four innings, during which he gave up seven runs. The Giants 
lost 7-3 as Lincecum's ERA ballooned 9.90, a bit on the high side for someone 
who recently signed a two-year deal north of $30m.

Click here for MLB standings 
<http://mlb.mlb.com/mlb/standings/?tcid=mm_mlb_standings>
 