
The comics writer Alan Moore has been denouncing superheroes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/jan/21/superheroes-cultural-catastrophe-alan-moore-comics-watchmen>
. Moore, whose imaginative, witty, provocative creations include the superhero 
seriesWatchmen <http://www.dccomics.com/graphic-novels/watchmen>, says now that 
it's a "cultural catastrophe" for adults to embrace superheroes as serious art. 
They were created for children. But if it's a cultural catastrophe that adults 
invest energy inBatman <http://www.dccomics.com/characters/batman>, what about 
the fact that adults read comics at all?

At some point in the late 20th century it became respectable for grownups to 
read comics. As late as the 1970s, this was considered a mark of illiteracy and 
mental regression. I know because in one of theDr Who novelisations 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/c/c5/Doctor_Who_and_the_Green_Death.jpg>
 I was reading avidly in those days, a villain's henchman is characterised as 
an idiot because he reads comics rather than proper books.

Then on a variety of fronts – from the ambitious graphic novel or history Maus 
<http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/9/98/Maus.jpg>, which uses the 
language of comics to speak of no less grave a theme than the Holocaust, to the 
scabrous reinvention of the Beano that isViz <http://www.viz.co.uk/> – comics 
suddenly became OK for adults.

Why did this happen? And is it really OK? Perhaps it was inevitable that 
people like me, who grew up with visual images hitting us all the time from TV 
screens, would find picture stories a rich literary form. And yet the case 
against is weighty. Suppose for a moment we try to see it through the eyes of 
the lateKenneth Clark 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/whats-on/tate-britain/exhibition/kenneth-clark>. I 
doubt if the author ofCivilisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2007/oct/05/agreatcriticandacivilisin>
 would accept comics into the western canon. An obsession with picture books 
might even be the mark of a barbaric time:monks in the dark ages 
<http://www.bl.uk/onlinegallery/sacredtexts/lindisfarne.html> who spent their 
lives illuminating the gospels were quite likely to be illiterate, and their 
crazed visual enrichment of texts can be seen as a substitute for actually 
reading or understanding.

In the Enlightenment, books were much plainer and people sat down to read long 
volumes with no pictures at all 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/History-Decline-Empire-Penguin-Classics/dp/0140437649>
. That's civilisation. So does the rise of the adult comic mean we are 
returning to the dark ages?

If so, give me a mud hut and pile of comics. They really do make excellent 
adult reading. Comics have become good at everything from personal confession 
to scientific theory. At Christmas I read a graphic biography of thephysicist 
Richard Feynman <http://www.amazon.co.uk/Feynman-Jim-Ottaviani/dp/1596432594>. 
It allows Feynman to speak in his own words. After an entertaining series of 
anecdotes about this great polymath, the comic "restages" some of his most 
important public lectures so we can encounter his ideas directly. I've been 
thinking about Feynman all month and it made me want to read his own works. 
What's not to like?

But Moore is right to question some aspects of today's comics culture. The 
banal Hollywood industry of turning piquant comics (including his) into 
mediocre blockbuster films is boring, and there is potentially something absurd 
about a civilisation that thinks graphic novels are way cooler than actual 
novels. There's a smug complacency about, say, theNew York Times giving comics 
masses of review space 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/10/21/books/review/building-stories-by-chris-ware.html?_r=0>
. Are graphic novels just cultural capital for the university-educated who dig 
the postmodernity of the medium?

This is why I fell in love with Moore's comics. Unlike cool graphic novels 
about urban angst, his comics really are comics with a restless 
unrespectability. His dark ideas and savage humour make his works less cosy and 
more dangerous than any rival.He puts the shame back into the grownup comic 
<http://www.topshelfcomix.com/catalog/alan-moore>, and that is as it should be.

Every kid knows comics are a guilty pleasure. That's the point of them.
 