
I’ve been an Apple user for over a decade, ever since I picked up a 
refurbished 17in PowerBook back in 2005 to replace my ailing Windows XP box. 
But last month, afterApple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> 
announced its most expensive new MacBook Pros in almost 15 years, I 
reconsidered my decision for the first time and, for the past few weeks, I’ve 
been back on a Windows PC.

I wasn’t always a Mac user. My first three computers were PCs, although the 
house I grew up in had an ailing, hated Power Mac Performa. My reasons for 
switching in my teens were fairly simple: I’d been playing fewer and fewer PC 
games, and spending increasing amounts of time using my computer to manage the 
music library linked to my iPod. I was one of those switchers, surprised by the 
elegance of Apple’s music player and convinced to take the plunge into their 
full desktop operating system.

The laptop wasn’t cheap, but it made shuttling between my separated parents’ 
houses much easier. And while I missed being able to play the full library of 
PC games I’d built up over the years, it was an exciting time to be moving to 
the Mac OS world. Plus, World of Warcraft was cross-platform, which was all the 
gaming I needed for a good while.

Ten years on, I’m a fairly default Apple user. I’m on my sixth iPhone, second 
iPad and third Mac; I have an Apple TV at home, Apple branded keyboard on my 
desktop, and even an Apple AA battery charger, from the days when they made 
them.

But the twin punches of a Brexit-led depreciation of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/brexit-apple-mac-customers-prices-rise-us-dollar-pound-sterling>
, and Apple releasing a new range of MacBook Pros with the least 
bang-for-your-buck in recent memory, made me think twice. The cheapest Mac that 
would be sufficient for my needs, a 13in MacBook Pro with 512GB of storage 
space and 16GB of ram, comes in at well over £2,000, yet is barely more 
powerful than the machine it’s replacing, a 15in retina MacBook Pro from four 
years ago that cost just over £1,500 at the time.

So I switched back. For the past month, I’ve been using the Surface Book 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/25/microsoft-surface-book-review-best-windows-laptop-detachable-screen>
, the top-of-the-line laptop sold by, of all people, Microsoft.

It’s been an experience.

Great-ish expectations
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9eea7ed95132b842a74c21a14b641907a1d29963%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20time%20to%20swap%20your%20Mac%20for%20a%20Windows%20laptop%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20time%20to%20swap%20your%20Mac%20for%20a%20Windows%20laptop%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9eea7ed95132b842a74c21a14b641907a1d29963%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 Microsoft Surface Book Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
My expectations going in were uncertain. I know Windows has evolved radically 
since I last used it, back in the XP era, and has even changed since the last 
time I used it in anger, shortly after the launch ofWindows 8.1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2013/dec/06/windows-windows-8>. 
The current latest version of the operating system,Windows 10 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/may/26/10-quick-questions-about-installing-windows-10-and-how-to-block-it>
 (confusingly, only one version later than 8.1; the story goes that too many 
developers wrote code referring to Windows 95 and 98 as “9*”, meaning an actual 
Windows 9 would break compatibility), is generally considered a good thing. It 
meshes the new Windows experience of version 8 with an old-style desktop more 
elegantly than previous versions, while consigning ever more of the cruft deep 
into nested menus and offering a slick experience for first-time users.

I was also given hope by the machine. After an awkward start with the first 
version of the Surface back in 2012, then pitched as an iPad competitor,
Microsoft <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/microsoft> has become one of 
the best manufacturers of Windows PCs there is. The Surface Book is a delicious 
machine, masquerading as a MacBook Pro-class laptop but with a fully detachable 
touchscreen that opens it up to a whole new range of uses.

The quality of the Surface machines has caused problems when it comes to 
Microsoft’s relationships with its hardware partners, who tended to expect 
Microsoft to be content raking in millions with the licensing fees for Windows, 
rather than competing with them directly for profit from hardware 
manufacturing. But for now, the company has been content to sit on the edge of 
the market, making niche devices for the power user.

Despite all of that, I had a fair amount of trepidation. Memories of blue 
screens of death, of driver conflicts, of cleaning out my registry and 
restoring the system after a malware infection, are hard to shake, as is the 
general hangover from my youth of Microsoft as the Great Satan of the tech 
world. As Zuckerberg is to the 2010s, Gates was to the 1990s: ever-present, 
professionally amoral, and incredibly, unflappably, successful.

But Gates is gone, as is Ballmer. This is Satya Nadella’s company now, and the 
Microsoft of this generation is everything the Microsoft of the 90s – or the 
Facebook of today – isn’t: humble, quiet, content with success where it can win 
and partnerships where it can’t, and as proud of working with competitors as 
Gates was of crushing them. In short, it’s a Microsoft that I could consider 
being friends with. It couldn’t be that bad.

Switching pains

The worst thing about switching, it turns out, is switching.

I’m not trying to be tautological. But the bulk of the unpleasantness I’ve 
experienced actually making this change hasn’t been inherent to Windows, but 
has either come about because of the differences between the two operating 
systems, or even just the difficulties in actually getting up and running from 
day one.

Some of the problems are as simple, but nonetheless infuriating, as different 
keyboard shortcuts. A lifetime of muscle memory has told me that Command-Space 
brings up Spotlight, which is the main way I opened programmes on my Mac. The 
same shortcut on Windows 10 is to simply hit the Windows key, which invokes 
Cortana, Microsoft’s AI assistant, and then typing in the name of the programme 
you want to open.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e32fbeddf130fdc1d707d3d8c29e8a064ee151c%2F0_0_1970_1182%2F1970.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20time%20to%20swap%20your%20Mac%20for%20a%20Windows%20laptop%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20time%20to%20swap%20your%20Mac%20for%20a%20Windows%20laptop%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e32fbeddf130fdc1d707d3d8c29e8a064ee151c%2F0_0_1970_1182%2F1970.jpg>
 It’s just all so ... blue. Photograph: Shannon Stapleton/REUTERS 
Similar mismatches appear in areas like window management, alt-tab behaviour, 
and programme installation. It’s a push to say which is better (though I 
maintain that running an installer is less elegant than just dragging an app 
into the Apps folder), but whichever you’re used to, the other will be worse 
until you re-educate yourself.

That’s not to say I didn’t have plenty to complain about, though.

That Spotlight/Cortana mismatch, for instance? It wouldn’t have been so bad, 
except that Windows maps the alt key to the location of the command key on 
Macs, and alt-space is the Windows shortcut for switching languages, so every 
time I failed to invoke Spotlight, I would accidentally switch the language my 
computer was set up in, resetting my keyboard to a US English layout.

That was an annoying problem. Worse was that I didn’t actually have two 
languages set up on the Surface Book in the first place. And yet, hovering in 
the bottom right, permanently, was a little box showing whether I was running 
in UK English or US English, with no option in sight to remove it.

In the end, I had to turn to Twitter for troubleshooting advice. We determined 
that there was no option to remove the US English language because there was no 
US English language set up. So to remove it, all I had to do was go into a 
language menu, add English (United States) as an option, and then remove 
English (United States) as an option. I know. But it worked, so who am I to 
complain.

I’m also firmly aware that a critical eye on Mac OS will reveal many similar 
bugs. Mac users, particularly long-term, slightly jaundiced, Mac users, have 
long become familiar with the hollow laugh and invocation of Apple’s erstwhile 
marketing slogan “It Just Works” as something emphatically continues to not 
Just Work. In fact, that phrase has been uttered in irony so many times that 
it’s easy to forget that it really does come from a place of competitive 
advantage for Apple.

That advantage has largely been eroded over the years, as Microsoft has 
cottoned on to the joys of vertical integration, plug and play accessories, and 
standards-compliant behaviour.

But not entirely. Plugging in an external mouse (an utterly standard 
Microsoft-made laser mouse), I was annoyed to find that I couldn’t reverse the 
scrolling behaviour on the scroll wheel to match that of the in-built trackpad. 
It’s one thing to have to relearn behaviours when you switch machines, it’s 
another to have to re-learn them every time you plug in a peripheral.


About an hour of fruitless Googling later – including several suggestions to 
install obsolete utilities, hack the registry, or roll back to an earlier 
version of Windows – and I discovered the way to do what I wanted. I had to 
download drivers for my mouse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14f7e41bad69044a07dd442a66555cd783d2eec0%2F0_108_2316_2892%2F2316.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20time%20to%20swap%20your%20Mac%20for%20a%20Windows%20laptop%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20time%20to%20swap%20your%20Mac%20for%20a%20Windows%20laptop%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14f7e41bad69044a07dd442a66555cd783d2eec0%2F0_108_2316_2892%2F2316.jpg>
 It just works … Steve Jobs with the MacBook Pro in 2008. Photograph: Justin 
Sullivan/Getty Images 
If you’re young, a Mac user, or not particularly technical, that might not 
mean much. Drivers are the small pieces of software that tell the operating 
system how to work with hardware, from complex components like graphics cards 
to simple accessories like this mouse. But the necessity, or not, of drivers 
for accessories was a big part of that competitive push by Apple, which made a 
point of ensuring out-of-the-box support for many of the most commonly used 
peripherals like printers, cameras and mice. When Steve Jobs said “it just 
works”, this is the sort of thing he was referring to: the ability to plug in a 
mouse and have it Just Work.

Installing drivers for a mouse to enable a niche behaviour is no great 
hardship, but it still left me moderately concerned. Microsoft made both the 
mouse and the laptop, yet the two weren’t able to play nicely together without 
my intervention. This digging in the nuts and bolts of the machine was not 
something I had missed.

Touching the void

The Microsoft of 2016 has a split personality. In many ways, the split is the 
same that it’s had for the past 20 years, between its desire for continuity and 
its desire for reinvention and technological leadership. Where the company is 
successful today is where that latter desire is ascendant, and the Surface Book 
is the best example of a forward-looking Microsoft you can find.

It’s a fantastic machine. Small and powerful, with a long battery life, it 
impresses as a laptop, but its real strengths are revealed when you undock the 
screen from its base. Being able to carry my laptop around the kitchen when 
doing the weekly shop, before docking it back and typing up some recipes, was 
genuinely cool.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d66b40531df83586054e33269b4b8bf6d828967%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20time%20to%20swap%20your%20Mac%20for%20a%20Windows%20laptop%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20time%20to%20swap%20your%20Mac%20for%20a%20Windows%20laptop%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d66b40531df83586054e33269b4b8bf6d828967%2F0_0_2100_1260%2F2100.jpg>
 Not being an illustrator, a graphic designer, or even a graphic thinker, the 
ability to pop out my laptop and write on it with a stylus was never that 
useful. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
Unfortunately, cool is all it was for me. The ability to pop out my laptop and 
write on it with a (very accurate) stylus was never that useful. If anything, 
it served to underscore how efficient the keyboard-and-touchpad combo is for a 
lot of hefty tasks.

I had a similar experience with the ability to use the touchscreen while the 
Surface Book was in laptop mode. I simply didn’t do it much, and most of the 
time when I did, it was just to see if I could.

Occasionally, the touchscreen was actively bad. My first time opening Windows 
Mail, I was greeted with a helpful popover showing that I could swipe mails to 
the left to archive them. But I couldn’t work out how: click and drag? 
Two-fingered swipe on the touchpad? The answer, of course, is to reach up to 
the screen, and swipe that way. A shortcut it is not, particularly if the 
screen is up on a dock and you’re already using a keyboard and mouse.

Incidentally, unlike many hybrid laptops, the base isn’t just a keyboard: it 
also contains a second battery, and a number of hardware components including a 
discrete GPU. (One downside of that setup: if you let the screen run out of 
battery while undocked, you can’t re-dock it until you’ve charged it 
separately, even if the base still has some power left).


PCs are from Mars

If this sounds like a long list of nitpicks, it’s because ... well, it is. For 
all the existential battles that have been fought over Windows versus Mac, 
there’s little to distinguish the two on any important level. The platforms 
have converged on everything but aesthetics and personal preferences. Both have 
a locked-down store which power users ignore; both are fighting for relevance 
in a world of web apps and mobile-first design; both feel the weight of 
versions past sitting on their shoulders.

If you asked me to explain why, despite it all, I’ve put my money down for a 
MacBook Pro rather than buying the Surface Book from Microsoft (which loaned 
the device for this trial), I can give you some reasons that feel solid enough 
for me.

I was shocked by the amount of advertising and cross-promotion riddled 
throughout the OS, from adverts for apps in the start menu, to a persistent 
pop-up offering a free trial of Office 365.

I was surprised by the paucity of solid third-party apps in general, and 
particularly by the lack of any good consumer productivity suite. When the most 
common recommendation, for services from photo storage to calendaring, is “just 
use Google’s web apps”, there’s a hole waiting to be filled (though maybe 
that’s just my dislike of web apps in general). It feels like the Mac dev scene 
is full of teams making fully featured apps that compete with the big 
companies, while Windows devs are more content to make niche utilities which 
serve particular needs without needing to start a war.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F288f915c5fe4b589b3df4b488b285c80f2f3cff4%2F0_218_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20it%20time%20to%20swap%20your%20Mac%20for%20a%20Windows%20laptop%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20it%20time%20to%20swap%20your%20Mac%20for%20a%20Windows%20laptop%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmac-windows-pc-macbook-pro-microsoft-surface-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F288f915c5fe4b589b3df4b488b285c80f2f3cff4%2F0_218_3500_2099%2F3500.jpg>
 The MacBook Pro is up to £1,000 more expensive than the Surface Book. 
Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
I disliked the lack of a smart sleep mode, meaning my computer would often be 
flat when I opened it up in the morning because some utility had been running 
in the background.

I hated the difficulty in typing special characters, from foreign accents to 
ellipses and em-dashes. I hated the lack of a universal paste-as-plain-text 
shortcut, and I mourned the loss of iMessage access on the desktop for texting 
my girlfriend.

Most of all, though, I couldn’t stand the small irritations, from the failure 
of Chrome windows to correctly adapt when dragged from a high-res screen to a 
low-res one, to the trackpad’s inability to accurately click when I used it 
with my thumb rather than my finger.

I don’t pretend that those irritations are unique to Windows, or even that 
they aren’t things I couldn’t have fixed with time, effort or re-education. But 
the problem is, fixing them isn’t worth it: the difference just isn’t there.

That’s true whichever way you’re thinking of switching. If you’re a Windows 
user nodding along with my problems, I can guarantee you that within a month of 
switching to Mac, you’ll have a list just as long. Maybe one day, one or other 
platform will have a commanding lead. For some use-cases, that’s already 
happened: gamers have Windows, while iOS developers have Mac, to state two 
obvious examples. But for now, for the vast majority, it’s hard to say there’s 
anything in it.

Except, of course, for price.

Because these problems are minor, and a price difference of up to £1,000 
isn’t. The Surface Book is around the same price as the new MacBook Pro, but 
many other high-quality laptops aren’t: you’ll easily find models like Dell’s 
XPS range or Lenovo’s Thinkpads for hundreds of pounds less than a 
comparably-specced MacBook.

For me, with four years of saving for a new Mac, good credit, and 
risk-aversion to digital irritation, it’s worth paying through the nose to 
stick with what I know. But it might not be the case for you.

Switching isn’t a panacea, and there’s no silver bullet out there – no Windows 
computer that will be anything better than a bit annoying for former Mac users 
– but before you get too complacent, I have a feeling the same is true the 
other way round. Ultimately, the question comes down to how much you’re 
prepared to pay to keep things the same as they have been. For me, it turns out 
that figure’s quite high.
 