
Note: We’ve updated this article with commenters’ suggestions. Scroll down to 
see their contributions.

Judging the Forward prize for poetry 
<http://www.forwardartsfoundation.org/forward-prizes-for-poetry/about/> must 
have been a perplexing experience for Jeremy Paxman: he has suggested the need 
foran “inquisition” in which “poets [would be] called to account for their 
poetry” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/jun/01/jeremy-paxman-poets-engage-ordinary-people-forward-prize>
, and explain to their audience why they chose their subject and form. Paxman 
found “a whole pile of really good poems”, but he wished that contemporary 
poetry “would raise its game a little bit, raise its sights”, and “aim to 
engage with ordinary people much more”.


Classic poetry has a definite place in popular culture, living on in readings, 
weddings and funerals. But as Jeremy Noel-Tod, editor of the Oxford Companion 
to Modern Poetry, pointed out: “Frank O’Hara was once patronised as a niche 
poet of the New York art scene. Fifty years later, he’s being recited by Don 
Draper onMad Men <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/mad-men-tv-series> 
and is one of the most influential voices around.” The outsider can move into 
the mainstream: here’s Don reading from Meditations in an Emergency, on season 
2 of the popular American TV series.


Another example would be Lisa Simpson’s wise words 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0701259/quotes> on Emily Dickinson, on an episode 
from season eight: “[She] lived alone, and she wrote some of the most beautiful 
poetry the world has ever known … then went crazy as a loon.”
 Lisa Simpson reading Emily Dickinson Photograph: Fox 
Then there’s Colonel Kurtz reading this spine-chilling passage from TS Eliot’s 
The Hollow Men at one of the most haunting moments of Apocalypse Now:


Going further back in the canon, the movie Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless 
Mind <https://www.theguardian.com/film/eternal-sunshine-of-the-spotless-mind> 
takes its title from a line in Alexander Pope’s tragic verse Eloisa to Abelard:

How happy is the blameless vestal’s lot!
 The world forgetting, by the world forgot.
 Eternal sunshine of the spotless mind!
 Each pray’r accepted, and each wish resign’d;

Here’s Kirsten Dunst’s character, the receptionist from the memory-erasure 
company, reading the lines in Michel Gondry’s surreal film about love and 
memory:


Poetry plays a central part in one of the best moments of Woody Allen’s classic
Hannah and Her Sisters <https://www.theguardian.com/film/hannah-and-her-sisters>
. The comic and pathetic merge when Elliot (Michael Caine) acts on his 
infatuation with his sister-in-law Lee (Barbara Hershey). His recommendation 
that she read ee cummings – especially page 112! – is one of the most 
brilliantly awkward scenes in the film:


So, which of today’s poets do you expect to see popping up in popular culture? 
Or do you agree withJeremy Paxman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremy-paxman> that their work has become 
too far removed from the general public? And, if so, do you believe this is 
only natural? Does asking poets to explain themselves defeat the whole point of 
poetry?

You helped us compile examples of the presence of poetry in popular culture 
and used examples of poems that have inspired you or been part of your daily 
life. Here is a selection of your contributions to the thread below.


Richard Curtis’s Four Weddings and a Funeral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/four-weddings-and-a-funeral> is, of course, a 
perfect example – thanks toSuzanne Fairless-Aitken 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12081214>, DanHolloway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3703160> and Andrew Paul Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/12955761> for the suggestion. 
Here’s John Hannah (Matthew) in the middle of his glorious moment reading WH 
Auden’s Funeral Blues.

Lauded TV drama Breaking Bad used the title of Percy Bysshe Shelley’s sonnet 
Ozymandias to fittingly nameone of its last episodes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2013/sep/16/breaking-bad-episode-14-ozymandias>
, one of the most awe-strucking television episodes of all time – and possibly 
one of the best ever written.

DO NOT watch the following episode teaser if you want to avoid spoilers. 
Protagonist Walt (Bryan Cranston) recites the poem and gives a whole new 
meaning tochilling with his reading of the verses ‘My name is Ozymandias, king 
of kings: Look on my works, ye Mighty, and despair!’

Thanks to ID9329316 <https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3022249> 
for that. And, asJohnHKeenan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/discussion/user/id/3752686> points out (spoiler 
alert again), the main plot of Breaking Bad turns on a copy ofLeaves of Grass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jul/04/guardian-archive-walt-whitman-centenary>
 carelessly left in the household toilet.

Here are some of your other examples:

 * Brian Turner’s brilliant Hurt Locker 
<http://www.poetryfoundation.org/poem/240652> was the title for the film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/aug/28/the-hurt-locker-review> which 
used some of his experiences detailed in the poem.Suggested by Suzanne 
Fairless-Aitken <http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36498981> 
 * In season one of Orange Is The New Black, the prisoners discuss meaning and 
ambiguity in The Road Not Taken 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x13mi29_frost-s-the-road-not-taken-explained-from-orange-is-the-new-black-s01e07-legendado_shortfilms>
 by Robert Frost.Suggested by JohnHKeenan 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36482370>

 * John Cooper Clarke’s Evidently Chickentown – from The Sopranos’ final 
episode <http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rBcbc8eWz6U>. Suggested by DrKRodgers 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36466805>

 * The title of John Green’s YA novel, The Fault in Our Stars 
<http://www.guardianbookshop.co.uk/BerteShopWeb/viewProduct.do?ISBN=9780141345659&guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
, is an allusion to a line from Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar. Says Cassius, “The 
fault, dear Brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves, that we are 
underlings.”Suggested by outis72 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36457125>

 * Betjeman’s Slough in The Office 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-935cbXTt_g>. Suggested by StewieJazz 
<http://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/36462833>  