
Name: Megan Ellison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/jul/08/megan-ellison-billionaire-heiress-save-movies>
.

Age: 27.

Appearance: Essentially an Oscar statue in human form.

Glittery? Prestigious? Bald? Yes, yes and – barring any elaborately secretive 
wigwork that has previously gone unnoticed – no.

Why else, then? Works in movies? Made of gold? Right on both counts. Megan 
Ellison is Hollywood's newest darling. She has been touted as the "new Harvey 
Weinstein"for a couple of years now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/jul/08/megan-ellison-billionaire-heiress-save-movies>
, but this week her status was confirmed: films she produced and financed were 
nominated fora staggering 17 Academy Awards 
<http://variety.com/2014/film/news/megan-ellison-low-profile-financiers-films-netted-a-massive-17-noms-1201061241/>
.

Oh really? Which are hers? American Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/19/american-hustle-review>, Her 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/14/her-new-york-film-festival-first-look-review>
 andThe Grandmaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/08/the-grandmaster-review>. And in 
previous years, movies such as Zero Dark Thirty, The Master and True Grit.

A woman of impeccable taste! What's her secret? She has two. First, an eye for 
ostensibly uncommercial work by acclaimed directors.

The second? She's LOADED.

Aha! I knew it. Megan's father is Larry Ellison, recently named as the third 
richest man in the US <http://www.forbes.com/forbes-400/gallery/larry-ellison>.

So this is just the story of a little rich girl playing at being a bigshot 
producer? Don't be daft. On top of all the critical acclaim, her films have 
made almost $300m at the box office. And at least she's doing something 
worthwhile.

What would you do if your dad was a billionaire? Sit on your bum all day 
eating gold-crusted pizza? Well, yeah. But not the Ellisons. Even Megan's 
brother David is in on the act. He's produced films such as Jack Reacher and GI 
Joe: Retaliation.

And how many Oscars <https://www.theguardian.com/film/oscars> were they 
nominated for? Oh, shush. My point is that 2013 was an incredible year for 
movies, and a lot of that is down to Megan's discerning tastes and deep pockets.

Sincere congratulations to her, then. What's her next film? Terminator 5.

A three-hour, arthouse meditation on society's changing relationship with 
euthanasia, directed byAbdellatif Kechiche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/oct/27/abdellatif-kechiche-interview-blue-warmest>
 from a recently discovered screenplay by David Foster Wallace? No, a film 
about Arnold Schwarzenegger punching loads of stuff.

That sounds amazing. I know.

Do say: "I've had a great idea for a film, Megan …"

Don't say: "… it's a remake of Digby, The Biggest Dog in the World, starring 
Adam Sandler and a fat monkey."
 