
You could be forgiven for thinking you had wandered into one of Stephen 
Hawking’s parallel universes 
<http://defamer.gawker.com/stephen-hawking-breaks-silence-about-zayn-1700371031>
 this week, where Zayn is still in 1D and muppets rule the world. But no,Miss 
Piggy really is set to receive a feminist award 
<http://www.avclub.com/article/miss-piggy-receive-feminist-award-which-should-end-218662>
. The Brooklyn Museum’s Sackler Center will honour her “spirit, determination 
and grit” with their First Award, one that has in the past been bestowed upon 
Toni Morrison and former Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O’Connor. Was she 
happy? “Moi is thrilled.”

 Another woman celebrated for her gumption this week is Cyndi Lauper, who was 
praised by the Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2015/04/30/cyndi-lauper-on-capitol-hill-and-the-secret-feminist-history-of-girls-just-wanna-have-fun/>
 for her work “advocating for gay and transgender kids thrown out by their 
parents — an issue she raised at a Senate subcommittee hearing about youth 
homelessness on Wednesday”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-all-hail-miss-piggys-spirit-cyndi-laupers-rallying-anthem-and-sandy-toksvigs-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430494955560%2F834dce5f-e045-4fb8-9da0-b8955f330027-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Miss%20Piggy%20a%20feminist%20icon%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-all-hail-miss-piggys-spirit-cyndi-laupers-rallying-anthem-and-sandy-toksvigs-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Miss%20Piggy%20a%20feminist%20icon%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-all-hail-miss-piggys-spirit-cyndi-laupers-rallying-anthem-and-sandy-toksvigs-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430494955560%2F834dce5f-e045-4fb8-9da0-b8955f330027-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Cyndi Lauper. Photograph: Time Life Pictures/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images 
If it’s a side to Lauper that you didn’t know about, then the secret history 
of Girls Just Wanna Have Fun 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2014/04/the-feisty-feminism-of-girls-just-want-to-have-fun-30-years-later/359834/>
 may well be new to you too: it turns out the original version, written by 
Robert Hazard, was, as the Atlantic put it, a song about “coerced bedroom 
shenanigans” – a man’s account of bedding women. Convinced by her manager that 
the song could take on a whole new meaning if a few lines were tweaked, Lauper 
transformed it “into a a rally cry for sexual equality”.

“I said to myself, ‘Hell yeah, I’ll make an anthem!’” Cyndi Lauper

Cue your excuse to listen to this: 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPIb6AZdTr-A&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPIb6AZdTr-A>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DPIb6AZdTr-A&media=>
One “girl” (it’s a ropy segue, let’s just go with it) who has, in her opinion, 
been having too much fun is the News Quiz’s Sandi Toksvig. “I have made jokes 
over and over again about politics and, do you know, this election I’ve had 
enough,” she said onquitting her BBC role this week 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-32531750>. “And I have decided 
that instead of making jokes about it, I need to participate.” And thus was 
launched a new political party: the Women’s Equality Party. They might not be 
fielding any candidates in next week’s general election, but watch this space 
circa 2020 and we may well be seeing WEP contenders on the ballot papers.




Over in the Vatican on Wednesday, the Pope called out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/29/pope-francis-christians-should-support-equal-pay-equal-work-gap-men-women>
 all of humankind. In a speech to a general audience in St Peter’s Square, he 
said that it’s “pure scandal” that women and men don’t earn the same, that 
Christians should be more demanding for “radical equality” and that it’s 
insulting to suggest that women’s rights movements should take the blame for 
declining marriage rates – doing so “is a form of chauvinism that always wants 
to control the woman”. Swoon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-all-hail-miss-piggys-spirit-cyndi-laupers-rallying-anthem-and-sandy-toksvigs-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430494318961%2F8f47e362-b00f-44df-85de-b44ffd5ed3f9-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Miss%20Piggy%20a%20feminist%20icon%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-all-hail-miss-piggys-spirit-cyndi-laupers-rallying-anthem-and-sandy-toksvigs-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Miss%20Piggy%20a%20feminist%20icon%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-all-hail-miss-piggys-spirit-cyndi-laupers-rallying-anthem-and-sandy-toksvigs-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430494318961%2F8f47e362-b00f-44df-85de-b44ffd5ed3f9-1020x612.jpeg>
 The Pope. Photograph: Gregorio Borgia/AP 


Calling out has been a theme across the board this week, it seems, with the 
public defacing Protein World’s “Are You Beach Body Ready?” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/15/beach-body-ready-brands-sexist-advertising-tactics>
 ads on the tube and the company respondingwith obnoxious guile 
<http://www.cosmopolitan.co.uk/body/news/a35280/protein-world-responds-beach-body-ad-backlash-twitter/>
.

While Protein World has seen a sharp rise in sales 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/health-and-families/protein-world-does-a-katie-hopkins-and-triples-sales-with-controversial-beach-body-campaign-10204928.html>
 as a result of its body-shaming PR campaign,good old-fashioned “shapewear”
brand Spanx has decided a “feminist re-brand” 
<http://jezebel.com/spanx-to-rebrand-with-feminist-inspiration-1700161942> is 
what’s needed to recover its depleted sales . Allegedly,fashion’s love affair 
with athleisure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/jan/01/athleisure-beyonce-topshop-style-trend-gym-ready-gear>
 and women being more comfortable with “real bodies” is why Spanx are now keen 
to emphasise “smoothness”, not thinness” as a way to sell their stuff. A coup 
for curves this is not. A cynical realisation that hanging on to the coat-tails 
of brands such as Dove, with it’s lathery notion of “real beauty”, might be 
good for sales? More like it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-all-hail-miss-piggys-spirit-cyndi-laupers-rallying-anthem-and-sandy-toksvigs-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430494671342%2Fa23d7d13-64e3-4fb0-8a80-e10ee4e1f7a1-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20Miss%20Piggy%20a%20feminist%20icon%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-all-hail-miss-piggys-spirit-cyndi-laupers-rallying-anthem-and-sandy-toksvigs-party%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20Miss%20Piggy%20a%20feminist%20icon%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fwomens-blog%2F2015%2Fmay%2F01%2Fthe-week-in-feminist-news-all-hail-miss-piggys-spirit-cyndi-laupers-rallying-anthem-and-sandy-toksvigs-party%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F1%2F1430494671342%2Fa23d7d13-64e3-4fb0-8a80-e10ee4e1f7a1-2060x1236.jpeg>
 American Apparel founder Dov Charney. Photograph: Fairchild Photo Service/Cond 
Nast/Corbis 
 Keeping it cynical, American Apparel – a brand famed for it’s Lolita-ish ad 
campaigns and creepyformer CEO Dov Charney 
<http://gawker.com/dov-charney-fired-from-american-apparel-again-1671916642> – 
has announced it will be launching a blog this summer to “enlighten” people 
about social issues, such as LGTBQ rights and bullying. Newly appointed CEO 
Paula Schneidertold the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/09/business/with-new-chief-american-apparel-shifts-focus.html?_r=0>
:

This is an edgy brand and it’s always going to be an edgy brand, and it’s 
about social commentary, it’s about gay rights, and it’s about immigration 
reform. It’s about the things millennials care about.

Maybe once whoever’s responsible for re-branding Charney’s mess is done 
mopping up, they can move over toBud Light 
<http://www.xojane.com/issues/somehow-bud-light-missed-the-entire-rapeculture-conversation>
, who this week was forced to cease production of bottles branded with the 
tagline: “The perfect beer for removing the word ‘no’ from your vocabulary for 
the night.” A marketing campaign which,according to The Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/anheuser-cans-controversial-bud-light-slogan-1430347201>
, had to have undergone at least five layers of approval, with no one pointing 
out that, NO,#UpForWhatever <https://twitter.com/hashtag/upforwhatever> wasn’t 
a clever idea.

Any more for more? ICYMI:

 * Labour hopeful Amina Lone: ‘I hated being on benefits’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/apr/27/amina-lone-tattooed-muslim-single-mother-labour-mp>
 * Black Widow can take a bit of sexism: she doesn’t exist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/29/black-widow-scarlett-johansson-sexism-avengers-jeremy-renner-chris-evans>
 * Wolf-whistling is not the story here – our reaction to sexual harassment is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/apr/29/wolf-whistling-is-not-the-story-our-reaction-to-sexual-harassment>
 * Fit-shaming: it’s like fat-shaming, but the exact opposite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2015/apr/28/fit-shaming-fat-shaming-exact-opposite-protein-world-beach-body>
 * Women who waive their anonymity are changing our perspective on rape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/01/women-waive-anonymity-rape-perspective>

 