
I doubt I’m the only one disappointed in The Wire creator David Simon’s 
decision to use the N-word in the context of a joke about Donald Trump choosing 
Sean Hannity to moderate a town hall focused on black issues. You would think 
that the man responsible forthe greatest black drama in television history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/jul/21/tvandradio.guide> would be more 
aware of the fact that black folks don’t like white folks using that word under 
any circumstances. Of course, that’s sort of the problem here, isn’t it? Isn’t 
it peculiar that the best black TV show of all time was created by a white man?

According to an investigation conducted by Variety, 90% of the showrunners 
<http://variety.com/2016/tv/news/diversity-television-white-male-showrunners-stats-fox-nbc-abc-cbs-cw-study-1201789639/>
 hired for new series in the 2016-17 season by broadcast networks (NBC, ABC, 
CBS, Fox, The CW) are white. Only four of the 50 new showrunners are black. 
David Simon’s place at the head of the black drama table is not just because 
his show was fantastic. It’s also because of a sheer lack of competition. It’s 
been three years since Fox debuted Lee Daniels and Danny Strong’s Empire and 
the networks still lag behind cable – the format that incubated The Wire – and 
streaming giants Netflix and Amazon.

Atlanta star Brian Tyree Henry: if Trump gets elected 'it's going to be Mad 
Max'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/20/atlanta-brian-tyree-henry-tv-fx-black-culture>
The most exciting African American series to hit since Empire is FX’s Atlanta, 
Donald Glover’s ode to black America’s capital city and a critical look at the 
modern infantile man. Glover plays Earnest Marks, an aspiring music manager 
struggling to provide for his estranged girlfriend and young daughter. There’s 
a casualness of tone toAtlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/atlanta> that’s rare in prestige 
black TV. Empire exists in a heightened reality where people poison each other 
and push their pregnant rivals down the stairs. Dramatic reveals of long-lost 
mothers come and go without much fanfare, primarily because outrageous plot 
twists are commonplace. It dulls the senses to the point where nothing is 
shocking any more.

In Atlanta, the southern black experience is treated as matter-of-fact and 
generally unremarkable. The stakes are small and intimate. Earn’s cousin, the 
underground rapper Paper Boi – tragically unrelated to the Paperboy responsible 
for the songDitty <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N58TYv7Vt3A> – sells drugs. 
He carries a gun. He goes to jail for shooting a guy over a broken rear-view 
mirror. No white character shows up to question the validity of this lifestyle. 
It’s treated as merely the world in which these people live. Of course, this is 
part of the surrealist, comedic aspects of Atlanta – the underplaying of 
outrageous situations like a drug dealer shooting a man in the back with a 
hunting rifle or an inmate drinking toilet water while amused onlookers cheer 
him on – but it’s also a true joy and a sign of black creatives behind the 
scenes that blackness is not seen as an impenetrable other. It’s not exotic or 
beguiling. It’s not mysterious. It just is.

The emergence of black creatives behind the scenes of black entertainment has 
been slow. There have been numerous stops and starts since groundbreaking 
series like I, Spy and Star Trek made African American faces on TV more 
acceptable to white audiences. The success of the Wayans brothers’ sketch 
series In Living Color led to numerous black comedies, many of them on the then 
fledgling Fox network: Living Single, Roc, Martin, True Colors. They often had 
black writers and felt authentic to the experience, though within the limiting 
confines of network TV.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgolden-age-black-tv-false-dawn-david-simon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47832578620c09117f1d9591de5ea676dc44141e%2F0_68_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20this%20a%20golden%20age%20for%20black%20TV%20makers%20or%20another%20false%20dawn%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgolden-age-black-tv-false-dawn-david-simon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20this%20a%20golden%20age%20for%20black%20TV%20makers%20or%20another%20false%20dawn%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fgolden-age-black-tv-false-dawn-david-simon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47832578620c09117f1d9591de5ea676dc44141e%2F0_68_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
 Michael K Williams as Omar Little in The Wire. Photograph: HBO 
Hope comes in the form of shows such as Marvel’s upcoming Netflix superhero 
tale Luke Cage – run by black screenwriter Cheo Hodari Coker – and Ava 
DuVernay’s Queen Sugar, a domestic drama about a family that inherits a 
sugarcane farm. This is as far away from the urban blight and shoot-em-up 
nature of the typical black series, typified by the Starz network’s Power. 
Power – set, like Empire, in the music industry – suffers from the bleak, 
violent posturing that has come to define the African American experience on 
screen and in the media. Much has been made of Queen Sugar challenging black 
ideas of masculinity through a five-year-old boy character named Blue who 
carries around a doll. Combine that with Atlanta’s ineffectual protagonist and 
his rapper cousin’s questioning of hip-hop bravado and you have the makings of 
a trend. This also extends to film, as the upcoming Moonlight chronicles the 
struggles of a black man to come out –a story rarely told 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/03/moonlight-review-devastating-drama-is-vital-portrait-of-black-gay-masculinity-in-america>
.

It is not a coincidence that these refreshingly complex visions of blackness 
come from series fronted by black writers. It’s not that white writers are 
incapable of telling black stories. Simon’s work on The Wire is a prime example 
of when that scenario works.The Wire <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wire> 
challenged our perception of what a prestige drama could be at a time when they 
were uniformly white stories of upper middle class suburban angst. What a white 
writer can miss is the subtle nuance of the experience of living in this world 
as a black person. When Simon excused his use of the N-word by saying he was 
employing the version with the suffix “a” as opposed to “er”, he thought he was 
playing within the boundaries of taste. The truth was that he was far from it, 
as he found out when numerous prominent black voices such as Jezebel’s Kara R 
Brown, the Undefeated’s Clinton Yates, the New York Times’ Greg Howard, and New 
York magazine’s Rembert Browne piped up with their displeasure.

One can only know what it’s like to be black in America by being black in 
America. The murder ofTerence Crutcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2015/jun/01/the-counted-police-killings-us-database#terence-crutcher-2016782>
 by Tulsa police officers can hurt an empathetic, concerned white person, but 
can it ever hurt as much as someone who fears for their safety because of the 
color of their skin? In order to understand our plight, you need to hear our 
story. And you need to let us tell it.

Empire season three starts Wednesday 9pm ET on ABC
 