
For some time I'd been hearing rumours of a pizzeria where the cooking was 
akin to alchemy, where the chef harnessed all the forces of nature, where the 
pizzas were magical. Italian friends were unable, or unwilling, to tell me how 
to find this place. I'd collected a few clues, and I knew the region was 
Campania, but I'd yet to work out its exact location.

Then, quite by chance, as I planned a house hunting trip to the area, an 
estate agent recommended a little hotel "where they make the most delicious 
pizza". Had I stumbled across the location? A few phone calls all but confirmed 
my hunch. I immediately booked flights to Naples, rented a car, reserved a room 
and bought a map.

I suppose I was expecting somewhere grand – an old palazzo perhaps, a temple 
to Italian cuisine – but Pizzeria Anna, in the small town of Agropoli, is a 
place without pretension. The dining room is brightly lit, none of the chairs 
or tables match and there are three TVs showing football and game shows. I 
ordered thepizza a sorpresa, the surprise, which turned out to be divided into 
eight sections, each representing a different selection from the menu. It 
arrived like a painting, like a masterpiece you see, smell and eat. The base 
was light and crisp – not too crisp, but nowhere near soft or spongy. One 
section was a sample of the remarkable and rareduchessa – a ham and mashed 
potato pizza, which tasted much better than it sounds, and was not at all 
stodgy or bland.

Another section held perfectly cooked squid and huge, succulent prawns. Yet 
another was a triangle of salad, with rocket leaves, slivers of carrot and what 
I think were pumpkin flowers. Elsewhere there was creamy mozzarella, fragrant 
basil and a rich, sweet, almost fruity tomato sauce. I travel to Italy 
regularly and I eat plenty of pizza so believe me when I tell you that this was 
extraordinary.

Pizzeria Anna is run by Anna Scola. Her husband Domenico is the chef or 
pizzaiolo; her daughters Caterina and Maria Carmela are the waitresses. 
Domenico's nickname is Baffo, meaning moustache, on account of his facial hair. 
The girls are known as the Baffo staff. Despite the laid-back dining 
experience, the cooking is handled with the utmost seriousness. There are 
certificates on the walls confirming that the tomatoes used in the sauce are 
indeed sweet San Marzano plum tomatoes grown on the slopes of Mount Vesuvius, 
there are framed letters assuring customers that the mozzarella is most 
definitely from buffalo reared in the marsh meadows north of Naples. There are 
citations from numerous organisations:L'Associazione Verace Pizza Napoletana 
<http://www.pizzanapoletana.org/> and La Nazionale Italiana Pizzaioli 
<http://www.nipfood.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=54&Itemid=54>
. Baffo's business card reads "specialist in the research and development of 
the noble art of the pizza". Pizzeria Anna even has its own vineyard, producing 
the perfect wines to accompany the food. I cannot recommend it more highly.

Pizzeria Anna is right on Agropoli's seafront in the Cilento national park. 
The Cilento is a wild and rugged landscape, where wolves and wild boar roam 
among abandoned medieval villages and ancient Greek temples. The beaches are 
pristine white and the coastal waters are a vivid turquoise. But you won't find 
many tourists there because the area is not well served by international 
airports. So you can use Italy's great rail network, or do what I did – fly to 
Naples, pick up a hire car and head south along the coast. You can call in at 
Vesuvius, Pompeii, Sorrento, Positano, Amalfi and Paestum on the way to 
Agropoli – a great way to build up an appetite.
• Pizzeria Anna (+39 0974 823763, ristorantepizzeriaanna.it). B&B Anna 
<http://www.bbanna.it/> (+39 0974 823763) above the restaurant has doubles from 
€65-€100.Easyjet <http://www.easyjet.com/asp/en/book/index.asp?lang=EN>, Thomson
 <http://flights.thomson.co.uk/en/index.html> and Thomas Cook 
<http://book.flythomascook.com/skylights/cgi-bin/skylights.cgi?campid=aff/affilinet/various&mpch=ads>
 fly to Naples from various UK airports. Car hire from Naples airport withAtlas 
Choice <http://www.atlaschoice.com/new/CarRental.aspx> from around £165 per 
week.
 