
Fifteen months ago, militants arrived in the village of Manan Bagh, eyeing its 
strategic location in the mountains close to Afghanistan’s border with 
Pakistan. They started picking out community leaders, elders and people they 
accused of conspiring against them.

Among them was Zahir Shah, who was marched into the mountains and whose fate 
his family only learned from a video uploaded to Facebook.

“They forced him to sit on explosives,” Ziarat Gul, Shah’s father-in-law, told 
the Guardian. “We haven’t been able to find even one part of his body.”

Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> fighters have been 
pummelled by US airstrikes and receive little local support, but they maintain 
a small – and seemingly resilient – stronghold in eastern Afghanistan.

The fighters are few but unusually brutal, in keeping with the group’s 
behaviour elsewhere. They may not be an existential threat to the Afghan state 
but they are to civilians.

Local authorities said using explosives was a common method of killing for 
Isis, who also impose strict rules at odds with local customs: forcing men to 
grow beards and women to wear burqas. They declare government-officiated 
weddings invalid, smash shrines and ban smoking, snuff and poppy cultivation.

These rules erode an already limited public support for Isis, argues the US 
Institute of Peacein a new report 
<http://www.usip.org/publications/2016/11/03/the-rise-and-stall-of-the-islamic-state-in-afghanistan>
.

However, since it emerged publicly in 2014, Isis has continued to claim 
attacks outside Nangarhar – the only province where it has managed to gain 
ground – most notably when it targeteda crowd of protesters in Kabul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/23/hazara-minority-targeted-by-suicide-bombs-at-kabul-protest>
 in July, and a group ofShia mourners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/11/afghanistan-gunmen-kill-fourteen-people-shia-shrine-ashura-kabul>
 last month.


Rebuilding Nimrud will help atone for the sins of the west | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/rebuilding-nimrud-atone-sins-west-isis-destruction>
This week, Isis attacked a unit of elite Afghan bodyguards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/12/afghanistan-suicide-bomb-kills-at-least-four-at-bagram-airbase>
 in central Kabul, which killed at least six, including civilians. Although on 
the ropes in Afghanistan, the group can still strike in the heart of the 
capital.


Since April, about 200 US airstrikes in Nangarhar alone have helped push Isis 
into retreat,killed its leader in Afghanistan – Hafiz Saeed Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/12/isis-leader-pakistan-afghanistan-hafiz-saeed-khan-killed>
 – and limited its reach to four districts.

“Without US or Nato forces, it would take our army and police 10 years to 
defeat Daesh,” said Moallem Mashoq, district governor of Achin, where Isis – 
also known as Daesh – has its Afghan headquarters.

But some civilians feel caught between three sides: the Taliban, who used to 
occupy their village; Isis, who took over; and Afghan and international forces.

Airstrikes have also caused civilian casualties; in September, a US drone 
killedat least 15 civilians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/deadly-drone-strike-afghanistan-isis-civilians>
, according to the UN.

Borhan Osman, a researcher with the Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan> Analysts Network, said that 
although Isis had lost half its initial territory in Nangarhar, it seemed to 
have dug in firmly in its four districts. “They have proved to be irremovable 
from these areas,” he said.

Locals say Isis fighters kill and abuse indiscriminately. One afternoonthey 
picked up 14-year-old Esmatullah as he returned home from the wheat fields and 
held him prisoner for 47 days.

Esmatullah said the militants beat him regularly, sometimes suspending him 
from the ceiling. When they eventually released him, the family fled. 
Esmatullah’s father had lost a brother to Isis months earlier.

“When they brought [Esmatullah’s uncle’s] dead body back, it was full of 
bullet holes,” the father, Jabarud, said. He did not want to risk his son, too.

The number of Isis fighters in Afghanistan is debated, as is the level of 
coordination it receives from Syria and Iraq, though the leadership there has 
endorsed its Afghan affiliates.

'Afghan girl' welcomed home by president: 'She represents our hope'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/afghan-girl-sharbat-gula-welcomed-home-president-ashraf-ghani>
Osman put the number of Isis fighters in Afghanistan up to 2,000, but said 
estimating was difficult because the scale of casualties and recruitment was 
unclear.

If Abu Omar Khorasani – a top Isis commander in Afghanistan – is to be 
believed, the election of Donald Trump as US president would help Isis.

“His utter hate towards Muslims will make our job much easier because we can 
recruit thousands,” he told Reuters about Trump, who he called “a complete 
maniac”.

 Compounding the frailty of Nangarhar, neighbouring Pakistan has begun 
expelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/06/exiled-pakistan-destitute-afghanistan-war>
 hundreds of thousands of Afghans. Some analysts fear the returnees could 
provide recruitment fodder for Isis which is said to pay about $400 (£322) 
monthly to low-level fighters.

“Their peak is over,” Osman said about Isis. “But they are not finished.”

 