
Those of us fortunate enough to be asked to review arts events are always 
expected to avoid cliches when describing them. There are occasions though when 
only cliches seem appropriate. The collection of work by Henri Matisse, 
currently on display at the Tate Modern in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/apr/14/henri-matisse-cut-outs-tate-modern-review>
 (which I visited for Radio 4's Saturday Review) was one of those occasions. I 
am forced, in the traditional reviewer's style, to suggest that people "beg, 
steal or borrow" a ticket to see it. But when you're finished with the Matisse, 
there are related things to think about.

I went to a comprehensive in east London, with easy access to all the great 
institutions which exhibit art in the capital, but not once was I taken to any 
of them by my school. And this problematic relationship between the creative 
arts and education is as much an issue now as it was then.

Everyone pays lip service to the notion that the arts should play an important 
role in children's education.Michael Gove was quick to rubbish the idea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/sep/02/school-students-english-maths-gcse>
 that a focus on Maths and English means there'll be no space left for all that 
airy-fairy drama, music and dance. But it's pretty clear which way the wind is 
blowing. The subtext is that in the brave new world of zero-hours contracts and 
flexible working, making clay pots in the classroom is all very well, but there 
won't be a job at the end of it. The arts are a luxurious add-on that we can't 
really afford. This view has been around, in one form or another, for a long 
time. The Whitechapel Gallery was within easy walking distance of my school. 
Some of us found our own way there, but the school didn't. The message was 
clear: in education, some subjects matter and others don't.

In fact, they all matter equally. It's precisely in this brave new world that 
we can't afford to be without the arts. Apart from the fact it would be very 
unfortunate if a modern Henri or Henrietta Matisse was left at the back of the 
class without being identified and assisted, creativity is a big and lucrative 
business in this country.

But the arts have a role in our society that's far more important than merely 
turning a dollar. For those on the wrong end of social and economic change, 
there can be a tendency to drift into despair, apathy, scapegoating and 
violence. Art, on the other hand, has always played a vital role in 
interpreting and understanding people's lives and expressing how they feel 
about it. Marginalised youngsters who pick up guitars instead of joining gangs 
or trashing high streets have already taken one positive step. If they use 
their music in an attempt to explain the world they live in, they've taken 
another.

Indeed, it may not be too cynical to suggest that it actually suits some if 
the creative noise is kept down in poor areas. Talented working-class 
youngsters who learn how to use the tools of their artistic trade are 
notoriously prone to asking awkward questions with them. For a start, there's 
that perennial political problem â€“ why are the fat cats getting all the cream 
while the cool cats have got empty saucers? On the eve of the riots in 1981, 
The Specials' Ghost Town had far more to say about what was happening on my 
streets than any number ofScarman reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/1999/feb/17/guardiansocietysupplement4>.

In many schools, teachers are already doing incredible work inspiring their 
students to discover, engage and, most importantly, participate in the arts. 
Institutions are playing their part and most of them actively work to get 
youngsters involved. The quickest way to wind up someone involved in opera is 
to suggest that they want to keep the riff-raff out. But this work also needs a 
lead from the top. Art isn't an extra; it's an integral part of a well-balanced 
education curriculum. The private school youngster standing at a bus stop with 
a musical instrument strapped to their back is a familiar sight. We need state 
school students with instruments, easels and scripts standing there too.
 