
I’m a practice leader in private fostering at Warwickshire county council, and 
I look out for children who go under the radar of children’s services.

My days are varied and I can be doing anything from visiting teams of social 
workers and other agencies, to chasing progress on individual cases and 
maintaining data sheets and development work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fits-all-too-easy-for-social-services-to-miss-privately-fostered-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436455101162%2F1824b798-3a8d-49c4-ad67-ccb96ce73d19-683x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It's%20all%20too%20easy%20for%20social%20services%20to%20miss%20privately%20fostered%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fits-all-too-easy-for-social-services-to-miss-privately-fostered-children%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%27s%20all%20too%20easy%20for%20social%20services%20to%20miss%20privately%20fostered%20children&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Fjul%2F10%2Fits-all-too-easy-for-social-services-to-miss-privately-fostered-children%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F7%2F9%2F1436455101162%2F1824b798-3a8d-49c4-ad67-ccb96ce73d19-683x1020.jpeg>
 Jenny Packeer, private fostering lead at Warwickshire county council. 
Photograph: Jenny Packeer 
Private fostering describes an arrangement that lasts for 28 days or more 
where a child is cared for by someone who isn’t a close relative. A close 
relative is defined as a grandparent, uncle, aunt, step parent or older brother 
or sister. Often children in private fostering arrangements are cared for by 
family friends, or members of their extended family.

By law, parents and carers must notify local authorities of any private 
fostering arrangements, but in practice, they often don’t. I receive inquiries 
and notifications from many sources including teachers, outreach workers, 
health service staff and sometimes family and friends.

I start my day by checking my emails. The first email is from a social worker 
seeking advice on Sophie, aged eight, who has moved from living with an 
extended relative to living with a close relative. I confirm this is no longer 
a private fostering arrangement and send what I hope is a helpful reminder to 
the social worker of what to record. There are concerns about parental mental 
health which, with other issues, requires further assessment.

Private fostering is a double-edged sword, which means I have to be extra 
vigilant in my working life. Some children in private fostering arrangements, 
where their parents are unable to look after them, are well cared for by a 
family friend or a member of their extended family. The actor Pierce Brosnan 
was privately fostered while his mother trained as a nurse.

But some children who are privately fostered can become victims of child 
trafficking, vulnerable to domestic slavery, or be at risk of child sexual 
exploitation. When people rememberthe tragic case of Victoria Climbié 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2001/sep/24/childrensservices>, a little 
girl who was trafficked to the UK and murdered by her great aunt and her 
boyfriend, they often forget that she was privately fostered.


I flick through my next email. It is regarding Zaki, aged 15, from Yemen whose 
private fostering assessment seems to have taken forever due to a delay in 
getting a GP reference. As Zaki is an international student and staying with 
family friends while in the UK, we were alerted to the private fostering 
arrangement by the school. In order to progress things, I remind the GP 
practice of the Climbié case. I don’t get a reply, but the fostering team does 
get their reference, so I class this as a result.

Knowing a child will be placed with a 'forever family' makes me happy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/jul/03/knowing-a-child-will-be-placed-with-a-forever-family-makes-me-happy>
It’s my job to ensure the carers, children and families receive an assessment, 
advice and support. The support available can include anything from access to 
relevant benefits, free school meals, mediation services with the child’s birth 
family, and access to foster care training, to more practical support such as a 
bed. Tailored support for children with more complex needs – for instance, if 
they’ve got a disability – is also available.

The rest of my day is taken up with working on an information leaflet for 
young people that theChildren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/children> in Care council have 
contributed to. The laptop and I are doing battle as I try to make it look more 
interesting and I struggle with the layout.


According to figures from the British Association for Adoption and Fostering 
(BAAF) only 9% of adults in the UK know what private fostering is. Yet, the 
most recent government estimates of the number of children in private fostering 
arrangements date from 2004, and indicate that there were approximately 10,000 
children in private fostering arrangements. Experts now believethe figure could 
be far higher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2007/dec/10/private.fostering>. This is 
why raising awareness of private fostering, especially among social workers and 
other agencies, is an important part of my role.

In the evening to unwind, I like to spend time catching up with my family, 
watching TV or reading, which helps me escape from the here and now. I also 
find sitting out in the garden on a long summer evening works wonders for 
relaxing the body and letting go of stress.

 