
At the Oval yesterday, as England won the Ashes from Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/aug/23/england-win-ashes-oval-test-australia>
, I was a small part of what Jim Maxwell onTest Match Special 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/sport1/hi/cricket/tms/default.stm> has apparently 
described as just about the best test match crowd ever. Well everyone likes a 
compliment, and I certainly had a good time at the game, but I'm not sure that 
Jim has got this right.

I can't go to the Oval these days without regretting that the Test match crowd 
isn't like it used to be. The first time I ever went to an Oval Test was in 
1963, when as a boy I watched the whole of the fifth Test betweenTed Dexter 
<http://www.cricinfo.com/ci/content/player/11886.html>'s England and Frank 
Worrell <http://www.cricinfo.com/ci/content/player/53238.html>'s West Indians. 
Three aspects of that experience would be impossible now. First, we paid at the 
gate on the day – no tickets were needed back then. Second, we sat on the grass 
behind the boundary, with as close a close-up view of Wes Hall's run-up as 
anyone could ever have managed without actually playing, a visual memory that 
has stayed with me to this day. Third, when Basil Butcher scored the winning 
run, we all ran across the grass and stood cheering and clapping until the 
teams appeared on the pavilion balcony above.

Nostalgia? Yes, of course. In lots of ways things are better now – the action 
replays, the food and drink choices, and the modernisation of the scoreboard. 
But the loss is very real too. Most important of all is the modern tyranny of 
the advance ticketing system. This has transformed the Test match crowd – as it 
has transformed the crowds for all sorts of other events too – from a 
multiracial, all social class, largely south London crowd into a white, 
prosperous middle class, largely male, predominantly home counties crowd. Sure, 
they generally behave well and they mostly hold their drink and they can be 
quite sporting. But that was true of a cricket crowd back in 1963 too. I have 
just looked upWisden <http://www.wisden.com/> for the 1963 game, which says:
 Those who were present will never forget the fantastic final scene. Early in 
the day the gates had been closed with 25,350 present. About two-thirds of the 
attendance were West Indies people now resident in London. They were jubilant, 
excited and well-behaved ... 
The difference today is that the poor are priced out and pre-booked out of the 
market and there are almost no black people any more – at a sports event in 
Lambeth too. My two tickets in the Lock stand yesterday (Tony Lock was playing 
in my first Oval Test match back in 1963) cost £92 each, were bought online 
last November (by which time the first three days were all sold out) and they 
were far from being the best seats in the ground.

The England Test match crowd is pretty well-behaved, quite fun to be part of, 
and the experience of sitting watching a day's Test cricket still makes almost 
all of the negatives easily palatable. But there has beena lot of stupid booing 
this summer against Ricky Ponting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2009/aug/05/ricky-ponting-ashes-booing-crowd>
 and the crowd chanting sometimes comes close to a deliberate attempt to put 
the opposition off. I don't think the crowds are as attentive these days as 
they used to be either, although this could be rose-tinted nostalgia for 
Headingley in the 60s, when it sometimes felt as if packed crowds watched in 
almost complete silence. But I certainly hate the attempt to import the 
Twickenham-style chauvinist singing of Jerusalem almost as much as I dislike 
the Last Night of the Proms-type songs that they were putting out over the 
public address system at the Oval yesterday.

Still, it's only a game – even if it's the best game in the world – and I'm 
delighted England won and I'm thrilled to have been there, drinking my Pimm's 
and cheering Freddie with the best (and the worst) of them. I just wish the 
England crowd (and England's largely South African-born team, come to that) 
felt a bit more like the England that I live in the rest of the year. But then 
what did I ever have in common with Ted Dexter either who, as I dimly recall, 
was born in Milan?
 