
Ask Americans about "global warming", and a new study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/may/27/americans-climate-change-global-warming-yale-report>
 suggests that 13% more of them will think it's a bad thing compared to 
"climate change". That, it turns out, was Republicans' point: way back in 2002, 
a Republican pollster warned candidates and then-President George W Bush to 
avoid using the term "global warming"because people found it "frightening" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2003/mar/04/usnews.climatechange>.

Since then, the debate about "climate change" has become a cultural battle 
and, out in the field, Republican midterm candidates are engaged in acontest 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/livewire/senate-race-thom-tillis-greg-brannon-kay-hagan-gop-primary>
 to become its most strident deniers. Even on Twitter, Pat Sajakthinks 
<http://www.motherjones.com/environment/2014/05/pat-sajak-wheel-of-fortune-global-warming-racism>
 you're an "unpatriotic racist" if you think climate change is a real problem.

But one Republican is trying to hold back the tide of his colleagues who 
continue to fall at the feet of the (largely) oil and coal industry-sponsored 
climate denial movement. Former South Carolina Congressman Bob Inglis, a 
Republican, is the movement's best advertisement – a real live conservative 
convert. His story has the arc of a religious experience, in part because it 
includes one.

Inglis says he was first asked to consider the possibility that climate change 
is real because of his son and the rest of his family – "and they're the ones 
who could change the locks," he told me last week – so he decided to listen. 
Then, as a member of the House Science committee, he went toAntarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica> and saw the ice-core samples 
that tell the story of human's impact on the environment.


Lastly, he had a conversation with a Australian climatologist at the Great 
Barrier Reef, and it became clear to Inglis that there was a spiritual 
component to environmentalism that aligned with his conservative Christian 
faith and not the fuzzy "earth mother" New Age environmental stereotype. "I 
could see he worshipped the God of creation, and not the creation itself," he 
told me here, where we're both fellows at the University of Chicago Institute 
of Politics – and where I've seen him coast in wearing khakis and a helmet, 
looking for all the world like tofu-eating Obama voter.


Whether you think it's the Creator or the creation that matters, mere mortals 
are not doing a great job with protecting the environment – which translates 
not just into sad pictures of displaced animals, but intowhole populations of 
humans displaced and dying 
<http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/planetpolicy/posts/2014/05/21-climate-change-displacement-ferris>
. Unforunately, to Americans, that suffering seems distant and abstractly 
related to climate change, and the only aspect of Inglis's own conversion he 
could possibly replicate for another non-believer is to show them those 
ice-core samples. And even that's the same kind of physical evidence that keeps 
failing to convince people.


But Inglis and his colleagues believe that they can convince the non-believers.

 In Bob Inglis's telling, his opponents haven't come prepared to debate – just 
to mock the idea of climate change as an issue in the first place. Photograph: 
/via @bobinglis/Twitter 
Inglis started the Energy and Enterprise Initiative at George Mason University 
as part of his crusade to bring Republicans around to climate change. He now 
thinks it's the absence ofpeople – their concerns, their jobs, even their faces 
– from activists' framing of the issue that has kept them from achieving 
progress. Inglis is so convinced that people's concerns are absent from the 
climate change debate that he is emphatic about evicting the environmental 
movement's most cherished signifiers: "no polar bears and no smoke stacks," he 
told me.


E&EI has an astro-turfy name, but it is no fig leaf for big oil – Inglis got 
seed funding from theRockefeller Family Fund 
<http://www.rffund.org/programs/environment> and the Energy Foundation 
<http://www.ef.org/grantee-stories/>, both long-established in lefty 
environmentalist grant-making circles. His solutions (like a revenue-neutral 
carbon tax and attaching all costs, including environmental costs, to all 
fuels) are free-market based and could be considered moderate – except that, 
you know, he believes in climate change.


Of course, believing in climate change (let alone pushing policy solutions on 
its behalf) is Republican heresy, and Inglis paid for it: in 2010, he lost his 
primary to tea party challenger Trey Gowdy (whose conservative bona fides are 
solid enough to have put him in charge of the new Benghazi select committee). 
Since then, former cautious undecidedssuch as Marco Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/may/12/marco-rubios-climate-change-remarks>
 have gone from delicately avoiding a firm position to edging toward the 
base-safe territory of denial. And the House Science, Space and Technology 
Committee (on which he once served) has, in the past two years,held more 
hearings on the possibility of extraterrestrial life than climate change 
<http://www.nationaljournal.com/energy/the-house-science-committee-has-held-more-hearings-on-aliens-than-on-climate-change-20140521>
.


Nonetheless, Inglis had some success in attracting converts – though his 
highest-profile recent get, Representative Michael Grimm, happened to get
arrested 
<http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2014/04/28/rep-michael-grimm-arrested/> on 
fraud charges the same week hewent public with his change of heart 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2014/04/25/3430952/grimm-embraces-climate-science/>
. Inglis's personal high-water mark came at adebate 
<http://energyandenterprise.com/video-r-streets-debate-are-there-circumstances-under-which-republicans-can-support-a-carbon-tax/>
 sponsored by the R Street Institute, where his stacks of research won a straw 
poll against the wisecracking representatives of the Heartland Institute. In 
his telling, his opponents didn't come prepared to debate, just to mock the 
idea of climate change as an issue in the first place.


But given an audience that's truly undecided and searching for answers, Inglis 
and his team believe they can convince people. To that end, Inglis acknowledges 
that his best bet is to reach those conservatives that haven't yet accepted the 
party orthodoxy: the young ones – not just the College Republicans, but the law 
school-focused Federalist Society types. His resources, he believes, are best 
spent not on flipping office-holders, but on recruiting fresh faces.


When I suggested to Inglis maybe he could find a young female former tech 
executive, someone who could authoritatively point to the venture capital money 
being poured into clean energy as an example of capitalism doing its thing, a 
thoughtful look crossed his face: "Yes, that could work," he said.

The only real flaw in Inglis's plan lies in recruiting that hypothetical young 
tech executive into a party that does, in fact, have other flaws besides a 
backwards approach to science and the environment. Inglis has a solution for 
that as well: he hopes coming around on climate change is just the beginning of 
change for the GOP. "We've been the 'mean people who suck' party for too long," 
he says. With Inglis's help, he's hoping the party can go from mean to green.

 