
I recently became an art student again. It marks my third stretch in higher 
education since 2003, following art-related stints at Swindon College and a 
London art school. I’m completing a PhD, which I need so that I can teach at a 
higher education level.


I need to teach so I can eat. For every period of study I’ve had to borrow 
progressively larger amounts of money: a student loan, overdraft and money from 
the family – for which they borrowed themselves – to fund an education in which 
I believe. All my arrears remain. Debt is the price I pay for a young adulthood 
spent researching and working in culture.

The arts sector is in desperate need of a fresh perspective
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture-professionals-network/2015/jun/23/arts-sector-desperate-need-fresh-perspective-susan-jones>
 For most an arts degree will provide little money 
<http://viewer.gutools.co.uk/culture-professionals-network/culture-professionals-blog/2014/may/19/paying-artists-nothing-uk-talent>
 or financial stability, but providing the lecturers are strong and curriculum 
diverse enough, it will offer exposure to life-changing engagements with 
culture and politics. Some consider this to be the point of an arts degree – to 
offer an experience of critical thinking as it relates to artistic work (and 
let’s not forget that itis a form of work).

But could there be a better way? There are some institutions that have 
resuscitated older forms of education, not quite forgotten in London or the UK, 
to question the expense and current neoliberal politics of most university art 
schools. Here are just a few examples:


The Antiuniversity of London 


 The Antiuniversity of London was founded in 1968, in Shoreditch, east London. 
It was also short-lived. This part of London played host to a collective of 
individuals inspired by the theory and practice of liberation, civil rights and 
other protest movements popular in the US and UK at the time.

 The Antihistory research blog <http://antihistory.org/>, which collates the 
legacy of the Antiuniversity, and the public space atFlat Time House 
<http://flattimeho.org.uk/>, where it began, are places where discussions about 
alternative arts education still take place. They follow in the philosophical 
footsteps of artist John Latham, who believed art should be accessible to all 
and lived in the house until his death, greeting whomever was interested in the 
subject at his door.

Open School East 


Open School East <http://www.openschooleast.org/> (OSE), a short bus ride from 
Shoreditch, was founded in a disused public library in De Beauvoir Town by a 
small group of writers, curators and artists. One of the more prominent and 
well-funded independent art schools, OSE supports 14 associate artists a year, 
from diverse backgrounds, with or without formal qualifications such as a BA or 
MA.

 In lieu of paying fees, associate artists are expected to exchange one day of 
labour a month, in support of various educational and public programming 
initiatives. As the founders of the school state: “OSE was born in a climate of 
spiralling tuition fees, which only perpetuates the lack of a social mix 
already present in the arts. OSE was instituted with access in mind as well as 
independence of thought and an openness to other forms of pedagogy and artistic 
learning.”

Islington Mill Art Academy 


The Islington Mill Art Academy <http://islingtonmillartacademy.blogspot.co.uk/>
 (IMAA) was founded in Salford in 2007.
A small group of artists had just finished their art and design foundation 
courses and, after attending various open days for university degrees, left 
uninspired.

 Maurice Carlin <http://www.mauricecarlin.com/>, one of the IMAA’s founders, 
has said before that university degrees present too narrow an idea of what 
being an artist in the world might be like, which sets students up for 
inevitable failure upon graduation.

He and his co-founders more recently said: “Through our experiences, we’ve 
learned that education need not be bought and sold; it’s something that any 
small group of people can entrust between themselves. IMAA is a continuing 
conversation about what it means to be an artist and an active response towards 
recovering education.”

The increase in tuition fees in the UK has further solidified government 
attempts to produce a culture of university education where exclusivity is 
favoured over access for all. Independent art schools offer an alternative, but 
not what is generally considered a certified qualification.

They do, however, put curriculum development in the hands of students 
alongside more experienced professionals. These curriculums try to develop arts 
education the way it should be: you get out what you put in – not financially,
but in the manner in which you engage a sense of community and equality, 
alongside the production of your own artistic work.

It’s too late for me; I’ve already got the debt, but future artists should be 
supported by a government that provides free education. And if this doesn’t 
happen? As artist Patrick Brill, aka Bob and Roberta Smithsuggests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/23/bob-and-roberta-smith-arts-education-yorkshire-sculpture-park>
, art schools will be full of rich people with posh accents. “It’s bad for art 
and it’s bad for democracy,” he says. I couldn’t agree more.

Daniel C Blight is a writer and co-editor of Loose Associations 
<http://thephotographersgallery.org.uk/loose-associations> – follow him on 
Twitter@DanielCBlight <https://twitter.com/DanielCBlight>

Join our community of arts, culture and creative professionals by signing up 
free to theGuardian Culture Pros Network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/culture-professionals/register/>.
 