
The ageing of societies across the world is a testament to progress. But as we 
grow older, the risk of mental as well as physical decline increases.Dementia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/dementia> affects one in five people over 
80 and its global prevalence is doubling every 20 years. To confront this 
challenge we need more than scientific brilliance. We need a new approach to 
the funding and regulation of research.

Next month (3-4 March) the World Health Organisation will set out its 
priorities for research into the degenerative brain disease at thefirst 
ministerial conference on global action against dementia 
<http://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0CCMQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.who.int%2Fnmh%2Fconference-on-dementia-march2015-concept-note.pdf&ei=WHfrVM63BNPlao-OgbgN&usg=AFQjCNH-h_TDO9nCdaIR7BCREh85-gqDSA&sig2=xcM7EdFOtY3CFJ9X8Mel7Q&bvm=bv.86475890,d.d2s>
 in Geneva.

It follows David Cameron’s announcement in the Autumn Statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/dec/02/dementia-fund-autumn-statement>
 last December of a £15m down-payment by the UK government to help fund the 
battle against what the prime minister described as “one of the greatest 
enemies of humanity”.

Death is life's finale and should not be cut short
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/02/assisted-dying-death-lifes-finale>
The scale of the challenge is laid bare in a report  
<http://wish-qatar.org/media-center/press-release-details?item=138&backArt=331>
published this month which shows that while the disease burden mounts 
inexorably, the search for effective treatments is sinking into the sand.

Between 1998 and 2012, there were 104 attempts to develop drugs for dementia 
of which 101 were unsuccessful. Just three new medicines were approved to treat 
the symptoms of dementia, the last – called memantine – over a decade ago.

Most worrying of all, despite the huge rewards on offer for a successful 
treatment, manufacturers are abandoning research into neuro-degenerative 
diseases because it is too difficult. In the last five years (2009-14) large 
pharmaceutical companies have cut their central nervous system programmes by 
half.

Many apparently promising compounds have been identified only to falter when 
tested in large-scale human trials. Some have been revealed to cause serious 
side effects. The history of failure, the long development times and the 
immense costs – from $0.5bn to over $5bn to develop a new drug – are deterring 
pharmaceutical companies from investing, according to the report by an expert 
panel to be presented at the World Innovation Summit forHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> (Wish) in Doha, which I chair.

‘I thought I would never marry again, but I found love at the age of 80’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/11/marry-love-older-people-civil-partnerships>
We cannot allow this to continue. The stakes are too high. Without effective 
treatments, the growth of dementia among ageing populations will overwhelm 
health and caring services and impose an impossible burden – social and 
financial – on future generations. The Wish report warns of a “global economic 
crisis”.

The barriers to drug company involvement in research are currently too high. 
They face immense costs and huge risks and the regulations are too onerous. We 
need to lower the barriers to encourage new investment. Exploratory discussions 
have been held by the US Food and Drug Administration and the European 
Medicines Agency, but we need co-ordinated action across regulatory agencies to 
achieve real progress.

The World Dementia Council and the UK Dementia Innovation Unit are working on 
a plan aimed at identifying gaps in the science of dementia and regulatory 
changes that might help address them, thereby accelerating drug development.

One example is a plan under consideration by the European Medicines Agency for 
a “staggered release” programme, designed to get drugs to market faster by 
limiting their initial prescription to patients who urgently need them and are 
prepared to tolerate a higher risk. As evidence on their safety and 
effectiveness accumulates, the drugs can be released to more patients.

Five things the next government should pledge for older people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/14/government-pledge-older-people>
By November last year, the programme had received 29 applications from drug 
makers and nine had been selected for further discussion.

Bringing new funds into dementia research is vital. Leaders of the G8 
countries agreed at the 2013 summit in Northern Ireland to increase resources 
and the UK government pledged to double its funding to £32m a year by 2025. But 
additional sources must be found.

Ideas include crowd funding (capitalising on fears about the disease among the 
middle classes), and venture capital models such as the Israeli Life Sciences 
Investment Fund where the Israeli government has agreed to take first loss to 
shield private investors from some of the risk.

The World Dementia Council <http://dementiachallenge.dh.gov.uk/category/wdc/> 
has asked JP Morgan, the investment bank, to create a $110m fund for basic 
research.

Resources are vital; without them we can do nothing. But they are only the 
start. Once we have the resources we must decide how they can be best used by 
identifying the most promising opportunities. A number of bodies are developing 
priorities for research including, in the UK, theAlzheimer’s Society 
<http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/>, the Lind Alliance 
<http://www.lindalliance.org/> and the World Health Organisation 
<http://www.who.int/en/>.

The Wish report on dementia calls on governments to commit one per cent of the 
cost of care for sufferers in their own countries to research. We must hire 
more scientists, diversify our approach, cover gaps in research and identify 
opportunities. Without co-ordinated action the future of health systems will be 
under threat.
 