
Stefano Pessina, a secretive Italian billionaire, is to become £4.45bn richer 
as a result of the $15bn (£9bn)Walgreens takeover of Alliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/19/pharmacy-walgreen-alliance-boots-merger>
.

The deal is worth £1.5bn in cash and a further £2.95bn in shares to the 
executive chairman and largest shareholder of Boots,nicknamed the "silver fox" 
for his hair and deal-making ability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/mar/18/theobserver.observerbusiness12>
, and who has already amassed a fortune worth $10.9bn (£6.5bn), according to the
the Forbes rich list <http://www.forbes.com/profile/stefano-pessina/>.

Born into a Milanese family in 1941, Pessina lives in the tax haven of Monaco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/monaco> alongside high rollers including Sir 
Philip Green. Unlike some of his neighbours, Pessina is not known for lavish 
parties and keeps a low profile. He prefers opera, art and boat design – his 
main extravagance is a yacht moored off Sardinia – and keeps fit with sailing, 
tennis and swimming.

With 1,500 deals under his belt, it is not surprising that his declared 
passion is "building businesses" 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/luisakroll/2012/04/27/billionaire-stefano-pessina-on-his-1500-deals-including-europes-biggest-lbo/>
. Following a degree and research jobs innuclear engineering at university in 
Milan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/mar/17/privateequity.italy> 
and a stint in marketing, Pessina got his first stab at this when his father 
asked him in 1974 to restructure the ailing family company, a pharmaceutical 
wholesaler.

The business, enlarged by a spate of foreign takeovers, eventually merged with 
Britain's UniChem and became Alliance UniChem in 1997. By the time Pessina 
invited the Boots management for merger talks on his yacht off Sardinia, the 
company had gobbled up more than 500 companies and joined the FTSE 100 index. 
Having stalked the UK high street chemist for at least six years, he pulled off 
a £7bn merger with Boots in 2006 to createAlliance Boots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/allianceboots>, a health and beauty group 
with 100,000 employees in 14 countries. A year later, Pessina and the private 
equity firm KKR surprised the City by taking the business private in Europe's 
largest leveraged buyout, a $22bn deal.

The Switzerland-based company was targeted by protest groups including UK 
Uncut over its tax affairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/may/16/boots-owner-anti-business-mood-uk>
. After Pessina engineered the sale of a 45% stake in Boots to Walgreens,he was 
criticised by investors for his "undue influence" over the US retailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/07/investors-restrict-power-boots-pessina-chairman>
. He is the single largest shareholder and has a seat on the board.
 