
Cetara is right at the eastern end of the Amalfi Coast – so has remained a 
sweet little fishing village. For thousands of years the villagers have 
specialised in catching and preserving anchovies. They make a wonderful anchovy 
essence, a little like Thai fish sauce or nam pla, by pressing the fish. It's 
absolutely delicious on hot spaghetti with onions. Stock up at one of the 
little delis in the village, and also buy anchovies in oil and some anchovy 
pesto, to bring home. If you want to stop for a lunch of local delicacies, try 
Francesco Tammaro at Ristorante San Pietro (+39 089 261091,
sanpietroristorante.it <http://www.sanpietroristorante.it>).

At Minori, Salvatore de Riso is a third-generation pastry-cook extraordinaire, 
and he's rightly proud of his pastries atSal De Riso <http://salderiso.it/> on 
Piazza Cantilena. He is most famous for hisdelizia al limone, which you can 
find all along the Amalfi Coast, but if you're going to have it anywhere, have 
it here. They serve delicious cappuccinos too, so sit outside and watch life go 
by on the promenade, then have a wander around Minori itself, which is 
beautiful.

We'd been told that GAS Bar <https://www.facebook.com/GASBar2012> (via Mauro 
Comite 47) inAmalfi does the best coffee, and it is true – the coffee is 
fantastic, as are the little oval pastries, filled with custard and cherry, 
calledpasticciotti. The owners are young and passionate about their coffee, 
taking great care of their espresso machine. It's not an easy place to stop, as 
it's on a junction, but locals pull up and nip inside for a perfect espresso 
and then zoom off.
 Amalfi Coast 
At lunchtime, head slightly further west to Praiano, with its pebbled beach 
and fishing boats. Walk down to the front and then follow the cliffs to the 
right, passing all the little restaurants, to the end. There you will find
Ristorante il Pirata <http://www.ristoranteilpirata.net/> . The owner's mother 
is in her 80s but still works in the kitchen, making wonderful potato 
croquettes andtotani e patate, a tomatoey calamari dish particular to Praiano. 
Sit in the sun, or eat there in the evening when it is very pretty (and they 
give you rugs if it gets chilly).

Praiano is also the place to eat amazing lobster spaghetti, as made by Signora 
Clelia at Bar Mare (via Marina di Praia, 9, +39 0898 74326). The menu changes 
every day, depending on what the fishermen bring in, so we had to wait several 
days for lobster. She showed us how to make it: using just Amalfi lemons, local 
olive oil and sometimes a little fresh mint.

In Positano, Il San Pietro di Positano <http://ilsanpietro.it> on via Laurito 
is a beautiful hotel, Michelin-starred and expensive. Go for an evening drink, 
sit on the terrace overlooking the sea and it will feel as though you are in a 
film. The waiters wear bow ties and the drinks come on silver salvers, and 
although it is €15 for one cocktail, they come with the very best local nuts 
and olives. The cocktails are wonderful things like rosemary-and-gin fizzes. 
Afterwards you can go and get a pizza somewhere cheaper, or dine atNext2 
<http://www.next2.it/>, a modern and friendly restaurant run by a mother and 
daughter with an excellent and delicate touch.

• The Amalfi Coast: A Collection of Italian Recipes 
<http://www.hardiegrant.co.uk/books/the-amalfi-coast> by Katie and Giancarlo 
Caldesi is published by Hardie Grant, £25
 