
Ittoqqortoormiit (formerly known as Scoresbysund) is remote. So remote, in 
fact, that it bears the distinction of being the remotest inhabited community 
in the western hemisphere. This “edge of the world” settlement is home to just 
450 hardy souls. To the north lies theNortheast Greenland national park 
<http://www.greenland.com/en/about-greenland/nature-climate/the-national-park/>
, to the south Scoresby Sund, respectively the largest national park and fjord 
on Earth.

The town is made up of a scattering of wooden buildings, painted in an array 
of bright blues, reds, yellows and greens, across a coastal bluff of pink and 
grey gneiss (some of the planet’s oldest rock).

Just two flights a week arrive on a Wednesday at Constable Point airport (one 
from Akureyri in Iceland with Norlandair, the other from Kangerlussuaq, West 
Greenland, with Air Greenland), and a helicopter meets incoming flights for the 
transfer to town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fittoqqortoormiit-greenland-remotest-settlement-on-earth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c31699538065400e6f15a26c3a1f3cf42410dc6%2F0_1210_3744_3744%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ittoqqortoormiit%2C%20Greenland%2C%20one%20of%20the%20remotest%20settlements%20on%20Earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fittoqqortoormiit-greenland-remotest-settlement-on-earth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ittoqqortoormiit%2C%20Greenland%2C%20one%20of%20the%20remotest%20settlements%20on%20Earth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fittoqqortoormiit-greenland-remotest-settlement-on-earth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c31699538065400e6f15a26c3a1f3cf42410dc6%2F0_1210_3744_3744%2F3744.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
Or you can come by sea. When our boat arrived from Milne Land (an island in 
eastern Greenland) where we’d been on expedition researching my book, it was 
immediately obvious something was going on. Crowds had gathered on the cliffs 
and gesticulated excitedly to the occupants of a flotilla of small craft 
zigzagging around the bay. A marbled grey and white flank suddenly rose from 
the water. A narwhal! The thrill of the sight was cut short by the retort of 
three gunshots. A crimson slick spread around the lifeless body.

Ittoqqortoormiit has just one bright orange guesthouse in town, a pub that 
opens one night a week, a shop selling the basics and a post office.Nanu Travel 
<http://www.nanutravel.dk/> can arrange all manner of adventurous excursions, 
from dog sledding and kayaking to hiking and hunting.

• Adrian’s Hall’s book, Follow that Musk Ox: Tales from Milne Land 
<https://www.facebook.com/followthatmuskox/>, is out now
 