
Cash-strapped ITV has raised £1m by selling its 70% stake in a spectrum 
management company.

The broadcaster, which is under pressure to tackle its onerous £2.6bn pension 
fund and manage debt in the worst advertising recession for more than a decade, 
today announced it had sold the stake in JFMG to transmission mast firmArqiva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/arqiva>. ITV said the sale was a further 
deal in its programme of non-core asset disposals.

Today's sale is part of Arqiva's acquisition of JFMG's entire issued share 
capital, withITV plc <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ITV> receiving £1m in 
cash on completion of the deal. JFMG provides access to radio spectrum used to 
provide essential mobility in broadcast production, entertainment and related 
activities.

ITV is expected to announce "savage" job cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/feb/13/itv-staff-hundreds-job-cuts>, 
with up to 500 staff departing, and a reduction in its £1bn-a-year programming 
budget when it releases its annual results for 2008 to the City on 4 March.

The broadcaster has been pursuing a policy of selling non-core assets, which 
has included theoffloading in April last year of its 50% stake in Arsenal 
Broadband Limited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/apr/07/itv.television2> to the American 
sports entrepreneur Stan Kroenke for a total of £65m.

ITV has raised more than £620m in its disposal programme since the merger of 
Granada and Carlton created ITV plc in 2004.

Other disposals over the past five years have included stakes in TV3 in 
Ireland and Seven Network in Australia, Carlton Books and the education 
business Granada Learning.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000.

• If you are writing a comment for publication, please mark clearly "for 
publication".
 