 Iwao Hakamada, former boxer, now on Japan's death row. 
Iwao Hakamada is believed to be the world's longest-serving death row inmate. 
He has spent the past 43 years in prison inJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, under threat of execution.

In 1968, Hakamada, a former professional boxer from Shizuoka prefecture, was 
convicted of the murder of the managing director of the miso (soya bean paste) 
factory where he worked, as well as the man's wife and his two children.

He was found guilty at an unfair trial, principally on the basis of a 
confession he made after 20 days of interrogation by police, and without a 
lawyer present. Hakamada later withdrew the confession, saying that he had been 
beaten and threatened.

One of the judges who convicted him, Kumamoto Norimichi, stated publicly in 
2007 that he believed Hakamada was innocent in 1968, but that he had been 
outvoted by his colleagues.

Within months of being given a death sentence, Hakamada began to show signs of 
seriously disturbed behaviour. There are grave concerns abouthis mental health 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/sep/10/japan-death-row-insane-amnesty?INTCMP=SRCH>
, but the prison authorities have refused his family and his legal 
representatives access to his medical records.

In recent months, visitors to Tokyo Detention Centre, where Hakamada is being 
held, have found him to be "confused, disorientated and rambling". The 
75-year-old has been known to refuse his medication for hypertension and he 
also suffers from diabetes.

His legal team, family and supporters are calling for Hakamada to be granted a 
stay of execution and for him to be removed from death row. They also continue 
to press his claim for a retrial, citing concerns about the soundness of 
evidence against him.

Japan has not commuted a death sentence since 1975. Executions in the country 
are by hanging and are typically carried out in secret. Death row inmates are 
only notified on the morning of their execution and their families are usually 
informed only after the execution has taken place.

Prisoners live in constant fear of immediate execution. Enduring these 
conditions for years, or even decades, has led to extensive depression and 
mental illness among those sentenced to death.

Tomorrow marks World Day against the Death Penalty 
<http://www.worldcoalition.org/worldday>. To email the prime minister of Japan, 
Mr Yoshihiko Noda, to call for Hakamada's execution to be stayed, clickhere 
<http://action.amnesty.org.uk/ea-campaign/clientcampaign.do?ea.client.id=1194&ea.campaign.id=8658>
 