
At the moment there is a rather under-valued play by Nicholas Wright, 
Travelling Light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jan/22/constellations-travelling-light-man-middle-review>
, playing at the National Theatre. It shows how Jewish folk culture, which 
flourished in theshtetls <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shtetl> of eastern 
Europe, influenced Hollywood cinema. Watching the play, I wondered if a similar 
argument could be made for the modern theatre. How much, in short, has it been 
shaped by Yiddish tradition?

In America, there is a reasonably clear-cut progression. Between 1881 and 1903,
well over a million Yiddish-speaking Jews arrived in the USA 
<http://www.israel-flowers-center.com/articles/JewsAmerica.asp>. Many of them 
settled in New York's Lower East Side, and a vigorous theatrical culture 
emerged. Plays,often incorporating songs and dealing with problems of exile and 
assimilation 
<http://www.jewish-theatre.com/visitor/article_display.aspx?articleID=1865>, 
were hugely popular. And although integrationled to the decline of Yiddish 
theatre 
<http://www.jewish-theatre.com/visitor/article_display.aspx?articleID=1411> and 
a corresponding diaspora of second and third-generation talent, it is virtually 
impossible to think of modern American theatre without the influence of Jewish 
artists.

The list is long and impressive. Jewish dramatists include Clifford Odets 
<http://www.gradesaver.com/author/clifford-odets/>, Arthur Miller 
<http://www.spartacus.schoolnet.co.uk/USAmillerA.htm>, David Mamet 
<http://davidmamet.com/> and Neil Simon 
<https://www.msu.edu/~pelowsk1/neilsimon/>; composers range from George Gershwin
 <http://www.ilperetz.org/graduates/adam_benaroya.htm>, Irving Berlin 
<http://parlorsongs.com/bios/berlin/iberlin.php> and Leonard Bernstein 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=422-yb8TXj8> to Jerry Bock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2010/nov/04/jerry-bock-obituary> and Stephen 
Sondheim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/dec/20/stephen-sondheim-life-music-profile>
. The critic-director Harold Clurman, who co-founded theGroup Theatre, 
<http://www.pbs.org/wnet/americanmasters/episodes/group-theatre/about-the-group-theatre/622/>
 the acting guruLee Strasberg 
<http://www.jbactors.com/actingreading/actingteacherbiographies/leestrasberg.html>
 and the designerBoris Aaronson 
<http://www.jewpi.com/boris-aaronson-from-nezhin-on-broadway/> â€“ all helped 
shape modern American theatre. And todayTony Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/aug/15/tony-kushner-honorary-degree-interview>
 stands as a supreme example of a writer who, in plays ranging from Angels in 
America to The Intelligent Homosexual's Guide to Capitalism and Socialism with 
a Key to the Scriptures, has managed to fuse sex, politics and religion in a 
way that might be described as definably Jewish.

But what of Britain? In one way, there was a similar pattern to America in 
that immigrants created a Yiddish theatre, opposed by the rabbis and often 
radical in content,in London's East End 
<http://www.jewish-theatre.com/visitor/article_display.aspx?articleID=370>. 
That tradition declined around 1914. But even if Jewish talent has never 
dominated British theatre in quite the same way as in America, what you find 
post-1945 is the emergence of a new generation of writers, including Arnold 
Wesker, Harold Pinter, Steven Berkoff and Bernard Kops who are the products of 
a working-class, East End, Jewish world.

As a non-Jew, I am wary of offering generalisations, but I see a distinction 
between Jewish dramatists and dramatists who are Jewish. I would place Arnold 
Wesker in the first category in that many of his plays derive their vitality 
from their cultural specificity. Wesker's early piece,Chicken Soup With Barley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/jun/08/chicken-soup-with-barley-review> 
(1956), brilliantly links the disintegration of a Jewish family with the 
disillusion with the idea of a socialist utopia. In 1977'sThe Merchant 
<http://www.jstor.org/pss/3194871> he offers a defiant response to what he 
regards asanti-semitism inherent in Shakespeare's The Merchant of Venice 
<http://www.arnoldwesker.com/openletters/nunn.htm>. And, in a recent work like 
Badenheim 1939 <http://www.barbican.org.uk/theatre/event-detail.asp?ID=11264>, 
based on a novel by Aharom Appelfeld, he charts the insulation of middle-class 
bohemian Jews from the catastrophe that was then ensuing under the Nazis.

Harold Pinter is a rather different case. As a Jew, he was vehemently opposed 
to any form of antisemitism: he once threw a glass of whisky in the face of a 
drunken Irish actor whocalled him "a filthy Yid" 
<http://www.tes.co.uk/teaching-resource/Mystery-plays-99398/>. But, although 
Pinter's work was informed by his experience of growing up in a post-war London 
where fascism still posed a threat,he always resisted any attempt to interpret 
his plays in specifically Jewish terms 
<http://www.jewish-theatre.com/visitor/article_display.aspx?articleID=1608>. 
The Homecoming was a case in point. Althoughoften seen as a portrayal of a 
north London Jewish family 
<http://www.haroldpinter.org/films/films_homecoming.shtml>, and the problems 
that arise from "marrying out", Pinter adamantly maintained that his play had a 
much wider social resonance.

The question of what makes a play Jewish is one I don't feel competent to 
answer. But what is clear, even if one confines oneself to Britain and America, 
is modern theatre's heavy dependence on Jewish writers. And, since those 
dramatists are the descendants of immigrant families, it is fascinating to 
speculate on how much an inherited sense of exile, loss and isolation offers a 
key to their work. Is there, in fact, such a thing as a Jewish theatrical 
identity? Or are there simply a lot of talented writers who are Jews?
 