
Jack Huston, the British actor known for roles in American Hustle and 
Boardwalk Empire,has been cast 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/jack-huston-star-ben-hur-733602> as the 
lead of the upcoming Ben-Hur remake.

The film will take on the epic tale of Judah Ben-Hur, originally told by 
novelist Lew Wallace in 1880. Set in 1st century Jerusalem, Ben-Hur is 
wrongfully separated from his family by a vengeful Roman tribune and imprisoned 
as a galley slave, before slowly fighting his way back to freedom. It was made 
into a silent film in 1925, and then one of the definitive Hollywood epics in 
1959, starringCharlton Heston <https://www.theguardian.com/film/charltonheston> 
alongside 10,000 extras and 2,500 horses â€“ it became a huge box office success 
and won 11 Oscars.

Huston joins the previously announced 
<http://deadline.com/2014/09/morgan-freeman-set-for-ben-hur-redo-833262/> 
Morgan Freeman, who will play Ildarin, a chariot race trainer. Timur 
Bekmambetov, the Russian film-maker behindWanted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/124869/wanted> and Abraham Lincoln: 
Vampire Hunter <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/147852/abraham-lincoln>, 
will direct it; John Ridley, who won an Oscar for his 12 Years a Slave script, 
has had input into the screenplay.

It is the first major leading film role for Huston, who is currently filming 
Pride and Prejudice and Zombies, a movie version of the parody-fiction hit. 
Hollywood press site Deadline reported last month that Tom Hiddleston was being 
considered for Ben-Hur, but the actor has insteadbeen announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/sep/16/tom-hiddleston-king-kong-origins-film-skull-island>
 as appearing in King Kong film Skull Island.
 