
So you’re a film director and your latest work wins the Palme d’Or in Cannes – 
what do you do with your trophy? Place it, in all its leafy glory, in prime 
position on your living room mantelpiece? Hide it in a bank vault? Let it grace 
your producer’s office? In a spirit of idle inquiry, I askFrench director 
Jacques Audiard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/24/cannes-2015-jacques-audiards-dheepan-surprise-winner-of-palme-dor>
. He half turns and casually waves his hand at the cafe behind him. “My awards 
are all over there in the drinks cabinet.”

Cannes 2015: Jacques Audiard's Dheepan surprise winner of Palme d'Or
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/24/cannes-2015-jacques-audiards-dheepan-surprise-winner-of-palme-dor>
It’s only once our interview is over that I realise he’s serious. We’re 
sitting in the upstairs bar at a cinema off the Boulevard Saint-Michel in 
Paris, owned byWhy Not Productions <http://www.imdb.com/company/co0049689/>, 
the company that Audiard has worked with for several years. And there indeed, 
in pride of place, is the 2015 Palme d’Or for his latest film,Dheepan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/21/dheepan-review-tamil-tiger-jacques-audiard-cannes-2015>
. It’s one of several awards – there are Baftas, too, and some of France’s 
much-prizedCésars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/27/cesar-film-award-nominations-announced>
 – gleaming in a sort of coffee table made of what I’m told is strongly 
reinforced glass. Audiard’s recent awards are all there for public scrutiny, 
although another French director from the same stable apparently insists on 
keeping all his at home. Audiard used to do so, he says, until burglars stole 
four of his Césars.

If you’re aware of the work of any contemporary French director, it’s probably 
Jacques Audiard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/dec/06/jacques-audiard-interview-a-prophet>
 – even if you don’t know the name. At the very least, you may have noticed his 
look. A dab hand at projecting an image, Audiard, 63, has established himself 
in people’s minds as the director who most resembles a 1950s detective; he’s 
usually seen with a fedora on his close-shaven head, sometimes sucking on a 
pipe, making him resemble a hipster Maigret. Why the hat, I ask him: is it his 
tribute to US film noir, or to the dapper numbers worn byAlain Delon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/aug/19/alain-delon-david-thomson> and 
his ilk in the classic French thrillers of the 50s and 60s? “No,” says Audiard, 
whose manner is soft-spoken, considered, and often with a faint edge of wry 
mockery. “It’s because I’m bald. What do you call that style – le pork pie? I 
just like hats. Maybe it’s an affectation – but it’s better to be elegant than 
not.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQpXHi7TGYpg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQpXHi7TGYpg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DQpXHi7TGYpg&media=>
 Watch the trailer for Dheepan. 
Today, however, Audiard has arrived wearing a woolly cap carrying the Why Not? 
logo – a touch more street than usual, in keeping withDheepan’s gritty gang-war 
theme. But the rest of his outfit is altogether nattilyLeft Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/13/from-left-bank-to-left-behind-where-have-the-great-french-thinkers-gone>
 – two snug layers of North Face winterwear, and a Hermès-style cravat, knotted 
(and here’s the crowning effect, what you might call le French touch) on top of 
a tie.

Among current French auteurs, Audiard has been the most successful at making 
films that keep their hard-edgedarthouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/series/the-drama-and-art-film-25> credentials 
while connecting with a wide, more mainstream international audience. It’s 
partly because his work has much in common with American crime cinema: his 
films aren’t always thrillers as such, but they invariably carry an underworld 
or lowlife bass note, and are intense, moody essays on transgression and living 
dangerously.Read My Lips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/91334/read.my.lips> (2001) was about a 
deaf female office worker who takes up with a career criminal;The Beat That My 
Heart Skipped <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/nov/04/1> (2005) was a 
quasi-remake of James Toback’s 1978 thrillerFingers; and, most famously, A 
Prophet(2009) <https://www.theguardian.com/film/a-prophet-un-proph-te> was a 
prison drama that charted the rise of a Scarface-style criminal who happened to 
be Arab. It made a star out of its then unknown lead,Tahar Rahim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/mar/09/tahar-rahim-always-refused-play-terrorists>
, and contributed substantially to making French cinema a less white 
middle-class concern.

A kinetic, dramatically and visually gritty (not to say grubby) drama of 
death, violence and survival,A Prophet easily could, and arguably should, have 
won the Palme d’Or when it competed in Cannes in 2009. As it is, Audiard’s 
first Palme is the powerful, brilliantly achieved, if flawedDheepan. It’s about 
a family of Tamil immigrants newly arrived in Paris – except that they’re not 
really a family, but refugees clinging together for survival. Yalini is a woman 
who ensures her passage out of war-torn Sri Lanka in 2009 by finding a young 
girl to pose as her daughter, while the man who plays her husband – under the 
assumed name Dheepan – is aTamil Tiger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2002/sep/19/srilanka> combatant fleeing 
after the defeat of his movement. The film shows the three trying to subsist as 
a family in France, where they find themselves living on a tough gang-run 
housing estate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fjacques-audiard-interview-dheepan-prophet-rust-done-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80473f8040f5640e6fb4e6a184328ea1fe2bf248%2F0_194_4368_2714%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jacques%20Audiard%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20to%20give%20migrants%20a%20name%2C%20a%20shape%E2%80%A6%20a%20violence%20of%20their%20own%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fjacques-audiard-interview-dheepan-prophet-rust-done-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jacques%20Audiard%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20to%20give%20migrants%20a%20name%2C%20a%20shape%E2%80%A6%20a%20violence%20of%20their%20own%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fjacques-audiard-interview-dheepan-prophet-rust-done-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80473f8040f5640e6fb4e6a184328ea1fe2bf248%2F0_194_4368_2714%2F4368.jpg>
 Tahar Rahim in Jacques Audiard’s 2009 film A Prophet. Photograph: Sony 
Pics/Everett/Rex Features 
Why did Audiard want to make a film about Tamils – what’s more, a French film 
largely in the Tamil language? He didn’t, he says. When he first started 
planningDheepan, immediately after finishing A Prophet, he knew nothing about 
Tamils. The idea was to attempt a remake ofSam Peckinpah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jan/09/sam-peckinpah-retrospective>’s 
Straw Dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/oct/31/shock-1971-straw-dogs-controversial>
. “I had this idea of immigrants arriving on an estate, being taken hostage and 
so on. Then I watched the Peckinpah again, and… well, I couldn’t quite see why 
I’d had the idea in the first place. But I had this idea of people coming to 
France who had no connection with the old colonial empire, so had no reference 
points in terms of language or culture.”

Then Noé Debré, one of Dheepan’s co-writers, announced that he had met some 
Tamils and brought Audiard up to scratch on the Sri Lankan civil war, which he 
says received little coverage in the French media. That got Audiard researching 
his theme. “There is a Tamil community in Paris, but not a very big one, and 
it’s still experiencing all the tensions of the conflict. They’re a little 
paranoid. It’s hard to really get to know them.”

Nevertheless he did get to know some Tamils, notably the non-actor he chose to 
playDheepan <https://www.theguardian.com/film/dheepan>. Antonythasan Jesuthasan 
is himself a former Tiger, who had been forcibly recruited as a soldier in his 
early teens, but later denounced the organisation; he’s now best known as a 
novelist under the name of Shobasakthi. Because of his past, he wasn’t entirely 
trusted in the Parisian Tamil community: “When people found out I’d been in 
touch with him,” Audiard says, “they told me, ‘If you’re working with Shoba, 
we’re out.’ It’s still a very conflict-ridden situation.” Jesuthasan came to 
Paris 20 years ago, but still doesn’t speak much French, Audiard says. “That 
would be like collaborating. He has to stay true to his culture.” Jesuthasan’s 
own history seems remarkably close to Dheepan’s, but Audiard didn’t know that 
when he cast him: “He’s very reserved. We were already rehearsing, just about 
to shoot, and he said, ‘I know about all this – it’s my life.’ I have to say I 
was a little surprised.”

Meanwhile, Kalieaswari Srinivasan, who plays Dheepan’s “wife” Yalini, is an 
experienced stage actor from Chennai, while nine-year-old Claudine 
Vinasithamby, who plays their adopted daughter, was born inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>. “Kali speaks southern Indian Tamil, 
Shoba speaks the Tamil of Sri Lanka, and they’re completely different. And 
Claudine learned Tamil at school and from her parents – her Tamil is very 
academic,” Audiard says, although he admits he doesn’t understand the language. 
Would Tamil speakers notice differences between the way the three of them 
speak? No idea, says Audiard – although there was a large Tamil presence when 
the film screened at the Toronto film festival, and people were cracking up 
over certain lines. He’s still not sure why.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fjacques-audiard-interview-dheepan-prophet-rust-done-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff310e5c125e384722ce09c5b66af5240756a4765%2F0_126_2300_1380%2F2300.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jacques%20Audiard%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20to%20give%20migrants%20a%20name%2C%20a%20shape%E2%80%A6%20a%20violence%20of%20their%20own%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fjacques-audiard-interview-dheepan-prophet-rust-done-director%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jacques%20Audiard%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20wanted%20to%20give%20migrants%20a%20name%2C%20a%20shape%E2%80%A6%20a%20violence%20of%20their%20own%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fapr%2F03%2Fjacques-audiard-interview-dheepan-prophet-rust-done-director%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff310e5c125e384722ce09c5b66af5240756a4765%2F0_126_2300_1380%2F2300.jpg>
 ‘A moving depiction of strangers living as a family’: a still from Dheepan, 
which won the 2015 Cannes Palme d’Or. Photograph: Alamy 
For all the harshness of the political realities that inform it, Dheepan is 
very moving as a depiction of three strangers trying to live together as a 
family. Emotionally, the centre of the film is really the mother, Yalini – not 
least because of Srinivasan’s nuanced and magnetic performance. But Dheepan is 
not without awkward flaws. There remains a lingering suspicion that Audiard 
hasn’t entirely escaped the temptation of exoticism – largely because of a 
recurring sequence that seems to represent Dheepan’s visions of the old 
country, represented by lush foliage and an elephant looming in slow motion.

“I just wanted elephants in my film,” Audiard admits, “and an image of nature 
moving. I don’t know what Tamils dream of. But what interested me was this – we 
see migrants as people who have no faces and no names, no identity, no 
unconscious, no dreams. And what happens to all the violence they’ve been 
through?I wanted to give them a name, a face, a shape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/24/jacques-audiard-dheepan-cannes-europe-migrant-workers>
 – and give them a violence of their own. It’s a naive film, really.”

Was the movie undertaken as a political statement, then? In one way it was, 
Audiard says – in its general rejection of the French language. “What makes it 
a French film? Only the name of the director, and the place where it’s shot. 
Persuading financiers to put €7m into a film about Tamils speaking Tamil – that 
was the political project, as far as I’m concerned.”

It has been high on Audiard’s agenda for some time, this attempt to open up 
some space for diversity in a national cinema that has long tended to privilege 
the same old petit-bourgeois dramas. What he’s interested in, he says, is 
“going somewhere where we don’t really know the people – because they’re not 
represented. For me, genre cinema is about representation on a noble, large, 
wide scale – it’s not about making socioeconomic films, or documentaries, or 
imparting information. It’s about creating a big, heroic image, in CinemaScope 
and full colour.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fmay%2F27%2Fa-prophet-jacques-audiard&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cast%20and%20crew%20of%20Cannes%20hit%20Un%20Proph%C3%A8te%3A%20'Audiard%20is%20like%20a%20sculptor'&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fmay%2F27%2Fa-prophet-jacques-audiard>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cast%20and%20crew%20of%20Cannes%20hit%20Un%20Proph%C3%A8te%3A%20%27Audiard%20is%20like%20a%20sculptor%27&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2009%2Fmay%2F27%2Fa-prophet-jacques-audiard&media=>
 Watch cast and crew of A Prophet speak about the film. 
Limited representation of his country’s real diversity is what makes Audiard 
most uneasy about French cinema, he says. In the past, he has stated that he 
sometimes feels stifled in French cinema and among French actors. “I feel like 
a bad team player for saying that. But I like to think that the whole point of 
cinema is to show you the world as it is. And we’re only getting a faint 
impression of that. When I open my front door and step out into the street, I’m 
not seeing French cinema walk by. It’s all about representing different faces, 
languages, idioms, pronunciations – the lot.”

Despite his wariness about fitting into the picture of French cinema, 
Audiard’s films have long been steeped in his nation’s cinematic tradition. His 
first feature as director was downbeat crime dramaSee How They Fall (1994), 
about two killers inhabiting a universe of seedy boarding houses – with echoes 
of the nocturnal dramas ofMarcel Carné 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/1999/nov/11/derekmalcolmscenturyoffilm> or 
the thrillers ofJean-Pierre Melville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/jul/13/artsfeatures1>. His follow-up, 
A Self-Made Hero(1996) was a caustic dismantling of the myths of resistance 
heroism.

Audiard is a pure product of the French cinema world. Formerly married to 
another director,Marion Vernoux 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/apr/20/french-film-new-wave-women-bridge-gender-gap>
, with whom he has three children, he is the son of Michel Audiard, who 
directed a handful of films, but was mainly known – and in France, hugely 
celebrated – as a screenwriter, with more than 120 credits to his name. When I 
first interviewed Jacques five years ago, he told me he thought his father was 
a terrible director, but a genius at scripts. Jacques himself was suspicious 
about cinema in his youth, and studied literature and philosophy, only to 
experience a Damascene conversion when he signed up for a film-editing course; 
he ended up working as assistant editor on Roman Polanski’s Parisian dramaThe 
Tenantin 1976. He went on to become a screenwriter himself, and collaborated 
with his father on the script for a strange and deservedly cult-celebrated film,
Claude Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2012/apr/05/claude-miller>’s 
Deadly Circuit(1983), with Isabelle Adjani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2000/nov/08/artsfeatures> as a 
shape-shifting murderer.

Audiard says he started directing at a time when French cinema was very “post- 
, or post-post-New Wave. Everyone was against the idea of scripts, but I wanted 
to go with the script – in other words, make genre cinema.” His father was 
famous for his dialogue; in his time, people used to quote chunks of Michel 
Audiard as they do with Tarantino today. For Audiard Jr, conversely, scripts 
are there to generate pictures. When he starts work on one, he says, “I have to 
write, and then rewrite, until the images come. And eventually, they do. 
Dialogue’s not that important to me.”

Like many French film-makers, Audiard displays a dandyish brio when it comes 
to discussing other people’s work. When I ask him how he feels aboutCGI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/feb/25/dont-knock-cgi-its-everywhere-you-just-dont-notice-it>
, he launches into a complex analysis ofThe Revenant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/17/revenant-leonardo-dicaprio-violent-meaningless-glorification-pain>
, a film he likes but is sceptical about. “People say it’s a film about 
survival – but which survivor are we talking about? The man who faces nature 
and lives? No, the survivor is cinema, let’s be clear about that.” The real 
theme ofThe Revenant, he insists, “is the question, under what conditions can 
film survive? Why are you laughing?” He breaks off, fixing me with a forbidding 
gaze. (I’m not, I’m just enjoying the very French way his argument is 
developing.) “A film with a technological structure like that can’t possibly 
have a script. Can you imagine psychology in a film like that? Impossible! You 
can’t create a fake bear and have psychology.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Foct%2F31%2Frust-and-bone-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Marion%20Cotillard%20on%20Rust%20and%20Bone%3A%20'She%20doesn't%20know%20why%20she%20lives%2C%20why%20she%20breathes'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Foct%2F31%2Frust-and-bone-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Marion%20Cotillard%20on%20Rust%20and%20Bone%3A%20%27She%20doesn%27t%20know%20why%20she%20lives%2C%20why%20she%20breathes%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Foct%2F31%2Frust-and-bone-video-interview&media=>
 Watch Marion Cotillard and Matthias Schoenaerts speak about their roles in 
Audiard’s Rust and Bone. 
The reason I veered on to the topic of CGI is because Audiard is particularly 
attached to a now largely lost idea of cinema directly showing us the real: the 
example he gave me, when we last discussed it, was the sight of Katharine 
Hepburn manifestly shedding actual tears inThe African Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/pictures/image/0,8545,-10604701993,00.html>. 
Yet Audiard himself is responsible for one of the most affecting, and audacious 
uses of defiantly non-spectacular CGI in cinema: the digital amputation of
Marion Cotillard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/29/marion-cotillard-feminism-film-industry>
’s legs in his 2012 filmRust and Bone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2012/oct/31/rust-and-bone-video-interview>
.

“It’s a purely erotic image. When the legs disappear, you’re looking at sex. 
That’s all the film is about.” The problem, he says, is that sex on screen 
never looks entirely believable. “So what detour do I have to take if I want to 
show just sex? I take a famous actress, cut her legs off, and suddenly in the 
love scenes, something completely new happens – it becomes 100% about sex. When
Matthias [Schoenaerts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/nov/10/matthias-schoenaerts-the-drop>, 
Cotillard’s co-star] lifts her out of the sea, he’s not carrying a disabled 
young woman, he’s carrying her sexuality. Am I right?”

One filmic reality that Audiard feels most nostalgic for is that of the 
western in its prime, when horses were horses, landscapes were landscapes and – 
according to him – “cinema dealt in pure truth”. He will have his own crack at 
the genre when he starts on his next film, an adaptation ofPatrick DeWitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/patrick-dewitt>’s The Sisters Brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/25/jacques-audiard-to-adapt-the-sister-brothers-for-english-language-debut>
, about two assassins riding on a mission to San Francisco. What is he planning 
to do with the western form?

Jacques Audiard to adapt The Sisters Brothers for English-language debut
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/aug/25/jacques-audiard-to-adapt-the-sister-brothers-for-english-language-debut>
“It’s nice of you to ask,” Audiard says, “but I have no idea yet. Have you 
read the novel?” I have, I tell him, and I was very surprised to see his name 
attached to it, because it reads so much like a Coen brothers movie in prose – 
detached and more than a little wiseacre – rather than anything you might 
associate with Audiard’s intense, unironic cinema. “Yes, it’s strange,” he 
says. “But then, the Coens [as jury presidents] did give me my Palme in Cannes. 
Actually, I saw theirTrue Grit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/10/true-grit-review> yesterday, and 
I don’t like it much – the last great western wasNo Country for Old Men, beyond 
a doubt.The Sisters Brothers will be more like a fairytale.” Other than that, 
all he knows is that the project will involve actor John C Reilly, who gave him 
the book in the first place.

Audiard doesn’t have a reputation as a shrinking violet, possibly because of 
the sharp image he projects. You’d certainly imagine that a director with seven 
feature films to his name and a coffee table full of awards wouldn’t be overly 
troubled by self-doubt – or would at least have a clear idea of what it is that 
has made him acclaimed in the first place. But when I ask Audiard whether he 
thinks he’s had any influence on other French directors, he hums and hahs.

“To know whether you’ve had any influence, first you’d have to have a certain 
idea of what your style is, and I don’t. If anyone says they admire my style, I 
always ask them to explain what they mean.” Film-making, he says, remains a 
rather stressful business for him. “I’m always really anxious when I start a 
film. I never feel I can rely on my professionalism; I worry a film’s going to 
be a bit vulgar, a bit banal.”

As for taking films to Cannes, where he has long been able to depend on a 
hero’s welcome, “It’s always tough. You’re happy to go, but you worry that 
they’re going to put you through the mincer.”

And as for movie-going, Audiard used to be an omnivore, and still pretty much 
is, he says – but it sounds as if a certain melancholia or fatigue has crept 
in. “I watch as much as ever, maybe more, but it’s not the same, because now I 
watch on DVD and I don’t like that. For me, images always have to be full 
screen.”

I feel much the same way, I tell him – and as I’m about to leave, after we’ve 
admired the coffee-table display of glittering prizes, I ask if there are any 
films showing in Paris that he recommends. He doesn’t hesitate. “Don’t go to 
the cinema,” he says. “There’s a fascinating exhibition on at the Grand Palais.”

Dheepan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/21/dheepan-review-tamil-tiger-jacques-audiard-cannes-2015>
 is released on 8 April
 