
An appeal hearing against a two-year prison sentence imposed on novelist Ahmed 
Naji for publishing a “sexually explicit” article in an Egyptian newspaper has 
been delayed.

The writer was jailed in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/20/egypt-author-ahmed-naji-book-sex-drugs>
 for “violating public modesty”. He was convicted after the state-owned Akhbar 
al-Adab published extracts from his 2014 novel The Use of Life. The prosecution 
followed a reader’s complaint that the extract had caused him to “experience 
heart palpitations and an extreme feeling of sickness along with a sharp drop 
in blood pressure”. The newspaper editor was fined the equivalent of £430 for 
running the extract.

This is the third attempt to have Naji’s sentence overturned. Though he was 
initially acquitted of all charges in January, the prosecutor appealed and Naji 
was found guilty.

Egyptian writer Ahmed Naji’s crime isn't what he wrote – it is that he is alive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/may/12/pleas-release-egyptian-writer-ahmed-naji>
Writers have been in the frontline of President Abdel Fatah al-Sisi’s 
crackdown on press freedom and public demonstrations over the past year. Though 
the country’s 2014 constitution expressly prohibits the jailing of writers and 
artists for publishing their work, it has not stopped their arrests or raids on 
publishers, theatres and galleries.

Naji’s case has been the subject of global protests. Human rights group 
International PEN said his imprisonment violated the right to freedom of 
expression, as provided for under theInternational Covenant on Civil and 
Political Rights <http://www.ohchr.org/en/professionalinterest/pages/ccpr.aspx>
, to which Egypt is party, and under Egypt’s constitution. The latter 
guarantees freedom of thought and opinion, as well as freedom of artistic and 
literary creation.

In May, more than 120 prominent international writers and artists, including 
Philip Roth, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, Patti Smith, Woody Allen and Stephen 
Sondheim,called on Sisi to release Naji 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/09/world/middleeast/egypt-pen-america-ahmed-naji-sisi.html?rref=collection%2Ftimestopic%2FEgypt&action=click&contentCollection=world&region=stream&module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=2&pgtype=collection&_r=0>
 in a letter sent by free speech organisation PEN America. That same month, the 
same organisation honoured Naji with the PEN/Barbery Freedom to Write award. 
Presenting the award, Suzanne Nossel, executive director of PEN America, said: 
“The name Ahmed Naji has become a rallying cry for writers around the world to 
stand with free-thinking Egyptians who are unwilling to surrender their rights 
without a fight.”

The appeal will be heard in Cairo on 18 December.
 