
James Hunt is thinking about Jon Hamm. In the bath 
<http://skyarts.sky.com/playhouse-presents/a-young-doctors-notebook-preview-image-gallery>
. With Daniel Radcliffe. The Sky Arts channel director's interest is entirely 
professional, looking ahead to his adaptation of Mikhail Bulgakov's A Young 
Doctor's Notebook, in which the two men will star.

"For Sky Arts <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-arts> to attract Don 
Draper and Harry Potter in the same production, in the same bath even, it's a 
dream come true," says Hunt. "It shows not only the ambition of the channel, 
but the ambition Sky has in trying to attract the world's top talent."

Radcliffe and Hamm play the same doctor at different stages of his life in the 
four-part series, which begins on 6 December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2012/oct/13/jon-hamm-daniel-radcliffe-russian-drama>
. The drama has been described by the Mad Men star as mixing "madness and the 
macabre", and it stands every chance of delivering Sky Arts' biggest-ever 
audience.

They are the latest stars to appear in Sky Arts' Playhouse Presents strand, 
after Emma Thompson, David Tennant, Alison Steadman,Harry Shearer (as President 
Richard Nixon) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/apr/17/harry-shearer-sky-nixon?INTCMP=SRCH>
 and, in his first acting role, Sir Tom Jones.

Next year's series will feature Doctor Who star Matt Smith, Luther's Idris 
Elba and Marc Warren (Mad Dogs, Hustle) taking turns in the director's chair. 
So what is it about Sky Arts – which has a fraction of the audience of, say,BBC4
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc4>, let alone BBC1 or Channel 4 – that 
has the stars calling?

"It is one of the great liberating things of not living under the tyranny of 
the [ratings] overnights," says Hunt. "We are able to take risks, alongside 
giving people artistic freedom and helping them fulfil their ambition."

Like its sister channels Sky1, Sky Atlantic and Sky Living, Sky Arts is about 
driving subscriber numbers for its parent company BSkyB's pay-TV business, not 
wooing advertisers with big audience figures (although clearly if no one is 
watching, it's not going to shift dishes either).

The night before we met last week, only two Sky Arts programmes had more than 
10,000 viewers – a Royal Ballet performance of La Bayadère, watched by 11,000, 
and a Kurt Cobain documentary, All Apologies, seen by 30,000. Mariella's Book 
Show, presented by Mariella Frostrup, had the dreaded zero rating at 6pm on Sky 
Arts 2.

The two channels' ratings tend to be well below BBC4's, where a breakout hit 
will be watched by a million viewers (the third series of The Killingbegan with 
1.04 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/19/the-killing-bbc4-tv-ratings> two 
Saturdays ago).

The bar for Sky Arts is set rather lower, given that it is in just over 10m 
pay-TV homes, compared to BBC4's more than 25m. For example, The Minor 
Character, starringDavid Tennant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/david-tennant> and written by Will Self, 
had 99,000 viewers for its first showing in April. Relatively small, then, but 
1.,333% up on the slot average over the previous three months.

Hunt says his shows rate rather higher when playback on Sky+ is included and 
when the audience is aggregated over multiple broadcasts. "If 30,000 people 
watch the New York Metropolitan Opera, we are happy about that, that's a core 
audience for us," he says. "It means we are serving audiences that are not 
served elsewhere."

He also says viewing figures are up, from a monthly reach of 800,000 in 2008 
to 6.8 million today, boosted by an increase in homegrown content (to 250 hours 
a year), a move up the Sky electronic programme guide and the launch of the 
second channel. "I'm not saying there isn't an awful lot to do," Hunt adds.

Overnight audiences may be small, but if an ability to irritate your 
publicly-funded rival is an indicator of success, then Hunt may be due a bonus.

The BBC's former director general George Entwistle used one of his few 
interviews 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2012-09-24/george-entwistle-on-improving-the-bbc-paying-for-big-name-talent-and-his-love-for-mad-men>
 in his 54 days in charge to dismiss Sky Arts as an also-ran. "I don't have a 
passion for creating tiny niche stuff that only incredibly small numbers of 
people see. If you're going to do arts, aspire to half a million people 
watching, not 5,000!"

"It was quite a snide remark," is Hunt's response. "You'd think he would have 
had bigger things to think about."

The BBC4 controller, Richard Klein, told a Broadcasting Press Guild lunch last 
week: "BBC4 is an editorialised proposition, Sky Arts shows lots of programmes. 
That is a different thing. We give intelligent context and insight into stuff, 
we don't just play stuff out, and that makes us different."

"BBC4 spends most of its money on programming and not much on marketing," 
added Klein. "I would challenge you [if you said] that Sky doesn't do the 
reverse of that."

Hunt says it "couldn't be further from the truth". "What money we do have 
tends to go on creating content," he says, labelling Klein "twitchy" and "quite 
sniffy". So what does he think of BBC4? "I'm a huge admirer of a lot of what 
they do, but there's a lot to play for."

Hunt does admit to commissioning shows which he thinks will generate a large 
amount of press, and proudly points to an acclaimed,all-star Chekhov season 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/nov/07/chekhov-shorts-tv-comedians> 
from Steve Coogan's company Baby Cow two years ago which cost £90,000 to make 
and generated press coverage worth about £2m. A Young Doctor's Notebook is 
likely to offer a similar return.

In contrast to BBC4, which has just had its budget cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/aug/25/bbc4-budget-cut-richard-klein>, 
Hunt says his spend has been trebled this year. He declines to say how much it 
is. BBC4's total annual spend is around £50m. "It's not up there at all," says 
Hunt. "BBC4 is very well funded in my view."

Sky Arts has splashed the cash – it's all relative – on Melvyn Bragg's South 
Bank Show after it was axed by ITV, and on another former ITV face, Michael 
Parkinson. Along with numerous festivals – from the Isle of Wight to Hay-on-Wye 
– it has also tapped into the vogue for subtitled dramas with Grand Hotel, 
dubbed the "Spanish Downton Abbey".

Hunt's CV suggests an unlikely Sky Arts controller. After starting out as a 
journalist on the Leicester Mercury, he moved to Central TV, before joining 
ITV's This Morning, which he edited. He then went on to help devise another ITV 
daytime show, Loose Women. But the switch to Sky Arts in 2010 was a return to 
his roots, as he studied fine art at Leicester Polytechnic under avant-garde 
composer Gavin Bryars.

It is 12 years since Sky Arts began life as Artsworld. The digital channel, 
initially backed by former Channel 4 chief executive Sir Jeremy Isaacs (and the 
Guardian's parent company, Guardian Media Group), struggled and nearly went 
under until Sky bought a 50% stake in 2003.

Sky took full control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/jun/20/broadcasting.uknews> two years 
later andrelaunched it as Sky Arts in 2007 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/feb/05/bskyb.broadcasting>, adding its 
second channel in 2008. Sky Arts 1 is home to "dad rock" – Queen and Johnny 
Cash fans are never far away from their next fix – while Sky Arts 2 tends to 
veer towards higher pleasures.

Critics labelled it a cultural "fig leaf" for BSkyB, which makes most of its 
money with football and films. Not so, says Hunt, pointing to the broadcaster's 
Sky Arts Ignition series, which will distribute £1.2m among six arts 
organisations, and its £150,000 Futures Fund initiative for young artists.

Hunt insists Sky Arts is a "fundamental part" of BSkyB chief executive Jeremy 
Darroch's pledge to spend £600m on homegrown content by 2014/15. "I'm not 
saying it's a big heavy lifter in terms of audiences in the way Sky1 or Sky 
Living might be, but it is right there in offering something you can't get on 
Freeview. That's the key point of all the Sky channels. You can't get this 
stuff anywhere else."

Curriculum Vitae


Age 55

Education Oakham school, Rutland; School of Fine Art, Leicester Polytechnic

Career 1980 Associated Newspapers graduate trainee, Leicester Mercury 1985 
East Midlands News Service 1987 Central TV 1989 producer, This Morning 1992 
editor, This Morning 1994 head of features, Granada TV; director of programmes, 
Granada Sky Broadcasting2001 controller of daytime and lifestyle, ITV 
Productions 2004 executive producer, Liberty Bell 2010 head of programmes, Sky 
Arts2011 channel director, Sky Arts
 