
James Taylor may have been "gutted" to miss out on England's Ashes tour party, 
apparently overtaken by Gary Ballance in the middle-order rankings late last 
summer, but he still managed to be in Perth when the urn changed hands last 
month. He paid his own way to do some independent work on his batting and 
stumbled on the former Australia coach Mickey Arthur.

Now Nottinghamshire's "Titch" is one of the lads most likely to benefit from 
the winds of change gusting towards English cricket, confirming that the 15 
members of the Lions squad who leave for Sri Lanka next weekend will do so with 
greater hope that places in the senior team are now up for grabs.

In Taylor's case, it is the conjecture over Kevin Pietersen's future that must 
be especially intriguing. The 24-year-old was at the centre of the action in 
Pietersen's "not easy being me"Test against South Africa at Headingley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/04/kevin-pietersen-south-africa> in 
2012 when, having been handed an in-at-the-deep end debut, he contributed 34 
but mostly watched in awe in a fifth-wicket partnership of 147.

Then he moved up one place in the batting order when Pietersen was dropped for 
the last Test of the series at Lord's aftertexting disloyally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/15/kevin-pietersen-apologised-provocative-texts>
, and failed twice – including a second-innings run-out. He had to wait almost 
a year for his next taste of the England setup, as a potential replacement for 
Pietersen in the third Test of last summer's Ashes series at Old Trafford after 
scoring a century against the Australians on a loan appearance for Sussex at 
Hove.

Pietersen passed a series of strenuous fitness tests on the calf he had 
strained at Lord's, Taylor was sent back to his county, and then found himself 
cast aside again when the winter tour squads were announced, despitea 
successful season with Notts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/apr/26/james-taylor-century-nottinghamshire-derbyshire>
 in all forms of the game.

Now, though, he can hear opportunity knocking again, especially as Andy 
Flower, the England team director who made a point of telephoning him to 
explain his Ashes omission last autumn, will be travelling to Sri Lanka next 
month to take a look at the Lions with James Whitaker, the new national 
selector.

"It's a great opportunity for everybody, especially now there's talk of a few 
spots up for grabs," Taylor said in a break from the tour preparations at the 
National Performance Centre in Loughborough.

"I was slightly surprised [to be left out of the Ashes tour party] but more 
just gutted. But after I wasn't selected for the Ashes tour I had a long chat 
with Andy Flower, a half-hour phone call. He was really positive and gave me 
some feedback, then just recently when Ashley Giles came out with the EPP 
[England Performance Programme] in Perth I had a good chat with him, walking 
around the outfield and talking about the ODIs. It's all been pretty positive."

Taylor had not been invited to attend the EPP in either Perth or before that 
Brisbane, the management judging that he had spent enough time on official 
camps and might be better off doing some independent development. He responded 
to that challenge by heading for the Claremont-Nedlands club in Perth, where he 
met and struck up an instant rapport with Arthur – the South African who has 
stayed in Australia despite hisunceremonious dumping as their national coach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2013/jul/16/ashes-australia-mickey-arthur-michael-clarke>
 last summer.

"It came about in a funny way but it was great and very worthwhile," Taylor 
explained. "To be around a world-class coach, somebody who has worked with the 
best players, and have him comment on my game was very positive.

"It was one to one, once or twice a week and he came to watch every game I 
played in. He saw how I practised and on a match day. I've had a great winter 
so far and I'm definitely inspired to get back into that England team. My 
game's in a great spot as well, I scored the runs last season in all formats 
and hopefully this is a great opportunity for us to stake a claim for next 
summer."

The Lions will play two three-day games followed by three four-day "Tests" 
against Sri Lanka A and will be captained by the Warwickshire all-rounder Chris 
Woakes, who made his Test debut against Australia at The Oval last August. The 
squad includes two members of England's last Test team in Sydney – Scott 
Borthwick and Jonny Bairstow, who is expected to share wicketkeeping duties 
with Ben Foakes of Essex but is also a potential rival to Taylor for 
Pietersen's middle-order place.

Other batting contenders are the Warwickshire opener Varun Chopra and Sam 
Robson, the Australian who has declared his allegiance to England after several 
successful seasons with Middlesex, plus Worcestershire's Moeen Ali who has the 
additional attraction of being able to bowl handy off-spin.

Tymal Mills, the Yorkshire-born Essex left-armer who troubled the established 
England batsmen with his pace in the nets in Australia, is one of five 
specialist seamers with Woakes, James Harris, Mark Wood and Chris Jordan, who 
is currently in Australia with the one-day squad.

Lancashire's Simon Kerrigan remains hopeful of proving his recovery from a 
back injury to travel with Borthwick as the two specialist spinners but Ollie 
Rayner, who had an excellent season with Middlesex, has been put on standby.

Lions squad for Sri Lanka

Chris Woakes (Warwicks, captain), Moeen Ali (Worcs), Jonny Bairstow (Yorks), 
Scott Borthwick (Durham), Varun Chopra (Warwicks), Ben Foakes (Essex), James 
Harris (Middx), Chris Jordan (Sussex), Simon Kerrigan (Lancs – subject to 
fitness test; Ollie Rayner of Middx on standby), Alex Lees (Yorks), Tymal Mills 
(Essex), Sam Robson (Middx), James Taylor (Notts), James Vince (Hants), Mark 
Wood (Durham)
 