
The woman at the centre of the sexism row involving former Sky Sports pundits 
Richard Keys <https://www.theguardian.com/football/richard-keys> and Andy Gray 
has launched a legal action against parent company BSkyB.

Louise Glass, the former partner of Sky Sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports> pundit Jamie Redknapp, filed 
legal papers at the high court in London on Thursday, 17 months after Keys and 
Gray lost their jobs over the controversial comments.

Glass said in January last year 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/richard-keys-spoke-about-me-like-an-old-107555>
 she planned to sue the broadcaster for breach of privacy and defamation.

Keys resigned and his co-host Andy Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/andy-gray> was sacked by Sky in January 
2011 after leaked footage appeared on YouTube of them making sexist remarks 
about women.

Keys, now a TalkSport <https://www.theguardian.com/media/talksport> presenter, 
referred to Glass as "it" and twice asked the former Liverpool footballer 
Redknapp whether he had "smashed it".

In the leaked footage, a conversation begins with someone off camera 
mentioning a former girlfriend of Redknapp called Louise. Keys asks Redknapp 
whether he "smashed it" and the former player replies that he "used to go out 
with her".

Although Sky Sports did not originally air the footage, BSkyB-owned Sky News 
replayed the comments after they appeared on YouTube.

Glass told the Sunday Mirror in January last year 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/richard-keys-spoke-about-me-like-an-old-107555>
 that the remarks made her feel "awful". "Richard Keys spoke of me like I was 
some old whore, like I was nothing. I'm not a prude, I've got a sense of 
humour, but the level of aggression in there was awful," she said. "I wasn't 
even a whore. I was an 'it'. My life has turned upside down and now I'm paying 
the price for their slapstick."

She added: "I just feel that if so many people are talking about me I should 
tell them I'm not an 'it', that it's not 'banter', it's very detrimental to my 
character and whoever leaked that should be punished."

Keys has maintained a relatively low profile since joining TalkSport just two 
weeks after the Sky Sports sexism row, although he and Gray picked up a Sony 
award for best sports programme for their radio show last month.

He apologised at the time for what he described as "prehistoric banter".

BSkyB declined to comment.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>.
 