
While Adelaide’s streets may have been empty for the Monday public holiday, the
Garden of Unearthly Delights was packed with families seeing shows. I joined a 
sold-out audience at a delightfully clever shadow puppetry work calledSwamp 
Juice. 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/swamp-juice/2a47ea03-e830-457e-8915-02f470b2c665>

Canadian artist Jeff Achtem <http://www.bunkpuppets.com/>  
<http://www.bunkpuppets.com/>creates his puppets out of cardboard and recycled 
materials, and both puppet and shadow are exposed simultaneously. It’s a 
celebration of simple things used to great effect. The show is billed as ending 
in an “eye-popping 3D finale”, with red and blue light, and old-school glasses 
used to render the puppets in 3D. It’s genuinely quite extraordinary. The 
audience of children raised on Disney 3D films screamed as the shadow of a bird 
flew towards their face – and I must admit I did too.

There was also a lovely holiday Monday vibe at Tuxedo Cat when I went to see 
Edge! 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/edge/dfc66c8c-76a9-4614-93a5-76c4ed9d62f7>
, the story of 11-year-old “tween viral sensation” Stella, played by 
25-year-old Isabel Angus. Stella starts as a bubbly child, but the work becomes 
a commentary – and harsh criticism – of the sexualisation of women and girls, 
and particularly on the pressures faced by young women in the public spotlight.

Edge! is a funny yet complex work, with the artists pushing their audience to 
a point where we almost entirely refused to laugh. Although we know Angus is 
not 11 we bought into the conceit, and by sitting in the audience we were made 
complicit in the events that happened on the stage. When Stella announced it 
was time for her to get a serious boyfriend and asked all of the “boys” in the 
audience to stand up, every man stayed seated. It took multiple prompts and the 
lifting of the house lights until anyone reluctantly moved. I left the work 
feeling quite confronted; I’ll be thinking over this one for a while.

The beloved Tuxy Cat has become an Adelaide Fringe institution, but their 
tenancy has always been slightly in flex. At the bar I spoke with Bryan Lynagh, 
who is behind the venue with Cassandra Tombs, and he told me they’ve taken on 
this space on Hyde street on a much more permanent basis. When they’re back 
from running Melbourne’s Tuxedo Cat for theComedy Festival 
<http://www.comedyfestival.com.au/2014/season/shows?filters%5Bcategory%5D=&filters%5Bdate%5D=Any+Date+%26+Time&filters%5Bvenue%5D=382>
 
<http://www.comedyfestival.com.au/2014/season/shows?filters%5Bcategory%5D=&filters%5Bdate%5D=Any+Date+%26+Time&filters%5Bvenue%5D=382>
the plan is to rent space to performance makers and other artists, and build 
Tuxedo Cat up as a year-round alternative arts space. Exciting news for locals.

Hang around the Fringe long enough and you’re bound to start receiving offers 
of discount tickets: $5, buy-one-get-one-free, “just come along and I’ll let 
you in”. Sometimes there is no audience to be seen, and the ushers get roped 
into gathering a crowd. Last night, my small group of three were rushed into 
the audience (of now four) forThe Underlad’s Bound for Glory 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/bound-for-glory/aaf1212a-61fb-489d-93da-9bf4c806e708>
.  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/bound-for-glory/aaf1212a-61fb-489d-93da-9bf4c806e708>
 The show started off well, but soon dissolved into an uncomfortable, unfunny 
and underdeveloped piece about two men trying to find money to buy pizza for 
our party. It’s great to take a punt on a show you’ve not heard of during 
Fringe – but this unfortunately is the risk.
 