
• The Street Theatre festival 
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/free-events/fringe-street-theatre-festival>
 kicked off yesterday, managing to pull massive crowds even on a Friday, 
slowing pedestrian traffic in Rundle Mall down to single file around the 
crowds. I first caught theLittle Red Trapeze Company  
<http://www.littleredtrapeze.com/>on their purpose-built trapeze rig, swinging 
over the delighted gasps of the crowd – they surely have the best sightlines 
you’re going to find this weekend. I only managed to see the tail end of the 
Pitts Family Circus, in which a boy about seven was pulled out of a suitcase 
and then became part of the act. It wasn’t long before his two-year-old sister 
was on stage, too.

• Away from the crowds of the city at Holden Street Theatres in Hindmarsh, I 
sawA Special Day  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/a-special-day/a5ec4941-cbc2-4510-86d5-d6b4dd97ac79>
from US’s the Play Company and Mexico’s Por Piedad Teatro. A stage version of 
the 1977Italian film by the same name 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0076085/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1>,  
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0076085/?ref_=fn_al_tt_1>the production embraces 
theatricality – the two cast members provide sound effects and supplementary 
voices, and the set is developed throughout the production with chalk drawings 
– but it never feels like anything more than a theatrical experiment where the 
text could be easily replaced. It doesn’t feel as if there’s a reason for this 
story to be onstage: its plot is insubstantial, meandering and dated, and the 
two characters are neither likable nor interesting.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F08%2Fjane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-street-theatre-festival-a-special-day-kraken%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F8%2F1394245444569%2Fffe81de3-c9e7-4ce8-b457-e2ac51936cd4-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jane%20Howard's%20Adelaide%20Fringe%20diary%3A%20Street%20Theatre%20festival%2C%20A%20Special%20Day%2C%20Kraken&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F08%2Fjane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-street-theatre-festival-a-special-day-kraken%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jane%20Howard%27s%20Adelaide%20Fringe%20diary%3A%20Street%20Theatre%20festival%2C%20A%20Special%20Day%2C%20Kraken&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Faustralia-culture-blog%2F2014%2Fmar%2F08%2Fjane-howards-adelaide-fringe-diary-street-theatre-festival-a-special-day-kraken%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F3%2F8%2F1394245444569%2Fffe81de3-c9e7-4ce8-b457-e2ac51936cd4-1020x612.jpeg>
 Kraken ... clowning around with a mythical sea monster. Photograph: Adelaide 
Fringe festival 
• My experience of Kraken  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/kraken/c3740efd-8202-4244-bc6a-4748a71476ba>
was almost certainly different from the experience you will have. This is a 
work-in-progress from Trygve Wakenshaw, better known asSquidboy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/21/fringe-world-festival-2014-theatre>
,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/feb/21/fringe-world-festival-2014-theatre>
and I don’t even have any idea of what sort of a work he is progressing 
towards. If there was a through-line – or anything to do with the kraken – I 
missed it completely, but we all laughed uproariously at 45 minutes of 
clowning, with the occasional audience punctuation of “what?!” and “really?!” I 
don’t know if the characters were exactly likable (I was “stabbed” in the 
forehead, getting off a lot lighter than most) but they are certainly 
interesting.
 