
• On Saturday afternoon, the Garden of Unearthly Delights was crawling with 
children and their families. But Canadian circus showCarousel & Clothesline  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/carousel-and-clothesline/d2956c16-4fcf-4136-90ee-b37c13fc12b6>
 seemed to have a hard time capturing the attention of some of the kids in 
their audience. The production’s strange mix of thematic influences – from 
French court dancing and seventies disco to an American rodeo – is confused. 
But the main problem is that the production never quite figures out how 
seriously it is taking itself: at times it’s as if the company is having a big 
laugh at self-important circus performers; at others it feels like they are 
those self-important circus performers. After 45 minutes the end of the show 
was announced, and the audience thanked for coming. A joke! There was still 
more show to come! I’m not convinced that’s a joke that works unless the show 
is magnificent – and probably not even then.

• Even with air-conditioning, the tents in the Garden were very warm under 
yesterday’s sun, and audience members at Carousel & Clothesline were provided 
with fans plastered with advertising for UK a cappella pop groupThe Magnets 
<http://themagnets.com/>.  <http://themagnets.com/> In a Fringe awash with 
flyers, this is the best method I’ve seen to cut through the noise: you’re 
surely going to remember the name after waving it in front of your own eyes for 
an hour.

• From confused circus to the absolutely confident, Fright or Flight  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/fright-or-flight/16757492-c970-4363-9925-3c7de7504a9c>
 is the strangest thing I’ve seen at the Fringe this year. Three blindfolded 
women, yellow washing gloves on their hands and feet, walk around the stage 
swiping each other with rolled-up paper. Had the company tricked a 
circus-loving audience into buying tickets to performance art? If an element of 
duration had been added to any of the scenes in this bird-themed circus, you 
could probably have viewed it in that context. It is absolutely bizarre, 
completely hilarious and still manages to showcase its performers’ skills, 
including a juggling act to The Beatles’ Blackbird that has the most impeccable 
musical timing.

• In case you thought the performers and crew at the Street Theatre festival  
<http://www.adelaidefringe.com.au/fringetix/free-events/fringe-street-theatre-festival>
didn’t take their work seriously, they were still going at midnight last night. 
Magician Charlie Caper <http://www.catchmagic.com/>  
<http://www.catchmagic.com/>(the 2009 winner of Sweden’s Got Talent, no less) 
wasn’t having the easiest time with that crowd, promising: “You’re going to 
love this one; drunk people love this one.” While Caper found a brief fan in 
the man standing next to me, muttering expletives in amazement before walking 
off into the night, the rest of the crowd were rather nonplussed. Similarly 
unimpressed, I’m afraid, I followed suit.
 