
Jaromir Jagr scored the equalizer with 1:01 left in regulation as the New 
Jersey Devils ended the Anaheim Ducks' eight-game home winning streak to open 
the season with a 4-3 victory on Wednesday.

Travis Zajac got credit for the winning goal at 2:58 of overtime, but the 
Ducks put it in their own net. Ben Lovejoy hit teammate Corey Perry with the 
puck while attempting to clear the crease, and it caromed past Jonas Hiller to 
end the longest season-opening home winning streak in Anaheim history. Ryan 
Getzlaf scored the tiebreaking power-play goal, and Nick Bonino had a goal and 
an assist for the NHL-leading Ducks, who have lost five straight.

Sidney Crosby delivered a goal and an assist to get the better of a quiet Alex 
Ovechkin in the past league MVPs' first matchup as division rivals as the
Pittsburgh Penguins ended a three-game road losing streak by beating the 
Washington Capitals 4-0. Marc-Andre Fleury needed to make only 18 saves for his 
second shutout this season and 25th in theNHL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/nhl>. Paul Martin and Beau Bennett scored 
less than 5Â½ minutes apart to give Pittsburgh a 2-0 lead in a first period it 
dominated, outshooting Washington 17-6.

Crosby, who assisted on Martin's goal, then netted his 11th on a power play 
with 29 seconds remaining in the second period. James Neal made it 4-0 with a 
goal 7:16 into the third.

At Ottawa, Ontario, Mikko Koivu scored the tiebreaking goal in the closing 
minutes of the third period and added two assists to lift theMinnesota Wild 
over theOttawa Senators 4-3. Koivu netted the winner with 2:57 left, allowing 
the Wild to rebound from a 6-2 loss in Montreal on Tuesday.

Former Senators forward Dany Heatley had a goal and an assist for the Wild 
(14-5-4), as did Jonas Brodin. Jason Pominville had the other goal, and Zach 
Parise had two assists. Milan Michalek scored on the power play as the teams 
approached the midway point of the third period to pull the Senators even with 
the Wild. It appeared that goal would at least get the Senators to overtime. 
Kyle Turris and Mika Zibanejad also scored for the Senators (8-10-4), who have 
lost three straight and four of five.

The Columbus Blue Jackets beat the Calgary Flames 2-1 after defenseman Nikita 
Nikitin scored his first goal of the season 2:25 into overtime. When David 
Savard's shot was blocked by Mikael Backlund in front, the puck caromed out to 
Nikitin, who had an empty net with Reto Berra down and out. Nick Foligno also 
scored for Columbus. Joe Colborne scored for Calgary, which has lost six 
straight at home.
 