
Oliver Jarvis gave Great Britain a winning start to the A1GP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> season with victory in the feature 
race in Holland.

Jarvis quickly displaced South Africa's Adrian Zaugg from the lead of the 
45-lap race before pulling clear at Zandvoort. By the time of the second pit 
stop Jarvis had extended his lead and a clean stop enabled him to finish almost 
six seconds clear of Zaugg by the end of the race, having slowed down 
considerably on the final lap.

A delighted Jarvis said: "That's the start to the year I was anticipating 
before we came here. It was a fantastic race - though very tough physically and 
mentally.The team made all the right pit stop calls - we pitted as soon as the 
first pit stop window opened and then pushed hard to close the gap and try to 
jump South Africa which we achieved.

"It's a special win for me with my whole family here, but for the team it's a 
great start to the season."

Zaugg, who had earlier won the sprint race as Jarvis could only finish 
seventh, leads the championship standings with 28 points. Jarvis' feature race 
win leaves his team second in the points standings on 19 points, one ahead of 
France. Ireland lie seventh on eight points thanks to Ralph Firman's eighth and 
sixth place finishes in the sprint and feature races respectively.

South Africa dominated the sprint race from start to finish, with Zaugg joined 
on the podium by France's Loic Duval and Holland's Jeroen Bleekemolen. Zaugg 
pulled away for a comfortable win ahead of Duval who held off the late 
challenge from Bleekemolen who had passed both Switzerland's Neel Jani and 
Mexico's Salvador Duran to claim the final podium spot.

Jarvis claimed seventh spot from Firman but his bid to oust Germany's 
Christian Vietoris from sixth proved in vain.
 