
Oliver Jarvis scored a maiden win for Britain in Mexico on March 25 but the 
Englishman may not be asked to race at home for the final round of theA1GP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> series at Brands Hatch on April 29. 
The anomaly comes about because the focus is on nation competing against nation 
and Jarvis is considered to be Britain's second choice. Jarvis, asked to stand 
in for Robbie Kerr in Mexico, grabbed his chance with a victory made all the 
more impressive by his lack of experience in this competitive series.

"I went into Mexico having only competed in one other A1GP race," says Jarvis. 
"That was in Beijing last November and the situation was made even more 
difficult because I didn't actually get to qualify the car in China thanks to 
qualifying being cancelled. Mexico was my first full weekend in the car. But, 
from the moment I started practice, I knew we were quick and it became clear 
that we were one of the favourites."

Jarvis proved it by controlling the main feature race from start to finish on 
the former grand prix track in Mexico City.

"In many ways, the cars are fairly basic when compared to F1 because there are 
no sophisticated electronics or driver aids," says Jarvis. "These cars are 
difficult to drive and you feel them moving about a lot, especially when the 
tyres get old as the race progresses. During the last few laps, the car can be 
quite a handful at times.

"The Mexico circuit is physically as well as mentally challenging because 
there are a lot of corners that lead one into the other. If you make a mistake 
in one corner, it will affect you for the next three or four. To win there was 
satisfying for a number of reasons, not least because it is a fantastic track 
and I was up against drivers who have been doing A1GP for a whole year."

Having been the runner-up in the British F3 Championship in 2006, Jarvis faced 
a familiar dilemma for young drivers. About to turn 23 in January, Jarvis knew 
that the next step would be critical. The ideal career move would have been to 
GP2, the series supporting grands prix in Europe and the final proving ground 
in recent years for Nico Rosberg and Lewis Hamilton. There was only one 
drawback; Jarvis could not lay his hands on the Â£1m needed for a GP2 season.

Jarvis accepted a drive with a leading Japanese F3 team because it would not 
cost him and he knew that Adrian Sutil, the winner of last year's Japanese F3 
championship, had done enough in this competitive series to earn an F1 drive 
with Spyker. The chance of the occasional race with Team GBR in A1GP completed 
the package. Jarvis has no regrets.

"One of the best things about A1GP is the atmosphere," says Jarvis. "I've 
raced in a lot of series and you barely speak to your fellow competitors. But 
A1 has such a friendly feeling, not just in terms of drivers with the fans, but 
also drivers with drivers. We all get along, have really good fun together and 
I think the fans can see that. It is a superb atmosphere to work in.

"Initially, I was not sure if this nation against nation idea was a good 
thing. But it works brilliantly. The support for the Mexican team at home was 
absolutely fantastic. The fans interact much more than usual, even if they 
don't know the drivers taking part. But the important point is that the people 
who matter in motor sport know who is actually driving the car. It is a 
fantastic opportunity for young drivers like myself to showcase their talent on 
a wider stage.

"Mexico was a chance to go out there and prove myself. It was fantastic to be 
able to repay the faith shown in me by bringing the first win for Team GBR. To 
do that in my second race was a truly great feeling and I hope to be given the 
chance to repeat it at Brands Hatch. The atmosphere there is going to be 
unbelievable. I just want to be a part of it."
 