
In Britain, we had the MMR triple jab controversy during which media outlets 
tended to give more credence than was due to a single campaigner,Andrew 
Wakefield <http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/andrew-wakefield>, who produced a 
fraudulent research paper that claimed the vaccine caused autism.

In the United States, a similar controversy blew up around another 
single-minded campaigner,Jenny McCarthy 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jenny_McCarthy>, who argued that childhood 
vaccines cause autism (after her son was diagnosed with autism) and who wrote a 
foreword to Wakefield's book.

Now a new row has broken out because McCarthy has been chosen to co-host the 
popular US TV daytime chat show, The View, asTom McCarthy (no relation) 
reported in The Guardian. 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2013/jul/16/the-view-jenny-mccarthy-autism> 

He listed several examples of forthright hostility to her being given such a 
high-profile platform. Exampleshere 
<http://www.salon.com/2013/07/16/dear_abc_putting_jenny_mccarthy_on_the_view_will_kill_children/>
 andhere 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/07/15/bill-nye-jenny-mccarthy-childhood-vaccines-autism-the-view_n_3600666.html>
 andhere 
<http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/elements/2013/07/jenny-mccarthys-dangerous-views.html>
, plus plenty on Twitterhere 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/live-feed/jenny-mccarthys-view-announcement-stirs-585510>
. Such is the antagonism to McCarthy's views, allied to the belief that she has 
been responsible for children's deaths because of people refusing to vaccinate 
their offspring, there is even a website calledJenny McCarthy body count 
<http://www.jennymccarthybodycount.com/Anti-Vaccine_Body_Count/Home.html>.

But many people - perhaps the majority of the American public - may not have 
read opinion pieces by commentators who oppose giving McCarthy a chance to 
spread what they regard as misinformation.

Instead, as an article in the Columbia Journalism Review 
<http://www.cjr.org/united_states_project/media_errs_giving_balanced_coverage_to_jenny_mccarthys_discredited_views.php>
 points out, they will have read news articles about her new job in which her 
discredited claims were given equal weight to those of the scientific medical 
community.

The CJR's writer, Brendan Nyhan, refers to this fake balance as "he said, she 
said" coverage. In so doing, he touches on one of mainstream media's common bad 
habits in attempting to produce so-called objective and/or impartial 
journalism. The mission to explain is replaced by the sustaining of myths.

Nyhan lists some examples. A USA Today reporter 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/tv/2013/07/15/abc-the-view-jenny-mccarthy-barbara-walters/2517659/>
 described McCarthy as "a brash blonde" (yes, note the sexism too) who had 
"embraced the controversial claim that vaccinations cause autism" which "has 
drawn the ire of pro-immunisation advocacy groups."

A Philadelphia Inquirer reporter 
<http://articles.philly.com/2013-07-16/news/40614842_1_david-miscavige-matthew-mosshart-scientology>
 simply, and simplistically, noted that "Jenny made enemies of doctors when she 
said vaccination caused her son Evan's autism."

And an Associated Press report, 
<http://www.kentucky.com/2013/07/15/2715422/jenny-mccarthy-to-join-the-view.html>
 carried by several newspapers across the States, observed only that McCarthy 
"emerged as an activist, campaigning about the dangers of vaccines, which she 
claims triggered her son's autism."

Nyhan comments: "There is no perfect way to cover McCarthy's hiring, of 
course, but giving 'balanced' coverage to fringe beliefs is the worst approach 
to covering misinformation."

He cites an article by another CJR author, Curtis Brainard, in which he 
contended that balanced coverage"helped sustain the bogus claim that childhood 
vaccines can cause autism." 
<http://www.cjr.org/feature/sticking_with_the_truth.php> In other words, by 
writing of McCarthy's viewpoint in strictly "neutral" terms keeps the myth 
alive despite scientific evidence that has effectively proved it to be 
unsupportable.

Treating McCarthy's claims as "controversial" and calling her a "campaigner" 
or "activist" is liable to give her and her opinions a spurious credibility, 
thereby justifying Nyman's point about such reporting having "potentially 
dangerous consequences for public health."
 