
Key points

Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> celebrated 
the surge in Labour membership, announced plans to crack down on unequal pay 
and urged his political opponents to get behind him.

Snap verdict

Corbyn has rarely sounded more confident. Unlike many other MPs, he has little 
time or respect for Westminster journalists (in some cases, understandably) and 
some of his previous encounters with the press have been awkward, to put it 
mildly. But today he was relaxed and good-humoured and, above all, confident. 
He gave the impression that he believes he will win this leadership contest 
easily. And it is not hard to see why.

Corbyn holds out 'hand of friendship' to opponents, urging them to get behind 
the party - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jul/21/jeremy-corbyn-campaign-labour-leader-theresa-may-paris-politics-live>
His speech contained a defence of his record over the last 10 months, a broad 
statement about tackling injustice, and the modern equivalents ofBeveridge’s 
five “giant evils” <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beveridge_Report> and a 
policy announcement about pay audits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/20/jeremy-corbyn-to-set-out-measures-tackling-discrimination-at-work>
. Corbyn has had relatively little new to say on policy since he was elected 
leader (which is odd, because in the leadership contest last summer he produced 
a dozen or so quite substantial policy papers – will they get recycled?) and so 
in that sense the speech was refreshing. But it was still relatively 
threadbare. By comparison,Theresa May’s one proper leadership campaign speech 
<http://www.theresa2016.co.uk/we_can_make_britain_a_country_that_works_for_everyone>
, delivered last Monday, contained much more new thinking.

More telling, though, was what Corbyn did not say. He did not mention Owen 
Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-smith>, his opponent in the 
upcoming leadership election, in keeping with the traditional reluctance of 
incumbents to talk up the status of their challengers. But he also had nothing 
to say about the circumstances that have led to 75% of Labour MPs declaring 
that they have no confidence in him.

Corbyn’s allies, such as John McDonnell, insist these MPs are opposing Corbyn 
because they cannot support his leftwing politics. The MPs themselves largely 
insist he has lost their support because of his incompetence. (See, for example,
Lilian Greenwood’s recent speech 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=11&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwj218LCtITOAhXoLMAKHR1MAJYQFghFMAo&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.politicshome.com%2Fnews%2Fuk%2Fpolitical-parties%2Flabour-party%2Fnews%2F77424%2Flilian-greenwood-why-i-quit-incompetent-jeremy&usg=AFQjCNGcJFnCiBo8CSXt3PkEtgMu-NabDw&sig2=Zd-DHpXppPMtaGyc92fyww>
 - perhaps the most detailed and judicious account of Corbyn’s perceived 
failings from a member of the shadow cabinet.) But as for what Corbyn thinks, 
we don’t really know. He refused to address this issue in his speech, and was 
not much more forthcoming in the Q&A. To his critics this must have come over 
as the ultimate complacency.

But Corbyn just did not seem to care; he exuded self-confidence. He knows that 
his support among members remains high, and he does not seem to rate Smith as a 
threat. He was acting like a winner.

Best line



[We are] laying the ground for a kinder, gentler politics … that respects 
those unable to work … that treats disabled people with dignity …
 