
Spain’s gastronomic maridaje – the marriage of food and wine – is a definite 
threesome in Jerez de la Frontera, where all life is fuelled by sherry and 
tapas, but marches to a flamenco beat. The annual flamenco festival is its peak 
– not only for larger ticketed events, but also for free performances in the
peñas (social clubs), tabancos (old-style bars), and late at night in the 
plazas. In fact, all the city’s many festivals andferias are accompanied by a 
flurry of flamenco activity – it’s just that, rather frustratingly, it’s not 
easy to sweep in and locate it.

Where to hear flamenco
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fjerez-andalucia-guide-what-to-see-hotels-restaurants-bars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424349035643%2F50b32834-3b78-4d85-9235-e631082cd4c0-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jerez%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20music%2C%20hotels%2C%20restaurants%20and%20tapas%20bars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fjerez-andalucia-guide-what-to-see-hotels-restaurants-bars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jerez%3A%20what%20to%20see%2C%20plus%20the%20best%20music%2C%20hotels%2C%20restaurants%20and%20tapas%20bars&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Ffeb%2F21%2Fjerez-andalucia-guide-what-to-see-hotels-restaurants-bars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F19%2F1424349035643%2F50b32834-3b78-4d85-9235-e631082cd4c0-2060x1236.jpeg>
 El Pasaje is a great bar in which to hear top quality flamenco. Photograph: 
Alamy 
Several of the tabancos actually have regular, scheduled events (and flyers 
for one-offs elsewhere). Best-known, and popular with locals and tourists, is
Tabanco el Pasaje <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KE6DuuHvWVU> (C/Santa María 
8) where guitarist and singer face the cramped bustle from Thursdays to 
Sundays. Another good option isTabanco el Guitarrón de San Pedro (C/Bizcocheros 
16) with performances on Saturday afternoons, participation flamenco on Sunday 
nights and, amazingly given the tight space, acadre (guitars, singing and 
dancing) on Thursday nights. As Mireia Dot Rodriguez, the tabanco’s co-owner, 
points out: “Flamenco is something you feel on your skin, in your senses, not 
watch from a distance.” So that’s all right.

The peñas are home base for many of today’s flamenco greats, and it’s worth 
passing one of the bigger ones over the weekend to see if it’s open. TryCentro 
Cultural Don Antonio Chacón (C/Salas 2) or Peña Flamenca Los Cernícalos (C/de 
Sancho Vizcaíno 25) in the Gypsy barrio of San Miguel.

What to do
 The gardens at the Alcazar de Jerez. Photograph: Alamy 
Cádiz and the Costa de la Luz: where to stay, eat, drink and more
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/sep/27/cadiz-costa-de-la-luz-andalucia-spain-stay-eat-drink-guide>
The many cobbled alleys, plazas, baroque churches and bars make exploring old 
Jerez a joy, and well-positioned street maps displaying recommended routes keep 
it easy. However,Plaza del Arenal (home to the tourist information office) is a 
useful reference point. For general ambling, head north-west from here to the 
old barrio of Santiago and south-west to San Miguel. Just to the south, there’s 
theAlcazar de Jerez, once a frontier of the Islamic kingdom, its thick city 
walls built to keep the Christians out. They didn’t and, in 1264, the overlay 
of monasteries, palaces and churches began. This fortress, home to caliphs then 
Christian governors, its mosque converted into a chapel dedicated to the Virgin 
Mary, says it all.

Or stroll 20 minutes north to the Royal Andalusian School of Equestrian Art (
realescuela.org <https://www.realescuela.org/en/>, adults €21, children €13) in 
which dancing horses put on an impressive show every Tuesday and Thursday (plus 
Fridays in August and September). You don’t have to be horsey to appreciate the 
history, skill, architecture and hats, although it helps. Or watch men 
controlling powerful machines down at theCircuito de Jerez (circuitodejerez.com 
<http://www.circuitodejerez.com/>). The city is World Capital of Motorcycling 
2015.




Where to eat and drink
 The Tabanco San Pablo, Jerez – great for traditional dishes. Photograph: Neil 
Farrin/JAI/Corbis 
A sherry cooking class with the city’s top chef, Javier Muñoz of La Carboná 
(C/San Francisco de Paula 2,lacarbona.com <http://www.lacarbona.com/web/>), 
combines three highlights in one. Obviously, you start at abodega (the gem that 
isDíez Mérito, C/Diego Fernández Herrera 4), then nose around the impressive 
fish stalls ofMercado de Abastos, before seeing alchemy at work back at the 
restaurant and savouring the results – accompanied by sherry, of course. It 
costs €65 a head, with a minimum of four people, on Wednesdays; available in 
English (+34 956 328 780,surways.com <http://www.surways.com/>).

Want to get straight in to the sherry? Avoid the crowds by visiting Lustau 
(C/Arcos 53, +34 956 341 597,lustau.es <http://lustau.es/>), which not only 
produces some of the world’s best, includingfino La Ina and oloroso Emperatriz 
Eugenia, but represents a few independent back-room winemakers in its glorious 
Almacenista range.

Zahara de los Atunes: sun, sea and seafood in southern Spain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2014/aug/02/zahara-de-los-atunes-spain-holiday-guide>
Tabancos, once basic stores selling wine from the barrel, and frequented by 
old men, have been resurrected by nostalgic enthusiasts, their old 
paraphernalia, tiles, wooden bars and barrels, green-and-mustard paint intact. 
All serve phenomenally good wine – specifically sherry – for €1; several, 
including Tabanco el Guitarrón (as before) stock a wide variety, including real 
rarities. Some offer more sophisticated tapas, but most, likeTabanco San Pablo 
(C/San Pablo 12,tabancosanpablo.es <http://www.tabancosanpablo.es/>), champion 
the old favourites: tortilla, meatballs, stews, clams andserranitos (hot pork 
and serrano ham rolls). You’ll find the densest concentration in a compact area 
east from Calle Larga to Barrio San Miguel, none more than a short stroll 
apart. Perfect dining,paseo style. Ask for a Ruta de los Tabancos map in 
participating bars.

Jerez’s unofficial “golden mile of gastronomy” doglegs through three plazas 
(Plateros, glorious Asunción, and shady Yerba) before continuing eastwards 
along Calle Consistorio. Table with umbrella? Glass of wine? View of old 
church? Tick, tick, tick. Food is all around.Cruz Blanca (
restaurantelacruzblanca.com <http://www.restaurantelacruzblanca.com/>) opposite 
the Town Hall, offering upmarket traditional fare (black rice with baby squid 
and prawns, Iberian pork, plenty of asparagus), andAlbores, next door, where 
the Madrileño chef does clever things to local produce using oloroso and Pedro 
Ximénez sauces, are worth the lengthy queues.

One night only? Unless it’s a Tuesday, when it’s shut, go for the sherry 
pairing menu at the Andaluz-chic, bodega-styleLa Carboná (as before). Javier 
Muñoz’s combinations – cooked in sherry, paired with sherry – are an inspiring 
revelation: a cheese ice-cream with fino, beef with oloroso, artichokes with 
amontillado ... who knew?

Where to stay
 Boutique hotel La Fonda Barranco 
Old, interesting and lovely without being twee applies equally to Jerez’s 
historic heart and the well-lovedLa Fonda Barranco (+34 956 332 141, 
lafondabarranco.com <http://lafondabarranco.com/>) tucked away inside it, close 
to the cathedral: restored, boutique, all fresh white and wooden beams, with 
Moorish lanterns, arches and central patio and breakfasts served on the roof 
terrace. An equally lovely former home, the aptly namedCasa Grande (+34 956 34 
50 70,hotelcasagrande.eu <http://www.hotelcasagrande.eu/>), offers calm, airy 
elegance; rooms with beautiful tiled floors above a large central patio, a huge 
roof terrace, and great hospitality in a central location. Both places have 
rooms from €60 in low season, though prices soar during festivals.

If you’ve ever fancied yourself as the owner of vineyards with a gracious 
country house, you can live the dream atCasa Viña de Alcántara (low-season 
rates from €160, + 34 956 39 30 10,vinadealcantara.com 
<http://www.vinadealcantara.com/>). This sweet and small hotel, the property of 
one of the Gonzalez-Byass sherry dynasty, is set in tree-filled grounds (with a 
swimming pool) designed for wafting through or sketching in. Service is 
provided by attentive staff, and dinner is provided on request, although the 
bright lights of Jerez are just a 15-minute drive away.

The 19th-century Palacio Garvey (rooms from €60, +34 956 32 67 00, 
hotelpalaciogarvey.com <http://www.hotelpalaciogarvey.com/>) is the former home 
of the Garvey winemakers, in Jerez, overlooking what is arguably its loveliest 
square: Plaza de Rafael Rivero. While some of the furnishings are tired, the 
art’s a bit odd, and leatherette and astroturf are never good, the building is 
grand and the large rooms good value. The Semana Santa parades pass under the 
floor-to-ceiling windows of rooms one and two.

• The Jerez Flamenco Festival runs until 7 March (festivaldejerez.es 
<http://www.jerez.es/webs_municipales/festival_jerez/>) 
 