
Jeremy Clarkson <https://www.theguardian.com/media/jeremyclarkson> and his 
former Top Gear co-presenters were prevented from boarding a flight by an 
airport worker as an act of revenge for the Argentinian numberplate row in 
2014, it has been claimed.

Clarkson, James May and Richard Hammond had been due to take a British Airways 
flight from Stuttgart to Heathrow after filming for their new show, The Grand 
Tour, when check-in agent Manuel Pereira stopped them boarding,the Sun reported 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2193124/furious-jeremy-clarkson-slams-ignorant-little-worm-who-kicked-top-gear-star-and-pals-off-flight-in-rant-over-falklands-number-plate-row/>
. After being told by a bodyguard that the trio would not be allowed to board, 
Clarkson said “this little bald guy” had told them: “I’m from Argentina so fuck 
you.”

In October 2014 the then cast and crew of the BBC’s Top Gear had to flee 
Argentina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/oct/03/top-gear-argentina-jeremy-clarkson-bbc>
 after being pelted with stones by a crowd incensed that one of their vehicles 
had a numberplate that appeared to refer to the Falklands conflict.

Jeremy Clarkson row: airport disputes 'Argentinian' claim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/jeremy-clarkson-row-airport-disputes-argentinian-claim-falklands>
May and Hammond were driving an old Lotus Esprit and a Mustang in Patagonia, 
southernArgentina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/argentina>, but it was the 
Porsche 928 with the plate H982 FKL, driven by Clarkson, that caused 
controversy, after it was suggested that it referred to the war of 1982. The 
BBC said the numberplate was entirely coincidental.

Clarkson said at the time that the attack was “the most terrifying thing I’ve 
ever been involved in”.

The presenter accused Pereira of lying to colleagues about the trio being too 
drunk to fly to prevent them boarding. “He’s a stupid, bitter and twisted 
little man,” Clarkson told the Sun. He added: “This ignorant little worm made 
us miss our plane and he will pay for it. The police said it was a hate crime 
and he would be arrested.”

The controversy happens to coincide with the debut of The Grand Tour on Amazon 
Prime on Friday.

Clarkson was dropped by the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/mar/25/jeremy-clarkson-top-gear-contract-bbc>
 in March 2015 after an “unprovoked physical and verbal attack” that left a 
colleague bleeding and seeking hospital treatment. The BBC director general, 
Tony Hall, said he had taken the decision to end Clarkson’s BBC career “with 
great regret”, 16 days after the presenter was suspended following the “fracas” 
with a member of the Top Gear production team, but said Clarkson had “crossed a 
line”.

May and Hammond decided to follow Clarkson out the door and were picked up by 
Amazon for a show that closely resembles Top Gear.

The BBC broadcast a new series of Top Gear earlier this year presented by 
Chris Evans and actor Matt LeBlanc. However,Evans quit in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/04/chris-evans-quits-bbc-top-gear-after-one-series>
 after just one series amid falling ratings, unrelenting newspaper criticism 
and a breakdown of his relationship with LeBlanc.

The audience for the Sunday night show more than halved since Evans took over 
in May, with the final episode watched by just 1.9m viewers, down from 4.3m for 
the opening show.
 