
Jessica Chastain <https://www.theguardian.com/film/jessica-chastain> would 
like a table at the back. She’s on a tight schedule, and in 10 minutes she’ll 
need to take a call to discuss “an issue” with “a studio”. “I’m not happy with 
the way a distribution plan is going,” she says, not rattled, just frank – 
happy, even. For another actor, such a call might be a windmill-tilt, but 
Chastain’s knack for picking prestige projects indicates a star with clout.

She has been on an almost flawless run (she pulled out of 2013’s Diana biopic) 
since 2011, AKA The Year of Jessica Chastain, when audiences saw her in The 
Help, Take Shelter, The Debt, Coriolanus and The Tree of Life. That was topped 
by a weekend in January 2013 when she became the first female actor in half a 
century to star in both the No 1 and No 2 movies at the US box office (Mama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/feb/21/mama-review> and Zero Dark Thirty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/zero-dark-thirty>). That same month, she 
landed her second Oscar nomination in as many years. This machine-like – and on 
the face of it rather frightening – rate of productivity was in fact an 
accident: projects that had been shot years apart ended up getting released 
back-to-back. Though she will admit to a certain work ethic. “I feel like I’m 
being drawn in so many directions,” she says. “I make so many films.”

Chastain, now 37, is in the rare position of being able to pinpoint the exact 
moment that her career got hot. She had just graduated from the Juilliard 
School in New York, on a scholarship funded by Robin Williams (she paid tribute 
to him following his death last month, describing how he “changed my life”), 
when she got the call. Would she read for the role of Salomé? Not just in any 
production, but one with Al Pacino as Herod. His production had previously been 
to Broadway with Marisa Tomei in the title role. But when Pacino and director 
Estelle Parsons brought the show to Los Angeles in 2006, they wanted an unknown 
to play his spiteful stepdaughter, who demands the head of John the Baptist on 
a silver platter in return for a dance of the seven veils.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fjessica-chastain-interview-al-pacino-salome-christopher-nolan-jc-chandor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409928948216%2F328c9217-b122-4faf-887e-441f4228ece3-2060x1557.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jessica%20Chastain%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d%20love%20to%20do%20a%20superhero%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fjessica-chastain-interview-al-pacino-salome-christopher-nolan-jc-chandor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jessica%20Chastain%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d%20love%20to%20do%20a%20superhero%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fjessica-chastain-interview-al-pacino-salome-christopher-nolan-jc-chandor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409928948216%2F328c9217-b122-4faf-887e-441f4228ece3-2060x1557.jpeg>
 Jessica Chastain in Wilde Salomé. Photograph: PR 
In fact, Salomé wasn’t just Chastain’s first big break on the boards, but her 
first movie as well. Pacino, who never does anything small, decided that the 
company would perform the play at night and, during the day, film it at a 
nearby sound stage. And, just for kicks, they would make a separate film – a 
documentary – recording the mayhem. After six years in the can, both Salomé 
(the filmed Oscar Wilde play, as directed by Al Pacino) and his making-of 
documentary Wilde Salomé are finally heading to cinemas. (A special double-bill 
is set for 21 September in London, with Pacino and Chastain in conversation 
with Stephen Fry.)

“I look like such a baby!” Chastain says of the films now. Also: “I still see 
Al as a second father.” Which is interesting, given the portrait of the artist 
that Wilde Salomé delivers. As Pacino raced the clock and battled producers, 
Chastain wasn’t shielded from his struggles. True, Pacino’s shouting is largely 
confined to when he’s in character (“Oh, SaaaAAAAAAAAaaaalomé! he roars as he 
makes his initial entrance”) but the ever-increasing chaos of a 
triple-production does make for some fraught scenes. “I could see the stress. 
He took a lot of time directing us and was very generous. But he’s also acting 
too, so he needs his time. There’s that moment in the documentary where he 
barks: ‘I can’t just turn it on!’”

A tale of malice, sacrifice and sexual power play, Salomé offered Chastain a 
role to get her teeth into. “She starts off saying she’s going to be a virgin 
and ends up a necrophiliac,” she says with a smile. “When I first read the play 
I was confused. It didn’t seem like Oscar Wilde and his sharp-tongued wit. But 
it’s very deep in its scope.”

It’s also quite a spectacle; Salomé may well be history’s most celebrated 
exotic dancer, and Chastain is naked for the climactic scene. “I’d still do the 
nudity,” Chastain says. “I think it’s necessary for that play. It isn’t a 
seduction or a striptease, it’s a murder. But if I played Salomé today I don’t 
know if it would be as good. I had nothing to lose.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fjessica-chastain-interview-al-pacino-salome-christopher-nolan-jc-chandor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409929030892%2Fc59b8874-bb84-4078-98d9-c71e78735722-2060x1367.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jessica%20Chastain%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d%20love%20to%20do%20a%20superhero%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fjessica-chastain-interview-al-pacino-salome-christopher-nolan-jc-chandor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jessica%20Chastain%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d%20love%20to%20do%20a%20superhero%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fjessica-chastain-interview-al-pacino-salome-christopher-nolan-jc-chandor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409929030892%2Fc59b8874-bb84-4078-98d9-c71e78735722-2060x1367.jpeg>
 Jessica Chastain with James McAvoy in The Disappearance of Eleanor RIgby. 
Photograph: Allstar Picture Library 
She pauses and pops a raspberry in her mouth. Our meeting at New York’s Mercer 
Kitchen is meant to double as breakfast, but vegan Chastain has barely touched 
the loaded fruit plate. With her flame red hair and upright posture, it’s not 
difficult to identify the movie star among the diners, but Chastain is lighter 
in conversation than her sometimes austere screen presence might suggest. She 
grew up in Sacramento, California, but now lives round the corner with her 
boyfriend, fashion industry exec Gian Luca Passi de Preposulo, and three-legged 
dog, Chaplin.

Not that Chastain gets to hang out in the Village all that much, you suspect. 
Salomé aside, this autumn she stars in three other Oscar contenders: 
experimental relationship dramaThe Disappearance of Eleanor Rigby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-disappearance-of-eleanor-rigby>, opposite 
James McAvoy;Interstellar <https://www.theguardian.com/film/interstellar>, the 
new science-fiction adventure from Christopher Nolan; and A Most Violent Year, 
JC Chandor’s followup to All Is Lost. Earlier this year she spent the spring in 
Toronto shooting Guillermo del Toro’s Crimson Peak. “He worked my ass off,” she 
grins.

Directors from Terrence Malick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/terrence-malick> (The Tree of Life) to 
Kathryn Bigelow <https://www.theguardian.com/film/kathryn-bigelow> (Zero Dark 
Thirty) are drawn to her willowy beauty and inner steel. When asked what makes 
her such a good actor, Crimson Peak co-star Tom Hiddleston describes her as 
“curious, investigative, passionate, immersive” and praises her extraordinary 
rigour. “She never yields to convention and she has a staggering emotional 
control. She can unlock pure, raw, unfettered emotion and seemingly put it away 
again, which attests to a core spiritual toughness.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fjessica-chastain-interview-al-pacino-salome-christopher-nolan-jc-chandor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409929179405%2F7f7f41e1-c425-4720-a548-5d5d129b5846-2060x1373.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jessica%20Chastain%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d%20love%20to%20do%20a%20superhero%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fjessica-chastain-interview-al-pacino-salome-christopher-nolan-jc-chandor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jessica%20Chastain%3A%20%E2%80%98I%E2%80%99d%20love%20to%20do%20a%20superhero%20movie%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F07%2Fjessica-chastain-interview-al-pacino-salome-christopher-nolan-jc-chandor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F5%2F1409929179405%2F7f7f41e1-c425-4720-a548-5d5d129b5846-2060x1373.jpeg>
 Colin Farrell and Jessica Chastain in Miss Julie. Photograph: Egor 
Kirpichev/Allstar Picture Library 
This week, she’ll take Miss Julie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jan/31/jessica-chastain-star-miss-julie> 
to the Toronto film festival: another play, by August Strindberg, written three 
years earlier than Salome. The director is Liv Ullmann, muse of Ingmar Bergman, 
who never played the part herself. “It was a partnership,” says Chastain. “She 
got to play it through me. Liv is someone who is all sensitivity, she has no 
bones. At one point she was crying so much that both Colin [Farrell] and I were 
left standing there. Some of her family were holding her. The material is so 
dark.”

Bread and butter to the star of Zero Dark Thirty, presumably. Kathryn 
Bigelow’s CIA thriller was her biggest challenge so far, she says (“insanely 
hard”). The Help was both her “showiest” and her “easiest”. Chastain takes her 
work as professionally as you would expect (she learned to play bass for Mama), 
but she loves watching movies too. At Cannes this year, whereas some stars are 
happy to punt their project then head for the yachts, she spent hours seeing 
what else was on the programme. She’s also passionate about the nuts and bolts 
of theatre, of collaboration, even direction. “Who knows, maybe I’ll go back to 
my alma mater, Juilliard. I definitely, definitely would love to teach.”

Another great ambition is less rarefied. “I would love to do a superhero 
movie!” she cries. “I would have loved to have played Black Widow.” Opportunity 
has presumably not been the issue; she dropped out of Iron Man 3, after all. “A 
couple of times I’ve gotten really close. The problem is, if I do a superhero 
movie, I don’t want to be the girlfriend. I don’t want to be the daughter. I 
want to wear a fucking cool costume with a scar on my face, with fight scenes. 
That’s what I’d love.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fmuvi.es%2Fw6252&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fmuvi.es%2Fw6252> 
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fmuvi.es%2Fw6252&media=>
Salomé and Wilde Salomé screen in a double-bill on 21 September at the BFI 
Southbank in London, followed by a Q&A with Al Pacino and Jessica Chastain 
broadcast live to cinemas around the UK. For participating cinemas and to buy 
tickets, visitcinestage.co.uk/salome <http://www.cinestage.co.uk/salome.html>
 