
Joe Cornish has been offered the chance to direct Skull Island, the 
high-profile prequel to fantasy blockbuster King Kong,reports Deadline 
<http://www.deadline.com/2014/07/comic-con-legendary-wants-joe-cornish-for-skull-island/>
.

Cornish, whose low-budget sci-fi action movie Attack the Block 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/attack-the-block> has made him a sought-after 
director in Hollywood, would take the reins from Lord of the Rings director 
Peter Jackson if he accepts the job. The Kiwi film-maker's take on the giant 
ape legend pulled in $550m worldwide in 2005 despite lukewarm reviews.

Legendary Pictures, the production company behind Christopher Nolan's Batman 
films and 2013's Superman reboot, Man of Steel, announced plans for Skull 
Island at last week'sComic-Con event in San Diego 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jul/29/comic-con-debut-2014-movie-trailers-hobbit-hunger-games>
.

Cornish is currently weighing up his next project, and has reportedly also 
been offered the spy caper Section Six by Universal, which distributes 
Legendary Pictures' films. He has turned down other high-profile projects in 
the past, such as Star Trek 3 and A Good Day to Die Hard.

It is not known if Skull Island will be based on Joe DeVito and Brad 
Strickland's lavishly illustrated novel Kong: King of Skull Island,which was 
reported to be the source book for a proposed film five years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/jul/27/kong-king-of-skull-island-movie>.

The novel, which was published in 2005 to coincide with Jackson's film, a 
remake of the original 1933 King Kong, acts as both a prequel and a sequel to 
the famous tale. It sees Vincent Denham, son of over-reaching film-maker Carl, 
return toSkull Island <https://www.theguardian.com/film/skull-island> in search 
of his long-lost father. He is joined by Jack Driscoll, the playwright who 
journeyed with Denham 25 years previously and was played by Adrien Brody in 
Jackson's film. Together the pair begin to unravel the mysteries of the island.

Attack the Block <https://www.theguardian.com/film/attack-the-block>, a 2011 
science-fiction movie with horror elements in which a group of teenagers defend 
their south London tower block from aliens, remains Cornish's only film as 
director so far.
 