
Anu Singh (Maggie Naouri) sits among a circle of fellow Australian National 
University law students at a Canberra backyard night-time party, jokily putting 
down another student. She is portrayed in this film as fragile at heart, with 
low self-esteem.


She turns to her boyfriend, Joe Cinque (Jerome Meyer): a fresh-faced young 
civil engineer from Newcastle. She grossly exaggerates a car accident he has 
been in.

“Babe,” he tells her, “you’re lying.” 

Her eyes well up, perhaps because he has shamed her in company. “I’m just 
telling them how brave you were,” she says.

The real Joe Cinque is dead. It is day 25 of a six-week shoot for a new 
feature film, adapted from Helen Garner’s 2004 book about his killing, Joe 
Cinque’s Consolation.

Everywhere I Look by Helen Garner review – elegant reflections on life, 
writing and Russell Crowe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/22/everywhere-i-look-by-helen-garner-review-elegant-reflections-on-life-writing-and-russell-crowe>
Singh was convicted of manslaughter in 1999 
<http://netk.net.au/Australia/Singh1.asp> and spent four years in jail after 
psychiatrists for her defence argued she had been mentally ill at the time of 
Cinque’s death in October 1997 and therefore had diminished responsibility.

Cinque apparently never had any idea he was in danger. His agonising death 
would take a day and a half, after Singh doped him with Rohypnol and plunged 
fatal doses of heroin into his arm.

The question that disturbed not only Garner but also everyone else who has 
encountered this grim, surreal story: with rumours circulating the couple’s 
dinner parties about Singh’s deadly intentions, why didn’t anybody go to the 
police to report her?

Singh’s friend Madhavi Rao even helped procure the drugs Singh used on Cinque 
and witnessed Cinque lying drugged on the floor on the Sunday morning he died, 
his lips turning blue. Yet Rao would be found not guilty of murder, and 
acquitted.

The only motivation Garner could attribute to Cinque’s killing was that he had 
recommended Singh consider a drug, ipecac, which models took to keep their 
weight down. Singh began taking the drug, then blamed Cinque for subsequent 
physical illness. Singh’s trial heard she had told another man she wanted to 
procure a gun or heroin, to commit suicide and kill Cinque.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fjoe-cinques-consolation-toxic-relationships-and-the-mysteries-around-his-killing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61d64204c7b19789f6915868e7fbfff5483e0cf0%2F0_55_1650_990%2F1650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Cinque's%20Consolation%3A%20toxic%20relationships%20and%20the%20mysteries%20around%20his%20killing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fjoe-cinques-consolation-toxic-relationships-and-the-mysteries-around-his-killing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Cinque%27s%20Consolation%3A%20toxic%20relationships%20and%20the%20mysteries%20around%20his%20killing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fjoe-cinques-consolation-toxic-relationships-and-the-mysteries-around-his-killing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61d64204c7b19789f6915868e7fbfff5483e0cf0%2F0_55_1650_990%2F1650.jpg>
 The film Joe Cinque’s Consolation grapples with the question of how much 
responsibility Singh and her law school friends should bear for Cinque’s death. 
Photograph: Consolation Films 
Similarly to Garner’s book, this film, directed and cowritten by Sotiris 
Dounoukos, grapples with the moral, ethical and legal conundrum of what 
responsibility Singh and her law school friends should bear.

Dounoukos was also an ANU law student at the time, and knew both Singh and 
Cinque. He has spoken to Joe’s still-grieving parents, Nino and Maria, but 
refuses to say whether he has spoken to Singh for his film, though it seems 
unlikely. (Garner did not speak to Singh for the book, despite initial attempts 
to make contact.)

“Reading the book, even from [Garner’s] removed perspective as a viewer, her 
portrait of [Singh] was absolutely the person that we knew at law school,” 
Dounoukos says.

Clinical psychologist Dr Kenneth Byrne gave evidence for the defence in 
Singh’s trial that she had suffered “severe borderline personality disorder” 
since adolescence.

“What was driving her, I think, was a great deal of fear,” Dounoukos says, 
“and then very much the thing that drives people with borderline personality 
disorders: narcissism. People that are masters at entering and taking advantage 
of relationships, where there’s the narcissist and the enabler.

“Joe’s death sits within an extreme form of the kind of harm that those toxic 
relationships can lead to. Part of the tragedy is how oblivious he was to what 
was really happening.”

During her time in jail and since being released in 2001, Singh completed a 
masters in criminology 
<http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2004/08/08/1091903447496.html> at Sydney 
University with a thesis on the causes of female crime, including abuse, mental 
illness and drug use. In 2004,Radio National’s Phillip Adams asked Singh 
<http://www.abc.net.au/radionational/programs/latenightlive/joe-cinque-is-dead/3426180>
 how she came to be the girl who killed Joe Cinque. “I think it started two 
years prior to the event occurring,” she answered. “I went through a traumatic 
breakup with a long-term boyfriend and I went into a fairly deep state of 
depression ... I was [also] going through a fairly significant eating disorder 
and then, of course, drug abuse on top of that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fjoe-cinques-consolation-toxic-relationships-and-the-mysteries-around-his-killing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55f025f081181ba4b98dcf6fc0973862d5a6979%2F0_0_1650_1100%2F1650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Cinque's%20Consolation%3A%20toxic%20relationships%20and%20the%20mysteries%20around%20his%20killing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fjoe-cinques-consolation-toxic-relationships-and-the-mysteries-around-his-killing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Cinque%27s%20Consolation%3A%20toxic%20relationships%20and%20the%20mysteries%20around%20his%20killing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Fjoe-cinques-consolation-toxic-relationships-and-the-mysteries-around-his-killing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55f025f081181ba4b98dcf6fc0973862d5a6979%2F0_0_1650_1100%2F1650.jpg>
 Maggie Naouri, who plays Anu Singh, said she tried to avoid preconceptions 
about the character she was playing. Photograph: Consolation Films 
But Singh also told Adams: “I absolutely am responsible and take full 
responsibility for [Cinque’s death].”

Earlier this year, Singh told News Limited 
<http://www.news.com.au/lifestyle/real-life/news-life/what-i-did-was-a-horrible-thing-anu-singh-seeks-atonement-for-killing-joe-cinque/news-story/0da02270935eccc2c690d64b8b6f9fd6>
: “One of the psychiatrists mentioned a state of disassociation, perhaps, like 
disassociated from reality. I don’t know. There’s no rational explanation.”

Actor Maggie Naouri, who plays Singh, tried to avoid deep preconceptions. “I 
have to give myself the story as to why she saw the world like that, how come 
she was so sensitive. There’s a way she wants the world to see her and the way 
she is inside that’s very different. What are the triggers for that fragility?”

Producer Matthew Reeder describes the screenplay as watching a car crash in 
slow motion: you know a tragedy is going to happen. “But it’s the way you get 
to that disintegration that is so captivating. Sotiris has a very poetic visual 
style and a very precise screenplay.”

But, as Garner noted in her reporting of the trial, Singh’s story constantly 
hogged centre stage, at the expense of Cinque’s own story. Nino and Maria 
Cinque’s grief was never given form in court.

True-crime stories: a centuries-old craze from Ben Franklin to Making a 
Murderer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/07/making-a-murderer-serial-true-crime-genre>
Garner’s interviews with the Cinque family attempted to bridge that gaping 
absence. So too does Meyer in his performance as Joe: Meyer was welcomed into 
the Cinque family home while researching the role and was even allowed to sit 
in Joe’s chair at the family dinner table.

Why did Joe stay with Singh? “As a young male, there was a sexuality she had 
that would have ensnared him,” Meyer says. “Also, he had a carer complex: that 
fed part of his character. He had this person who was weak and frail, and that 
would have made him feel very good about himself.”

Did Meyer get a sense Joe Cinque’s parents are at peace? “No way. I heard a 
quote one time: ‘Grief never goes away. It just changes.’ When you talk to 
Maria especially – Nino is very quiet – when Maria speaks, it’s all still in 
her voice. She holds herself beautifully and she never lets the conversation go 
to a place of aggression. But it’s all still there.”

• Joe Cinque’s Consolation opens in cinemas nationally on 13 October
 