
Johnny Vaughan is to join Absolute Radio to front its Olympic Games coverage, 
four months after announcing a shock departure from his£1m-a-year role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/nov/18/johnny-vaughan-leaves-capital-fm?INTCMP=SRCH>
 at 95.8 Capital FM.

Vaughan, who walked out of his role as the London station's breakfast DJ after 
eight years when itemerged his contract would not be renewed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2011/nov/18/johnny-vaughan-leaves-capital-fm?INTCMP=SRCH>
, will join Absolute during the buildup to the Games.

Vaughan said: "For two weeks this summer we're celebrating the two greatest 
things Great Britain has given the world – sport and music. So I'm really 
looking forward to celebrating both."

From the day of the Olympics opening ceremony, 27 July, Vaughan will broadcast 
a daily two-hour show from 5pm.

Absolute said that the slot has been "specifically scheduled to appeal to 
audiences as the country travels home for the duration of the Games".

Vaughan's show will be repeated on the Absolute Radio Network – its range of 
digital "decade" stations, from the 1960s through to the noughties, as well as 
Classic Rock andAbsolute Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/absolute-radio> Extra – one-hour later from 
6pm to 8pm.

His show will be interwoven with the music that it is typically played on each 
of the seven stations.

The show will feature interviews with famous comedians, musicians, presenters 
and Olympians reflecting the big events, the obscure sports and the "day's 
talking points on and off the track".

A spokeswoman for Absolute Radio said that Vaughan is only under contract for 
the two-week period of theOlympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games>.

However, the broadcaster "see this as the start of a relationship with Johnny 
and it could lead to other things".

Vaughan left Capital in November and official radio listening figures show 
that in the final quarter of 2011 Capital FM had its best performance in nearly 
eight years.

Capital FM had 2.25 million average weekly listeners in the final quarter of 
2011, up 14.9% year on year,according to official Rajar figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/02/capital-fm-johnny-vaughan?INTCMP=SRCH>
, and regained the top spot among London commercial stations from Bauer Radio's 
Magic.

• To contact the MediaGuardian news desk email editor@mediatheguardian.com or 
phone 020 3353 3857. For all other inquiries please call the main Guardian 
switchboard on 020 3353 2000. If you are writing a comment for publication, 
please mark clearly "for publication".

• To get the latest media news to your desktop or mobile, follow MediaGuardian 
onTwitter <http://twitter.com/#!/mediaguardian> and Facebook 
<http://www.facebook.com/mediaguardian>
 