
The drive for power leads to deceit. Soon moral ruin comes in its train, then 
violence, then murder. This cycle of high hopes rolling down to hell in a 
handcart is probably plot No 2 in literature. (Plot No 1 being girl meets boy, 
etc.) Corruption of the soul, of the heart, of men, of power, of ideals and 
idealism has been at the dead centre of so many great books it’s kind of 
invidious to pick a top 10. Still, here we are.


My first thriller, Cold <http://www.johnsweeney.co.uk/>, touches on how too 
much veneration forGod and soil  
<http://gracchii.blogspot.co.uk/2009/05/god-and-soil-nationalism-religion.html>
– love of nation – can corrupt. The hero is an ex-IRA man, one of his allies an 
ex-Mormon CIA man wrestling with his religion. But events in modern Russia 
inspired it: things I’ve seen with my own eyes from Chechnya to Moscow, from 
Siberia to Sochi. It’s not about Putin, but while working as a journalist, I’ve 
met him and three of his critics:Anna Politkovskaya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/oct/09/guardianobituaries.russia>, 
Natasha Estemirova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/15/chechnya-natalia-estemirova-murdered>
 andBoris Nemtsov <https://www.theguardian.com/world/boris-nemtsov>. They all 
got murdered, reason enough to dedicate Cold to their memories.


Below is my idiosyncratic selection of the books that pass two tests: they’re 
all great reads, and their subjects are rotten to the core.


1. Macbeth by William Shakespeare 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/oxford-shakespeare-the-tragedy-of-macbeth.html>
It still grips me, this play written in 1611 about a Scottish nobleman 
corrupted by the lust for power who goes on to kill a good king and – to secure 
his grip on the throne – keeps on killing. Rereading Macbeth, you get the 
flavour of what it must be like to be at the court of Kim Jong-un in Pyongyang, 
or of Caliph Al-Baghdadi in Isisland: “It will have blood, they say; blood will 
have blood.”

2. Darkness at Noon by Arthur Koestler 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/darkness-at-noon.html>
The outstanding novel about how the Russian revolution became twisted by 
Stalinism. It’s great literature, but at its heart is the corruption of a human 
soul, as the great revolutionary Rubashov allows himself to be ruined – and 
ruin others he loves – to serve an ideal. When people rot, Koestler tells us, 
they do so from within.


3. Chinatown by Robert Towne 
<http://www.screenplay.com/downloads/scripts/Chinatown.pdf>
Picking a screenplay is a cheat. Yeah, but it’s Chinatown. To me, this is the 
defining work of art about the corruption that is the essence of LA; the 
living, breathing, pulsing dishonesty of Tinseltown. At the dead centre of the 
American Dream is a lie, a city built on wrongdoing. When power indulges in 
murder, hypocrisy and paedophilia, the forces of law and order don’t just look 
the other way, they entrap the honest detective. He ends up with slit nostrils. 
The helplessness of ordinary people in the face of corrupt entitlement has 
never been better told.

4. Zinky Boys: Soviet Voices from the Afghan War by Svetlana Alexievich 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/boys-in-zinc.html>
The 2015 Nobel laureate’s stunning work on the Soviet agony in Afghanistan is 
simply written but no less profound for that. She tells the stories of 
individual soldiers and Soviet citizens, in Kabul and elsewhere, coming to 
realise that the ideals of fraternity and solidarity the old men in Moscow 
spout are toxic. It’s a lament for a noble idealism that turned sick. The boys 
were sent home in zinc coffins – hence the title.

5. Bare-Faced Messiah by Russell Miller 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/bare-faced-messiah-the-true-story-of-l-ron-hubbard.html>
This extraordinary biography of L Ron Hubbard tells the gobsmacking truth 
about the greatest conman of the 20th century, a title for which there’s a lot 
of competition. Miller considers Scientology’s boasts about their founder and 
on critical examination, all of it – that L Ron was a war hero, an explorer, a 
nuclear scientist (and not a bigamist) – turns to dust. But at a higher level, 
the book tells us something about how feeding the longing for a god can, if 
corrupted, get very, very crooked indeed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fjohn-sweeneys-top-10-books-on-corruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4328171571ac0e6d650633678df9704419adf867%2F0_536_1966_1266%2F1966.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Sweeney's%20top%2010%20books%20on%20corruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fjohn-sweeneys-top-10-books-on-corruption%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Sweeney%27s%20top%2010%20books%20on%20corruption&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fjohn-sweeneys-top-10-books-on-corruption%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4328171571ac0e6d650633678df9704419adf867%2F0_536_1966_1266%2F1966.jpg>
 Under-told story … Alec Guinness in the 1959 film of Our Man in Havana. 
Photograph: Allstar/Cinetext/Columbia 
6. Our Man in Havana by Graham Greene 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/our-man-in-havana-2.html>
In this satire on the fantasy land of the intelligence agencies, specifically 
MI6 (for whom Greene worked), the urge to make a bit of money on the side in a 
corrupt and seedy pre-Castro Cuba entraps the hero. He ends up constructing a 
web of deceit that envelops him and others to their cost. It’s the under-told 
story that too many James Bonds are on the take.

7. The Big Sleep by Raymond Chandler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/nov/24/100-best-novels-the-big-sleep-raymond-chandler>
Into the city with no more personality than a paper cup, Chandler’s genius was 
to place a knight in battered armour, a heavy-drinking, chess-playing Sir 
Galahad transposed to 1940s LA. In this reworking of the Knights of the Round 
Table, Mordred is the city’s immoral rich, his thanes bent cops and 
smooth-talking, grey-suited mobsters. A corrupt city has never been so 
skilfully drawn.

8. Maxwell: The Rise and Fall of Robert Maxwell and His Empire by Roy 
Greenslade <https://www.theguardian.com/fromthearchive/story/0,,1078193,00.html>
The sickly sweet corruption of journalists in thrall to an ogre from a 
medieval fairy story, Greenslade’s account of the madness of those under the 
monstrous whim of King Bob is hilarious and tragic, both at the same time. But 
as newspaper finances collapse, this book also salutes print journalism’s 
richer, funnier, ignoble past.

Top 10 dodgy lawyers in literature
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/07/top-10-dodgy-lawyers-in-literature>
9. The War Diaries of Count Galeano Ciano 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/war-diaries-of-count-galeazzo-ciano-1939-43.html>
Vainglorious, conceited, sometimes silly, Count Ciano was Mussolini’s foreign 
minister and son-in-law. Grubby, on the make and with a love of the good life, 
Ciano was a fairweather fascist who understood the far deeper evil of Nazi 
Germany and did his ineffective best to save Italy’s honour and overthrow his 
father-in-law, for a time. When the Nazis rescued Mussolini, Ciano was shot in 
the back on the orders of the old man. But his diaries record Italy’s descent 
from corruption into something far worse, providing posterity a window into 
Mussolini’s dark soul.

10. The Unravelling by Emma Sky 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/unravelling-413469.html>
Sky, a punky, anti-war English liberal, provides a ringside seat from within 
the US military to the aftermath of the invasion of Iraq and the moral quagmire 
into which the west’s great warriors sank. The funny thing is that eventually 
the Americans corrected some of their mistakes with the surge and got enough 
boots on the ground to end murderous chaos and restore order. Then Obama came 
in – and the US left Iraq in the hands of a hopelessly incompetent sectarian, 
paving the way for Islamic State. This is a nicely told morality tale, of how 
high hopes of installing democracy ended up souring and corrupting the American 
soul.

 * John Sweeney’s debut thriller Cold is published by Thomas & Mercer priced 
£8.99 <http://www.johnsweeney.co.uk/?p=my.publications>.
 