
John Oliver has taken aim at the FBI’s renewed investigation into Hillary 
Clinton’s emails and the connection with disgraced politicianAnthony Weiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/anthony-weiner>.

John Oliver challenges Trump on election results: 'Take the bet, Donald'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/24/john-oliver-donald-trump-last-week-tonight>
In his HBO show Last Week Tonight with John Oliver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/john-oliver>, he referred to this 
year’s election as “the shit-filled cornucopia that just keeps on giving 2016”.

He joked: “Bacardi should really consider switching their slogan to Bacardi: 
because there might be more fucking Clinton emails.”

Oliver expressed suspicion over the FBI announcing their decision to 
investigate emails found on a laptop used by Clinton’s aide Huma Abedin, the 
estranged wife of Weiner.

“OK so nine days out from the election, the FBI has basically delivered us the 
equivalent of a mystery box and like the box from the end of Seven – it could 
contain anything from nothing to Gwyneth Paltrow’s head,” he said. “Although it 
almost definitely contains Anthony Weiner’s penis.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4odN5g_urjI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4odN5g_urjI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D4odN5g_urjI&media=>
The reason behind the discovery also led to Oliver calling this out as a new 
low for a particularly controversial election

“The grinding hell of this election has thrown in yet another twist with the 
election potentially hanging in the balance,” he said. “All thanks to the fact 
that Anthony Weiner allegedly sexted with a 15-year-old girl.”

Oliver continued: “Now, a month ago when Donald Trump tweeted we should check 
out a sex tape of a former Miss Universe contestant, I said if you looked up, 
you would see rock bottom. Well if you look up now, you will see absolutely 
nothing and I’ll tell you why: we have burrowed through, not just rock bottom, 
but through the core of the earth and we’ve come bursting out the other side, 
startling kangaroos and we’re currently hurtling toward outer space and there 
is no up, down, light or darkness, just an endless void in which death comes as 
sweet, sweet relief. Please let this thing be over soon.”
 