
Conservative Republicans are gunning for House Speaker John Boehner – from his 
three primary opponents, whom he beat easily on Tuesday, to his own Number 2, 
to the conservative newbies trying to keep their tea partying constituents 
happy. But liberals should enjoy Boehner while they still can.

After 64 years on earth, four of them in high school and eight in the House 
Republican leadership, it is difficult to imagine that Boehner could hear anynew
double entendres about his last name. This election cycle might have been the 
first time that someone used one against him in a campaign ad. One of those 
three opponents, JD Winteregg, appealed to voters searching for a cure to "
electile dysfunction 
<http://www.msnbc.com/hardball/boehner-opponent-ad-electile-dysfunction>". 
Winteregg lost his job teaching at a Christian college over the stunt – and 
didn't even come close to besting Boehnerwhen the totals came in Tuesday night 
across Ohio 
<http://atr.rollcall.com/john-boehner-j-d-winteregg-ohio-primary-tea-party/>.

Winteregg is not the only Republican to take a below-the-belt swing at the 
speaker. Actually, most of John Boehner's true enemies are Republicans, like 
his pun-slinging primary opponent – and they're almost just as subtle.

Boehner's most obvious enemies in the House are the Tea Party agitators – 
they're the ones who crow to reporters about his betrayal and openly plot 
coups. And he's not interested in the same issues as the Tea Party members, a 
former colleague tells me: "I don't think he even likes them."

The speaker's sense of self-preservation is well-honed enough that I believe 
he will likely escape the machinations of his compatriots. Unlike the rebellion 
that brewed under Newt Gingrich, the Tea Party froth comes from a distinct (if 
vocal) subculture within the party, rather than the GOP rank-and-file. Most of 
the critics are members of the House "Liberty Caucus", and largely talk amongst 
themselves rather than actively solicit the support of less radical 
representatives.


Still, that doesn't mean Boehner's planning to hold on to the gavel for 
another two years. As another of his former colleagues told me: "He has the 
loyalty of too many people to get voted out, but he doesn't want his legacy to 
be the guy that oversaw the 100th failed effort to repeal Obamacare."

In other words, John Boehner's legacy wouldn't be the 100th failed effort to 
repeal Obamacare – it would be turning into the guy smart enough to leave after 
the 99th.

But Boehner's most dangerous enemy is the man standing next to him at press 
conferences: Eric Cantor. The majority leader benefits from being able to play 
that podium-sized distance between him and Boehner as a wide gulf; even more to 
the point, he benefits from being the one to hand out checks to upstarts.

Cantor has his hand in not one but two "leadership PACs", helming his own 
Every Republican Is Crucial (see what he did there?) PAC, which gave twice as 
much – $1.5m – to GOP candidates this cycle as Boehner. This spring, Cantor 
moved quickly to capitalize on theMcCutcheon campaign finance decision 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2014/04/02/mccutcheon-v-fec_n_5076518.html> to 
form a "joint fundraising committees 
<http://sunlightfoundation.com/blog/2014/04/23/cantor-joints-forces-with-six-other-va-reps/>
" and benefit from the new upper limit on campaign donations from a single 
person (which went from $48,600 to $2.2m in the wake of the ruling). Boehner, 
by comparison, spent a meager $715k on the campaigns of other members, which is 
a sign of either supreme self-confidence or apathy about his future.

And as unease about Boehner from the far right has grown, Cantor has reportedly
 
<http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/house-conservatives-plot-to-oust-boehner-put-scare-into-cantor-20140410>
 been willing to capitalize on their discontent and install a tea partier as 
his own deputy to get the votes to unseat Boehner as the next speaker of the 
House.

Cantor wants the job, but he hasn't actually endeared himself to the tea 
partiers whose support he needs to get it, as evidenced by disgruntled 
conservatives'threats 
<http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/after-venting-over-sneaky-doc-fix-vote-house-gop-coalesces-behind-ryan-budget-20140402>
 to withhold their votes on Paul Ryan's budget to protest Cantor's "sneaky" 
move onthe Medicare "doc fix" vote 
<http://blog.heritage.org/2014/04/08/conservatives-vent-house-vote-medicare-doc-fix/>
. His disloyalty to Boehner and willingness to cut a deal for the top spot 
means they don't see him as the "enemy of their enemy" so much as someone 
without any loyalties whatsoever.

But if not Cantor or some Tea Party favorite, who could actually succeed 
Boehner? The lack of other obvious choices shows there's no one for his 
internal opposition to coalesce behind.

What Republican is popular enough, politically savvy enough and brave enough 
to try and herd those House cats? The smart and savvy seem singularly 
uninterested: up-and-comers Jeb Hensarling and Jim Jordan, for instance, have 
repeatedlydenied 
<http://www.nationaljournal.com/congress/house-conservatives-plot-to-oust-boehner-put-scare-into-cantor-20140410>
 any such ambitions.

And who can blame them? As one former member put it 
<http://www.breitbart.com/Big-Government/2014/04/22/Eric-Cantor-Shadow-Job-Interview-For-Speaker>
: "You would have to be a serious masochist to want that job."

That just leaves the loose cannons that no sane Republican really wants in 
charge: Speaker Louie Gohmert, whopostulated 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/07/20/louie-gohmert-aurora-shootings_n_1689099.html>
 that the Aurora massacre happened people don't pray at high school 
graduations; Speaker John Culberson, whocompared 
<http://www.newrepublic.com/article/114924/meet-john-culberson-house-republican-who-said-lets-roll>
 the congressmen that shut the government down to the heroes that charged the 
cockpit of United flight 93; or, Speaker Paul Broun, who hasaccused 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/the-origin-americas-top-tea-partier> Obama of 
plotting an armed takeover and called evolution "lies straight from the pit of 
hell".

That is perhaps the fondest home of some Democrats – and some political 
writers: for the Republicans to install someone so out-there to most Americans 
that the entire party would be tainted going into the 2016 presidential 
election.

But liberals should be careful what they wish for. Wacked-out culture warriors 
make for good fundraising appeals and Upworthy videos, but polarizing an 
electorate doesn't necessarily move those in the middle to one side or another 
– they usually wind up just dropping out.

What's more, a truly dedicated obstructionist force of cultural conservatives 
in the House could slow down not just legislation, but the country's entire 
economic recovery: Boehner may be aroadblock 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/republican-senator-pushes-john-boehner-to-pass-unemployment-bill/>
 to extending unemployment benefits, but at least the economy is what he wants 
to talk about. Friends even say that Boehner would be happy to talk aboutonly 
the economy.

It seems hard to believe that we could ever look back fondly on the past four 
years: just consider the record-level unpopularity of Congress, the 
unprecedented gridlock and the willingness of many of its members to simply 
walk out on their jobs. But considering what we might expect from a the Tea 
Party Reign, the whole Boehner Era might take on a familiar sepia tone. We 
could even miss him when he's gone.

 