
From Edward Scissorhands' gothic pallor to Jack Sparrow's guyliner-friendly 
swashbuckling, his rose-tinted Mad Hatter to his dazzle-painted Tonto, Johnny 
Depp has always been partial to a bit of greasepaint. And now all those hours 
in the makeup chair have been rewarded, with the Distinguished Artisan award 
from theMake-Up Artists and Hair Stylists Guild <http://www.local706.org/>. 

This is a new awards category from the industry body, which celebrates an 
actor who has made particularly artistic collaborations with hair and makeup 
specialists. The award will be presented by Joel Harlow, the Oscar-winning 
make-up artist who worked with Depp onThe Lone Ranger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156526/lone-ranger> and the Pirates of 
the Caribbean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2014/jan/15/pirates-of-the-caribbean-on-stranger-tides-watch-with-us-from-755pm>
 movies as well as the fortcomingTranscendence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/jan/02/transcendence-trailer-johnny-depp-sci-fi>
.

"Makeup and hair artisans agree that Johnny Depp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/johnnydepp> is a wonderful selection to 
receive our first Distinguished Artisan Award," guild president Susan 
Cabral-Ebert said in a statement. "He, probably more than any other actor 
working today, uses the skills of our members to delineate his characters. Depp 
has constantly been an outstanding supporter of our crafts, ultimately 
respectful and appreciative of our members' abilities and generous with his 
creative collaboration. A great artist himself, he allows others to shine."

The awards take place on 15 February at Paramount studios, and its nominations 
include a mix of Oscar favourites and curveballs with tonsorial innovation. The 
Paul Potts biopicOne Chance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156210/one-chance> gets nominations in 
both Best Contemporary Hair Styling and Best Contemporary Make-up, while the 
aforementioned Lone Ranger also gets two nominations.

It'll have strong competition in the Best Period and/or Character Hair Styling 
category fromAmerican Hustle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156243/american-hustle> however, in 
which Jeremy Renner and Bradley Cooper effectively co-starred alongside their 
own hair, and from Steve Jobs biopicJobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/156375/jobs>, which accurately 
replicated the Apple founder's Lego cut atop Ashton Kutcher.
 