
John McFarlane has a fearsome reputation for shaking up companies soon after 
he joins them.

Barclays said Antony Jenkins’ abrupt departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/08/barclays-fires-chief-executive-antony-jenkins>
 as chief executive was triggered by non-executives agreeing that his time was 
up. But McFarlane’s arrival as chairman less than two months ago surely played 
a part.

Barclays fires chief executive Antony Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/08/barclays-fires-chief-executive-antony-jenkins>
The veteran banker helped oust Andrew Moss as Aviva’s chief executive in May 
2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/may/08/aviva-chief-executive-steps-down>
 after a shareholder revolt over pay and financial performance. There, too, he 
became stand-in executive chairman, running the insurer for eight months, 
reining in costs and redrawing its strategy.


McFarlane was named as Barclays’ chairman in September 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/sep/12/john-mcfarlane-barclays-chairman-bank-aviva>
, having vehemently denied any interest in the job. He took over from Sir David 
Walker, who spent three years as chairman, at the bank’s annual meeting in 
April and is paid £800,000 a year.

At the meeting, disgruntled shareholders called for McFarlane to repeat his 
shakeup of Aviva at Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/23/barclays-agm-new-chairman-john-mcfarlane>
. One shareholder told the board that only two directors were left at Aviva 
after McFarlane “arrived at Aviva with his axe”. Another said he was looking 
forward to McFarlane wielding his chainsaw at Barclays.

McFarlane sat impassively throughout but he issued an unusual letter to 
investors suggesting that protesters at the meeting might get their way.Barclays
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> was changing too slowly, costs 
were too high, businesses might need to be closed and the bank needed to settle 
disputes with regulators, he said.

“While substantial progress has been achieved … it is transparent that a great 
deal still needs to be done,” he said.

McFarlane also played a part in the ejection of Fred Goodwin as chief 
executive of Royal Bank of Scotland. He became a director of RBS in October 
2008 – two weeks before the bank’s rescue by taxpayers. McFarlane later said he 
was “slightly instrumental in the change of the chief executive” at RBS.

He was tipped to become RBS’s chairman but the job went to Sir Philip Hampton. 
McFarlane stayed on as a non-executive director of RBS until he became Aviva 
chairman in 2012.

McFarlane has chaired the Scottish-based bus and train operator FirstGroup 
since January. Soon after arrivinghe cleared out half of the company’s board 
and quashed hopes of a resumption of dividend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/21/firstgroup-chairman-revamps-board-quashes-dividend-hopes>
 payments at the indebted company.

Tim O’Toole, FirstGroup’s chief executive, was under pressure when McFarlane 
arrived but has survived in the job. McFarlane will leave FirstGroup in July, 
having taken the Barclays job.

The Scottish-born banker is best known in Australian banking circles after 
running ANZ – Australia and New ZealandBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group – for a decade until 
September 2007.

He turned the bank into one of the region’s most respected companies by 
focusing on retail banking, cutting investment banking and expanding in China. 
Before ANZ he was an executive director at Standard Chartered, the Asia-focused 
UK bank, and headed Citibank’s UK and Ireland business.

McFarlane started his business career in manufacturing at Ford’s European 
operation in 1969. He moved back to the UK from Australia in 2012 to chair 
Aviva. Outside of his business career, he has played in a skiffle band called 
the Sekrets and now grows olives in Provence.

A reputation for cost control and a willingness to oust chief executives have 
led some UK journalists to label him Mack the Knife. McFarlane said on 
Wednesday he did not recognise the nickname and that cost cuts were only part 
of his work at Aviva.

“Tripling the market cap and doubling the stock price isn’t about knives its 
about accelerating”. He said slashing costs had not been a hallmarkt of his 
40-year-career but he said: “I am decisive and that’s fair enough … Look at my 
track record: it’s largely about process not just about cost.”

In Australia, newspapers called him Johnny Hollywood in honour of his 
performing past and willingness to sing songs such as House of the Rising Sun 
at corporate and charity events.
 