
John Howard <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/john-howard> says 
there is no need to ban political donations from trade unions or corporations.

The former prime minister says the only thing that needs to be fixed is more 
timely disclosure of donations, because voters have to wait far too long to see 
who is donating to whom.

Just days after the Labor senator Sam Dastyari resigned from Labor’s frontbench
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/07/sam-dastyari-steps-down-from-labor-frontbench-over-donations-row>
 amid questions about donations from a wealthy Chinese businessman, Howard said 
the whole political class in Australia had been “panicked” about the donations 
issue.

Australian political donations: how hard would it really be to clean up?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/10/australian-political-donations-how-hard-would-it-really-be-to-clean-up>
He said he was “completely at odds” with the positions taken by Malcolm 
Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, Tony 
Abbott and Bill Shorten on the need for political donation reform.

“I am not against foreign donations, I don’t believe in banning corporate 
donations, I don’t believe in banning trade union donations, so therefore I’m 
the odd man out in this whole debate,” Howard told Sky News on Sunday.


“The one big change that’s needed is more timely disclosure of donations. 
Transparency is the key.


“It seems as if we are, as a collective political class, saying federal 
politics is so potentially corrupt that we’ve got to insulate ourselves against 
undue financial influence. In all the years I was in federal politics I did not 
see any significant evidence of corruption.

“We bewail the fact that people don’t respect politicians. Well, you won’t win 
respect if you, by implication, admit you’re capable of being bribed by the 
size of a donation.

“So I am completely at odds with what Tony Abbott said, what I hear Malcolm 
saying, what I hearBill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten> saying. I think 
transparency is the key. You can debate as to whether it should be disclosed in 
24 hours, 24 days, 24 weeks but it’s far too long now.”

Turnbull, Abbott and other Liberals have been calling for only individuals to 
be allowed to donate to political parties, in effect banning union, foreign and 
corporate donations.

Malcolm Turnbull cites 'clear economic plan' as biggest win in first year in 
office
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/malcolm-turnbull-cites-clear-economic-plan-as-biggest-win-in-first-year-in-office>
On Thursday, while travelling in Laos, Turnbull said he had argued for many 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/08/malcolm-turnbull-says-ideally-donations-should-be-limited-to-australian-voters>
 that “ideally, donations to political parties should be limited to people who 
are on the electoral roll – voters”.

“I would like, if we can manage it, financial participation in the election 
process to be limited to those people who can vote and that’s where we should 
get to,” he said.

After his near-death election loss, Turnbull has also been seeking to widen 
the reform conversation to include spending on political campaigns by 
third-party entities, including unions and GetUp.

Last week Abbott said: “We need to look long and hard at restricting donations 
to real people on the electoral roll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/abbott-joins-call-for-ban-on-donations-from-unions-and-corporations>
.”

He told Fairfax Media 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/tony-abbott-speaks-out-on-donations-reform-challenges-turnbull-government-20160908-grbo4u.html>
: “To that end, there should be no union donations, company donations or 
foreign donations.”

Labor backs a ban on foreign donations but opposes a ban on union and 
corporate donations, which the shadow attorney general, Mark Dreyfus, has 
warned the high court has already found is unconstitutional.
 