
"Jonathan Creek? Is that still on?". That will doubtless be the surprised 
declaration uttered over many a TV listings page this Easter. But after an 
almost three-year break Alan Davies is once more donning his duffel coat to 
appear as the asthe grumpy, frizzy-haired magician sleuth 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/nov/27/jonathan-creek-natalie-haynes-tv-detectives>
 in a new special: The Clue of the Savant's Thumb.

The show's return even shocked writer David Renwick 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/media/2006/nov/27/tvandradio.television> – who 
presumed that the show, whichfirst aired 16 years ago 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dEoGd3UZlCY>, was destined never to come back 
after its final full series in 2004. There was a five-year wait for the next 
single adventure in 2009. "We thought it was over when the BBC had issued this 
cellophane-wrapped definitive box set and then we upset it all with two more 
specials," he said.

The show seems to have refound favour with the BBC, with a further three more 
one-off mysteries to be filmed this autumn –BBC1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> controller Danny Cohen is apparently a 
fan. Creek, it seems, has risen from the dead in a manner that would have the 
man himself struggling for a rational explanation. Presumably it would involve 
swapped bodies, carefully concealed clues and two or three other twists of 
outlandish improbability – although a more pragmatic reason may be Renwick's 
habit of agonising over the plot.

But do we still care about the curly-haired detective? Should we be pleased to 
see his return to screens?

Personally speaking, I love Creek. There is nothing quite like it: a detective 
story without a detective; more a howdunnit than a whodunnit. But it's fresh in 
other ways as well. Along with a dose of creepiness, it's no surprise that 
Renwick, writer of One Foot in the Grave and Not the Nine O'Clock News, also 
slips some dry, funny moments under the door. The moment in the 2009 special 
when Creek pours a cup of tea into his groin worked perfectly – you can see it 
coming, the cup poised, making the inevitable moment it does all the more 
delicious.

Essentially Creek is posh hokum – Midsomer Murders 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/sep/17/tv-detectives-midsomer-murders-barnaby>
 with brains and genuine criminal ingenuity – but what's wrong with that? All 
the crimes seem impossible at first, and ingenious when you find out what 
happened. And, while I consider myself a pretty good sleuth when it comes to 
Marples and Morses, I have never come close to guessing how a Creek crime was 
committed. Renwick has also never borrowed one of his nutty ideas from anyone 
else –magician Ali Bongo 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/uk/2009/mar/09/ali-bongo-magician-dies> did work as 
a consultant on early shows, but only to advise on technical details. "I have 
never even met Derren Brown," Renwick assures me.

 Of course, Benedict Cumberbatch 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/benedict-cumberbatch>'s Sherlock has 
rather stolen JC's thunder 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/jan/16/sherlock-how-fake-own-death>
 in recent years, but there is more to Creek than ingenious plot devices. I am 
not going to pretend Davies is the greatest actor in the world, but he's helped 
create a definite one-off, delightfully at odds with the crazy worlds he 
confronts.

And I mean crazy. A show that has guest stars ranging from Jim Bowen to John 
Bird; Griff Rhys Jones to Tamsin Greig can not be accused of taking itself too 
seriously, whatever else. Renwick, never afraid to have a joke at his own 
expense, packs Creek with gothic mansions, creaking staircases, crunching 
gravel and moonlit thunderstorms. The magician's faraway look frequently and 
hilariously reminds me ofVelma from Scooby Doo 
<http://www.google.co.uk/search?q=velma+scooby+doo&hl=en&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ei=GM5RUaXQF6iw0AWg1oHQCg&ved=0CDAQsAQ&biw=1521&bih=1063>
.

And it's survived. Creek has had three female sidekicks – Caroline Quentin 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VHE4diUfy4c>, Julia Sawalha 
<http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dUqRl4VNgUE> and now Sheridan Smith 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/culture/2012/dec/30/sheridan-smith-television>, who, 
for all her brassy breeziness, contributes more than her fair share of 
detective work to the cases.

"Once you are hooked into the story you want to find out what happens," 
explains Davies. "It's because it's so well crafted that we don't have that 
many," he adds. "There should be a bust of David at MediaCity, there really 
should."
 