
Please Like Me may well be the only show this year to begin its season 
premiere with a threesome. The awkward exchange of kisses between Josh, his 
boyfriend, Arnold, and a handsome interloper is made even more awkward by the 
knowledge that one of the actors – the show’s creator and star,Josh Thomas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/josh-thomas> – was directing the scene at 
the time.

“It was Jackson [Gallagher], that boy’s second day on set, and I’m like, ‘OK, 
so you’re going to kiss me, and then you’re going to kiss him, and I need you 
to roll around … ’,” he laughs, horrified at the memory. “It’s especially weird 
when we’re doing so many sex scenes this season. A few times I’d be like, 
kissing a boy, and then I’d yell ‘Cut!’ into his mouth.”


It’s not Thomas’s first time in the director’s chair (he directed an episode 
in season three), but season four of the acclaimed series finds him splitting 
the directing duties evenly with Matthew Saville. Thomas felt confident taking 
on the role now that the show has settled into a creative groove, though he 
admits he quickly realised that becoming a showrunner who also directs might 
have indicated he was drunk on power.

Please Like Me: this millennial comedy is more than just the Australian Girls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/oct/16/please-like-me-josh-thomas-australia-girls-thomas-ward>
“If it wasn’t working, I would’ve [sacked myself],” he cackles, before adding, 
“I just wanted to get the experience, and I have learned so much over the last 
few years. I just really like all the control, as long as things are going 
well. As soon as they’re not going so well, I can’t turn to anyone and get 
frustrated.”

In an attempt to put him at ease, I mention an anecdote the actor Barbara 
Hershey once shared about Martin Scorsese crying on set about how he thought 
the film was a mess and nobody was going to like it. Thomas seems relieved to 
hear it.


“There were days like that, where I was just like, ‘Well, this is 
impossible,’” he recalls. “But I can’t get upset about it because I have to act 
it; I can’t take on the burden of, say, going into overtime, because the reason 
that we’re going into overtime is because I’m not doing a very good job of 
looking happy, you know? So it’s about emotional control, and not taking stress 
into scenes with actors; that’s the biggest learning curve for me, learning how 
to not let on if we were fucked.”


If the team was in trouble at any juncture throughout the production, the 
first two episodes of season four (Babaganoush and Porridge) do a very good job 
of hiding it. Picking up not long after season three’s eventful Christmas 
finale, the show once more revels in its trademark melding of the heartwarming 
and excruciating.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fjosh-thomas-on-the-new-season-of-please-like-me-the-hardest-thing-now-is-being-surprising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52689deb7e276052a4f05f5a43cf5f106e58f28f%2F0_0_3810_5460%2F3810.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Josh%20Thomas%20on%20Please%20Like%20Me%20season%20four%3A%20'We're%20doing%20so%20many%20sex%20scenes'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fjosh-thomas-on-the-new-season-of-please-like-me-the-hardest-thing-now-is-being-surprising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Josh%20Thomas%20on%20Please%20Like%20Me%20season%20four%3A%20%27We%27re%20doing%20so%20many%20sex%20scenes%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fjosh-thomas-on-the-new-season-of-please-like-me-the-hardest-thing-now-is-being-surprising%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52689deb7e276052a4f05f5a43cf5f106e58f28f%2F0_0_3810_5460%2F3810.jpg>
 Josh Thomas on directing Please Like Me: ‘I just really like all the control, 
as long as things are going well.’ Photograph: ABC TV 
“I feel like when we show you them driving away on vacation [in Porridge], as 
happy as they are in the beginning, you know they’re not going to be driving 
home happy, by now, after 38 episodes! But I read this thing the other day 
where someone was like, ‘It’s gonna make you sad at the end,’ and I don’t want 
people to be expecting that every time. So we do have some episodes where that 
doesn’t happen, and that’s the hardest thing now: trying to be surprising.

“We’ve done MDMA and abortion, we did suicide a few times, and we’ve done 
underarm hair … Josh has never had a job, but I never find those [potential] 
storylines very thrilling; I don’t really care about people at work.”


I ask Thomas whether he feels the burden of expectation from viewers who want 
Please Like Me to exactly reflect their own particular lived experience. “Gay 
people, all the time, get annoyed at the way gay people are portrayed [on the 
show], and it’s like, there are lots of bad gay people, you know, some gay 
people text while driving. We’re not a team; we’re all separate,” he says, 
wearily.


The show has a big fanbase in China and Russia, where it is downloaded 
illegally by a brace of fans, many of them LGBT people in fear of persecution. 
“That’s what you want, you know?” he says. “The gay Australians are like, ‘Oh 
we’re so glad to get some representation,’ but when the gay Russians get it, 
you’re like, yeah, that’s legit.”


Perhaps, I suggest, it’s because representation and diversity is so scarce 
across mostAustralian television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australian-television> content that the 
shows that do offer diversity suddenly have to be everything to everyone? 
“Which we aim to do!” Thomas says, laughing.


Josh Thomas and why no one is watching Australia's best comedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/australia-culture-blog/2014/aug/26/josh-thomas-please-like-me-interview>
Where to, then, for Australian television? “Those networks, I guess, don’t 
think that people want to watch people that aren’t white, but I don’t know if 
they’ve ever really checked with anyone. Those TV executives, their job isn’t 
to take risks and succeed, their job is to not fail.”


It’s a topic seemingly close to Thomas’s heart, and he is genuinely baffled at 
commercial networks’ lack of creative bravery, let alone their apparent fear of 
progress. “I feel like reality TV used to be so much better at diversity: 
Australian Idol and Big Brother, they were the diverse shows, that’s what was 
so cool about them. But Channel Nine’s Big Brother was just, like, white, hot 
people. Like, The Block or The Bachelorette – I mean it’s spooky to look at 
them all lined up in a row.”

Bec Shaw (@Brocklesnitch) 
i'm not racist but i cannot tell any of these men apart 
pic.twitter.com/jyDr6P47lu <https://t.co/jyDr6P47lu>
 <https://twitter.com/Brocklesnitch/status/788527603938230272> October 18, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/Brocklesnitch/status/788527603938230272> 
No Activity: Patrick Brammall and Darren Gilshenan deliver Australian farce at 
its finest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/26/no-activity-patrick-brammall-and-darren-gilshenan-deliver-australian-farce-at-its-finest>
Please Like Me’s success in the US might suggest Thomas could be en route to 
further success but as yet he’s not convinced Tinseltown has much to offer 
beyond The Player-esque self-parody. “I go to LA and do these ‘general 
meetings’, where you go in a room and sit and ‘meet each other’ and chat for 
half an hour, which is not a good thing for me to be doing because I’m not good 
at ‘chatting’. Especially with Americans, because they’re so earnest and they 
don’t really understand that I’m joking, ever. (I really don’t know what they 
get when they watch the show.) They all say, ‘Well, we’d love to work 
together!’ every meeting, so it’s impossible to get a gauge of who’s 
interested.”


Part of Thomas’s circumspection may be due to the fact that the US cable 
channel Pivot – Please Like Me’s co-producer with the ABC since season two – 
recently ceased operations, something that Thomas announces without fanfare. 
“We don’t know definitely that we’re not doing another season of this show, but 
our [US] network shut down, so that doesn’t seem like a good omen. I don’t know 
… ”


Then he laughs again, that trademark Thomas giggle. “Are there any jobs going 
at the Guardian?”

• Series four of Please Like Me 
<http://www.abc.net.au/tv/programs/please-like-me/> starts on ABC TV on 9 
November at 9.30pm

 