
The release of investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/investigative-journalist-khadija-ismayilova-freed-azerbaijan-radio-free-europe>
 from an Azerbaijani prison has drawn applause from international human rights 
groups, but it has also highlighted the plight of numerous other activists and 
journalists who remain behind bars in the oil-rich former Soviet republic.

Investigative journalist Khadija Ismayilova freed in Azerbaijan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/investigative-journalist-khadija-ismayilova-freed-azerbaijan-radio-free-europe>
The US-based rights watchdog Freedom House 
<https://freedomhouse.org/country/azerbaijan> estimates there are still more 
than 80 political prisoners in Azerbaijan, while at least five journalists 
remain jailed on a range of charges, including alleged hooliganism and 
drug-related offences.

Dunja Mijatovic, a representative for the Organisation for Security and 
Cooperation in Europe, urged Baku to “release all remaining members of the 
media and bloggers still in prison today inAzerbaijan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/azerbaijan>, including Seymur Hazi, Nijat 
[Nicat] Aliyev, Abdul Abilov, Rashad Ramazanov and Araz Guliyev.”

As part of a broad clampdown on dissent 
<https://freedomhouse.org/article/azerbaijan-renews-crackdown-activists>, 
critics of president Ilham Aliyev have frequently been imprisoned in the last 
three years, including several members of the opposition Popular Front party 
and the civic youth movement N!DA.

Earlier this month, N!DA activists Bayram Mammadov and Giyasaddin Ibrahim were 
charged with drug possession 
<https://freedomhouse.org/article/azerbaijan-renews-crackdown-activists> and 
placed in pretrial detention. They were said to have sprayed graffiti on a 
statue of former president Heidar Aliyev ahead of Flower Day on 10 May, a 
national holiday celebrating the late leader. If convicted, they face 12 years 
in prison.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fazerbaijan-khadija-ismayilova-political-prisoners-ilham-aliyev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb317aa2f5490fc41f2a597f85e2c924fe24fed02%2F0_26_3288_1973%2F3288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Journalist's%20release%20highlights%20plight%20of%20Azerbaijan's%20other%20political%20prisoners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fazerbaijan-khadija-ismayilova-political-prisoners-ilham-aliyev%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Journalist%27s%20release%20highlights%20plight%20of%20Azerbaijan%27s%20other%20political%20prisoners&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fazerbaijan-khadija-ismayilova-political-prisoners-ilham-aliyev%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb317aa2f5490fc41f2a597f85e2c924fe24fed02%2F0_26_3288_1973%2F3288.jpg>
 Presdient Ilham Aliyevand his wife Mehriban. Photograph: Sergei Grits/AP 
The Popular Front deputy chairman, Fuad Qahramanli, also remains behind bars 
after being arrested in December 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/azerbaijan-opposition-leader-arrested/27415882.html>
, accused of attempting to overthrow the government and incite ethnic, 
religious and social hatred.

Other prominent critical voices currently imprisoned include Ilqar Mammadov 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/press-releases/2015/03/azerbaijan-must-immediately-release-political-opposition-leader/>
, the leader of the Republican Alternative movement who remains in jail despite 
a ruling by the European Court for Human Rightsthat his arrest was politically 
motivated 
<http://www.coe.int/en/web/portal/-/jagland-azerbaijan-court-decision-on-ilgar-mammadov-deeply-disturbing->
.

Azerbaijan attacks Amal Clooney over support for jailed journalist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/amal-clooney-azerbaijan-khadija-ismayilova>
However there are tentative signs that Aliyev is finally heeding international 
calls to release political prisoners. Just before Ismayilova’s sentence was 
suspended, the president issued a snappardon of 16  
<http://www.economist.com/news/europe/21695278-oil-rich-autocracy-tries-polish-its-image-ahead-washington-summit-azerbaijan-frees-14>
detainees, including human rights activist, Rasul Cafarov. The government also 
allowed human rights defendersLeyla and Arif Yunus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/28/azerbaijan-activists-leyla-arif-yunus-charges>
 to leave the country.

Ismayilova’s release comes just three days before Azerbaijan celebrates its 
annual Republic Day with a mass amnesty, proposed by the country’s first lady, 
that anticipates the release of some 3,500 prisoners convicted of minor crimes.


However it remains unclear whether those who are considered political 
prisoners will be freed as part of the amnesty.

A version of this article first appeared on RFE/RL 
<http://www.rferl.org/content/azerbaijan-other-political-prisoners/27757458.html>
 