
Jozy Altidore’s miserable spell at Sunderland is now almost over 
<http://www.espnfc.com/story/2242968/toronto-fc-agreed-to-acquire-jozy-altidore-from-sunderland-for-jermain-defoecash>
, but it will stand as a reminder to players that the big money deal isn’t 
always the right one.

At the age of just 25, the forward is abandoning European football and 
returning to MLS branded as one of the biggest transfer failures in recent 
Premier League history,Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/sunderland> having received a solitary 
league goal in return for their £6.5m ($9.9m) transfer fee.

Altidore will surely go down in Sunderland legend as one of the club’s worst 
ever signings. His time in the Premier League, on a reported £30,000 ($45,000) 
a week salary, has been so fruitless that he is likely to feature in ‘waste of 
money’ lists for years to come. But he could also count as one of the most 
badly-advised players of recent years, a victim of football’s propensity for 
ill-thought out deals.

This is, after all, the second time in his young career that he has been a 
big-money failure.

In 2008, Villarreal <https://www.theguardian.com/football/villarreal> spent a 
reported $10m to bring an 18-year-old Altidore from New York Red Bulls. A raw 
talent, an exciting prospect he may have been, but he was clearly far from 
ready to play in the Spanish top flight. The New Jersey born forward made just 
six appearances for the club scoring once and was loaned out to then second 
division Xerez where injury meant he failed to make a single appearance.

Altidore needed games and goals at a club where he could be sure of starting, 
having chances created for him and where Villarreal could keep an eye on his 
progress. Instead he was sent to Humberside, a season on loan to aHull City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hullcity> team struggling in vain against 
relegation from the Premier League. In 28 appearances he again managed just one 
goal and looked well short of the quality needed for that league.

Not surprisingly Hull didn’t exercise their option for a permanent move and 
Villarreal, looking to cut their losses, let him go to Dutch clubAZ Alkmaar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/azalkmaar>. It was a step down in 
standard and profile but finally, Altidore started to deliver on his promise.

At Hull he had looked like a lumbering, unsophisticated old-school ‘target 
man’ but in Holland he bloomed. His 38 goals in 59 appearances for the club 
came with backheel flourishes, clever touches and tricky dribbles. He scored 
with both feet and his head, from close range and long range.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhdvcYCBi0YU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhdvcYCBi0YU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhdvcYCBi0YU&media=>
“On and off the ball and linking up with the players around me, I just got 
better. It’s that simple,” said Altidore.

There were reports of interest from Serie A and the Bundesliga, as well as 
from several English clubs.The World Cup finals were a year away and Altidore 
had established himself as the first choice No9 for Jurgen Klinsmann and could 
be confident of a prominent role in Brazil. Another year of progress in Holland 
could have left him in the perfect position in the transfer market after the 
World Cup. A well-thought out move to a European club could have maintained his 
progress. Instead he signed for Paolo Di Canio’s Sunderland.

The switch always looked a dangerous one for Altidore because, for all the 
club’s greater pedigree, it so obviously risked a potential repeat of his 
dreadful season with Hull. A bottom-half team, potentially involved in the 
relegation battle, with chances at a premium and the constant pressure caused 
by the fear of the drop, is no easy environment for any player to prove his 
worth, let alone one so evidently reliant on confidence.

By January of his first season, Altidore, looking like the Hull City version 
again, was already receiving boos or ironic cheers from Sunderland fans. It 
only got worse.His self-belief visibly drained and into his second season and 
the fans had simply given up on him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/oct/09/jozy-altidore-usa-striker-premier-league>
.

A comedic miss from three yards out against West Ham last month, where 
Altidore ended up on his backside, prompted more pity than anger.

“I feel sorry for him and that is not good for a striker,” wrote former 
Sunderland player Don Hutchison in his column for the local Evening Chronicle. 
“He doesn’t want to be a figure of fun or a figure of sympathy, he wants to be 
proving himself as a Premier League striker but he’s had enough chances and not 
done it now. Unfortunately I just don’t think he’s good enough for the Premier 
League, which is a bit of a problem for Sunderland”.

A bit of a problem for the player too. When Altidore was speculatively linked 
by a tabloid newspaper with a move to relegation-threatened Burnley, their fans 
rushed to an internet forum to make clear that there was no way they wanted the 
striker at their club.

American fans know Altidore is capable of better than he showed at the Stadium 
of Light. His performances for the US national team are evidence that he can 
lead the line effectively and score goals. His record playing in the Stars and 
Stripes stands at a respectable 25 goals from 76 appearances.

Perhaps he simply wasn’t up to Premier League level, perhaps the Dutch league 
was the kind of standard he is suited for but it is hard to escape the feeling 
that Altidore’s career in Europe could have been so much more enjoyable and 
productive had he – or his advisors – made more sensible career decisions.

Regular playing time and frequent goals in MLS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mls> should repair his confidence and 
Klinsmann can only benefit from that. But Altidore’s experience should be a 
warning that the right career move isn’t only about the right amount of money.
 