
Two men who planned to bomb a Sydney Shia prayer hall and vowed to stab people 
in the kidneys to impress anIslamic State 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> recruiter have been jailed for at 
least 15 years.

Sydney terrorism plotter 'lied to Isis recruiter' about why he didn't bomb 
Shia temple
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/15/sydney-terrorism-plotter-lied-to-isis-recruiter-about-why-he-didnt-bomb-shia-temple>
Omar Al-Kutobi, 25, and Mohammad Kiad, 27, each pleaded guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/sydney-men-plead-guilty-to-terrorism-plot-involving-bomb-and-knife>
 to one count of acting in preparation for a terrorist act, after they were 
arrested during counter-terrorism raids in February 2015.

In the NSW supreme court at Parramatta in Sydney’s west on Friday, Justice 
Peter Garling sentenced them to 20 years’ imprisonment with a non-parole period 
of 15 years.

The pair were arrested during a raid of their western Sydney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/sydney> flat by counter-terrorism 
police in February 2015, with officers finding a hunting knife, a machete and a 
homemade Islamic State flag.

Garling said neither of the offenders had been raised to follow an extreme 
version of Islam. But by the end of 2014 both “had been drawn to and had 
embraced the ideology of the Islamic State and extremist Islamic views”.

He said the prosecution had alleged that the conspiracy between the two 
amounted to detonating an improvised explosive device to damage or destroy a 
building, and/or using a machete or hunting knife to attack a member of the 
public.

Outside court, Detective Chief Inspector Darren Sly said police acted swiftly 
because they believed a terrorist attack was imminent.

“I think we were very, very lucky in the circumstances and if it wasn’t for 
the intervention of police there then I think we would have had a terrorist 
event on our hands,” he said on Friday.

“From a police perspective we’re happy with the sentence. I think it sends a 
good message to the community that we’re strong on terrorism.”
 