
American Apparel founder Dov Charney has lost his last-ditch attempt to wrest 
back control of the bankrupt retailerhe started in his Tufts University dorm 
room in 1989 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/21/once-sexy-american-apparel-looks-impotent-impending-doom>
.

Charney, who had been chief executive until he was forced out in a 2014 
boardroom coup,had been trying to buy the company out of bankruptcy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/11/american-apparel-dov-charney-bid-fashion-retailer>
. But on Monday, a US judge rejected Charney’s $300m takeover plan and sided 
with the company’s debtors, following a two-day court battle.

The decision wipes out all American Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel> shareholders, including 
Charney, who was the company’s single biggest investor.

US bankruptcy judge Brendan Shannon said she had no doubt that Charney wanted 
the best for the company, but that his private equity-backed plan was not a 
“meaningful alternative”.

Charney had teamed up with private equity firms Hagan Capital Group and Silver 
Creek Capital Partners in a bid for the retailer that would have reinstalled 
American Apparel’s controversial founder as chief executive.

In court Charney had argued that the company was stolen away from him and he 
had been wrongfully terminated over unfair claims of sexual misconduct with 
staff. The sexual harassment allegations included claims that he made an 
18-year-old sales clerk his“sex slave” 
<http://nypost.com/2014/06/20/american-apparel-ceo-ouster-linked-to-sex-slave-case/>
. Charney accuses the company of running a “grotesque” and “hateful” campaign 
against him.

Paula Schneider, American Apparel’s current CEO, described Monday’s ruling as 
a “great accomplishment”. “This is a new day for the company, and a positive 
outcome for our customers, vendors and employees,” she said.

Chad Hagan, managing partner of Hagan Capital, which was providing most of the 
money for Charney’s bid, had said: “Dov’s creativity, entrepreneurialism and 
dedication are the cornerstone ofAmerican Apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/american-apparel>. Removing him from the 
company’s board and leadership was a shortsighted mistake, and we are seeing 
the results of this error unfold in the declining performance of the company 
today.”

The company, which has not made a profit since 2009, saw losses in the six 
months to the end of June (the latest available) more than doubled to $45.8m.
 