

It has been some hours since sunset on the island of Sandhornøya, just inside 
the Arctic Circle, and I’m standing on the beach with a near-naked Norwegian, 
debating the temperature of the water I’ve just jumped into. “I was told it was 
14C,” I say. “Well, a friend told me it was just nine,” he replies, adjusting 
his underwear. Shivering, we settle for 11 – about average for an icy plunge 
pool – before sprinting back to the sauna as my feet go numb in the sand.

It’s the opening weekend of SALT, a year-long arts festival in remote northern 
Norway. Consisting of a series of striking architectural structures (including 
the world’s largest sauna, naturally), a site-specific art installation and a 
programme of contemporary music, the project is almost as dramatic as the 
landscape that surrounds it.

“We travelled for almost two years around the north of Norway looking for the 
right place for the festival,” co-founder Helga-Marie Nordby tells me. “But it 
wasn’t until we came here ...” She pauses. “Well ... it’s special.”

Although the island can be reached by a long drive over bridges, pine forests 
and fjords, you get a better sense of its remoteness and ruggedness if you 
arrive by boat from Bodø, capital of Nordland county. As you turn into the bay, 
the festival site comes into view: three giant triangular prisms made of wood 
stand on the clean, white sand beneath a looming cliff.

“You see contemporary art all over the world, but this kind of scenery, not so 
often,” says Nordby, who wants the festival to create an awareness of the 
region’s history, present and future. “If you bring something humanmade into 
that scenery, it’s not just about nature, but about our role in that landscape.”

Nordby conceived the idea for SALT, which she founded along with cultural 
entrepreneur Erlend Mogård-Larsen, in 2010 while the pair were curating the 
Lofoten International Art Festival. In many ways SALT functions more as a venue 
than a festival. On weekends throughout the year, monthly and bi-monthly events 
will take place, ranging from classical concerts and lectures to club nights 
and theatre performances. The sauna, bar and restaurant will be open 
throughout, and visitors can come for the day from the mainland, rent a cabin 
on the beach, or camp for free.

After its stint in Norway, SALT will move on to Greenland, Iceland, Scotland 
and Alaska, where location-specific installations will be commissioned.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsalt-arts-festival-norway-arctic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F12%2F1410540477564%2F41a755c4-8eed-4f08-92dc-f55834ce42ef-1020x574.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Just%20add%20SALT%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20new%20Arctic%20arts%20and%20music%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsalt-arts-festival-norway-arctic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Just%20add%20SALT%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20new%20Arctic%20arts%20and%20music%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsalt-arts-festival-norway-arctic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F12%2F1410540477564%2F41a755c4-8eed-4f08-92dc-f55834ce42ef-1020x574.jpeg>
 Sandhornøya, the stunning setting of the SALT festival Photograph: PR 
The “pyramids” on Sandhornøya are designed by Finnish architect Sami Rintala, 
based on the traditional fish-drying racks of the region. The largest is 
currently home to an installation by Chinese artistYang Fudong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2006/apr/25/1>, who has produced a series 
of haunting films that show local dancers drifting like spirits around the 
island. Yang’s work – if it survives the winter storms – will stay on the site 
for six months, and after that will be replaced by a new commission.

Sitting cross-legged, drawing spirals in the sand with his finger, Yang, who 
has spent a month living and working on the island, explains through an 
interpreter that the instant he landed there all his plans for the installation 
changed. “I had imagined true peace in the past,” he says. “But when I moved on 
to the island, it was the first time I had experienced it in reality.”

Yang’s sentiments seem to be unanimously shared by all the visitors I speak 
to, who are scattered around the beach, investigating the structures, watching 
Yang’s films, or lying in the sand. Children are climbing up the wooden frames 
to get a better view of the performances, and smoke drifts out of the top of 
the sauna, which is warming up for the evening.

Behind the stage two young girls in Scandi jumpers are selling torrfisk – 
dried cod – from a stand made from old wood with a hand-drawn sign. The wizened 
fish is hammered with a mallet to soften it so you can pull it off in strips to 
eat. I buy some (it tastes like fishy polystyrene, but is pretty satisfying to 
gnaw on) and walk over to the concert venue, where a violist and cellist from 
the Arctic Philharmonic Orchestra are creating conceptual classical sound waves 
with their bows.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsalt-arts-festival-norway-arctic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F12%2F1410540835264%2Ffefb972f-5b0c-4161-9f4f-f2511d17eed1-1020x680.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Just%20add%20SALT%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20new%20Arctic%20arts%20and%20music%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsalt-arts-festival-norway-arctic%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Just%20add%20SALT%3A%20Norway%E2%80%99s%20new%20Arctic%20arts%20and%20music%20festival&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2014%2Fsep%2F13%2Fsalt-arts-festival-norway-arctic%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F12%2F1410540835264%2Ffefb972f-5b0c-4161-9f4f-f2511d17eed1-1020x680.jpeg>
 The northern lights at the SALT festival. Photograph: Kristian Sivertsen/PR 
Other acts in the largely alternative line up that weekend included Lonnie 
Holley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2013/nov/13/101-strangest-spotify-lonnie-holley>
, an African-American artist who grew up in poverty in Birmingham, Alabama in 
the 1950s – his found-object sculptures and warbling atmospheric blues have won 
him worldwide acclaim – and Biosphere, a Norwegian electronic musician known 
for his Arctic-inspired ambient techno.

While admiring the concert venue, I bump into one of its builders, Tomas. “We 
built that in 19 hours,” he says proudly, clenching his biceps through his 
thermal jacket. “Now feel this.”

When night falls, the festival takes on even more Norwegian earthiness. 
There’s a bonfire, but, having come slightly underprepared for the cold that 
evening, I head to the “amphisauna” to warm up properly. I sip on a warm beer 
(with a polar bear on the can) in the prism-like oven, which can fit up to 120 
people and has a huge triangular window at the front so you can look out over 
the beach. With a bar at the back and deep house music pumping, it feels more 
like a club than a sauna, the only difference being that rather than cooling 
off in the smoking area, people dash into the sea instead.

As the weekend draws to a close those still on the island are treated to a 
sight that outdoes both the art and the landscape. In the early hours, during 
the short period when the horizon is in total darkness, an unusually strong 
display of northern lights – surprising even the locals – dances in the sky.

Eventually I retire for the night. I’m staying in a mobile home called a njalla
, designed by artist and architect Joar Nango, which sits on wooden skis that 
allow you to drag it to a spot of your choosing. Inside is a woodburning stove 
and a bed consisting of reindeer pelt on a surprisingly comfortable layer of 
dry branches. I look up through its glass ceiling, drifting off as the northern 
lights fade into darkness. Barely two hours later, the sun rises.


• The trip was provided by SALT, which is at Sandhornøya until 6 September 
2015. Njalla cabins sleep up to four and cost £125 a night for one person, plus 
£20 for each extra person. Event tickets from £15. A day package with transfers 
from Bodø, guided tour, dinner and sauna costs £126pp. Book atsalted.no 
<http://www.salted.no/>. Norwegian Airlines (norwegian.com 
<http:www.norwegian.com/uk/>) flies to Oslo from Gatwick and Manchester from 
£70 return, and from Oslo to Bodø from £145 return. Singles Bodø to Sandhornøya 
costs £19.50 ferry, £13 bus
 