
His problems included 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/09/justin-biebers-resurrection-how-the-pop-star-made-a-spectacular-return>
 urinating into a bucket, allegedly mistreating a monkey and egging a 
neighbour’s house. Hers involved balancing the pressures of fame and 
extraordinary singing talent while struggling with a dependency on drink and 
drugs.

Nevertheless, Justin Bieber has said that he identifies with Amy Winehouse. In 
a recent interview,the Canadian pop star and amateur drag-racer told NME that 
<http://www.nme.com/news/justin-bieber/89656>, like her, he had been abused by 
the media – in his case, while “rebelling against everybody and everything, and 
being a normal 19-year-old”.
 Justin Bieber on the cover of NME. Photograph: Dean Chalkley/NME 
Bieber said: “I watched the Amy Winehouse documentary  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/16/amy-review-asif-kapadias-amy-winehouse-film-is-a-tragic-masterpiece>
on the plane and I had tears in my eyes because I could see what the media was 
doing to her, how they were treating her. People thought it was funny to poke 
her when she was at rock bottom, to keep pushing her down until she had no more 
of herself. And that’s what they were trying to do to me.”

In a lament echoing the time-honoured complaints of rock stars down the ages, 
Bieber added: “I just want people to know I’m human. I’m struggling just to get 
through the days. I think a lot of people are. You get lonely, you know, when 
you’re on the road. People see the glam and the amazing stuff, but they don’t 
know the other side. This life can rip you apart.”

Justin Bieber: Purpose review – a look back and a fresh start
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/nov/12/justin-bieber-purpose-review-fourth-album>
However, Bieber has found comfort from one source: Kanye West 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kanyewest>. Bieber said that the rapper gave 
him advice as he made his forthcoming album Purpose – which has already spawned 
two worldwide hits, Where Are U Now and What Do You Mean?

“Out of anyone in the industry who is creative and I see eye to eye with, he 
really gets me,” Bieber said. “His advice is always just, ‘make music that’s so 
good people can’t hate on it’.”
 