
Fredi Kanoute proved just why Tottenham fought so hard to keep him at White 
Hart Lane after a classy double strike helpedMali 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/mali> beat Kenya 3-1 in the African 
Nations Cup Group B opener. It was his competitive international debut.

 Spurs had questioned whether Kanoute was eligible to play in the competition 
after a previous appearance for France's Under-21s, but he chose to defy them 
and fly to Tunisia with Mali.

 Mohamed Lamine Sissoko, who like Kanoute had played for France at junior 
level before changing his footballing nationality earlier this month, put Mali 
ahead after 28 minutes.

 But after battling to remain in the game, and drawing level thanks to Titus 
Mulama, Kenya were guilty of falling asleep at the back. A blistering turn of 
pace from Seydou Keita gave him room to cross to the unmarked Kanoute who 
side-footed the ball home.

 Kanoute then made the most of the wide open spaces left by Kenya's defence to 
score the third with a typically cool finish and only nine minutes left on the 
clock.

"Today's the beginning of something for me so I'm very happy, but it is only a 
beginning," Kanoute told reporters.

"I have to keep going like this, keep fighting for this country because it's 
very important to me," he added. "I've scored two goals, the team played well 
and today I'm happy for a whole country. "I know they've waiting anxiously for 
me to be here and today I'm glad to able to give them something back. "They're 
very much in my thoughts. It's been a long time since I've been back there, but 
I know what the atmosphere is like when there's a match. So I know they're 
behind us and I hope it stays that way, whatever happens, until the end of the 
competition."

Group B action will continue later today when 2002 finalists Senegal take on 
Burkina Faso in Tunis.
 