
It’s not difficult to spot Karl Ove Knausgaard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/karl-ove-knausgard> waiting at Ystad train 
station. Partly, it must be said, because there’s no one else present at the 
open-air platform on a brilliantly cloudless February afternoon in southernmost 
Sweden. Yet even if there had been a large crowd, Knausgaard is the sort of man 
who would stand out.

He’s 6ft 4in with a strikingly handsome face, a writerly beard and a thick 
mane of swept back silvery hair. But it’s not that he’s a commanding presence 
so much as a conspicuous absence. There’s an air of separateness about him, 
something noticeably aloof and withdrawn. He doesn’t look like the sort of 
person, in other words, who would readily divulge his innermost secrets, 
desires and insecurities.

Yet that is precisely what he did in writing a six-volume, 3,600-page 
novel-cum-autobiography, provocatively titledMy Struggle – or in Norwegian Min 
Kamp. In Knausgaard’s native Norway, where the book was published between 2009 
and 2011, it was an unprecedented phenomenon, selling half a million copies in 
a nation of 5 million people. It has subsequently been translated into 22 
languages. In English, the fourth volume,Dancing in the Dark, is about to be 
published. And given the size of the undertaking, the widespread critical 
acclaim and cultural buzz the series has generated, it has strong claim to be 
the great literary event of the 21st century – so far.

Although the series is ostensibly fiction, it is also an unflinching memoir, 
from early childhood right up to the controversial reception of the book 
itself. Such an endeavour is hardly unique. Bookshops are full of unflinching 
memoirs, and even the literary novel is no stranger to the genre. Knausgaard’s 
portrait of his cold, authoritarian father, who drank himself to a squalidly 
premature death, may have scandalised the reading public of Norway, but it’s a 
tale of mild familial dysfunction by comparison with, say,Edward St Aubyn’s 
autobiographical Patrick Melrose series 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/patrick-melrose-novels.html>.

So what is it that has led fellow authors like Zadie Smith and Jonathan Lethem 
to rave about Knausgaard and hail him as literary pioneer? Why did the novelist 
Jeffrey Eugenides speak of the Norwegian breaking “the sound barrier of the 
autobiographical novel”?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-interview-shame-dancing-in-the-dark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424793837143%2F567e5f5e-fa2a-4afc-b41b-93e27bc676c8-2060x1314.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20%E2%80%98Writing%20is%20a%20way%20of%20getting%20rid%20of%20shame%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-interview-shame-dancing-in-the-dark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20%E2%80%98Writing%20is%20a%20way%20of%20getting%20rid%20of%20shame%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-interview-shame-dancing-in-the-dark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F24%2F1424793837143%2F567e5f5e-fa2a-4afc-b41b-93e27bc676c8-2060x1314.jpeg>
 Knausgaard in his writing studio: ‘I get so tired of my own voice.’ 
Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose/Observer 
The answer lies not in Knausgaard’s depth of revelation so much as the 
intensity of focus he brings to the subject of his life. He seems to punch a 
hole in the wall between the writer and reader, breaking through to a form of 
micro-realism and emotional authenticity that makes other novels seem 
contrived, “made up”, irrelevant. As Smith put it: “You live his life with him. 
You don’t simply ‘identify’ with the character, effectively you ‘become’ them.”

Whether he’s writing about his adult alienation at a toddler’s birthday party 
or the memory of trying to get hold of alcohol as a teenager on New Year’s Eve, 
Knausgaard is prepared to go into extraordinary sensuous detail that can last 
50 pages or more.

The most obvious antecedent is Proust, whom Knausgaard has said he “virtually 
imbibed” whenA la recherche du temps perdu was finally translated into 
Norwegian in the 1980s. But the prose has little of Proust’s delicate 
refinement. At times it’s poised, beautiful, profound, and at others mundane 
and casually tolerant of cliches. People pick up and put down coffee cups a 
lot, close doors and light cigarettes. There’s a great deal of the sort of 
writing that is usually edited out before publication, and yet the overall 
effect is utterly hypnotic.As the critic James Wood put it 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/08/13/total-recall>, even when he was 
bored he remained interested.

It’s not to everyone’s taste. Writing in the Nation, the critic William 
Deresiewicz complained: “Instead of thinking about the character, I was 
thinking about the author, and the fact that they were the same individual only 
made it worse. Who cares? I kept wondering. Why is he telling me this? Who is 
he to think his life is worth this kind of treatment? I wasn’t just bored (even 
his fans are bored), I was angry about being bored. I felt my time was being 
wasted.”

But to see in Knausgaard’s epic bildungsroman the evil of banality is to miss 
the point. Cyril Connolly declared that the enemy of promise was the “pram in 
the hall”. Knausgaard, feeling trapped by young children, bravely confronts the 
enemy and then recruits it to the cause of what Connolly called “good art”.

His digressions, chronological shifts – time washes back and forth like an 
unpredictable tide – and forensic observations of the everyday are an 
astonishing effort to capture the vast mystery of consciousness through the 
techniques of a novelist. At any given time our selfhood is the sum of our 
memories and Knausgaard understands that this means the throwaway ore as well 
as the precious metal.

What, though, are memories? How accurate and reliable are they? Knausgaard 
makes several mentions of his poor memory during the course of the thousands of 
pages of precisely rendered recollections. And it’s not false modesty. This is 
less a work of formidable retention than concentrated invention.

To do something good you have to step out of society, almost out of humanity, 
if that's possible

“For me,” he says, “there has been no difference in remembering something and 
creating something. When I wrote my fictional novels they always had a starting 
point of something real. Those images that are not real are exactly the same 
strength and power of the real ones and the line between them is completely 
blurred. When I write something, I can’t remember in the end if this is a 
memory or if it’s not – I’m talking about fiction. So for me it’s the same 
thing. It was like I was writing a straight novel when I was writing this but 
the rule was it had to be true. Not true in an objective sense but the way I 
remember it. There’s a lot of false memory in the book but it’s there because 
it’s the way it is, it’s real.”

We’re all familiar with the idea that fiction can achieve a greater truth, but 
in the real world, regardless of differing perceptions, either something 
happens or it doesn’t, and where and when it happens are similarly objective 
facts. The actual truth sometimes matters. Did he ever begin to question his 
version of events?

He says the manner of his father’s death was the subject of bitter dispute, 
which caused him to doubt his own memory. Some family members insisted that 
Knausgaard’s father, contrary to his son’s recollection, had not been 
surrounded by bottles of alcohol when he died, there was nothing unseemly about 
the scene, and he had peacefully suffered a heart attack.

“I began to doubt everything,” he says. “Did I exaggerate it? Did I exploit it 
for my own benefit? Because I’ve done that in my life before. I used to talk 
about my father to make myself more interesting. And I knew that the shocking 
details in the story are good literature in themselves almost – it’s a good 
story.”

Then he received a letter from a health worker who, reading the first volume A 
Death in the Family, recognised the house Knausgaard’s father died in, and got 
in touch to confirm the accuracy of his description.

“And that,” he says, “was such a relief.”

Dancing in the Dark – Karl Ove Knausgaard’s teenage years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/26/dancing-in-the-dark-fourth-volume-my-struggle-karl-ove-knausgaard>
Knausgaard lives with his second wife, the poet and novelist Linda Bostrom, 
and their four children (aged one to 11) in a small village 10 minutes’ drive – 
in a downbeat old van – from Ystad. He tells me they moved there because it had 
a good school. There’s a pause before he adds: “It closed down the year after 
we came here.”

It’s a typically wry observation. He does a good line in self-deflation, but 
there’s nothing insincere or ironic about him. For all his ability to laugh at 
himself, he is a serious presence both on the page and in person, someone, you 
feel, who is acutely aware of the existential tensions between life and art.

He met Bostrom at a writer’s conference while he was still married to his 
first wife, the journalist Tonje Aursland. He made a pass at her, which she 
rejected, and, in a drunken state of demoralisation, he deliberately cut up his 
face with broken glass. He later left Aursland and moved to Sweden, but she 
only learned of the initial episode with Bostrom when she read the second 
volume,A Man in Love, where it is recorded with characteristically scrupulous 
candour. Deeply upset, she made a radio documentary in which she confronted 
Knausgaard.

As uncomfortable as that experience was, still more troubling was his family’s 
reaction to the first volume, a mordant reflection on the ignominious demise of 
Knausgaard’s father. An uncle threatened to sue, and one side of the family 
stopped talking to the author.

It had been Knausgaard’s four-year failure to write a fictionalised account of 
his father that led him to embark on his autobiographical outpouring. He 
declared himself nauseated by the very idea of fabricated plots and characters. 
Again the Norwegian is not alone in that sentiment. Many writers have expressed 
their belief that in the age of information saturation, made-up stories have 
lost their power. InHHhH, his novel about the assassination of Reinhard 
Heydrich, Laurent Binet is positively disgusted by the prospect of committing 
any form of embellishment or factual inaccuracy.

But Knausgaard took this distaste for the unreal and the manipulated to new 
extremes. He abandoned a careful approach to prose and structure, and wrote in 
a blind creative frenzy, producing upwards of 20 pages a day. John Updike, who 
rummaged through his own life for fictional source material, used to speak of 
writing as “unpacking” his bag. With Knausgaard it was more like upending the 
contents and shaking them on to the page.
 Karl Ove Knausgaard (left) with his father and older brother Yngve, circa 
1970. Photograph: Courtesy of Karl Ove Knausgaard 
“My initial thought was empty everything,” he says. “Put everything out there 
so there is nothing left, which of course is impossible.”

He sat at his keyboard in what he calls an “autistic” state, oblivious to the 
impact his words would have on the world, and in particular those close to him. 
The first two volumes were written together and published before he began the 
third. But such was the pain that the first two inflicted on family and friends 
that he pulled back in the third, fourth and fifth. In the sixth he returned to 
full disclosure, cataloguing the breakdown his wife, Linda, suffered during the 
fall-out over the first two volumes ofMy Struggle.

If he was more restrained about others in the middle volumes, about himself he 
remained completely unsparing throughout. InDancing in the Dark, the latest to 
be translated, he documents his prolonged and calamitous attempts to dispose of 
his virginity during his late teenage years, a struggle sorely undermined by a 
chronic condition of premature ejaculation.

It’s very funny but also excruciatingly exposing. I ask him if, having 
detailed his father’s physical humiliations (including incontinence), it made 
it easier to address his own.

“No,” he says firmly, “I didn’t make that connection. I read everything to a 
friend while I was writing. I’d never told anyone about my sexual shortcomings, 
not girlfriends of course, not my brother. It was a complete secret. And I read 
it to my friend and he just laughed and didn’t stop laughing. And I thought, 
OK, it’s out. It can’t be any worse than this.”

Knausgaard presents an oddly vulnerable figure. A timid child who tiptoed 
around his brooding father (as described in the third volume,Boyhood Island), 
he grew into a cripplingly self-conscious teenager, and then, by his own 
reckoning, an adult who is seldom happy in the company of others. When I tell 
him that, for all his stated insecurities, he looks like the very picture of 
strapping Norse masculinity, he replies drily.

“Yeah, but I don’t behave like it. That’s the problem.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-interview-shame-dancing-in-the-dark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425055864120%2Ffd5629e8-76fb-4623-a648-bca0e40fa455-2060x1345.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20%E2%80%98Writing%20is%20a%20way%20of%20getting%20rid%20of%20shame%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-interview-shame-dancing-in-the-dark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20%E2%80%98Writing%20is%20a%20way%20of%20getting%20rid%20of%20shame%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-interview-shame-dancing-in-the-dark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425055864120%2Ffd5629e8-76fb-4623-a648-bca0e40fa455-2060x1345.jpeg>
 Karl Ove Knausgaard (right) with brother Yngve in Bergen, circa 1990. 
Photograph: Asbjorn Jensen 
The issue of masculinity is a recurring theme in My Struggle. He says he 
formed his views on male identity as a child growing up in the 1970s. He was 
teased by the other boys for being a “jessie” or gay.

“It put such doubt in me that I’ve never really recovered from it,” he says. 
“I have all these notions of what it is to be a man. You shouldn’t cry for 
instance [he spends many pages crying or trying to conceal his tears] and you 
shouldn’t talk about feelings. I don’t talk about feelings but I write a lot 
about feelings. Reading, that’s feminine, writing, that’s feminine. It is 
insane, it’s really insane but it still is in me.”

In Sweden, he says, there is a widely held conviction that gender identity is 
socially constructed rather than biologically determined. You’d think that for 
a such a lachrymose man, riven by longstanding doubts, his adopted home would 
be an ideal refuge. Yet he can’t help but reject Sweden’s social idealism, and 
even hanker after the tormenting certainties of his youth.

“Those small things like giving a hug to man,” he says, almost wincing, “I try 
to avoid it. Because I can see the situation is coming and I try to prepare. 
But I remember the first time I did it, I was 16 and I was at the gymnasium and 
it was a cosmopolitan thing, an international thing, a modern thing, but I 
never felt at ease with it at all.”

It’s this sort of comment, he acknowledges, that has led to a misunderstanding 
among some readers and critics. “I’m not saying what I think people should do. 
People should do whatever they like. I really don’t care about that whatsoever. 
I’m just writing about my own discomfort in the culture. But I think there are 
a lot of men who have read this and felt like I’m expressing something they can 
relate to.”

Knausgaard’s home is a quadrant of low-slung, pretty but unassuming buildings, 
one of which – his study – is really a glorified garden shed. It’s divided into 
two book-lined rooms. In one there is a drum kit, guitar, bass guitar and amps. 
In the other, an armchair and sofa on which we sit. With their mountains of 
unwashed coffee cups and other detritus, both rooms display a reassuring 
indifference to order. He apologises, explaining that he spent “about an hour” 
that morning tidying up for my visit.

This scene – the acclaimed writer in his rock’n’roll lair discussing his 
latest work with a member of the international press – is doubtless one about 
which the young Knausgaard dreamed. The book is full of longing – for escape, 
experience and recognition – as well as paralysing inhibition and vaunting 
ambition.

At one stage in Dancing in the Dark he reacts to his brother’s dismissal of 
his authorial aspirations with an internal outburst: “I’ll bloody show the 
whole sodding fucking world who I am and what I am made of. I’ll crush every 
single one of them. I’ll render every single one of them speechless. I will. I 
will. I bloody well will. I’ll be so big no one is even close. No one. No. One. 
Never. No bloody chance. I will be the bloody greatest ever.”

But every escape contains its own confinement, and the escape from obscurity 
to a global reputation has brought unwanted attention and preoccupying 
commitments to the business of bookselling. He cancelled a promotional trip to 
the UK earlier this year. Was he beginning to feel the weight of his phenomenon 
imprisoning him all over again?

He pauses and lights a cigarette.

“Like my friends say, I’m crying in my limo,” he jokes, letting out a bashful 
smile. “No, it’s like this. When this massive breakthrough came in Norway it 
was completely unexpected. And then it was like a dream. It was very difficult 
on many levels but basically it was what I wanted as a writer.”

Knausgaard has been through several stages of adjustment to the attention and 
success the book has brought. The first was dealing with the familial 
repercussions. He has a strong moral instinct, someone who thinks of himself as 
a man who tries to do the right thing. Yet in hurting those close to him, he 
couldn’t help but believe that he had done the wrong thing. The compensation – 
and it was considerable – was writing something that showed the whole sodding 
fucking world who he was and what he could do.

I think shame is an essential mechanism in social life. It makes people behave 
in an appropriate way

However, the fact that so many people did indeed take notice occasioned the 
next stage of anxiety.

“We were raised to believe that if many people like something, it’s not good,” 
explains Knausgaard, dragging on another cigarette.

His two books before My Struggle had been well received in Norway but the 
readership was limited to what he calls “people in the system”: students, 
academics, other writers and those with a particular interest in literature. 
With the six-part memoir, the world outside the system got involved.

He seems to have come to terms with the fact that popularity isn’t necessarily 
antithetical to quality. What bothers him now is the ceaseless call of book 
promotion and the self-promotion and self-analysis that demands.

“Now it’s different because I’ve been talking about it for five years. And I 
do not talk about books. I talk about myself. And that’s to be trapped in 
something, because it never ends.”

But after a short time in his company it’s clear that there’s much in the book 
that continues to pique his own curiosity. He answers questions not with terse 
reluctance but genuine intellectual engagement.

One aspect of Knausgaard’s writing that is distinctly unusual for a modern 
writer in western Europe is its constant grappling with the question of shame.

Time and again in the book, Knausgaard displays a talent for experiencing the 
maximum shame in even the most unpropitious circumstances. What to most people 
would be cause for a minor outbreak of sheepishness can lead Knausgaard to 
suffer agonies of mortification. Was he aware of the extremity of his responses?

“When I wrote my first novel my editor wrote the sleeve note and he called it 
‘a monument of male shame’. And it had never occurred to me that I was writing 
about male shame. It was so much a part of me that I didn’t see it, didn’t 
recognise it as shame.”

Once he accepted the diagnosis, he began to explore its literary potential.

“Writing is a way of getting rid of shame. When you write the whole idea is to 
be free. And what are you free from? From people looking at you. I think shame 
is an essential mechanism in social life. It regulates everything and makes 
people behave in a decent and appropriate way to each other. But I have kind of 
too much, an overdose. I’m so restricted I can’t do anything.”

All of which makes it that much more remarkable that he was able to dredge up 
his sexual and moral failings for public delectation. He argues that when he’s 
writing, he’s not thinking about the reader. His focus is entirely on getting 
to the truth of his story. Authors often claim to write for themselves, but 
they usually have one eye on the reader, if only in terms of structuring their 
narrative, selecting when to release information for maximum impact.

There’s little sense of those ploys in My Struggle. Nor does Knausgaard 
intrude on the truth of the past with the hindsight of the present, even when 
it comes to the question of musical taste – a subject that is notorious for 
historical revisionism. We see the young Knausgaard proudly displaying his love 
of Simple Minds and other now unfashionable bands without any nods or winks 
from the author to the reader. Was that difficult?

“Yes it’s very hard to write from that point of view because of the vanity,” 
he admits. “In a book about childhood it’s obvious there is a difference 
between the writer and the kid, but when you’re 17, 18 it’s not so obvious 
anymore. I remember my editor said, ‘Can’t you once or twice make a reflection 
here?’ But I wanted to see if it was possible to identify with him at that age. 
That’s a risk because you are never so stupid as when you are 17. Never. When 
you are eight you’re not stupid. You’re many things but not stupid. But at 17 
you are.”

As the drum kit and guitars testify, Knausgaard has not lost his passion for 
rock music. But as he got older, his interest turned increasingly to writing 
and writers. And his preferences, we learn, are the poets and thinkers who stem 
from the German Romantic tradition: the poetHolderlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2010/may/01/friedrich-h-lderlin-religion-christianity>
, most obviously, but also it could be argued the philosophersNietzsche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2012/feb/07/political-message-nietzsche-god-is-dead>
 andHeidegger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/jun/05/heidegger-philosophy>
. In them he seems to find a galvanising rejection of liberal complacency and 
post-enlightenment pieties.

In an essay on Knausgaard, the novelist Hari Kunzru suggested that this desire 
for the kinds of spiritual renewal propagated by these writers made the 
“Hitlerian provocation of the title… more than a flippant joke”. He worried 
that Knausgaard wanted to “drink from the same wells of Nordic tradition as his 
predecessor”.

In fact Knausgaard includes a 400-page essay on Hitler in the sixth and final 
volume. So was his affinity for German Romanticism merely aesthetic or was 
there something more ideological at play?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-interview-shame-dancing-in-the-dark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425055954967%2F7cf7ff3a-6594-49cc-b24a-80099b8bb400-2060x1507.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20%E2%80%98Writing%20is%20a%20way%20of%20getting%20rid%20of%20shame%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-interview-shame-dancing-in-the-dark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Karl%20Ove%20Knausgaard%3A%20%E2%80%98Writing%20is%20a%20way%20of%20getting%20rid%20of%20shame%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2015%2Fmar%2F01%2Fkarl-ove-knausgaard-interview-shame-dancing-in-the-dark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F2%2F27%2F1425055954967%2F7cf7ff3a-6594-49cc-b24a-80099b8bb400-2060x1507.jpeg>
 Knausgaard in Bergen, circa 1989. Photograph: Asbjorn Jensen 
“I’m certainly interested in it but I also recognise that if you take these 
things to the bitter end you end up in Germany in 1934,” he says, reaching for 
another cigarette. “And that’s why I was writing about it in the last volume, 
to find out what’s good in Nazism and what’s not. Which is a kind of refreshing 
take on it. There is a longing for something not contemporary in me, and in 
many people of course. But I have a completely anti-ideological point of view. 
Everything in ideology is the opposite of a novel, which to me is the 
anti-totalitarian language per se.”

The phrase “what’s good in Nazism” would be enough to set alarm bells ringing 
in many readers, but Knausgaard is making a subtle and important point. The 
Germans – and Norwegians – who waved flags in support of the Nazis didn’t see 
themselves as followers of genocidal sadists. They thought that they were part 
of something larger than them, a community, a movement, a happening.

In the final volume, Knausgaard says, he compares this feeling to that felt by 
Norwegians when they came out into the streets to protest against the attacks 
by the ultra-nationalist terroristAnders Breivik, who killed 77 Norwegians in 
2011 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik>.

“One hundred thousand people are out there, everyone is united. I said if you 
want to think about Nazism, what that was, you must think of it like this. It 
was something good, we are out on the streets for something good. The timing 
for saying that was not so good,” he concedes, “but I still think it is like 
that.”

Knausgaard says he broke down crying when he heard about what Breivik had 
done. Exiled in Sweden, he experienced a powerful solidarity with his fellow 
Norwegians.

“I felt so strongly identified with a kind of ‘we’ and I had never felt that 
before. This has happened to ‘us’. And it was so strong. And I’m very 
interested in those strong forces in society. To be a good writer you must be 
out of the ‘we’. You can’t be a part of it.”

Knausgaard found it particularly disturbing that Breivik was roughly from his 
generation, and what’s more that in his manifesto there were some echoes of his 
own thinking.

“I could see the train of thought in the way that he criticised certain things 
that I criticise. For instance, the feminisation of society.”

It wasn’t until after he’d finished writing about Breivik that he realised 
that he formed a coherent part of the thesis ofMy Struggle.

“The feeling of lack of presence, lack of physicality, the feeling that the 
world is disappearing into images and stories and his description of what he 
experienced on the island [Utoya]. It’s like he’s not in this world, it’s all 
images, no bodies just pixels. He turned away from the world to do that, I 
think for three years, only by himself, playing games on his computer, 
completely antisocial, and then he could do it.”

In a way, of course, Knausgaard also turned away from the world. “To do 
something good you have to step out of society, almost out of humanity, if 
that’s possible,” is how he has put it. Alone in his study, he was immune to 
the consequences of his actions, of his writing. He believes that the 
description of his intimates in his book amounted to an “unmoral” act. And he 
has even compared apologising for it after publication to killing someone and 
then saying sorry.

But he did not kill anyone, and nor did he disappear into a deranged fantasy 
of his own making. He wrote his autobiographical novel to connect with reality, 
his own reality, it’s true, but one that speaks to a great many other people.

His struggle was a tremendous act of recovery. He reclaimed not only the story 
of his life, but a sense of artistic purpose, and not incidentally a book title 
that had been for too long sullied by history’s most vile tyrant. In the 
process, however, his writing became overwhelmed by its subject, or rather the 
means of dealing with the subject.

He announced at the end of volume six that he would “enjoy, really enjoy, the 
thought that I am no longer an author”. But, he tells me, he has been writing 
ever since. Last summer he co-wrote a diary of the World Cup, a correspondence 
with the writer Fredrik Ekelund, in which he muses on his affection for the 
cynical approach of Argentina – for a long time, “Argentina” was the planned 
title of My Struggle.

“It’s written in the same style [as My Struggle],” he says of the World Cup 
book. “I write essays like that, and long articles for the newspaper in the 
same way. What I have to do is get out of that way of writing. I get so tired 
of my own voice. It’s like it’s producing something like a machine. I need to 
get somewhere else. I can’t keep using that technique. So every day I try to 
write one page about one thing, and I will do so for a year.”

That’s how Knausgaard intends to write his next novel, one day at a time. He 
has shown the world what he’s made of. And now, like all great artists, he must 
show us all over again. In a cluttered study in a small village near Ystad, the 
struggle continues.

Dancing in the Dark is published by Harvill Secker (£17.99). To order a copy 
for £14.39click here <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/my-struggle.html>
 