
Karl Rove's recent fiendish theorizing 
<http://pagesix.com/2014/05/12/karl-rove-hillary-clinton-may-have-brain-damage/>
 about Hillary Clinton suffering a traumatic brain injury is not just 
offensive, but tellingly so. He deftly dialed down the accusation in the 
original report and simultaneously kept the issue alive on Tuesdayafternoon 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-politics/wp/2014/05/13/karl-rove-hillary-clinton-has-to-be-forthcoming-about-her-2012-health-episode/>
, saying "Of course she doesn't have brain damage" – but that "she is going to 
have to be forthcoming" about the details of where, how and when her injury 
happened.

Such inflammatory messaging suggests the depths to which the GOP will go to 
destabilize Clinton's earned reputation for competence – ironically, a trait 
that conservatives had a hand in crafting. It's the Republicans who repeatedly 
cast her as an über-manipulative Lady Macbeth, whispering plans and moving 
pawns and knights into place. Like all successful smear campaigns, that label 
has stuck because of its relationship to an observable truth: Clinton, while 
sympathetic as a wronged wife, has never seemed powerless, much less confused. 
Rove's grasping at a brain injury diagnosis could have just been a trial 
balloon for a new anti-Hillary message from the GOP, an attempt to replace 
"dangerously clever" with "dangerously impaired".


I doubt it will work.


But what frustrates me the most about the news of Rove's remarks is that no 
one seems to have nailed down the context of them. He "stunned the conference" 
he was at; he was there with former White House advisor Robert Gibbs and CBS 
correspondent Dan Raviv; the conference was "last week" and "near Los Angeles". 
It can't even be narrowed down to something obviously political or think-tank-y 
or ideas festival-esque, because Rove and Gibbs have been been appearing 
anywhere that can fork over the$100,000 or so 
<http://www.oregonlive.com/mapes/index.ssf/2012/07/karl_rove_set_for_a_lucrative.html>
 they have been charging for a joint appearance since Gibbs left the White 
House.


As one might expect, there are a lot of universities on their tour – Duke, 
Stanford <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AWHUgS_R6xE>, Hofstra and even the 
fundamentalist ChristianRegent University 
<http://www.regent.edu/news_events/?article_id=1127&view=full_article>, founded 
by Pat Robertson. (Former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers was also present for 
that particular"Clash of the Titans". 
<http://www.harrywalker.com/massemails/Clash-of-the-Titans-5-29-WEB.html>) They 
have even peddled their shtick at select trade associations and industry 
conferences, including the Council for Responsible Nutrition, medical 
technology marketer theTriZetto Group <http://biz.yahoo.com/ic/60/60786.html>, 
the Urban Land Institute 
<https://www.facebook.com/notes/urban-land-institute/uli-fall-meeting-friday-debate-robert-gibbs-and-karl-rove-to-talk-land-use-real-/10151198652838420>
, theNational Ethanol Conference 
<https://smartblogs.com/leadership/2012/02/24/live-from-nec12-karl-rove-and-robert-gibbs-debate-the-u-s-energy-crisis/>
 and theMarcus Evans CXO Summit 
<http://www.teg123.com/news/eteg/conversation-with-rove-and-gibbs.html>.


I'm not sure which is worse: the idea that Rove and Gibbs might be imparting 
valuable insider information to these paying audiences at largely closed-door 
events; or that they've willingly emptied out whatever convictions they have 
about politics and agreed to play-act as partisans for sheer entertainment 
value.


It's not a news flash that political debate has morphed into entertainment, 
but there's something unseemly about the format being commercialized so 
blatantly. Theirglad-handing we're-all-really-friends"appearances 
<http://www.harrywalker.com/massemails/Rove-Gibbs-3-15-WEB.html> – and Gibbs 
and Roves are far from theonly 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=jonah+goldberg+debate&oq=jonah+goldberg+debate&aqs=chrome..69i57.9828j0j1&sourceid=chrome&es_sm=91&ie=UTF-8#q=jonah+goldberg+debate+peter+beinart&spell=1>
culprits <http://www.greatertalent.com/monicacrowleyalancolmes/> – cheapens any 
debate about issues or real ideological differences, and gives Americans yet 
more evidence that party divides are largely for show (and that the real divide 
in American politics is between the powerful and the powerless). It's not so 
much that they're friendly with each other – I'm for being friends! – it's that 
they've chosen to link arms and walk on a treadmill of pointless conflict.


What's more, however skillfully Gibbs might argue his ideology and policy with 
Rove, his convictions are undermined by continued presence on the stage – 
especially in this instance, given Rove's outrageous "brain damage" hypothesis. 
Gibbs refused to comment on the quote, which seems to confirm that Rove did 
make the accusation, and absolutely makes Gibbs (and perhaps Raviv) complicit 
in legitimizing it.


Think about it: Rove apparently unleashed this idea in front of a seasoned 
news reporter and a Democratic operative personally familiar with Clinton... 
who apparently said nothing, let the comment pass or nodded sagely! Neither 
Gibbs nor Raviv are responsible for that Rove said, but their apparent silence 
underscores what might be the larger problem with Rove's comment: he made his 
musings in a for-profit setting where outlandish accusations generate more 
bookings, and substantive debate and principled moral stands give you more time 
at home with your principles.


Appearing with Rove validates him, and appearing with him dozens of times, 
debatingthe exact same topics, over and over, says that you have no real 
interest in moving the conversation forward – and creates the suspicion than 
that you might not take the conversation very seriously to begin with.


Look, if you dangled a $50,000 speaking fee in front of me to appear alongside 
Karl Rove, I would probably take it. But I can't imagine doing it for years on 
end without, at some point, wanting to throttle him. See, I actually have 
fundamental philosophical disagreements with Rove. I think that what he did 
over the years is objectivelybad for America. I believe that he helped create 
policies that led to the needless loss of thousands of American lives. He is 
one of the men behind thesignature military failure of modern American history 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/aaron-belkin/karl-roves-war_b_2892910.html>. He 
is the architect of the plan thatused fear-mongering about gay marriage to turn 
out GOP votes 
<http://www.newrepublic.com/blog/the-plank/karl-rove-lifelong-gay-baiter>. He 
helpedsteal the 2000 election. This is not "agree to disagree" stuff. I don't 
respect him and I don't think I would learn from him.


The reason I'd like to debate Rove is that I'd like to win the debate, to 
delegitimize him and to prove that his ideas are dangerous and wrong. 
Furthermore, if I were to debate Karl Rove multiple times over the course of 
several years and discovered that people still took him seriously, that would 
mean I had failed, and I wouldn't have earned the money I had been paid – and I 
wouldn't blame you if you lost respect for me for taking it.

 