
A Victorian student has raised almost $5,000 for a primary school in the 
Northern Territory that missed out whenKaty Perry chose an elite private school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/australia-culture-blog/2014/nov/15/why-did-katy-perry-give-her-10000-prize-to-a-private-melbourne-school>
 as the winner of a performing arts video competition.


The touring pop singer awarded $10,000 to Loreto Mandeville Hall College in 
Toorak, Melbourne, over 300 other entries, including the relatively 
under-resourced Clyde Fenton school in Katherine.

The story of Clyde Fenton inspired Natasha Joyce, 39, to begin a crowd-funding 
campaign, which has raised several thousand dollars for the primary school 
through private donations and the campaign’sFundRazr page 
<https://fundrazr.com/campaigns/dtvI4?activity=28cbie&utm_campaign=story-update&utm_medium=email&utm_source=12-2014>
.

Among the donors are former students and parents of Loreto Mandeville. Another 
parent wrote to Joyce reporting that her daughter had attended Perry’s 
Melbourne concert and chosen to donate the $50 she would have otherwise spent 
on a merchandising T-shirt to the campaign.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1rEWqb3R6LU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1rEWqb3R6LU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1rEWqb3R6LU&media=>
Joyce has firsthand experience of the gaps in opportunity between urban and 
regional Australia. After years of living in Melbourne, she returned to her 
hometown of Bendigo to be closer to her family and study for an arts degree. 
She had recently resumed making art, having dropped the subject in high school 
because her family couldn’t afford the cost of materials.

“Rather than moving to the next hashtag issue, I chose to act,” Joyce said. 
“Clyde Fenton having an arts program is a luxury that the school would normally 
never be able to consider and I wanted them to have some creative options open 
to them.”

Joyce puts in two to three hours each day running the project’s social media, 
processing donations and reaching out to media and potential donors.

Clyde Fenton’s principal, Warwick Peter-Budge, said media coverage led to 
several offers of financial support from the public, calls he now directs to 
Joyce’s fundraising page. Joyce had been periodically transferring the money 
raised into the school’s bank account, he said.


“We’re really grateful for the public interest and the fundraising 
opportunity,” Peter-Budge told Guardian Australia. “It hasn’t been a massive 
windfall, but it’s certainly been better than selling raffle tickets in town, 
which is what we usually do.”

A 2013 report on rural poverty 
<http://ruralhealth.org.au/documents/publicseminars/2013_Sep/Joint-report.pdf> 
showed young people in rural and remote areas were less likely to complete high 
school and enter higher education.

Clyde Fenton, in the Northern Territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/northern-territory> town of 
Katherine, is attended by nearly 250 children, more than 60% of whom are 
Indigenous. The school provides basic care few private schools need to offer, 
including a breakfast program, a pool of clothes for students to use and 
extensive support for behavioural issues.

“A large number of our kids come from home backgrounds that are pretty 
destabilised, where they’re not getting a lot of their basic needs met, be it 
financial or other forms of care,” Peter-Budge said.

He was quick to stress that Clyde Fenton was hardly the poorest school in the 
nation, but said Loreto Mandeville was “much, much better resourced, what with 
the fees they can charge parents and the funds they get from government on top 
of that”.
 