
Kell Brook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kell-brook> has expressed his 
desire to prove himself as the best welterweight in the world, with the fighter 
continuing to target a showdown with one of the other leading contenders this 
summer.

Brook made a routine third defence of his IBF welterweight title against the 
mandatory challenger Kevin Bizier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/kell-brook-canada-kevin-bizier> 
at the Sheffield Arena on Saturday night, stopping the Canadian in five minutes 
and 15 seconds of the contest. The champion dominated from the first bell and 
having cut Bizier with an uppercut early in the second round, he floored him 
twice in quick succession – with a thudding right and then via a barrage of 
shots – to win by TKO and extend his record to 36-0-0.

Kell Brook keeps focus to beat Canada’s Kevin Bizier in two rounds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/mar/26/kell-brook-canada-kevin-bizier> 
By own his admission, Brook is entering a crucial stage of his career. He is 
30 in May and desperate to take part in a fight that will secure his status as 
the leading figure in the 147lb division, and firmly propel him on to the 
global stage. Certainly, the fights he has been involved in since winning the 
IBF crownfrom Shawn Porter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/17/kell-brook-shawn-porter-ibf-title-amir-khan-awaits-boxing>
 two years ago have not done that – straightforward victoriesagainst Jo Jo Dan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/29/kell-brook-jo-jo-dan-ibf-welterweight-title>
,Frankie Gavin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/may/30/kevin-mitchell-world-title-fight>
 and Bizier, who may have been a mandatory challenger but is nowhere near 
world-class.

Facing Amir Khan remains Brook’s preferred next step but, given the Bolton 
fighter is stepping up in weightto face the Mexican Saúl “Canelo” Álvarez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/feb/02/amir-khan-a-whipping-boy-no-longer-after-career-defining-choice-of-canelo>
 in Las Vegas on 7 May and will then be observing Ramadan until the start of 
July, the earliest the two Brits could realistically meet is the autumn. Brook 
does not want to hang around until then and is therefore calling out other 
high-level opponents for a July showdown, ideally to be held at another, larger 
venue in his home town – Sheffield United FC’s Bramall Lane. “[I’ll fight] 
anyone who weighs 147lb or even 154 [super-welterweight],” Brook said. “I want 
to unify the division and there’s no one who can touch me at 147. I’ll clean 
up.”

The other welterweight world champions, Keith Thurman (WBA), Danny García 
(WBC) and Jessie Vargas (WBO), have all been mooted as possible opponents for 
Brook, as has the former two-times world champion Timothy Bradley, with the 
promoter Eddie Hearn confirming provisional discussions have been held with the 
32-year-old’s camp regarding him facing Brook after the American hastaken on 
Manny Pacquiao 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/31/manny-pacquiao-april-fight-timothy-bradley>
 at the MGM Grand on 9 April.

“We have 12 months now in which we won’t have to fight a poxy mandatory again. 
We want big fights,” Hearn said. “Because of how good Kell is we’re not going 
to get multiple choices. It is going to be one from all the names mentioned and 
any one of those we have to grab immediately.

“I’ve always liked the Tim Bradley fight and I think he beats Paquiao. Even if 
he loses, it’s still a huge fight.

“If Amir loses to Canelo I’m sure we’ll make that fight but we’re talking 
October/November. We want a big one in July at Bramall Lane. We’ve had massive 
support from the club, they’re right behind Kell.”

García, who stopped Khan in four rounds four years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/15/knockdown-amir-khan-danny-garcia>
, has apparently made it clear to his own team that he will not travel to 
England to face Brook, which is also believed to be the case with Thurman. 
Hearn believes the fellow Americans Vargas and Bradley would cross the 
Atlantic, with the latter having already done so when he fought andbeat Junior 
Witter in Nottingham eight years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2008/may/12/boxing>.

“I’d love Kell to fight Danny García, he’d smash Danny Garcia, but we’d have 
to do that in America,” Hearn said. “Fine. If we have to travel, we will.”

That was also the message from Brook, who travelled to Carson, California, in 
order to triumph over Porter. “I’ve been over to America and if we have to go 
over again, we’ll go over,” the 29-year-old said. “I want to challenge myself 
and see how many gears I can go up.”
 