
Searching for Kell Brook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kell-brook> on a 
sunny afternoon in Sheffield is a surreal experience. Rolling up and down the 
fanciest street in town with only a house name to look for, we meander past one 
mansion after another. This is not typical boxing terrain. My taxi driver and I 
are more accustomed to gritty back-street trawling when hunting for a derelict 
old gym.

The driver, an interesting Asian man who boxed as an amateur, offers a cool 
appraisal of a possible showdown between Brook and Amir Khan. He comes from 
Sheffield but the cabby argues in favour of Khan’s fast hands from Bolton 
deciding a bitter and eagerly awaited clash. Yet,despite his flawless 35-0 
record <http://boxrec.com/boxer/272717> and IBF world welterweight title, Brook 
remains locked outside the career-defining fight he craves.

Khan, after finally appearing ready to meet Brook at Wembley this summer, has 
opted for Las Vegas and an even bigger contest against Saúl “Canelo” Álvarez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/29/amir-khan-canelo-alvarez-fight-boxing>
. Real risk is attached because Canelo, an imposing Mexican, operates as a 
middleweight – two divisions heavier than Khan.

The British welterweights deserve to feature at the highest level of world 
boxing but, in our taxi, we feel like they have done so often – lost and 
disorientated in the fight game as yet another high wall or iron gate leads to 
the next dead end. Brook finally answers his phone. Of course he is not at 
home. The world champion is where he should be only days from his latest title 
defence, against theanonymous Canadian Kevin Bizier on Saturday in Sheffield 
<http://www.boxingnewsonline.net/kell-brook-vs-kevin-bizier/>.

Brook is toiling away in the gym in downbeat old Wincobank. This is Brendan 
Ingle’s famous boxing shrine where he shaped Herol Graham, Naseem Hamed and 
little Kell Brook 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/sport/general/boxing/brendan-ingle-still-loves-the-craic-even-after-50-years-in-boxing-9923176.html>
.

As soon as I walk through the door to St Thomas’ Brook takes me back to when 
he was seven and first entered this mysterious place of weaving and punching. 
He has been a pro for almost 12 years and, only weeks from his 30th birthday, 
Brook conjures up the fevered atmosphere of a gym packed with small boys 
dreaming of becoming world champions.

St Thomas’ is deserted now and Brook soon cuts to the heart of his life and 
describes how elation was swallowed up by despair. “I can’t really explain how 
high the feeling waswinning that world title in California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/aug/17/kell-brook-shawn-porter-ibf-title-amir-khan-awaits-boxing>
 with my family watching me,” Brook says. It was a sticky August night in 2014 
when, in Carson, on the fringes of Los Angeles, Brook became only the second 
British fighter to depose a world champion in the US.Lloyd Honeyghan had made 
history when shocking Donald Curry in 1986 
<http://www.boxingnewsonline.net/on-this-day-lloyd-honeyghan-stuns-donald-curry-and-grabs-world-welterweight-title/>
. Brook’s defeat of the unbeaten Shawn Porter felt as seismic to the Sheffield 
man.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fkell-brook-amir-khan-respect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd69806769f0aa187e65891c7add616b1e3a2a211%2F0_0_4272_2783%2F4272.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kell%20Brook%3A%20%E2%80%98Amir%20Khan%20has%20no%20respect%20for%20me%2C%20I%20want%20to%20destroy%20him%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fkell-brook-amir-khan-respect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kell%20Brook%3A%20%E2%80%98Amir%20Khan%20has%20no%20respect%20for%20me%2C%20I%20want%20to%20destroy%20him%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fkell-brook-amir-khan-respect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd69806769f0aa187e65891c7add616b1e3a2a211%2F0_0_4272_2783%2F4272.jpg>
 Brook overcomes Porter. Photograph: Peter Cziborra/Action Images 
“My mum and dad remembered me as a little kid, with teeth missing,” he says. 
“I had been to the gym and told them I’d become a world champion. So when I 
became the king of the welterweights I can’t put into words the feeling of 
seeing my mum and dad upset with joy, seeing my partner, Lindsey. It was a big 
feeling after the fight, walking in the Californian air, nursing my bruised 
face with my family. We were looking at each other and they were saying: 
‘You’ve done it, son, you’ve done it.’ It lived up to all my fantasies and 
beyond. It was the best week of my life.”

Brook pauses, his face clouding. “Then, soon after that, came the darkest 
time, a time when I didn’t think I was going to live. I didn’t think I was 
going to walk again. I remember laying on a hospital bed in Tenerife and it was 
shocking.”

The shock of being stabbed so badly while on holiday with Lindsey in Tenerife 
in September 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/04/kell-brook-hospital-stabbed-leg-tenerife>
, just over two weeks after he won his world title, seeps through Brook again. 
“I had no way of knowing if I would walk again. It wasn’t the holiday side of 
Tenerife. It was the local side of Tenerife and no one really spoke English. I 
just wanted to know how bad it was and I was getting no answers. I had drips in 
and it was a nightmare. I was thinking for a long time I wouldn’t walk again.

“It was nearly a week before we finally got hold of someone, a doctor, who 
could speak decent English. He said: ‘I believe you will make a 100% recovery.’ 
Plain as day now I can see my mum and dad in that hospital room. We were so 
emotional, thinking: ‘We’ve got another crack.’”

Brook looks up. “It’s been a rollercoaster. It’s been mad. I needed my family 
around me to get through that dark time. It’s definitely changed me because, 
coming out of hospital, it felt like a new world. I felt the breeze and heard 
the birds singing. I saw the sand and I was thinking: ‘These small things in 
life are so precious.’ It’s changed how I look at life, how I look at my kids. 
It had a big effect on me – because I was close to death.”

What happened to the man who stabbed him? “They put an international arrest 
out on him. He’s still on the run. I didn’t know him before. He was an English 
guy and they knew I’d just won the world title and they were all excited to be 
with me, having a drink, celebrating. But you don’t know what’s going on in 
their minds. This guy was a complete nutter.

“He stabbed me out of the blue. He’s drinking and getting revved up comparing 
street fighting to boxing. He’s saying: ‘You can do anything in a street fight. 
You can pick up a knife and stab someone.’ I said: ‘I know. But, in my eyes, if 
you do that you’re a coward.’ The guy paused for a minute and, then, he jumped 
up. I’m sitting down. He’s over me with a big knife, saying: ‘Are you calling 
me a coward?’ He’s in a different world, crazy, and he stabbed me.

“Here’s the sad thing. I’m the nicest kid. I’m not a big head. But, now, 
whenever I have people around me I feel tense. I can’t have people walking 
behind me. I hardly go out at night now.”

We have hardly spoken about Bizier and the challenge the Canadian may present 
on Saturday. He nods when I say the only fact I really know about Bizier is that
his two defeats were against Jo Jo Dan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/mar/29/kell-brook-jo-jo-dan-ibf-welterweight-title>
 – another Canadian-based fighter whom Brook stopped in four rounds last year. 
It must be hard to motivate himself against Bizier rather than Khan or their 
American rivals?

“It’s not a huge fight,” Brook admits, “and it has been hard getting up for 
it. Bizier has not got the Shawn Porter factor, the Keith Thurman factor, the 
Danny García factor. He doesn’t spread the fear of those American guys. You 
need that fear – thinking this guy is a machine coming for me. They make you 
train hard. But Bizier has desire and he will be hungry. I learned that lesson 
against Carson Jones.”

Brook’s toughest fight, when he almost lost to Jones, was in July 2012 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/boxing/18742064>. He eventually won a majority 
decision but he spent much of that night in a Sheffield hospital after his nose 
was broken badly. “I did underestimate Jones and it were a Gypsy warning, a big 
wake-up call. I lay in hospital, thinking: ‘This is a game where you can 
legally get killed if you’ve not done everything right.’ That’s why I’m working 
hard for Bizier.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fkell-brook-amir-khan-respect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b911a099e0c5c8ae9a61a2abdcc570f4f808e77%2F0_0_3800_2568%2F3800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kell%20Brook%3A%20%E2%80%98Amir%20Khan%20has%20no%20respect%20for%20me%2C%20I%20want%20to%20destroy%20him%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fkell-brook-amir-khan-respect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kell%20Brook%3A%20%E2%80%98Amir%20Khan%20has%20no%20respect%20for%20me%2C%20I%20want%20to%20destroy%20him%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fkell-brook-amir-khan-respect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4b911a099e0c5c8ae9a61a2abdcc570f4f808e77%2F0_0_3800_2568%2F3800.jpg>
 Brook celebrates victory over Carson Jones at the Motorpoint Arena in 
Sheffield. Photograph: Paul Thomas/Getty Images 
Khan, inevitably, still hangs over Brook. Did he believe their fight was about 
to happen? “Absolutely. It was close. But you saw him on Twitter. He was 
talking like he were the champion.”

Unlike Brook, Khan does not hold a world title. But Brook’s camp alleged Khan 
was demanding 80% of the combined purse 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/sport/boxing/35386831>. “The Khan kid has delusions. But 
we weren’t getting dictated to when we are the world champion. I’ll take care 
of the mandatory [challenge of Bizier] and that will free up some big fights.

“I want Khan but I think his demands were a way of avoiding the fight. He sees 
it as too much of a risk. He’s gone for Canelo. Even if he loses he can say 
that big weight difference was the factor. So I understand why he took the 
fight because there’s also a big pot of money.

“When it first got announced I thought there’s no chance he can beat Canelo. 
But now I think he could do well. If he listens to his coach and follows the 
precedent of how to beat Canelo – given in the Floyd Mayweather fight[which 
Álvarez lost widely] <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5fRdSONTO1Q> – Khan could 
do well. I still think Canelo wins. He’s a proud Mexican who will find a way 
and nail this Khan kid at some point.”

The hype implies the British rivals hate each other – but such venom is rarely 
true of fighters. “I don’t want him hurt,” Brook says of Khan. “We’re both from 
Britain and fighting away from home, against these Americans and Mexicans, I 
want Khan to win. If he does – fantastic. I’m not praying he gets splattered. 
But when it comes to me and him, in this country, I want to destroy him. He’s 
got no respect for me and I’ve come up the hard way.”

I have interviewed Brook once before when he used our conversation to address 
for the first time in public that, as a mixed-race man, he has white parents, 
Julie and Terry. Many people had assumed he was adopted but Brook explained 
that his mother had been only 20 when she gave birth. Kell’s biological father, 
who is black, left them soon afterwards. Fourteen months later his mother met 
Terry and Kell found a new dad.

“My dad looks after me incredibly,” Brook says of Terry. “If he saw me taking 
too much punishment he’d step in. I’m actually a mummy’s boy. That’s why it was 
important we did that interview years ago. It helped people understand me. Now, 
Lindsey, me and our two girls live in the best area of Sheffield. Our oldest 
daughter [aged four] is so far ahead of where Lindsey and I were as kids. We 
want the best for the girls. The best areas, the best schools.

“When I come back from the gym I can’t believe I’m driving up those roads to 
my house.

“ As a kid, mum and dad would take me to the Toby Carvery for a treat and we’d 
drive past these big houses with high walls and cameras. I always said I want 
to live there one day. I do now – but I deserve it. I suffer in the gym every 
day. I’ve got the black eye to prove it.”

Brook grins as he gestures to his bruised face and imagines the riches of a 
fight against Khan. “I have a huge house surrounded by luxury but I’ve earned 
it. That house is beautiful but it’s not quite champion. I have my eyes on 
something better – the perfect champion’s house. One of those even better 
houses with the big gates opening up, the long drive, the even bigger mansion. 
It’s out there – and I will get it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fkell-brook-amir-khan-respect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8824702578ff6502146d2f32c2b576535fe144d%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kell%20Brook%3A%20%E2%80%98Amir%20Khan%20has%20no%20respect%20for%20me%2C%20I%20want%20to%20destroy%20him%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fkell-brook-amir-khan-respect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kell%20Brook%3A%20%E2%80%98Amir%20Khan%20has%20no%20respect%20for%20me%2C%20I%20want%20to%20destroy%20him%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2F2016%2Fmar%2F21%2Fkell-brook-amir-khan-respect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8824702578ff6502146d2f32c2b576535fe144d%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Brook at the Ingle Gym in Woincobank, Sheffield. Photograph: Christopher 
Thomond for the Guardian  