
It was no surprise that Kelly Clarkson gave an emotional performance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9FHYBQxURQo> on American Idol last night. That 
ability to connect with an audience is what allowed her to win the first season 
of the groundbreaking show, now in its final season, in 2002. Her tears while 
singing her single, Piece by Piece, actually caused her to stop and apologize 
to the audience. That is Kelly Clarkson, and if there is one thing she knows 
how to do, it is how to not mess up on American Idol.

American Idol: a final farewell to the 'Death Star' of reality TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jan/06/american-idol-final-season-the-voice-the-challenge-reality-tv>
When she was done she explained to host Ryan Seacrest that she was very 
emotional because she’s pregnant with her second child, and that her 
performance was “so nostalgic and I can’t believe it’s the last season”. That’s 
what made Kelly’s performance so emotional for all of us – it’s the end of an 
era after 14 years.

Remember when the country elected Clarkson as its first American Idol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/american-idol>? Things were so 
different back then. We used to call in and vote on a phone, sometimes even a 
landline. You had to dial actual numbers to place your vote. What universe were 
we living in? The democracy of the show was novel too, a concept since copied 
by plenty of other reality shows that have come and gone.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9FHYBQxURQo&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9FHYBQxURQo>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D9FHYBQxURQo&media=>
What makes us all tear up when watching this video is the good kind of 
nostalgia. (Not the bad kind of nostalgia that leads to shows likeVinyl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/10/vinyl-hbo-martin-scorsese-mick-jagger>
 andFuller House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/feb/26/fuller-house-netflix-full-house-reboot-tanner-family>
.) We’re thinking about 14 years ago, when Clarkson was just an unknown with an 
incredible voice. Now she’s a wife and mother with one child and another on the 
way – oh and a bajillion hit singles under her belt.

Part of that nostalgia isn’t just about a former number-one show ending, but 
about missing an era gone by. There will be nothing like American Idol again. 
It is no longer the ratings juggernaut that it once was. There will never be 
something that unites the whole country to sit around and watch it at the same 
time, at least not on the scale of Idol in its prime. Now events like Grease: 
Live get half as many viewers, and people react not by voting but by sending 
mean tweets.

So many of us grew up with Clarkson – watching her on TV, listening to her 
songs, secretly hoping that we could also be plucked out of obscurity and 
launched to instant fame. She grew up right there on that set. That’s what 
brings tears to our eyes – a longing for the past and a grasping to understand 
the future. And, like always, no one can deliver that better thanKelly Clarkson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/kelly-clarkson>.
 