
Kell Brook <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kell-brook> and his promoter 
Eddie Hearn have responded to an outburst by Amir Khan on social media with a 
public offer of a world title fight.

A bout between the British pair has been talked about for years and there 
appeared to be progress between the camps at the end of 2015 but on Friday Khan 
sent a flurry of tweets accusing Brook of avoiding the fight, and claimed 
Brook’s team had demanded an unreasonable cut of the revenues from any 
potential meeting.

Brook announced on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jan/20/kell-brook-ibf-welterweight-title-defence-kevin-bizier-sheffield-march-boxing-luke-campbell>
 he will make the third defence of his IBF welterweight title against the 
mandatory challenger Kevin Bizier in Sheffield on 26 March.

“I want it, Eddie wants it, Sky want it, all the fans want it, but then Kell 
decides to fight Kevin Bizier who’s lost to Jo Jo Dan twice!” said Khan. “Never 
known of a world champion to have 3 bum defences back to back, make that 4 if 
you include Diego Chaves, at least fight some1 in top 10 [sic].”

He added: “Brook wants 50/50 split with me. Wake up son and smell the coffee! 
Be realistic and make it happen, even Eddie told you you’re not worth that! 
Fact is they are fooling the fans fighting all these bums on the back of my 
name to hype his fights and profile saying I’m running scared.”
Eddie Hearn (@EddieHearn) 
made but enough of the insults. @AmirKingKhan 
<https://twitter.com/AmirKingKhan> we will make this easy for you 60-40 in your 
favour (Kell is World Champ) and you have it.
 <https://twitter.com/EddieHearn/status/690556094213660672> January 22, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/EddieHearn/status/690556094213660672> 
Hearn quickly responded, claiming Khan’s team had asked for an exorbitant 80% 
share during a meeting between the two camps on Monday. “He [Khan’s lawyer] 
asked for a £10m guarantee with upside to fight Brook with Kell getting approx 
£2-2.5m,” Hearn tweeted. “After I spat my coffee out we said no thanks. Enough 
of the insults. We will make this easy for you: 60-40 in your favour (Kell is 
world champ) and you have it.”

Brook added: “There you have it – put up or shut up. No more talk, June 4 
Wembley Stadium for the world title. I will destroy you.”

Khan, a former WBA and IBF light world welterweight champion, also turned on 
Manny Pacquiao, accusing him and his team, led by Bob Arum, of providing 
conflicting reasons forchoosing to fight Timothy Bradley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/dec/31/amir-khan-misses-out-manny-pacquiao-timothy-bradley>
 in April, instead of the Bolton born boxer.
 