
Team GBR celebrated after Robbie Kerr finished third in the feature race at 
Eastern Creek, Australia, in round six of theA1GP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/a1gp> World Cup. The result was a welcome 
return to the podium for GBR, especially after a risky strategy in the 
morning's sprint race had seen Kerr trail in 16th.

The sprint had been affected by heavy rainfall, which arrived when Kerr was 
running fourth in the 14-lap event. The team's ensuing decision to bring Robbie 
in to the pit to change tyres backfired as just three other teams made the same 
choice, allowing the remaining drivers to hang on in the wet conditions on 
slicks.

Fortunes changed dramatically for the afternoon's feature race, the entire 45 
laps of which were held in heavy rain, causing spray and limited visibility. 
With pole-sitters New Zealand beginning the race from the pitlane, Kerr began 
from second position behind Switzerland.

After losing out to eventual winners South Africa in the first round of stops, 
Kerr produced a solid drive to come home in third 25 seconds behind Adrian 
Zaugg and claim 10 championship points. "It's great to be back on the podium as 
it's been a long time since we were last up there in Brno last October," Kerr 
said. "The feature race start was a bit mixed - it definitely looked like we 
could challenge for P1, but unfortunately the pace dropped off a little and we 
couldn't get the grip out of the car on the corner so lost time. But it's a 
good result and definitely one we needed. Now we just need to make sure we 
carry on with the momentum and stay on the podium to give us a chance in the 
championship."

Team GBR has now moved up to sixth in the championship with 58 points. Two 
further Team GBR podiums came today courtesy of rookie driver James Winslow, 
who has also been competing in this weekend's Australian F3 Championship rounds.
 