
In his Covent Garden office, the Royal Ballet’s director, Kevin O’Hare 
<http://www.roh.org.uk/people/kevin-ohare>, is considering the current 
dance-world stir caused by choreographersHofesh Shechter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/hofesh-shechter>, Akram Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/18/shahin-novrasli-akram-khan-review-music-and-dance>
 andLloyd Newson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/oct/29/death-drugs-and-survival-dv8-physical-theatre-tells-the-story-of-john>
. All three have said British dancers aren’t matching the standards of their 
international counterparts and that UK training is simply not rigorous enough.


Are British dancers really outclassed on the world stage?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2015/apr/13/are-british-dancers-outclassed-on-the-world-stage-akram-khan-hofesh-schechter-lloyd-newson>
O’Hare is sceptical. Shechter has, in fact, just made a piece for some of the 
young dancers in his company. “They were mostly dancers who had come from the
Royal Ballet <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/royal-ballet> School in the 
last three years, and he was beyond impressed with them,” he says.

But whether our dancers are in demand or not, one thing’s for sure, says the 
director, our choreographers certainly are. “Look atBenjamin Millepied’s first 
season for the Paris Opera, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/dance-blog/2015/feb/04/benjamin-millepied-paris-opera-sidi-larbi-cherkaoui-royal-ballet-flanders-top-jobs>
” says O’Hare. “He’s got Wayne McGregor, Chris Wheeldon and Liam Scarlett 
involved, and Arthur Pita. In Britain, we’ve got choreographers that people 
around the world want.”

Where would he rank British-trained choreographers globally? “I have to say I 
think we’re right at the forefront,” says O’Hare. “Chris just opened in New 
York [withAn American in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/apr/13/an-american-in-paris-christopher-wheeldon-new-york-review>
], Liam’s work [most recently Carmen for Norwegian National Ballet and With a 
Chance of Rain for American Ballet Theatre] is going right across the world 
now, and everyone wants to have a McGregor in their rep.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fkevin-ohare-weve-got-choreographers-that-people-around-the-world-want%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429038165680%2F8cab4d80-b7af-43f1-a358-d27efb955bea-1020x612.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kevin%20O'Hare%3A%20'We%E2%80%99ve%20got%20choreographers%20that%20people%20around%20the%20world%20want'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fkevin-ohare-weve-got-choreographers-that-people-around-the-world-want%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kevin%20O%27Hare%3A%20%27We%E2%80%99ve%20got%20choreographers%20that%20people%20around%20the%20world%20want%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fapr%2F15%2Fkevin-ohare-weve-got-choreographers-that-people-around-the-world-want%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F4%2F14%2F1429038165680%2F8cab4d80-b7af-43f1-a358-d27efb955bea-1020x612.jpeg>
 Leanne Cope and Robert Fairchild star in An American in Paris, directed and 
choreographed by Christopher Wheeldon. Photograph: Angela Sterling/AP 
New choreography is the focus of the Royal Ballet’s 2015-2016 season, which is 
announced on Wednesday, with new works commissioned from all the company’s 
associated artists: McGregor, Wheeldon, Will Tuckett, Carlos Acosta (who will 
be reimagining Carmen, which he plans to star in before retiring as a dancer at 
the end of the season) and Scarlett, who is tackling a full-length retelling of 
Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein (bringing out the love story, apparently).

The reason British choreography is so strong, especially in the world of 
modern ballet, says O’Hare, is because we’ve spent the last decade nurturing 
the people who make it, and encouraging conversations across the 
classical-contemporary devide. O’Hare’s predecessor, Monica Mason, started the 
trend, which O’Hare enthusiastically continues, and this season he’s also 
making a move to bring through more young talent. There’s an expansion of the 
Draftworks programme, featuring works made by members of the company, plus a 
new summer school where guest choreographers from different fields can 
experiment on ballet dancers from the Royal and other companies, just to see 
what happens.

And, big news, among all that: a woman! There has been a bubbling debate for 
the past couple of years about the paltry lack of female choreographers at the 
top of the dance world, especially in ballet. There hasn’t been a new work by a 
woman on Covent Garden’s main stage since 1999. And – don’t get your hopes up – 
there won’t be one just yet, but the wheels are in motion. Talented 18-year-old 
Charlotte Edmonds has been handpicked for a newly created Young Choreographic 
Programme where she’ll get to shadow the Royal’s choreographers and work with 
their dancers (and possibly most crucially, have access to some of the most 
influential people in the business).

There are women choreographers I admire, and I’m pursuing them
Kevin O'Hare 
Observer dance critic Luke Jennings has called Edmonds’s work “accomplished 
and sophisticated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/mar/09/yorke-dance-project-review-sadlers-wells-charlotte-emonds>
”, and he chided the Royal Ballet School, where she was a student, for letting 
her go at 16 when she was “assessed out”, which means she didn’t pass the year, 
because technically or physically she didn’t fit the mould to be a professional 
dancer. But O’Hare had his eye on her all along, noticing a “talent beyond her 
years” when he judged a student choreography competition that she won. “There’s 
something really special about her, a really interesting vocabulary,” he says. 
“And she’s very smart.”

O’Hare can’t say for sure why female choreographers haven’t been making it 
through. At choreography competitions for younger students the entrants are 
usually about 80% female, he notes, and in the upper school, it’s 50/50. But it 
could be that by the time they make it into a company as a dancer, they’re 
swamped by the workload. “In all honesty, the women do more work,” he says. “In 
those big corps de ballet works – we’ve just done 21 Swan Lakes, it’s four 
acts, it’s tough going. Even for people who’ve got an interest in choreography, 
it takes a back seat.”

O’Hare is hoping this will change. “There are women choreographers I admire, 
and I’m pursuing them,” he insists. It’s just taking a long time to pin them 
down. O’Hare has been in the job for three years now and seems to have a sure 
vision of where he’s going.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-winters-tale-royal-ballet-bbc-four-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418647127659%2Fcrop_KP-53178_640.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Must-see%20festive%20TV%3A%20The%20Winter's%20Tale%20by%20the%20Royal%20Ballet%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-winters-tale-royal-ballet-bbc-four-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Must-see%20festive%20TV%3A%20The%20Winter%27s%20Tale%20by%20the%20Royal%20Ballet%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2Fvideo%2F2014%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-winters-tale-royal-ballet-bbc-four-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2014%2F12%2F15%2F1418647127659%2Fcrop_KP-53178_640.jpeg>
There’s a solid commitment to new work and creating “classics for the future” 
such as Wheeldon’s well-received Shakespeare adaptation, The Winter’s Tale, 
which will also be revived next season, and to making narrative ballets, but 
done in a modern way.

The Shechter commission, Untouchable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/mar/29/untouchable-hofesh-shechter-royal-ballet-review>
, which had a sold-out run and successfully transformed the airy ballet dancers 
into an earthy troupe of warriors, is by far the most contemporary thing the 
Royal has done – and shows he’s not afraid to throw in a curveball. He has an 
idea that in 2020 he’d like to programme a whole year of work made in the 
preceding decade. What, so no Nutcracker? O’Hare’s eyes dart towards the door 
and he puts a finger to his lips: “Shhh …”
 