
Kevin Pietersen <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/kevin-pietersen> has 
accepted his former team-mate and England’s current director of cricket, Andrew 
Strauss, was right to overlook him for this year’s Ashes series.

Pietersen was sacked by England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/feb/09/kevin-pietersen-ecb-england-alastair-cook>
 last year, at which stage his international career appeared to be over. 
However, a clamour grew for him to be recalled to the squad before the Ashes 
after he hit 355 not out for Surrey against Leicestershire, an innings that 
prompted a meeting in May with Strauss. HoweverStrauss decided not to recall 
the 35-year-old 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2015/may/12/kevin-pietersens-england-cricket-career-to-be-confirmed-as-over-live>
, with it no secret that the pair do not get on.

Asked at a Sports Industry Breakfast Club meeting on Thursday if Strauss made 
the correct move in leaving him out of the squad thatwent on to win the Ashes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/aug/08/england-win-ashes-beat-australia-fourth-test>
, Pietersen replied: “Absolutely. It seems to be the right decision at the 
moment and good luck to him. He’s done OK. Some of the stuff he has done with 
the England team and with getting past players back in the dressing room is 
brilliant”. Asked if he thought the door was now firmly closed on a return to 
the England squad, Pietersen added: “If it is, it is. I’m not sitting here 
worrying about what has happened. I’m living my life.

“I went there [to the meeting with Strauss] with a lot of positivity and left 
with quite a bit of negativity. He had a decision to make and he made his 
decision and it turned out absolutely fine. At the time I thought it was 
ridiculous, it was nonsense to leave me out. I might have said something 
stronger to him. But I am buzzing that England won and I am not looking back to 
the meeting in May thinking, ‘Oh goodness, things could have been so 
different.’ I am pretty cool about it.”

Pietersen, who hit 8,181 runs in 104 Tests, including 23 centuries, said he 
had many business interests but was in no mood to quit cricket yet. As well as 
playing for Surrey this year, he has represented St Lucia Zouks in the 
Caribbean Premier League and recently signed for the Dolphins in the South 
African Twenty20.

“Twenty20 is going to stay for sure because that form of the game brings a 
whole different audience to Test cricket,” said the 35-year-old. “I love Test 
cricket and I think we owe it to the great game, which is Test cricket, to 
speak positively about it. I don’t want to sit on this stage and say Test 
cricket is dead.”

Zafar Ansari to miss England’s Test series against Pakistan in UAE
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/sep/23/zafar-ansari-england-winter-test-pakistan-uae> 