
‘It’s a game-changer,” says Joel Cadbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/aug/14/cadbury-chocolate-dynasty>
, the chocolate heir and former owner of the Groucho Club. This may be 
something of an understatement. Cadbury is the chairman ofKidZania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/sep/16/kidzania-tokyo-replica-town-children>
, a £20m mini-city currently being built above the Marks & Spencer in west 
London’s vast Westfield shopping mall. KidZania will be two-thirds the scale of 
reality and will consist of a 75,000sq ft role-playing theme park for kids aged 
four to 14. It will include airport, A&E, police station, sports stadium, 
theatre, shops, university, bank, sushi and pizza concessions. It will even 
have its own newspaper, passports and currency. Most strikingly, it will also 
feature a sort of holding pen for parents.

It’s certainly a game-changer for children’s entertainment, but it may also be 
one for education. Instead of tranquilising kids with video games, or suckering 
them with rollercoasters in the traditional theme-park manner, KidZania will 
recreate workplaces such as operating theatres, plane cockpits, radio stations 
and banks. Children will play at working and will be paid in “KidZos” – above, 
you would hope, the minimum wage. There are more than 60 roles to choose from, 
each taking about 25 minutes. Your child could be a refuse collector in the 
morning, pizza chef over lunch, and surgeon in the afternoon. “Get ready for a 
better world,” is KidZania’s slogan. In the park, everything works: slacker 
kids, like broken lightbulbs, are programmatically unacceptable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414170516637%2Fbf2d5643-6242-4d3e-8542-cdc838ada628-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=KidZania%3A%20the%20mini-city%20where%20children%20are%20in%20charge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=KidZania%3A%20the%20mini-city%20where%20children%20are%20in%20charge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414170516637%2Fbf2d5643-6242-4d3e-8542-cdc838ada628-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Japanese children play at being dentists Photograph: Kiyoshi Ota/Getty Images 
So the architecture of KidZania isn’t just a simulation of the real world. 
It’s a preparation for it. Cadbury, who has a touch of the Willy Wonka about 
him, explains why. Children can learn to fly a BA aeroplane, deliver letters 
dressed as little DHL drivers and make Innocent smoothies. At the Renault 
engineering centre, they can learn how to change tyres; at H&M’s academy, they 
will be taught the rudiments of fashion and design; and at the Dorsett Hotel, 
they can be managers, front-desk staff or housekeepers. Your child could even 
become anoompa loompa <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2005/jul/27/1> – sorry, 
an expert chocolatier – at the Cadbury factory.

The promotional material shows a child in a pretend KidZania surgery, 
apparently anaesthetising a dog on an operating table. (That’s got to be a 
contravention of something, surely, unless the dog’s stuffed.)

“We’re opening children’s eyes to the realities of life,” says Cadbury, who 
talks glowingly of all the “industry partners” who are being wooed to lend 
their brands. But why do you need them? “If you have a bank called The Bank, 
it’s not very authentic,” he says. “You need the real names to authenticate the 
content.” While KidZania has lots of partners worldwide (including McDonald’s, 
Waitrose, Epson, Sony, DHL, Walmart, Olay and Mitsubishi), its London outpost 
has yet to firm up a banking partner. Perhaps a failed one like RBS would be 
the perfect way to teach kids about banking in the real world. But that 
probably won’t happen.

The most intriguing KidZania simulation involves a pretend burning building. 
Paramedics will pull a child casualty from a fake blaze, check for a pulse, 
then stretcher them to a child-sized ambulance that will ferry them to A&E, 
where little nurses will administer pretend treatment. Meanwhile, child 
firefighters will put out the blaze, child cops will investigate the incident, 
and cub reporters from the radio station and the newspaper will go Paxo on 
those responsible.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414170560745%2Fa970f465-c9e9-4e07-aab7-0dae591f502c-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=KidZania%3A%20the%20mini-city%20where%20children%20are%20in%20charge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=KidZania%3A%20the%20mini-city%20where%20children%20are%20in%20charge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414170560745%2Fa970f465-c9e9-4e07-aab7-0dae591f502c-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Junior Japanese firefighters. Photograph: Kiyoshi Ota/Getty Images 
“The inspiration for KidZania is what children do every day,” says Xavier 
López Ancona 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/1bc2e7f6-17e1-11e4-b842-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3H4HBhTmm>
, the creator of KidZania, who is taking me on a tour of the thing that has 
made him very rich. “Little girls pretend to be mothers or boys simulate 
driving cars.” When the 50-year-old man described as“the Mexican Walt Disney 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/1bc2e7f6-17e1-11e4-b842-00144feabdc0.html>” was 
working at General Electric in the 1990s, an old schoolfriend approached him 
with an idea to launch nurseries focusing on role-playing. That morphed into 
KidZania and the first park opened in Santa Fe in 1999. Today, 35 million 
children have visited a KidZania in cities as diverse as Mumbai, Tokyo, Cairo, 
Istanbul, Lisbon and Seoul. Nine more, including the London one, are in the 
offing. KidZania hasn’t yet broken into the US, but López hopes to soon.

The KidZania parks all have a similar formula. First, parents pay for 
admission. “The most expensive ticket will be £28,” says Cadbury, “so it’s 
cheaper than childcare.” Children are then fitted with radio-frequency tags so 
their whereabouts can be monitored for the four-hour experience. They are then 
separated from their parents, who can watch from what’s called the Parents’ 
Clubhouse; or – as is more likely, given that almost all KidZanias have been 
cunningly built next to malls – go shopping.

How refreshing, I say, that in the age of helicopter parenting, children are 
being separated from cosseting, overbearing adults. “That’s essential,” says 
Ollie Vigors, Cadbury’s longtime business partner. “The kids are empowered to 
make their own decisions. Parents are an impediment. I know, as a parent, that 
I say ‘Don’t do that’ to my children a ridiculous number of times a day. If 
parents are taken out of the equation, it actually gives children the freedom 
to play and learn.” The only roles for parents are as spectators: they can 
watch a play or a football match, or sit in an aeroplane being told by 
pint-sized cabin crew what to do in case of an emergency, but nothing more. In 
London, this will be flight BA 2311 (actually the fuselage of a British Airways 
Airbus that’s already been winched into place 
<http://www.britishairways.com/en-gb/bamediacentre/newsarticles?articleID=20141023114330&articleType=LatestNews#.VEoC2L7IWTM>
).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414170620907%2F004ce7f1-c73c-4283-8e78-c3b1a340ab41-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=KidZania%3A%20the%20mini-city%20where%20children%20are%20in%20charge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=KidZania%3A%20the%20mini-city%20where%20children%20are%20in%20charge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414170620907%2F004ce7f1-c73c-4283-8e78-c3b1a340ab41-1360x2040.jpeg>
 A Japanese child makes a hamburger Photograph: Kiyoshi Ota/Getty Images 
Kids will be welcomed to KidZania with a cheque and the greeting from adult 
staff: “Have a productive day!” They can cash their cheque at the bank and 
spend their kidzos on food, go-karting or gifts. They can then earn more by 
working at different jobs. The children who graduate from the university will 
earn more. “Just like in the real world,” says López. They can also open a bank 
account, deposit their cheque, and be issued with a debit card for use at 
KidZania cash machines. Japanese kids, says López, save more KidZos than their 
Mexican or Indonesian counterparts. British kids would probably rack up massive 
debts, I suggest. López laughs: in the happy land of KidZania, debt does not 
exist. Pity. If it did, kids could train as loan company flunkies, or take 
turns playingCarol Vorderman <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/vorderman> in 
debt-consolidation adverts.

Dr Richard Barry, KidZania’s head of education, is keen to stress that the 
emphasis is on learning through doing: “I believe Einstein hit the proverbial 
nail on the head when he said, ‘Learning is experience. Everything else is just 
information.’ I think the experience is a tin opener for further learning.” 
Barry and the team have been planning KidZania activities with an eye on the 
national curriculum and the Early Years Foundation Stage. Have any schools or 
teachers, I wonder, been put off by KidZania’s capitalist ethos, its 
consumerism and its echoes of child labour? Not so far, Barry replies. He 
doesn’t think that will be an issue. “We’re expecting lots of school trips and 
lots of teachers as well as children to find this inspirational.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414170711991%2Fff997fce-c393-47dd-a321-948e2df55666-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=KidZania%3A%20the%20mini-city%20where%20children%20are%20in%20charge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=KidZania%3A%20the%20mini-city%20where%20children%20are%20in%20charge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2014%2Foct%2F26%2Fkidzania-westfield-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F10%2F24%2F1414170711991%2Fff997fce-c393-47dd-a321-948e2df55666-2060x1236.jpeg>
 An aeroplane being installed at the London KidZania. Photograph: Matthew Lloyd 
But for some, there is a problem. When I tell a fellow parent about KidZania, 
she emails: “This seems like total capitalist nightmare abomination, and I 
wouldn’t want my child involved.” Certainly, parts of the press pack do not 
seem to be directed at parents. I felt queasy at the description of KidZania as 
a “new and innovative way to build your brand”. So it offers a means, funded by 
parents, for businesses to sink their claws into what the blurb calls 
“customers of the future”. Children: not so much little dudes as money-making 
opportunities.

Still, it seems a safe bet that, come next year, this building site in west 
London will be teeming with children. Cadbury and Vigors expect up to one 
million children each year, and are already planning to expand their franchise 
to east London, as well as to Birmingham or Manchester. As a result, millions 
of British children may be readied for the world of work – and perhaps 
inculcated with a revulsion for benefit dependency – at Britain’s most 
ideologically explicit theme park.

As I leave, I can’t help thinking that KidZania is what you’d get if work and 
pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith was put in charge of Alton Towers. Goodbye 
white-knuckle ride. Hello nice sensible career-nurturing fun.
 