
Killings at a British-owned gold mine in east Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> have alarmed a group of MPs, lawyers 
and human rights campaigners, who have called on the British government to 
intervene.

The all-party parliamentary group on international corporate responsibility 
met last week to discuss incidents at a Tanzanian mine run byAfrican Barrick 
Gold <https://www.theguardian.com/business/african-barrick-gold> (ABG), amid 
unconfirmed allegations that four people may have been killed there this year.

Lisa Nandy MP, who chairs the group, said: "In the past six years we know that 
16 people have been shot dead by the Tanzanian police, which indicates that 
this is a major problem."

The British firm is a subsidiary of Toronto-based Barrick Gold Corp and has 
been embroiled in years of controversy over how it handles security at North 
Mara, an open-pit gold mine in the far north ofTanzania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tanzania>.

It sits in the middle of a group of seven villages, which are home to 70,000 
people, most of whom live in poverty and prospect for specks of the precious 
metal in the waste dumps and pits of the mine as a way of survival.

Villagers, including one man who has been left disabled and the relatives of 
six men who were killed, are suing ABG in the UK high court, represented by 
British law firm Leigh Day, alleging that Tanzanian police officers shot 
unarmed locals. The claimants say the company is responsible because the police 
are an integral part of the mine's security.

Last year ABG paid compensation to 14 women who were sexually assaulted by 
police and security guards at the mine.

Shanta Martin, a partner at Leigh Day, said: "The numbers who have been shot 
and injured on the mine is just extraordinary. In 2014 we should be sending the 
message to all that there is no place to hide if you violate human rights. We 
would expect any British company to operate to the same standards in the most 
remote corner of the world as they would do operating in the UK. The mine's own 
security are not armed with live ammunition; they have teargas and non-live 
projectiles. But they are commonly accompanied by police who do carry live 
ammunition, and use it."

Tricia Feeney, executive director at human rights group Rights and 
Accountability in Development (Raid <http://raid-uk.org/index.php>), which has 
called on ABG investors to question the death toll at the mine, told the 
meeting: "The human rights record of Tanzania is astonishingly bad. No one 
should rely on Tanzanian police to enforce security. The British government has 
signed up to protect human rights, so why doesn't it incentivise good 
behaviour? They are not taking this seriously at all."

She said that every day, hundreds of men and women continued to go to the mine 
to collect rocks that they hoped contained tiny amounts of gold, something 
locals had done since before the open mine was established in the area. She 
rejected ABG's recent adoption of a voluntary code of practice and assurances 
it was taking allegations seriously. "I can't see any major change in the way 
it deals with this problem," she said.
 Lisa Nandy, who chairs the parliamentary group on corporate responsibility, 
said the North Mara mine had 'a major problem'. Photograph: Martin Argles for 
the Guardian 
A representative of ABG told the Observer that the company had not been able 
to attend the meeting at Westminster, having been invited only the day before 
it took place. He said ABG was keen to arrange a meeting between the all-party 
group and chief executive Brad Gordon, who has been credited with trying to 
address community tensions.

"African Barrick Gold <https://www.theguardian.com/business/gold> is 
vigorously defending itself against Leigh Day's lawsuit, which currently 
involves 10Â claimants," the spokesman said. "We are deeply saddened by any 
injury or loss of life at our operations. The company is committed to 
addressing legitimate grievances in an open and transparent way, but we will 
not compensate illegitimate claims or lawsuits."

He added: "While some local people conduct legitimate artisanal mining in 
areas near North Mara, of greater concern is highly organised trespass on to 
the mine site. This often involves hundreds or even thousands of illegal, armed 
and violent intruders systematically stealing gold-bearing rocks and other 
property from the mine. In 2013, there was a 35% reduction in the number of 
illegal miners on site compared with 2012. This reduction follows five years of 
consecutive increases in the number of intruders on site.

"As a company, we are committed to ensuring that all precautionary measures 
are taken in order to prevent any incidents between intruders and the police. 
It is only in very rare cases and extreme circumstances and when all 
alternatives have been exhausted that the police intervene in confrontation 
with intruders. We regret any loss of life at the mine and continually strive 
to improve relations with local community members to reduce instances of 
trespass.

"In addition to community investments, we have continued to train our staff to 
ensure they are prepared and equipped to manage situations that arise whilst 
ensuring we fully comply with the UN voluntary principles on security and human 
rights," he said.

To date, 31 men and 24 women have accepted remedy packages in response to 
grievances involving allegations regarding the use of force by mine security or 
police against intruders.
 