
At midday on 31 August, a silent and subversive music event happened inside 
Parliament House. Milling among the gaggles of children on school excursion 
were about 15 unacquainted visitors distinguished by one thing: all wore 
earphones and walked the same route through the building’s public zones.

I was one of them. That morning, as instructed by the artists, I downloaded an 
album from Bandcamp called Kill Climate Deniers: Listening Party Mix and headed 
to Parliament House. I parked between gleaming government-issued cars, walked 
to the forecourt and pressed play. Over ambient sound came the disembodied 
voice of the Canberra musician Reuben Ingall.

Debunking Malcolm Roberts: the case against a climate science denier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/debunking-malcolm-roberts-the-case-against-a-climate-science-denier>
“There are plain-clothed police officers patrolling every floor. You’ll be 
watched on camera for the whole trip and Australian federal police officers are 
armed with SR16 semi-automatic assault rifles,” he said. “When you head through 
security, act as normal as possible. How does a normal person act? Be like 
that.”

Easier said than done. Ingall’s concept album was based on a playscript called 
Kill Climate Deniers by the experimental theatremaker David Finnigan. The play 
is a hostage drama about an eco-terrorist attack on Parliament House with the 
tagline: “What happens when the unstoppable force of climate change meets the 
immovable object ofAustralian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics>?”

Even before the volley of gunfire during the song Music to Shoot Climate 
Activists To, Ingall’s “bangers” were an unsettling score for a Parliament 
House stroll. His classic house and techno tracks expressed an abandon and 
depravity that was utterly incongruent with the civic fustiness of the meeting 
place of our nation. When two AFP officers eyed me, then cruised slowly by, I 
felt vaguely treasonous and very paranoid.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fkill-climate-deniers-provocative-play-slyly-infiltrates-australias-parliament-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff0c0f5cf36572be634f637c39c7ce3901903e4b%2F0_0_2532_3806%2F2532.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kill%20Climate%20Deniers%3A%20the%20provocative%20play%20that%20sneakily%20infiltrated%20Australia's%20Parliament%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fkill-climate-deniers-provocative-play-slyly-infiltrates-australias-parliament-house%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kill%20Climate%20Deniers%3A%20the%20provocative%20play%20that%20sneakily%20infiltrated%20Australia%27s%20Parliament%20House&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fkill-climate-deniers-provocative-play-slyly-infiltrates-australias-parliament-house%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff0c0f5cf36572be634f637c39c7ce3901903e4b%2F0_0_2532_3806%2F2532.jpg>
 Playwright David Finnigan wrote Kill Climate Deniers as a response to a 
‘calcified’ climate change debate. Photograph: Sarah Walker 
This bold listening party in August was just the latest iteration in what has 
become a spectacularly sprawling project for Finnigan. His script has found 
form as a radio play, a book, a short film and a live show. And its creative 
eruptions show no sign of stopping.

The album has just been released 
<https://clananalogue.bandcamp.com/album/kill-climate-deniers> on the seminal 
electronic label Clan Analogue and last week Finnigan unveileda video for the 
track Bolted <https://youtu.be/809XLvFtgu4>. A remix of the same song by James 
Atkin of British band EMF (best known for 1991 track Unbelievable) is due for 
release as well. This week Ingall and Finnigan launch the album in Canberra and 
atMelbourne fringe festival 
<https://melbournefringe.com.au/program?event/kill_climate_deniers/6d9c5044-7669-4af7-b61e-b2afee5cec4a/>
.

But why vintage rave? It’s an era thing, says Finnigan. “It’s been 28 years 
since [Nasa scientist] James Hansen testified to the US Congress that climate 
change had commenced. Around that time Chicago house and Detroit techno arrived 
in the UK with all the cheap ecstasy and kicked off the second summer of love.”

Unlike a lot of current dancefloor music, these tracks aren’t smart or 
self-referential. They are pure elation, pure escapism. If Nero were around, 
they’d have been his jam as Rome burned. Which fits nicely with the extinction 
theme that Julian Hobba, artistic director of Aspen IslandTheatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Company, sees as “the hard kernel 
sitting at the heart of the [Finnigan’s] play”.

Hobba commissioned the work but it hasn’t yet been performed as the 
traditional stage play it was written to be. In late 2014 the Herald Sun 
columnistAndrew Bolt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/andrew-bolt> discovered 
Finnigan had received funding from Arts ACT. Bolt hadn’t read the play – it was 
still in development – but the title was enough.

“How does the ACT government justify spending taxpayers’ money on a theatre 
work entitled Kill Climate Deniers?”he wrote 
<http://www.heraldsun.com.au/blogs/andrew-bolt/act-government-donates--to-kill-climate-deniers-project/news-story/1dc34e7614ced0ca80939889403b6541>
. “What sane government donates to a project urging others to kill fellow 
citizens, even as a ‘joke’?”

Others decried it too, sight unseen. The climate sceptic and writer Don Aitken 
blogged about it 
<http://donaitkin.com/kill-climate-deniers-more-on-public-funding-of-the-arts/> 
and the ACT shadow arts minister,Brendan Smyth, condemned the funding body for 
the decision 
<http://www.canberratimes.com.au/act-news/kill-climate-deniers-perfectly-predicts-brendan-smyths-outrage-20141002-10p4cp.html>
. In April of this year theconservative US website Breitbart piled on too 
<http://www.breitbart.com/london/2016/04/03/kill-the-deniers-yep-this-is-a-title-of-an-actual-play-funded-by-taxpayer-grant/>
.

Finnigan is not optimistic about the play’s chances of becoming a full-scale 
stage production. He is out of money and says “it can’t be a shambolic, 
rough-as-guts first go because there is an audience waiting for it to fail”. 
Instead, he has been folding the scandal back into the script, blurring fact 
and fiction in what he calls a “constantly evolving text”.

The play’s provocative title and topic are necessary stimulants in the 
“calcified” climate change debate, he says. “If I see an article with a climate 
headline, my eyes just slide right off,” he says. “And I suspect that’s a 
feature, not a bug, for the organisations who’ve spent a lot of money muddying 
the water with absurd technical falsehoods. They want us to be bored and to 
look away.

Cut the Sky review – angry and political story told through dance and theatre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jan/15/cut-the-sky-review-angry-and-political-story-told-through-dance-and-theatre>
“It would probably require a pitched gunfight between the environment minister 
and a terrorist on the Parliament House flagpole at dawn to make me pay 
attention again. So I wrote Kill Climate Deniers. Stupid, over-the-top, flashy, 
ridiculous, fun. And angry, because I am angry.”

It’s a comedy, he says, because you have to laugh. “We have politicians 
subject to a competitive, two-party system driven by polls, the 24-hour media 
cycle and conflict. Then we have the massive, abstract, global phenomena of 
climate change, unfolding over a span of decades. The tools are manifestly 
unfit to deal with the problem.”

He is right. Driving to Canberra for the listening party, I realised I had no 
idea of the major political parties’ policies on climate change, even though an 
election campaign had just lapsed. It was the second sitting day of parliament 
yet I heard nothing about the environment. There was talk of new, even more 
alarming data on the Great Barrier Reef but according to Finnigan, data doesn’t 
help anymore.

“The assumption by the scientific community in the 90s was that all people 
needed was the evidence, provided clearly and straightforwardly,” he says. “Now 
we know about confirmation bias and the echo chamber effect and we can see 
evidence is never going to be enough to change people’s minds. What a thing, if 
that’s true! Climate scientists back in the 80s would shake their heads in 
disbelief if you told them that.”

Finnigan has plans for a solo show of Kill Climate Deniers at festivals in 
2017 but he’s trying not to overthink the next instalment. “There’s a degree to 
which these project evolutions should be intuitive and driven by excitement and 
urgency, not market research. Dancing to a no-holds-barred club beat animated 
by political desperation feels right to me in 2016 – and reason enough to do 
it.”

• Kill Climate Deniers <http://www.killclimatedeniers.com/> launches in 
Canberra on Wednesday 21 September and Melbourne on Friday 23 September
 