
This week, the actor Lia Williams visited a butcher’s shop. There, she learned 
how to stab a knife through live flesh and ribs: to feel in her arm and hand 
what it is to cut through a body, through its sinew and muscle and bone, to the 
death. This is part of her preparation for playing one of the great roles in 
theatre, Clytemnestra. This powerful, clever, rhetorically able, much wronged 
and murderous woman appears in all three plays of theOresteia, the only extant 
tragic trilogy of ancient Athens. When she commits her kill, a jet of warm 
blood from her victim soaks her – as delightful and refreshing to her, she 
asserts, as the rain that Zeus sends to sustain the ripening ears of corn.

The first two plays of the trilogy, Agamemnon and The Libation Bearers, see a 
family locked into a nightmarish pattern of kill and counter-kill. The third,
Eumenides, releases the drama from this blood-clotted atmosphere, this feedback 
loop of horror, and brings to bear civic, judicial processes that at last have 
the power to neutralise and contain the seemingly endless pattern of vengeance. 
Along the way, the scene has shifted from Argos to the Delphic oracle, and 
finally to the audience’s home city. Here,Eumenides presents an aetiology 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Etiology> of Athens’ own newly reformed homicide 
court, the Areopagus (situated on a hill just north-west of the Acropolis, not 
far behind the right shoulders of the first audience). Its powers, hitherto 
wide-ranging and concentrated in the hands of the aristocracy, had been the 
focus of bloody democratic revolution in the decade preceding the premiere 
of the plays. TheOresteia, in short, with its grip on love, rage, murder, 
class, gender and the role of the state, is no drama for sissies.

The last major production in the UK was in 1999, when Katie Mitchell directed 
the plays at the National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/1999/dec/03/theatre.artsfeatures>. This 
year, three significant productions – atHome in Manchester <http://homemcr.org/>
, and at the Almeida and the Globe theatres in London – are to be staged. 
In Manchester this autumn, therising star Blanche McIntyre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/nov/03/blanche-mcintyre-interview-theatre-coward>
 (who as a classics graduate is marinaded in Greek theatre) will direct “a 
radical, stripped back” production of Ted Hughes’s version, with the citizens 
of Manchester taking the role of the chorus – an intriguing prospect, given the 
civic questions the plays poses about how societies accommodate their most 
unruly and frightening elements. The Globe’s production, directed by Adele 
Thomas, will draw on a new translation by Rory Mullarkey. And at the Almeida, 
as part ofthat theatre’s Greek season <http://www.almeida.co.uk/greeks>, Robert 
Icke is directing his own “freehand” adaptation. The three taking on this great 
dramatic challenge in their different ways are young directors in their 20s or 
early 30s. For Icke, at least (whose production is the first to open, on 29 
May), there is an urge to travel back to the very origins of European drama, 
and to investigate what these plays can tell us in 2015. How they can retain 
their freshness and excitement for an audience now? For Mullarkey, the plays 
pose a question of urgent import: “What does it mean when a society’s extreme 
elements are subsumed into the mainstream? Are these the compromises we all 
need to make in order to live together?”

The Oresteia, with its grip on love, rage, murder, class, gender and the role 
of the state, is no drama for sissies

Icke is intrigued by the plays’ significance as family dramas. Aeschylus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/aeschylus> sets Agamemnon and The Libation 
Bearers on the threshold of the royal palace. Here the king, Agamemnon, arrives 
home from his 10-year-long, victorious campaign in Troy. Here we see the 
despairing, vatic outpourings of his piece of human loot, the Trojan princess 
Cassandra, whose always accurate prophecies are never believed. Here, in one of 
the great scenes in theatre, Clytemnestra greets her husband as he’s on the 
point of entering the palace and outdoes him in verbal dexterity and 
persuasiveness, scoring a symbolic victory over him before she deals the actual 
death-blow. But the plays’ main events, the murders, take place behind closed 
doors, just out of sight of the audience. Icke, however, asserts the domestic 
setting and his adaptation will beckon us into this family’s interior world. In 
addition, theOresteia’s “prequel” – Agamemnon’s sacrifice of his own daughter 
on the eve of his military expedition to Troy – is unhooked from the background 
of the drama and becomes a central event (in Aeschylus’s original, this story 
figures as a tale from the past narrated by a remembering chorus).

Icke also became fascinated by the formal daring of the dramas, especially the 
extraordinary scene at the end ofThe Libation Bearers. At this point, Orestes 
has just murdered his mother, Clytemnestra, who has murdered her husband, 
Agamemnon, who has killed their daughter Iphigenia (because the gods told him 
to, or, perhaps more accurately, because they apparently told him to). Just as 
the play ends, Orestes – a tortured, Hamlet-esque young man – is confronted by 
hideous apparitions, blood dripping from their eyes: these are the Furies, 
ancient spirits who seek vengeance for family murder. No one else can see them.

At the beginning of the third play, however, the Furies are embodied: they 
are, in fact, the play’s chorus, evident for all to see. For Icke, reading in 
the post-Freudian age, this opens up the possibility that the third play might 
occur entirely within Orestes’s disordered mind. It’s a fascinating notion, 
though one that may result in downplaying the change in atmosphere between the 
plays, a change that is partly contained in Aeschylus’s very language, and 
relates to the work’s wider politics. InAgamemnon in particular, the world of 
its words is jagged, bold and unbalanced – reflecting and creating the 
terrifying and confusing universe of the drama. Metaphors are unresolved and 
polysemic, a fact skilfully recognised by Icke when he has his characters 
debate the multiple possible meanings of the famous omen, inAgamemnon, of two 
eagles killing a pregnant hare.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fblood-oresteia-aeschylus-tragedy-almeida-globe-home-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432136726450%2F2312e9ed-4621-4163-9cff-42aab6704de5-1486x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kill%20and%20counter-kill%3A%20why%20does%20the%20Oresteia%20still%20slay%20them%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fblood-oresteia-aeschylus-tragedy-almeida-globe-home-theatre%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kill%20and%20counter-kill%3A%20why%20does%20the%20Oresteia%20still%20slay%20them%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2015%2Fmay%2F22%2Fblood-oresteia-aeschylus-tragedy-almeida-globe-home-theatre%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F5%2F20%2F1432136726450%2F2312e9ed-4621-4163-9cff-42aab6704de5-1486x2040.jpeg>
 Robert Icke, directing at the Almeida. Photograph: Manuel Harlan 
Considerably more clarity and light runs through the language of Eumenides, 
however. We have shifted away from the bizarre and frightening Argos, where, as 
the classicist Edith Hall points out, the queen quotes Egyptian poetry in her 
welcome-home speech and freakishly prostrates herself to her returning husband. 
(A practice that, for contemporary Greeks, was the sort of unacceptable act 
that belonged to the hated Persian court.) InEumenides we are more recognisably 
“at home” – albeit a in mythical, long-ago version of Athens, where gods and 
the Furies wander freely among mortals and interfere directly in human lives.

More striking, though, than this supernatural element is the fact that 
Eumenides takes place in a city with no king – the only extant Greek tragedy to 
lack a royal ruler. This is a play about a kingless society, a democracy; it is 
about about presenting a mythical origin for modern institutions. It was the 
democrat Ephialtes who had reformed the aristocrat-dominated institution of the 
Areopagus, splitting up its decision-making powers between the popular assembly 
and other bodies but retaining its role as a homicide court.The Eumenides, in 
making Orestes the court’s first defendant, thus presented the Athenian 
audience with a story about the ancient origins of its (limited) powers. 
Ephialtes was assassinated in 461, three years before the play’s premiere in 
458. It is, as Hall writes in a forthcoming essay, quite probable that his 
assassins were in that first audience. This play was extraordinarily close to 
the bone.

In the play’s trial, Athene, the goddess of the city (and of winning, and of 
cleverness) hears evidence. Apollo speaks for Orestes, and argues that his 
crime was no crime, because the mother is not truly a blood relative of the 
son: she is merely the container for the seed of the father – even by 
contemporary Athenian standards, a casuistical argument. Orestes cannot 
therefore be guilty of killing a family member. The jury votes, and is split 
evenly. Athene casts the deciding vote – and spares the mother-killer. As a 
goddess sprung from the head of her father, she asserts the superiority of the 
male.

“The Eumenides,” wrote Simone de Beauvoir 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/simonedebeauvoir> in The Second Sex, 
“represents the triumph of the patriarchate over the matriarchate.” If one 
thing is clear in theOresteia – and so much is not – it is the truth of De 
Beauvoir’s words, tucked away in a footnote of her masterpiece. The claims of 
the dead woman who spoke like a king, for whom action followed thought in the 
flick of a second, who called for a “man-slaying axe” in a moment of duress are 
all wiped out. And the Furies – those female, atavistic spirits – are 
suppressed and subsumed into the civic and religious life of the city; they are 
transformed and neutered into “kindly ones”, which is what “eumenides” means. 
Terror, from this moment forward, will be exerted not by frightening female 
spirits, but by the instruments of the state. So it is that theOresteia 
dramatises democracy as it is invented – troublingly.

• The Oresteia is at the Almeida 
<http://www.almeida.co.uk/whats-on/oresteia/29-may-2015-18-jul-2015>, London 
N1, from Friday to 18 July (almeida.co.uk);at the Globe 
<http://www.shakespearesglobe.com/theatre/whats-on/globe-theatre/the-oresteia>, 
London SE1, from 19 August to 16 October (shakespearesglobe.com); andat Home 
<http://homemcr.org/production/oresteia/>, Manchester, from 23 October to 
14 November (homemcr.org).
 