
Having seen his Megaupload file-storage site closed, the internet entrepreneur 
Kim Dotcom has been arrested and released, seen his Auckland mansion raided, 
and may yet face extradition to the US. But, defiant, as ever, he is back with a
successor to Megaupload 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/jan/18/kim-dotcom-prepares-mega-site>
. Here he is in his own words.

On the raid, one year on

There isn't a day that you don't think about it. Because you walk around the 
house, and all of our funds were frozen so we weren't able to fix most of the 
damage, so I still see sledgehammer marks on all the doors, footprints on the 
walls, holes in the walls. Wherever they caused damage – that scarring is still 
there. That's one reminder. And of course the other one is whenever there's 
some kind of noise, or it's getting loud, you'll rush out of bed and 
subconsciously you are always worried – here they are again. It's something 
that stays with you for some time and I think it will still take some time to 
overcome that.

On the extradition hearing

We want to have [one]. We want to expose what has happened here. We have a lot 
of information that shows the political interference. We feel that what 
happened here was manufactured to destroyMegaupload 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/megaupload>, and we want to show that.

The only way I see myself settling is with full reinstatement of Mega[upload] 
and substantial payment for damages. And that's not going to happen. So we will 
have an extradition hearing.

On court orders that prosecutors provide evidence

What they are alleging is that we were a "mega-conspiracy", that we had intent 
to set up some kind of criminal network that is comparable to a mafia 
organisation. And that is basically what the whole extradition argument 
revolves around. And the court has said: "We want to see some evidence in that 
regard. Show us what you have that confirms this …" If they had such a strong 
case, and they can prove there is a mega-conspiracy, then why not hand it over?

On how Mega differs from Megaupload

There are quite a few innovations that Megaupload didn't have. For example, we 
have built in upload-download acceleration in the browser, which is technology 
that only became available nine months ago. We have on-the-fly encryption to 
protect our users' privacy – because of my own experience having been spied on, 
and also throughout the proceedings, the US government looking into the files 
of users, without a warrant …

I think privacy is a very important topic, and more important today for users 
than ever, because you read about all these privacy violations, and reaching 
out from companies like Facebook and Instagram, and expanding their rights on 
what should be yours. We want to create a service that gives you fully 
automated, real-time, one-click, on-the-fly privacy. You don't even have to 
think about it, it just happens.

On user concerns that Mega might suffer the same fate as Megaupload

I agree that there will be a certain degree of anxiety around that, and I can 
fully appreciate and understand that. I would say that with time, when people 
see what the site is capable of, when they understand the technology, they read 
the reviews, and people like it, they're going to try it, and hopefully over 
time feel comfortable using it for their personal data.

The good thing here is that you can now be sure when you upload your files 
into the cloud that only you hold the keys – not the service provider, not 
anyone else outside the service provider, only you personally hold the keys. 
And what you do with that is your responsibility.

On how he has changed over the past year

I think what changed the most is my understanding of what is really going on 
in the world today. When you live in your happy bubble and you have everything 
you desire and you live a great life, you don't think about all the nasty shit 
that is happening. I have a much better understanding now of how the US 
government operates and how much spying is actually going on, how much privacy 
intrusion is the reality today. And from that knowledge, I said, I want to do 
something about that, I don't want to accept that. I think nobody should accept 
that.

The kind of invasions in our life that we are seeing as normal today shouldn't 
happen – we are very close to George Orwell's vision becoming a reality.

I see myself in a role now of someone who has been put in this impossible 
situation, and I'm not only fighting just for myself but for the rights of 
everybody.

I think they were very naive to go into this but I also think they didn't 
really care much. They just wanted to shut us down. We had all these artists 
supporting us, we had a very popular site. They knew it was 4% of the internet, 
they knew we had millions of users. And it didn't stop them, you see?

It was a very politically motivated move, because the MPAA [Motion Picture 
Association of America], which is behind all of this, has hired Chris Dodd, who 
is a former senator of I think 30 years, and is a very close friend of the 
vice-president – actually Joe Biden called him his "best friend in life". 
Suddenly you take a power player in the political arena, put him on to a 
copyright fighting agenda, of course that guy is going to call up all his 
buddies and say, hey, favours, 30 years, now's the time for me to call them in. 
And we know for a fact that Joe Biden had a very active role in this whole 
thing. The prosecutor in the US that is managing our case, Neal MacBride, was a 
former employee of Joe Biden. Over 20 years ago he helped Joe Biden with his 
campaign in his effort to become president, and later he was his personal 
counsel. Joe Biden put him into the DOJ [department of justice]. So if you 
connect all the dots, and you see who the operators are behind all of this, you 
understand the political scope.

They had a political agenda, plus they had an upcoming election, and they 
needed an alternative for Sopa [the ill-fated Stop OnlinePiracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/piracy> Act]. Obama was in Hollywood 
February, March, April to raise money from his Hollywood supporters for his 
re-election campaign, and what would he have to show if Sopa failed? It would 
probably have looked very bleak for him to go to Hollywood and ask them to help 
him get re-elected when he couldn't make Sopa happen for them. So Megaupload 
became a plan B."

On Aaron Swartz

I don't want to go into that too much, out of respect for Aaron. All I can say 
is that I see similarities in the way we have been prosecuted. Over-reaching 
abuse of power, no due process, just completely insane.

On Julian Assange

It would have been the easiest thing for the Swedish prosecutor to do an 
interview over a video link. You don't have to extradite someone to be in 
Sweden to be interviewed. If you have questions to make up your mind [whether] 
you want to bring a criminal case against Julian Assange, why not do it over a 
video link? It's a reasonable thing. So you have to wonder, why are they not 
doing that? What is their reasoning behind that?

I think Julian Assange's fear, that the Swedish government is co-operating 
with the US government and that there might be an attempt to extradite him from 
Sweden, is very real. So I sympathise with him. I see also similarities and 
abuses that are happening in the case against WikiLeaks that were happening to 
us.

On surveillance culture

In the UN charter, article 12, it says every human being has the right to 
privacy. And how is that being respected these days by governments around the 
world? In the US, they are basically monitoring every bit of communication. Not 
just individually, with a warrant. They just copy everything. They're spending 
billions on data centres, they're one of the biggest purchasers of hard drives, 
and you wonder what do they need all that storage for? I know what they need it 
for. Because they continuously capture everything. In the UK, you have a 
government that installs cameras every 10 metres. They need a reality check … 
There has to be a balance here, and we're trying to re-establish that, and give 
the power back to the people.

On copyright

I think copyright has a right to exist. If you create something, you don't 
want someone else to go and profit from it, you have your right to make a 
living and everything. So I respect copyright. What I don't respect is 
copyright extremism. And I what I don't respect is a business model that 
encourages piracy. Hollywood has a business model where they release their 
product at different times in different markets. In the age of the internet you 
can't do that.

On Hollywood

If Hollywood would find a way – and I would instantly know several ways – how 
to solve its business model and create something that is available to everyone 
online at the same time and have a really nice offering, they could beat 
companies like Google in terms of market cap – I mean these guys have what 
everyone wants. They have the content that everyone wants. Google has no 
content. Google is making $40bn profit a year – I think – based on advertising 
by linking to stuff. They don't create the stuff that they're linking to. Now 
imagine if you would create something that has all the content in there. You 
could make 10 times more money than Google does because you have the rights to 
that stuff. You could create a very valuable internet business. Hollywood has 
totally missed the internet opportunity, and it's now other players that are 
doing that for them … There's so much money to be made, and those fools don't 
get it. They just don't get it.

The Hollywood industry is more hated than ever now. That can't be good for 
business. There are people now out there who out of principle wouldn't go into 
a cinema or buy any product from them, simply because they are interfering with 
everybody's rights. And they are doing it in a malicious fashion, with corrupt 
methods – paying politicians and using their political influence. It's just 
wrong.

On America

I always thought of myself as more American than Americans when I was living 
in Germany, because I always had this attitude of can-do, and if you're 
successful you can show it, which is a very un-German thing, you know. And now, 
in hindsight, looking at this, the US has lost a lot of its flair for me. It's 
becoming such an aggressive state, that is really harming people's rights, and 
I just want to do everything I can to fight that.

On the endgame

I'm not evil, you know? I'm a good guy. Everyone who knows me likes me … They 
should really come to the table, come to their senses and work this out. 
Because I'm not going to cave in. I'm going to fight this thing. And there's no 
way in hell that they have any chance to win this. I don't see it. I don't see 
it because I know I'm innocent, and the lawyers know I'm innocent, and we have 
right on our side.

Asked to name his internet heroes

Sergey Brin and Larry Page, founders of Google: they have changed the 
landscape of the internet like no other. Their whole philosophy of making 
information available to everyone, and the power that Google has become in 
providing knowledge to people, I would say is the most important achievement of 
society in this whole internet age.

Mathias Ortmann, chief technical officer, Megaupload: a true genius, a 
brilliant developer, and he had to go through hell in this whole indictment 
against us … With all of this pressure on him he managed to create a really 
outstanding solution that I'm really proud about – he is definitely one of my 
heroes.

Jimmy Wales, Wikipedia founder: it's things like Wikipedia that help us to 
advance as a society, and help us to accelerate our evolution. If you're a 
researcher and you need some answer to something, and in today's world you can 
find it this quickly, it allows you to develop whatever you are doing much 
faster.
 