Thrill rating 9/10 
Danger rating 8/10

Fitness rating 8/10

In a nutshell ...

Kitesurfers harness the combined power of wind and waves to launch huge aerial 
manoeuvres, pull wakeboard-style tricks and carve tracks in the water at speeds 
of up to 40 knots - an eye-watering 20 metres per second. Despite demanding 
strength, fitness and an innate desire to show off, kitesurfing (also known as 
kiteboarding) has grown massively since hitting the extreme sports scene in the 
mid-90s. With courses on offer across the UK it's easy for beginners to give it 
a go - yet still manages to make even the most hardened adrenaline junkie skip 
a heartbeat or two.

What's the buzz?

Not so much a sport as a way of life; once you've strapped yourself in and 
experienced the exhilaration of harnessing all that natural energy on some of 
Britain's most beautiful (if more than a little windblown) beaches, you'll be 
hooked.

Thrill a minute?

The experts are dedicated thrill seekers: gasp as they jump up to 10 metres in 
the air, pulling amazing freestyle manoeuvres and flying over the waves. 
Beginners, on the other hand, take things a bit more slowly: a one-day course 
will teach you the basics of equipment and safety before letting you have a go 
at "body dragging" (allowing the kite to pull you across the water), which 
shows you the fierce power these kites can generate.

Adrenaline peak

One word: hangtime. Without doubt the most awe-inspiring aspect of 
kitesurfing, hangtime is when the kite is used to perform massive jumps and 
remains suspended in the air for as long as possible. The current record of 13 
seconds is held by American kiteboarding legend Adam Koch.

Where to do it

You're on the look out for a reliable onshore wind and a coaxing swell. 
Experienced kitesurfers can be found in Shoreham, West Sussex; Gwithian Beach 
in Cornwall (the north-west facing beach catches the best swells the Atlantic 
has to offer); and hanging out of the sky in Rhosneigr on Anglesey. The shallow 
waters of Poole Harbour are beginner-friendly, and you'll find a fantastic 
choice of watersport schools and shops nearby.

Who can do it

One website states: "Sorry, no Mickey Mouse corporate groups. This is an 
extreme sport" - which says it all really. Children under the age of 16 won't 
be allowed to take part and participants will need (and want) to have the 
strength, stamina and agility to stay in the water for hours on end.

What to take

If you're just testing the waters, so to speak, then the school will provide 
all the kit you need to get going. If after several lessons you decide to go it 
alone, every good kitesurfing shop does beginner packages which include a 
board, kite, bar, lines, wetsuit and harness. Or you'll save a fortune if you 
opt for second-hand kit.

Typical prices

One-day courses cost around Â£100.

Impress your pals

... with some kitesurfing trivia: the sport actually dates back a lot further 
than the mid-1990s. While kites were invented and popularised some 2,800 years 
ago, kitesailing (as it was once known) has been traced back to 13th-century 
China, where kites were used to propel canoes and rafts along the Pacific rim.

YouTube searchwords 'UK kitesurfing'

Good links

kitesurfing.org <http://www.kitesurfing.org>

kiteboarder.co.uk <http://www.kiteboarder.co.uk>

kitesurfwales.co.uk <http://www.kitesurfwales.co.uk>

kiteworldmag.com <http://www.kiteworldmag.com>

paracademy.co.uk <http://www.paracademy.co.uk>
 