
Stanley Kubrick did not deserve the only Oscar he ever won, the prize for best 
visual effects he received in 1969 for2001: A Space Odyssey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2001-a-space-odyssey>, according to Hollywood 
special effects giant Douglas Trumbull.

In an interview with the Hollywood Reporter 
<http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/douglas-trumbull-kubrick-didnt-earn-729702>
, Trumbull made it clear he felt the UK-based film-maker should have won many 
more garlands from the US Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences for his 
writing and directing work over five decades. But he said Kubrick had not been 
involved in creating the effects for 2001, one of his best-known films.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN6ywMnbef6Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN6ywMnbef6Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DN6ywMnbef6Y&media=>
“Kubrick did not create the visual effects. He directed them,” said Trumbull. 
“There was a certain level of inappropriateness to taking that Oscar. But the 
tragic aspect of it for me is it’s the only OscarStanley Kubrick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/stanleykubrick> ever won. He was an 
incredibly gifted director and should have gotten something for directing and 
writing and what his real strength was — not special effects.”

Trumbull, 72, was credited as special photographic effects supervisor on 2001 
and has been widely credited for the film’s pioneering use of retroreflective 
matting for both space sequences and the iconic “Dawn of Man 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U2iiPpcwfCA>” opening chapter. He described 
the techniques involved in an extensively detailedinterview with American 
Cinematographer <http://www.visual-memory.co.uk/sk/2001a/page3.html> in 1968. 
Trumbull went on to direct the sci-fi classicSilent Running 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/nov/27/silent-running-french-classic-dvd>
 in 1972.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F04%2Fstanley-kubrick-did-not-deserve-oscar-2001-special-effects-douglas-trumbull%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409825114987%2F1769adeb-8a9c-4b8d-b884-0b0c073d8b3f-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kubrick%20%E2%80%98did%20not%20deserve%E2%80%99%20Oscar%20for%202001%20says%20FX%20master%20Douglas%20Trumbull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F04%2Fstanley-kubrick-did-not-deserve-oscar-2001-special-effects-douglas-trumbull%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kubrick%20%E2%80%98did%20not%20deserve%E2%80%99%20Oscar%20for%202001%20says%20FX%20master%20Douglas%20Trumbull&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2014%2Fsep%2F04%2Fstanley-kubrick-did-not-deserve-oscar-2001-special-effects-douglas-trumbull%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F9%2F4%2F1409825114987%2F1769adeb-8a9c-4b8d-b884-0b0c073d8b3f-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Douglas Trumbull, director, producer and special effects pioneer, in 2010. 
Photograph: Andy Cross/Denver Post via Getty Images 
Kubrick was nominated for 13 Oscars 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0000040/awards?ref_=nm_ql_2> during his career, 
including best director and best writing nods for his science fiction epic 
2001. He lost out in 1969’s best director category to Carol Reed, who directed 
the musical Oliver!, while A Clockwork Orange was beaten to best film by The 
French Connection in 1972, and Dr Strangelove was pipped by My Fair Lady in 
1965. Further nominations for the New York-born film-maker came in 1976 for 
Barry Lyndon and 1988 for Full Metal Jacket.

Kubrick, who was credited as special photographic effects designer and 
director on 2001, and the only member of the effects team on the Oscar 
nomination list, did not attend the 1969 Academy awards at the Dorothy Chandler 
Pavilion in Los Angeles to collect his prize. Presenters Diahann Carroll and 
Burt Lancaster accepted the award on his behalf.

 * Interview: the genius of Douglas Trumbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jul/09/douglas-trumbull-special-effects>

 * My favourite film: Killian Fox on 2001: A Space Odyssey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/dec/12/favourite-film-2001-space-odyssey> 