
The votes to decide Labour’s nominees for mayoral elections in Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/liverpool> and Manchester should be delayed 
because of problems sending out ballot papers, two of the candidates have said.

Sadiq Khan unveils plans for extra charge on London's most polluting cars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/05/sadiq-khan-unveils-plans-for-extra-charge-on-londons-most-polluting-cars>
Andy Burnham <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andyburnham> and Steve 
Rotheram both called for the deadline to be pushed back and for electronic 
ballots to be reissued to everyone who has not yet voted.

“We are genuinely concerned that many Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> members will be disenfranchised 
from participating in these important decisions,” they said in a letter to 
Labour’s general secretary, Iain McNicol, and Paddy Lillis, the chair of its 
National Executive Committee.

The two MPs said that the party has missed two deadlines to deliver postal 
ballots and now have only two weeks left of the four-week campaign period, 
during which many families will be away on summer holidays. “Even if the 
ballots arrive tomorrow [Monday 25 July], many people will have already left 
for their holiday and will not return in time to vote by 5 August,” they wrote.


“We call upon the National Executive Committee to ensure that these contests 
are open and fair to all eligible members.”


They said that they should be extended by a week, to 12 August, that the 
electronic ballots should be reissued to those who have not voted, and that the 
party should email all members to let them know.

“The last couple of months has been a turbulent time for the country, in the 
wake of the Brexit vote and instability that has followed in our political 
leadership. It is a crucial time for Labour to move forwards united and our 
party democracy is a cornerstone to achieve that.”

Burnham, the former health secretary, is fighting to be Labour’s candidate for 
the Great Manchester position and is up against the former shadow minister Ivan 
Lewis and Tony Lloyd, the interim mayor and current police and crime 
commissioner in the city.

Rotheram, a parliamentary aide to Jeremy Corbyn, wants to stand for the party 
in the Liverpool city region election and faces opposition from Luciana Berger, 
shadow minister for mental health, and Liverpool’s mayor, Joe Anderson.

The new metro-mayor positions in some of England’s biggest cities were created 
by the former chancellor, George Osborne, who sought to devolve some power to 
authorities, whose influence will transcend local council boundaries.
 